AN ALPHABET of the holy PROVERBS of KING SOLOMON specially from the beginning
of the tenth Chapter to the end of the book: For the help of memory and for
a more ready finding out of any whole sentence, if only the beginning be
called to mind: with a short interpretation of the more hard Proverbs, wherein
also diverse translations are compared and laid together for a further help to
understanding. Collected and set down in this order with a mind desirous to
procure that these holy Proverbs might be made yet more familiar even to
children by the delight of so plain and familiar a method.

The heart of a wise man guides his mouth wisely, and he adds doctrine by
his lips. Prou. 16.23.

As a thorn coming into the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable in the mouth
of fools, Prou. 29.9.

Printed by Robert Robinson for Robert Dexter. 1596.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE young Lord THOMAS Lord WENTWORTH, and to MR. ROBERT RICH
the eldest son of the right Honorable the Lord RICH, for a gratulatorie
testimony of duetifull affection and thankefulnes to their honorable parents:
with his most humble and hearty prayer unto GOD the only author and aduancer
of all true nobility, that it may please him of his infinite mercy to
increase them in all such worthy gifts and graces of his most holy spirit,
both for learning and godliness as may more and more adorn and bewtifie their
noble degree; through our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory and life, Amen.

R. A. A minister of Gods word has dedicated this alphabetical collectio^ of
the holy Proverbs of King Solomon.

To the Christian Reader grace and peace.
Beloved in the Lord (Right christian and prudent reader) may it please thee
to understand that I thy poor well willer, do willingly accord, and
religiously profess together with thy self, that the most holy scriptures of
God are set down and delivered unto us, by his own divine dispensation, in
all wise and holy perfection, not only for the matter therein contained, but
also even for the order and manner it self, whether for phrase of speech, or
for coherence of sentence, yea even in those parts which to us may seem less
coupled and knit together then the rest.

Where as therefore this present digesting of the holy proverbs for the
greater part (of the whole book) in that form which here thou see is far
differing from the original disposing of them; yea so as they may seem
transposed as it were out of their natural and kindly seat and soil: I
thought it necessary by way of entreaty (even for the pity thou bear
toward humane infirmity) to seek to obtain that favorable allowance at thy
hands) wherein God has vouchsafed the first permission and leave) which cannot
otherwise by any other sufficient reason be extorted from thee.

Now then may it please thee to be entreated, yea rather by humble and hearty
entreaty to be overcome, only so far to favor this bold enterprise as it
may be either discerned by light of thy favorable judgment or shall be found
by willing diligence in the use of it, to be helpefull to any, toward the more
profitable reading and remembering of these divine sentences, in that holy
order wherein the holy penmen of the Lord have first set the^ down.

If this request may seem reasonable unto thee upon the premises and also
according to al good hope which may be conceived herein: then also may the
practice of the Lord himself who has succored memory by his own disposing
of diverse portions of his holy and blessed word in the same order, (as is
evident in the holy language both in sundry Psalms and in the Lamentations
of Jeremy: and even in the last Chap. of this book of the Proverbs) this I
say may further induce thee to conceive so much the better liking of this
endeavor, at the least upon such wise caution as the matter requires: that is
to say, that the comparison be in no wise equalled herein, but only tolerated
as an humble reverend and begged imitation for a help to our weak and frail
memory as has been said.

Besides through the grace of God, it may be thou shall find something
performed in this poor labor which of thy self thou will judge, not a
together unworthy some piece of thy gentle acceptaunce. Namely in that the
translation of diverse sentences is somewhat nearer fitted to the authentical
text: and also because the diverse interpretations of many sentences are
presented before thee in one short view, for the exercising of thine own
modest judgment and wits in making the best choice, as in some few places
(not doubting of thy good leave) I have not feared to do.

But that I be not tedious; I will rest in this persuasion that thou will
yield to be of this mind (in such sort as has been entreated) that what
good and helpful way soever (whether thus by the order of the letter, or by
laying together all sentences concerning one and the same matter which indeed
often falls out in this alphabet, but must be left to an other labor as
touching the exact performance of it) I will rest I say persuaded, that thou will account every commodious way, serving to make this excellent portion of
the word of God more familiarlie known, and to draw it forth to a more
plentiful and holy use, to be accepted as a grace given from him who is the
only author of every good gift and grace.

Hitherto for the manner of the present disposing of these holy sentences: I
beseech thee (gentle reader) to hear me in a few words concerning the
sentences themselves, as touching the most excellent wisdom comprised therein.

Many make great reckoning of the sentences of Tullie and Seneca and many other
fine witted heathen me^. And verily they are not to be contemned especially of
wise Christians, the least whereof can more holilie understand and also make
better use of their own sentences (such as point toward any good matter) then
they could themselves. And also by such sentences scatered and dispersed in
their writings we may as by certain ruins perceive what was the excellent
frame and building of man's first creation.

But what are those their sentences, and the rather if they be interpreted
according to their heathnish and profane mind, seeing they had not the true
knowledge of God, nor of them selves, nor of any thing pertaining to true
religion and godliness: seeing also their guide was but corrupt and obscured
light of weak and imperfect reason: what (I say) are all those their
sentences, in comparison of the most holy and perfectly wise proverbs of King
Solomon? Yea in comparison of such of them, wherein, for some appearance of
words, they might seem to aim at the same thing with him? For all the
sentences of this our heavenly teacher (a very true master of sentences
indeed) they are holy and heavenly, proceeding from the holy spirit of God
in the work of his regeneration and new birth, through a special enlightening
and sanctifying of the heart, tongue and pen of his servants, whose faithful
labors are met in the publishing of them for the common instruction of the
Church of God: but the sentences of heathen men are in themselves unholy,
earthly and profane The sentences of King Solomon are all grounded upon the
true knowledge of God, in the faith of Christ Jesus our redeemer and savior,
who is the only true light of men, and the very life, soul and spirit of all
sonud doctrine and perfect instruction: they have also their scope and drift,
the glory of God cheefely, and then the faith and repentance of Gods people
under the assured hope of the forgiveness of sins, and of the inheritance of
eternal life in the kingdom of heaven: but the sentences of the heathen are
nothing so, but wanting all sure ground they teach rather a shadow of virtue,
then virtue indeed, and therefore without a better teaching all the fruit
vanishes away in an idle and fruitless speculation.

Moreover as the sentences of King Sulomon guide us certainly to the right end
of faith, even the glory of God and salvation of our souls, so do they lay
out and perfectly describe unto us the only right way of holy obedience and
duty both to God and man: but all the goodly direction of human and
philosophical virtues dies in the serving of men's own turns, either for the
gayning of worldly praise or worldly honor, or for some other like end, in so
much as it is truly said that (the matter truly scanned) all their virtues
are but shining and glittering sins.

Wherefore now upon such unequal comparison let every of us provoke our
hearts to have these most holy sentences among the rest of the sacred
scriptures in more high and precious estimation in finitely above all sentences
of heathen men. And to this purpose I beseech thee to consider with me that
whatsoever may have special force to move the mind to desire a thing absent,
to joy and delight in it being present, and to hope for after fruit by it,
they all do meet in the gracious sentences of King Salomo^ (considered
together) as in one subject. For what moves the mind to desire any thing, but
fame, sweetenes, pleasure, riches, beauty and such like? What delights but
the same things, and therewithal in the matter of speech and instruction,
these three things plainnes, brevity, and variety? And what afterfruite is
more comfortable then joy after sorrow, saftie after danger, glory after
reproach, and if there be any other like unto these.

Behold then what fame (the fame of our Savior only excepted) was ever so
great as the fame of Salomons wisdom? How sweet are his words as ointment
and sweet perfume to rejoice the heart by all kind of sweet counsel? How
pleasant and bewtiful like apples of gold with pictures of silver? How rich,
even like the chain about the neck, yea like the diadem and glorious crown
upon the head? Again do not K. Salomons proverbs most briefly contain
most ample and large matter? do they not lead us as it were by the hand into
very high turrets whence by a quick view we may easily behold many things a
far off which would ask greater pains and longer time to be less discerned
of the wisest among us, walking through the low vallie of our own thoughts?
Touching variety, what a large garden is here unlocked unto us, full of all
sorts of sweet fruit and pleasant flowers: what a storehouse for all plenty of
spiritual food and vittaile? what a wardrope with robes fit to deck the
minds of all that resort to it like princes children? what a iewell-house of
all kind of precious jewels to garnish the soul withal? what a library of
all flowers and elegancies of the best learning as in one little enchiridion or
shedule to replenish thy mind with holy understanding and wisdom? And
touching the fruit therefore of these so excellent sentences well learned and
digested in the mind and holilie practiced in the ordering of the life, who can
reckon them up in order? Only this shall now be said in general that blessed
are they of God who will daily exercise themselves in the meditation,
remembrance, use and practice of them as of any other the holy scriptures of
God. Blessed are those Parents which will wisely and carefully acquaint their
children with them, as the very manner of setting them down in the name of a
father most lovingly and carefully teaching his child does declare that it is
the will of God they should do so: and blessed for ever are those children who
harkening to their wise and godly Parents will learn vnstanding and wisdom
from them.

Now finally this book is dedicated more particularly to the honorable
children above mentioned, to this end (beside the reason expressed before) that
by one duty tendered to them, many by occasion thereof, might be made
partakers of a common benefit. And thus good reader, I commend thee to the
Lord, beseeching him most humbly for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake to deliver
us more and more from all vanity of mind, and to preserve our hearts with
daily increase of all heavenly grace both for wisdom and godliness, unto his
everlasting kingdom of glory Amen.

Thine in the Lord both craving thy faithful prayer and also praying withal
his heart for thee.

Proverbs Chap. 4. verses 3. etc. 3. When I was a Child with my Father, tender
and dear in the sight of my mother;

4. He taught me and said unto me; let thine heart hold fast my words; keep
my commandments and live.

5. Get wisdom, get under standing; forget thou not neither decline from the
words of my mouth.

6. Forsake her not, and she will keep thee; love her and she will preserve
thee.

7. Wisdom is the chief thing, get wisdom therefore; yea with all thy
possession get understanding.

8. Exalt her and she will exalt thee; she will surely make thee honorable,
if thou will embrace her.

9. She will give a comely ornament unto thy head, yea she will give thee a
crown of glory.

Chap. 22. verse 6. 6. TEach a child in the trade of his way, and even when he
shall be old he will not depart from it.

AN ALPHABET of the holy Proverbs of King Solomon especially from the beginning
of the tenth Chapter to the end of the Book.
A B
Above every watch, watch over (or keep) thy heart, for from it are the
outgoings (or issues, that is to say, the actions) of life. Chap. 4. verse. 23.

A brother offended (to wit, by the evil and unfaithful dealing of a brother)
is harder to win then a strong City, and their contentions are like the
bar of a palace, or castle, Chap. 18. verse. 19.

A C
ACcuse thou not a servant to his master, (or as the word signifies, hurt him
not with thy tongue; to wit by any unjust or uncharitable complaint) lest he
curse thee, and thou be found to have offended. Chap. 30.10. Read more in the
letter. T. The words of Agur. etc.

A child is known by his doings whether his work be pure and right. Chap.
20.11. Or thus, let even the child make himself known (or bewray himself)
whether his work be pure, and whether it be right. That is, let every one even
from his childhood avoid all hypocrisy and dissimulation, acquainting himself
to deal always simply and plainly both in word and indeed. To the which
end may that also be referred which follows in the next verse: The Lord has
made even both these, the ear hearing and the eye seeing. Chapter 20.12 And
therefore (by good consequence) he both knows how and also will in time
discover and lay open all counterfeit dealing.

A continual dropping in the day of stormy rain, and a contentious woman are
alike. He that hides her (that is, which goes about to hide her ill quality,
yea though it be by wise admonition and loving counsel) hides the wind
(that is, he loses his labor, to wit, unless God give special grace and
blessing) for she will utter herself as oil (or ointment) in his right hand.
The smell whereof cannot be kept in. Chap. 27.15.16.

A D
A Desire accomplished (that is, the blessing desired being now at hand and
presently inioyed, specially the spiritual graces and blessings of God in
assarance of his favor) deliteth the soul: but it is an abomination to
fools to depart from evil. So far off is it from them to desire to do the
will of God, Chap. 13.19.

A discreet servant shall have rule over a lewd son, and he shall divide the
inheritance among the brethren. Chap. 17.2.

A divine sentence shall be in the lips of the king: his mouth shall not
transgress in judgment. Chap. 16.10. Or thus. Let a divine sentence (or most
sage, prudent and sharpesighted wisdom) be in the lips of the King: (that
is, let him always have a holy care to speak vvisely and discreetly, but
chiefly then when he shall sit iudicially to give sentence in weighty
causes, according to that which follovveth) let not his mouth transgress in
judgment. Read in A. A true weight. etc. Chap. 16.11.

A F
A Faithful man (or as the hebrew sounds) a man of much faithfulness (or a
very faithful man) shall abound in blessings; but he that makes have to be
rich shall not be innocent. Chapter 28.20.

A faithful witness delivers souls: but a deceiuer speaks (or breaths
forth) lies Chapter 14.25.

A faithful witness (the hebrew is more significant, as before) A very
faithful witness will not lie: but a false witness will breath out lies. Chapter
14.5.

A false tongue, (that is, a man of a false or deceitful tongue) hates those
whom he afflicts, (or whom he would destroy) and a flattering mouth
causes ruin. Chap. 26.28.

A false witness (in heb: a witness of false matters) shall not be
unpunished: and he that speaks lies (or breaths forth, that is, lightly
and unadvisedly vtterreth lies,) shall not escape. Chap. 15.5. And verse. 9. He
shall perish. So also Chap. 21.28.

A false witness (in Heb. A witness of lies) shall perish: but he that
hears (that is, the well advised witness) shall speak for ever, or
continually: to wit, with credit.

Affliction (or rather evil) follows sinners, (to wit as pursuing and
dogging them) but that which is good recompenceth the righteous. Chap. 13.21.

A fool despises his fathers instruction: but he that regards correction is
prudent. Chap. 15.5.

A fool has no delight in understanding, but in that only which discovers
it self to his heart. Chap. 18.2.

A fool powers forth all his mind; but a wise man keeps it in till
afterward, (or restrains it) as touching the latter part. That is, he
reserueth it for the fittest season. Chap. 29.11.

A fools anger shall be known in a day, (that is, in a short time) but he
that is wise covers shame. That is, he refraineth his anger which otherwise
would break forth to his shame. Chap. 12.16.

A fools lips come with strife, (or make strife) and his mouth calls for
stripes. To wit, to his own sore hurt, as it follows in the next verse.

A fools mouth is his own destruction, and his lips are a snare for his
soul. Chapter 18.6.7.

A foolish son is the calamity of his father, (that is, he is the cause of
great trouble to him) and the contentions of a wife are like a continual
dropping. To wit, which marreth and rotteth all, Chap. 19.13.

A friend loves at all times: and a brother is borne for adversity. That is,
to help and succor in adversity. Or thus, and a brother is borne (or shows
himself to be a brother in deed) in adversity. Chap. 17.17

A froward person (or as the words of the text are) A man of frowardness
(that is, such a one as is given to much frowardnes) sows strife, and a
tale-teller makes division among Princes, (or rather thus) separateth a chief
friend, Chap: 16.28.

A G
AGe is a crown of glory, when it is found in the way of righteousness. Chapter
1631.

A gift in secret pacifieth anger, and a gift in the bosom great wrath (or as
the word signifies) the vehement (or mighty) heat of wrath. Chap. 21.14.

A good man gets favor of the Lord: but he will condemn the man of wicked
imaginations, Chap. 12.2. Or rather thus; The favor of the Lord prefers
(or aduanceth) a good man: but he condemns the wicked, (or mischeeuous) man.

A good name is to be chosen above great riches, and loving favor is above
filuer and above gold. Chap. 22.1. or rather thus. A name (or fame, King
Solomon means indeed a good name or report, to wit, in the church of God and
among good men) is to be chosen above great riches, and favor, (that is,
gracious credit and estimation) is better then silver and gould.

A gracious woman attayneth honor, as strong men attain to riches, Chap 11.16.

A haughty look and a proud heart, yea even the light of the wicked (that
is, whatsoever seems most excellent unto them, or has the greatest
appearance) is sin. Or thus: yea the enterprise (or endeavor) of the wicked
is sin. Chap. 21.4.

A I
A Joyful heart causes good health, (or yeldeth good help to the medicin
orphisick whether it be bodily or for the soul) but a sorrowful mind (that
is, a mind or spirit crushed with sorrow) dries the bones. Cha. 17.22.

A joyful heart makes a cheareful countenance, but by the sorrow of the heart
the mind is broken (or chrushed as before,) Ch 15.13.

A K
A King by judgment (that is, by executing judgment) mainteineth (or
establishes) the earth, ( as Psa. 75.3.) but a man of offeringes, (that is,
receiving gifts offered, such one as counts all fish that commes to net
etc.) destroys it. Cha. 29.4.

A King that judges the poor in truth (or faithfully) his throne shall be
established for ever. Chapter 29.14.

A King that siettth in the throne of judgment, chaseth away all evil with
his eyes. That is, God gives a special blessing to such Kings as be careful
in their own persons to see that justice take place. Cha. 20.8.

All (or as the construction well bears) every one that is proud in heart
is an abomination to the Lord: though hand join to hand he shall not be
unpunished. (that is, no help or assistance shall deliver him from the
punishing hand of God.) Chapter. 16. 5. See in the letter. T. Though hand. etc.

All the brethren of the poor do hate him, yea even his friend, (to wit, he
that was his friend in appearance) they all stand aloof from him; though he be
instant with words, yet they will not be near. That is, they will not be
entreated to help him Chap. 19.7.

All the days of the afflicted (or poor man, to wit, such one as is not
content with his estate) are evil (that is, they are grievous and irksome to
him) but to him that has a good conscience, they are a continual (or daily)
feast. Chap. 15.15.

All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes (or thus in an other very
apt construction) Howsoever man as touching all his ways, is clean in his
own eyes (that is, seems so to himself) Yet the Lord pondereth the
spirits. As though he should say noe counterfaite thing shall go for payment
with him: Cha. 16.2. Read in. T. The preparations etc.

A M
A Man cannot be established by wickedness; but the root of the righteous
shall not be removed. Chap. 22.2.

A man destitute of understanding touches the hand, (or clappeth hands) and
becomes suertie for his neighbor. Chap. 17.18. He reproves rash and
unadvised suertishipe.

A man of much anger shall suffer punishment: and though thou deliver him, yet
will his anger come again. Chap. 19.19. Read in the letter C. the next verse
to Chasten thy son. etc.

A man's gift (to wit, whether we take it for that inward gift wherewith God
has graced a man, or for that external gift or present which he has enabled
him to gratify any with all) it inlargeth him (that is, delivers him out of
straites) and brings him before great men) that is, before men of great
state and dignity, Chap. 18.16.

A man shall be commended according to his wisdom: but the froward of heart shall
be despised. Chap. 12.8.

A man shall be satiate with good things by the fruit of his mouth: and the
recompense of a man's hands will God give unto him, Chap. 12.14. Or rather
thus; accoring to the natural construction of the words. A good man shall be
satiate by the fruit of his mouth, the recompense of his hands (that is, of
his works) shall he cause to return to himself. That is, he shall receive it
to his own benefit.

A man shall eat good things by the fruit of his mouth: (or as before) A
good man shall eat the fruit of his mouth (that is, he himself shall enjoy
the benefit of his good and gracious and well ordered speech) but the soul of
trespassers shall eat the fruit of violence. That is, it shall suffer
violence. Ch: 13.2.

A man that bears false witness against his neighbor is like an hammer and
a sword, and a sharp arrow. Chap: 25.18.

A man that boasts of false liberality (in heb: of a gift of falsehood, that
is, of a false gift, that is, such a one as promises but performs not) is
like clouds and wind without rain. Ch: 25.14.

A man that does violence against the blood, (that is, the life) of a man (or
as some other translate, though all tending to one and the same end) A man
that is opressed (that is to say, earnestly pursued by the auenger of blood,
to wit, according to the law of God provided in that behalf) for the blood
of a man, let him fly to the grave, let no man stay (or support him) that is,
let no man hinder speedy execution of the murderer. Cha. 28.17.

A man that flattereth his neighbor, spreads a net for his feet. Chap.
29.5.

A man that hardens his neck, having been often rebuked, shall be (as one)
suddenly crushed to pieces, so as he cannot be cured, Cha. 29.1.

A man that has friends ought to show him self friendly: for a friend (that
is, some frende-bodie as we call him) is nearer (that is, he is more entirely
affected, and bears more hearty good will) then a brother (that is, then some
natural brother how near soever they are linked by bound of consanguinity and
nature. Chap. 18.24.

A man that loves wisdom rejoices his father but he that see death (or
companieth with) harlotes, wastes his substance. (and so is a grief and
burden to him. Chapter 29.3.

A man that refraineth not his appetite, (or which has no rule over his
spirit and affection) is like a city broken down and without a wall. Chapter
25.28.

A man that wandereth out of the way of wisdom shall rest (or cease, to wit,
from his erring) in the congregation (or company,) of the dead. That is, he
shall have his portion with them whose thoughts perish and who have no part
in the kingdom of God. Chapter 21.16.

A man will give his riches for the ransom of his life: or thus. The riches of
a man shall be the ransom of his life: (that is, it falls out oftentimes
that the rich man will he, nill he, must part with his riches to save his
life): but the poor man hears no reproof. (that is, he is quiet while the
rich is sifted, to wit, in times of warrefare and tirannous gouernmente: so
that riches as well as poverty has certain peculiare discommodities. Chapter
13.8.

A man with a wicked eye, (that is, which has an evil eye) hastes to get
riches, but he knows not, (that is, he willingly considers not) that
poverty shall come upon him. Ch: 28.22. yet this contrary event befalls many
of those which do most greedily hunte afterworldly wealth.

A N
AN angry man stirs up strife, and a furious man abounds in
transgression. Chapter 29.22.

An angry man stirs up strife, but he that is slow to wrath (or long
suffering) appeaseth strife. Chapter 15.18.

Anger is cruel and wrath is raging: but who can stand before envy? Ch: 27.4.

An heritage hastily gotten at the beginning, shall not be blessed in the end
thereof. Chap: 20.21.

An hipocrite with his mouth hurts his neighbor; but the righteous shall be
delivered by knowledge. That is, by wise caution and diligente taking heed to
the word of God. Ch: 11.9.

Answer not a fool according to his foolishness, least thou also be like
him.

Answer a fool according to his foolishnes, least he be wise in his own
conceit: that is, answer not folishlie, but with wisdom as his folly
requires to be answered Ch: 26.4.5.

A P
A Poor man which oppresses the poor, is like the raging (or sweeping) rain
which leaves no food. Chapter: 28.3.

Apply thine heart to instruction and thine ears to the words of knowledge.
Chap: 23.12.

A prince which is destitute of understanding and a great oppressor (shall
shorten his days) but he that hates covetousness (or gain, to wit,
unlawful and wicked gain) shall prolong his days, Ch 28.16.

A Prince is pacified by long suffering, and a soft toungue breaks the
bones. That is, it mitigateth and alayeth the anger of the very hard hearted
man, Ch: 25.15.

A prudent man foreseeing the plague (or evil whatsoever it be,) hides himself
(to wit, by humbling himself and seekeing mercy at the hands of God) but the
foolish going on still (to wit without repentance) are punished. Chapter 22.3.

And again. 27.12.

A reproof enters more into him that has understanding (or daunteth him
more) then an hundredth stripes into a fool: (or, then if thou should beat
a fool a hundredth times. Ch: 17.10.

A reward (or gift) is as a precious stone very pleasant in the eyes of them
that are greedy of it: it prospers whithersoeuer it looks. (Or tends) Ch:
17.8.

A righteous man falling down (or rather, turning aside, that is, declining
from his righteousness whether for fear or through hope of preferment) before
the wicked, is like a troubled well, (to wit, when the mied is roared and
raised up by treading in it) or a corrupted spring. Great therefore is the
sin both of the one and of the other: but especially of those that do
trouble and mar the clear spring. Chap: 25.26.

A righteous man hates the lying word (or matter) but it causes the wicked to
stink, and puts him to shame. To wit, when his wickedness is found out
in that he loves and delights to slander and lie. Ch: 13.5.

A righteou sman regards the life of his beast, but the tender mercies of the
wicked (that is, the mercies which they acount tender) are cruel. Ch: 12.10.

A S
A Scismaticall person seeks for that which he desires (or that which is to
his own liking) he will have to do in every weighty matter. Ch: 18.1.

A scorner loves not him that rebukes him, neither will he go to the wise.
Chapter 15.12.

A scorner seeks wisdom and it is not; (that is, it will not be found) but
knowledge is easy to him that will understand. That is, it willingly
presents and offers it self unto him. Chapter 14.6.

A seditious person seeks only evil: or thus, An evil person seeks only
sedition (or rebellion) to wit against the holy laws of God: wherefore, a
cruel messenger shall be sent against him. That is, God will in due time one
way or other take vengeance of him. Ch: 17.11.

A servant is not chasticed with words, (that is with words alone, but will
ask stripes as we say) when though he understand yet he answers not. That
is, though knowing his masters will, he does it not. Ch: 29.19.

A slothful hand makes poor: or rather thus, He that works with a
deceiptful hand becomes poor, (that is, this curse of God is upon him:) but
the hand of the diligent makes rich. To wit, through the blessing of God upon
their honest and faithful dealing. Chap. 10.4.

A soft answer turns away wrath: but a grievous word stirs up anger.
Chap. 15.1.

A sound heart; or rather, A healing heart, (that is, a heart ready to show
mercy tovvard the healing of others) is the life of all the flesh (that is, of
the whole body,) but envying is the rotting of the bones. That is, it
consunteth the inmost and most strong parts. Chap. 14.30.

A stone is heavy (or has heaviness) and the sand has weightinesse: but a
fools wrath is heavier then them both. Cha. 27.3. Read also the next verse.
Anger is cruel. etc. Or thus, Cruelty is in anger and an ouerflowing in wrath:
and who can stand before envy?

As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so is a man which wandereth from his
place. Chap. 27.8. Such a one can have no assurance either for comfort to his
own conscience, or for safety under protection of the Lord.

As a dog turns again to his own vomit, so a fool turns again to (or
reitterateth) his foolishness. Chap. 26.11.

As a jewel of gold in a swines snowte, so is a fair woman that lacks
discretion, (or rejects reason.) Chap. 26.11.

As are the cold waters to a weary foul, so is good news from a far
country. Chapter 25.25.

As a roaring Lion, and a hungry Bear (or a bear ranging about, to wit, for his
pray being hungry) so is a wicked ruler over the poor people. Chap. 22.11.

As a thorn coming up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable in the
mouth of fools: He (that is the drunken man) troubles all, he gives the
fool his payment, yea he gives his reward to all that pass by. (That is, he
makes no difference, he troubles one as well as an other. Chap. 26.9.10. Se
in the letter. T. The excellent, etc.

As he that feineth himself mad (or as a mad man) casts firebrandes, arrows
and mortal things; (that is, things mischievous and deadly) So is every one
that deals deceitfullie with his neighbor, and says am I not in sport?
Chap. 26.18.19.

As in water face answers to face, so does the heart of man to man. That is,
but darkely) Chap. 27.19. Read. 1. Cor. 2.11. and James 1.23.24. And Ier. 17.9.
The heart of man is deceitful above all things. Yet so as by means, such as
are, countenance, speech, and course of actions it may be in part discerned:
and generally all have the same corruption of nature in common though in some
it lurketh and keeps in more closely then in other.

As is the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold, so is every man
according to his dignity. Read in the letter T. The fining pot, etc.

As is the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold, so the Lord tries
the hearts. That is, he alone does both discover the hidden corruption of all,
and also does cleanse and purge out the inward dross that is in the hearts of
his children by the fire of his spirit, Chap. 17.3.

As ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, so does the sweetness of a man's
friend more then his own counsel. Chap. 27, 9.

As righteousness leads to life: so he that follows evil seeks his own
death, Chapter 11.19. Read in T. next after, The wicked works, etc.

As silver dross ouerlaid upon an earthen vessel, so are burning (or fauning)
lips (that is, such as pretend hot and earnest love) and an evil heart.
Chap. 26.23.

As the closing up of a precious stone in an heap of stones, (or rather thus)
As he that puts a stone into a sling (or into any engine made to throw
stones) so is he that gives honor to a fool. That is, he does but imbolden
him to do hurt. Chap. 26.8.

As the cole makes burning coals and wood a fire, so the contentious man is
apt to kindle strife. Chap. 26.21. Read in W. Without wood. etc.

As the cold of the snow, (that is, as the water which is as cold as the snow,
or snow water it self) in the time of naruest, (to wit, when a man drinks
it to cool his thirst, etc.) so is a faithful messenge to them that send him:
for he refreshes, (or restores, and as it were reuiueth) the soul of his
masters. That is, of those that think long to hear good news while the
matter, (being weighty) is yet in suspense and hangs doubtful. Chapter 25.13.

As the door turns upon the henges, so does the slothful man upon his bed.
Chap. 26.14. Read more in T. The slothful, etc.

As the northwind drives away rain, so does an angry countenance the
slaundering tongue. Chap. 25.23. A holy and good sense. Nevertheless the
words will bear an other signification and construction which is worthy to
be considered of, as it follovveth.

As the northern wind ingendreth (or breeds rain) so does the tongue of
the whisperer (or privy slaunderer) cause an angry countenance. To wit,
against those that are misreported and slaundered.

As the snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so is honor unseemly for a
fool. Or not convenient that it should be given unto him. Chap. 26.1.

As the sparrow (is wont) to wander here and there, and the swallowe to fly
about, so the curse that is causeless shall not come. That is, it shall not
light upon him that is unjustly cursed. Chap. 26.2.

As the whirlewind passes, so is the wicked no more: but the righteous man is
as an everlasting foundation. Chap. 10.25. Read in T. after. That which, etc.

As they that lift up the legs of the lame, so is a parable in a fools
mouth. That is, he uses it very vntovvardlie. Chap. 26.7. Or as some
translate. Take away the ornament of the legs (such as are pantaples or
baskins. etc.) From him that is lame (to vvitte, as things which he cannot
well use so long as he continues lame) so also take away the parable which
is in the fools mouth. That is, shevve the right use of it to the reproof of
his abuse. Chap. 26.7.

As vinegar is to the teeth (to wit, in that it sets them on edge) and as
smoke to the eyes, so is the slothful body to them that send him. That is,
he is a grief to them by his delay, Chap. 10.26. Read more in T. The
slothful. etc.

As well (that is, in like manner) sins he whose mind discerns not that
which is not good, as he that hastes with his feet. That is, as he easily
stumbleth, who going a journey chooses not his way or looks not to his
feet, so without knowledge and care to discorne betwixt good and evil a man
shall easily break the commandment of God and hurt his own soul. A further
declaration whereof follows in the next verse. Read in T. The foolishness.
etc. Chap. 19.2.3.

A T
A True weight and balance are of the Lord: or thus. The beam and the
balances of judgment (that is the scoales and what soever serves to fasten
to the beams for equal counterpaise) are of the Lord: that is, the King must
do justice as he will answer before God, because all judgment is his
ordinance. For so it follows) all the weightes of the bagg are his work,
Chap. 19.11. And that this verse is so to be understand it may appear by many
sentences of the same argument before and after. Read in A. A divine sentence
etc. And in in I. It is an etc. And in R. Righteous lips. etc.

A V
A Virtuous woman is the croune of her husband, but she that puts him to
shame is as corruption (or rotte^nes) in his bones. Chap. 12.4. That is, she
takes away the joy of his life.

A VV
A Wholesome tongue (or, The wholsomenesse of the tongue) is as a tree of life
(that is, such a tree as bears medicinable and healing leaves etc. but the
frowardness thereof is as a breach which the wind makes. That is, it is
verio mischeeuous, it turns up root and rind as we say. Chap. 15.4.

A wicked (or boisterous) man by faier words deceives his neighbor, that he
may lead him in a way that is not good. That is, which is not commodious or for
his profit: he shuts his eyes to devise wicked things, he minceth with his
lips and brings mischief to pass. Chap. 16.29.30.

A wicked man diggeth up evil (that is, he is painful about it and makes as
it were his secret pitfals) and in his lips there is as it were burning fire.
That is, he is every way pernicious and hurtful. He speaks of such a one as
regards neither God nor man but is a lawless and desperate fellow, Chap.
16.27.

A wicked man harde^neth his face (to wit, against all reprofe of his sin and
is of a brazen forhead as we say) but he that is just will direct his way. That
is, he is not only willing to be admonished, but of him self he is careful to
walk forward in good duty. Cha. 21.29.

A wicked man is an abomination to the just, and he that is upright in his way
is an abomination to the wicked. Chap. 29.27.

A wicked man takes a gift out of the bosom (that is, a gift which is
secretly and closely given) to wreste the ways of judgment. Chap. 17.23.

A wicked messenger (that is, such a one as deals unfaithfully in that
business wherewith he is betrusted) falls into evil, but a very faithful
ambassador is preservation. Or as one that heals or does a great cure and so
is beneficial to himself in procuring the good of other. Chap. 13.17.

A wicked witness mocketh at judgment (that is, he regards neither right nor
wrong profanely and unconscionably abusing the sacred seat of justice) yea so
that the mouth of naughty men swalloweth up iniquity (or thus) so does
iniquity swallow (or soupe up) the mouth of the wicked. That is all that they
say or do is greedely employed in the service of sin:

But judgments are prepared for such scorners, and stripes (that is, brusing
or battering stripes) for the backs of such fools. Chap. 19.28.29.

A wise heart (or the heart of a wise man) gets knowledge (that is, he so
gets it that he holds it in possession) and the ear of the wise seeks
learning, that is, continues in seeking still, to increase. Chapter, 18.15.

A wise King scatters the wicked (or fanneth them) after that he has caused
the wheel to turn upon them, (or as it were throsheth them) Chap. 20.26. That
is, he uses all godlieseueritie to the repressing or bettering of them.

A wise man concealeth knowledge (to wit, when it is no fit season to utter it)
but the heart of fools publishes (or proclaims) folly, that is, they do
it heartily, taking pleasure in it. Chapter 12.23.

A wise man fears and departs (that is, diuerteth or escapes) from evil
(or mischief) but a fool brings himself into trouble so confident (or over
boulde and venterous is he. Chap 14 16.

A wise man goes up into the City of the mighty, and casts down the
strength of the confidence thereof, Chap. 21.22.

A wise man is with strength (or let a wise man be with strength) that is, let
him join strength with wisdom and policy, as mutual helpers and companions)
yea let a man of under standing increase (or fortify) strength, that is, let
him ad strength to strength. The reason follows. For with wise councelles
thou shall prosperously make war and by the multitud (or excellency) of
counselors thou shall find safty.

A wise reprouer (that is, he that reproves wisely and with good discretion)
is to the obedient ear as a goulden earing and an ornament of fine gould.
Chap. 25.12.

A wise son makes a glad father, but a foolish son is a heaviness to his
mother, Chapter 10 1.

A wise son rejoices the father, but a foolish son despises his mother,
Chap. 15.20.

A wise son will obey the instruction of his father, but a scorner will hear
no rebuke, Chap. 13.1.

A wise woman builds her house: but a foolish woman destroys it with her
own hands. Chap. 14.1, A very unnatural and unkind part.

A word spoken in his place (or in the right and current manner as it should
be) is like apples of gould with pictures of silver, Cha. 25.11.

B
Be diligent to know the state (in heb: the faces) of thy cattle, (that is, or
ouersee the^ thy self in thine own person) and take heed to the flocks,

For riches remain not always: and shall the crown (continue) from
generation to generation?

As soon as the heye discovers it self, and the tender grass appear, let
the grass of the mountains be gathered together.

The lambs shall be for thy clothing and the goats for the price of a field
that is, for the purchase of a field, to wit, through the plentiful increase
which they yield.

And besides there shall be sufficiency of the milk of the Goats for they
food, for the food of thy family and for the sustena^c (or liuelyhood) of thy
maids. Chapter 27.23.24.25.26.27.

Before dectruction the heart of a man is hautie, and before honor goes
lowliness. Chap. 18.12.

Behold the righteous, even he is reco^pensed in the earth, that is, he tastes
of GODS corrections for sin): how much more the wicked and sinner? Chapter 11.31,

Be not thou a witness against thy neighbor without cause, (or unadvisedly)
neither deceive him with thy lips: (or neither undo thou him with thy lips:)
Say not I will do to him as he has done to me, I will recompense this
fellow according to his work. Ch: 24.28.29.

Be not thou envious against the wicked (or boisterous) man, neither choose
thou any of his ways:

For the froward is an abomination to the lord: but his secret is with the
righteous. The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked: but the
habitation of the righteous is blessed.

And insomuch as he (that is God) scorneth the scornful but gives grace to the
humble: the wise shall inherit glory, but reproach takeeth away fools. Chapter
3.30.31.32, 33: 34.35.

Be not thou envious against evil men, neither desire to be with them: for
their heart imagines destruction, and their lipes speak mischief. Ch: 24.1.2.

Be not thou glad when thine enime falls, (I say again) when he falls let
not thine own heart rejoice: Lest the Lord see it and it displease him, and
he turn his anger from him, to wit against thee. Chap: 24.17.18.

Be not thou of them that touch the hand, nor of them that are suerties for
debtes: If thou have nothing to pay why should he (that is, the creditor, to
wit, thoroughe thine own defalte and rashness) take thy bed from under thee?
Chapter 22.26.27.

Be not thou wise in thine own eyes, but fear the Lord and depart from
evil: So health shall be to thy navel, and moistening (or watering, that is,
marrow,) to thy bones. His meaning is, by the reverend fear of God thou shall
prosper in the bosom of the church through the secret blessing of God as the
child prospers after a wonderful manner in the womb of the natural
mother. Ch: 3.7.8.

Better is a dry morfell if peace be with it, then a house full of slaughtered
beasts with strife. Ch: 17.1.

Better is a little with righteousness, then great revenues without equity.
Ch: 16.8.

Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure and
trouble therewith. Better is a dinner of green herbs where love is, then a
stalled ox and hatred therewith. Ch: 15.16.17.

Better is it to be of humble mind with the lowly, then to divide the spoil
with the proud. Chapter 16.19.

Better is the poor that walks in his integrity, then he that abuses his
lips and is a fool. Ch: 19.1.

Better is the poor that walks in his integrity, then he that peruerteth
either of his ways (that is, declining either on the right hand or on the
left) though he be rich. Chapter 28.6.

Blessed is the man that greatly fears always, (to vvitte, with such a
fear as does not confound or amaze him, but only causes vvatchfulnesse
against sin with continual prayer to God for the help of his grace): but
he that hardens his heart shall fall into evil. Ch: 28.14.

Blessings are upon the head of the righteous, but iniquity (or violence)
shall cover the mouth of the wicked. That is, his own sin shall as it were
smother and choke him. Ch: 10.6.

Bloody men hate him that is entier (that is him whose heart is wholy in
some measure of truth with the lord): but the just have care of his soul,
(to wit, to deliver him from the malice of the cruel.) Chap. 29.10.

Boast not thy self before the King neither stand in the place of great men:
(that is of noble personages): for it is better that it should be said to
thee; come up hither, then that thou should be put lower in the presence of
him that is lowly minded whom thine eyes do see (to wit, to be prefered
before such as presume above their degree) or thus, which thing thine eyes do
see. Namely that the proud man is debased to his shame. Ch: 25.6.7.

Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what the day may bring
forth. Ch: 27.1.

Buy the truth but sell it not; (even the truth,) of wisdom and instruction
and understanding. Ch: 23.23.

By mercy and truth (that is, through the mercy of God who is faithful and
true) iniquity is forgiven (or done away) wherefore in the fear of the Lord
depart thou from evil. To wit, as a dutiful child loath to offend thy most
gracious and heavenly father. Ch: 16.6.

By the blessing of the righteous, (that is by the manifoulde good which they
procure by giving council, by doing justice, by maintaining Gods pure
religion, and by their faithful prayers to God) the city is exalted: but it
is subverted by the mouth of the wicked. To wit, by their wicked council, by
their blasphemies etc. Ch: 11.11. Read in S: Scornful men etc.

C
Can a man take fire into his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? or can a
mango upon hot burning coals (to wit, bare footed) and his feet not be
burnte? So he that goes into his neighbors wife, (to wit, with an adulterous
mind) he shall not be innocent whosoever touches her. Chapter 6.27.28.29.

Cast out the scorner, and strife shall go out; and contention ceasing, so
shall also reproach. Ch: 22.10.

Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his
murmuring, or to his destruction. And if thou do forgive the punishment, yet
show thy self very angry: for if thou let him escape (to wit over
remislie) thou must use more sharp correction afterward. Chapter 19.18.19.

Childrens childen are the crown of the elders: and fathers are the glory of
their children. Ch: 17.6.

Commit thy works unto the Lord, and they shall be directed together with
thy thoughts. Ch: 16.3. Read. in T. The preparations. etc.

Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a broken tooth and
a lame foot. (or a foot out of joint.) Ch: 25.19.

Correct thy son and he will cause thee to have rest, yea he will give
pleasures to thy soul. Ch: 29.17.

Council in the heart of man is like deep waters: but a man that has
understanding will draw it out. (To wit, by wise questions and by taking
advantage from all fit occasions to provoke him to shevve his opinion and
judgment. And mark that the vvisest men are described to be more sparing in
talk then the fool who will ever he bablinge, Ch: 20.5.

D
DEath and life are in the power of the tongue; as a man loves to use it, so
shall he eat (that is, enjoy) the fruit of it, Chapter 18.21.

Debate with thy neighbor thy matter which thou have against him, and
discover not an other man's secret:

Least he that hears it put thee to shame, and least thy diffamation (to wit,
that evil report wherewith thou have diffamed thy neighbor) cease not. So
then he uses two reasons to persuade to the receiving of the former precept
according to the two several parts of it. Ch: 25 9.10.

Deceit (that is, fraudulent and deceitful counsel) is against the heart of
them that imagine (or plot) evil: that is, mischife: (according as we say
commonly; evil counsel is worst to the giver:) but to the counselors (that
is, to the faithful counselors) of peace, shall be joy. Chap. 12.20.

Depart from before the foolish man, seeing thou perceiuest not in him the
words of knowledge. Chap. 14.7.

Diverse weightes and diverse measures, even both these are abomination to the
Lord. Chap. 20.10. And verse. 23. Diverse weights are an abomination to the
Lord, and deceitful balances are not good.

Do not they err that imagine (or busy themselves about) evil? (that is,
about mischievous practices) but to them that work (or busy themselves in
devising and practicing) that which is good, shall be mercy and trueh. Chap.
14.22.

E
EAse stays the foolish, and the prosperity of fools destroys them. Chap.
1.32.

Eat thou not the bread of him that has an evil eye, neither desire his
dainty meats.

For as if he thought it in his heart, so he will say unto thee; eat and
drink, but his heart is not with thee. Or thus. For as he thinks (or
esteems) in his heart, so is he (or) so is it, (that is, so is he or his meat
to be accounted of:) eat and drink will he say; but his heart is not with
thee: Thou shall vomit thy morsel which thou have eaten: (that is, thou shall
have no joy but shall find thy stomach as it were ouerlaid at such a man's
table, though thou take but a small pittance: to wit, if thou follow not this
counsel to abstain altogether from it:) and thou shall loose all thy pleasant
words. (That is, all thy words of welcome. (Or) when thou have lost (or cast
it up) (that is, when thou shall find thy self nothing beholding to him, no
not for one morsel of his meat or one draught of his drink) thy affairs (or
business which thou go about) shall be more joyous (or delight full) unto
thee. Chapter 23.6.7.8.

Enter not into the way of the wicked, neither walk thou in the way of evil
men.

Avoid it, and go not by it; turn from it, and pass by.

For they cannot sleep unless they have done evil, and their sleep is taken
from them if they have not caused some to fall: For they eat the bread of
wickedness, and drink the wine of all kind of violence. (That is, whatsoever
they can get by hook, or by crook as we say.)

But the way of the righteous, is as the light which shines, yea which goes
on in shining, (or shines more and more) unto the perfect day (that is, to
high noone) or thus, which goes on in shining, so as every one of them is
firm in day, (that is, constantly continuing and abiding in the light of the
day, walking as it were in the light of the Lord uprightly and in the plain
path. etc.) As for the way of the wicked it is like the darkness, they know
not whereat they shall stumble. or sall. Chap. 4.14.15.16.17.18.19.

Establish thoughts by counsel, and by counsel make war. Chap. 20.18.

Even a fool when he holds his peace (that is, auoideth rashness) is counted
wise, and when he stops his lips prudent. Chapter 28.2. Read in H. He that
has knowledge.

Even by laughter (that is, by wicked mirth or earnall iolitie) the heart is
sorrowful: and the end of that mirth is heaviness. Chapter 14.13.

Every way of man is right in his own eyes: but the Lord pondereth the
hearts. Chap: 21.2.

Every wise man deals by knowledge (that is, he will not be busy in such
things as he is ignorant in) but a fool spreads abroad, (or lays open)
folly. To wit, by his intermedling in matters above his skill. Chap. 13.16.

F
Fair words (or pleasant and delightful speeches, to wit, such as are fit for
the use of edification) are sweetness to the soul and causing health to the
bones. That is, they are as good physic, and very medicinable. Chap. 16.24.

False balances are an abomination to the Lord, but a perfect weight pleases
him. Chap. 11.1.

Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction will
remove it far away from him. Chap. 22.15.

Foolishness is joy to him that is without heart that is, to such a one as is
destitute of under stading) but a man which has understanding will walk
uprightly. Yea he will make this his joy. Chap. 15.21.

For the desire thereof (or to the end he may have his desire) he will separate
himself to seek it, and occupy himself in all wisdom (or, in every weighty
matter, or in all things that are.) Read in A. A scismaticall person etc.
Chap. 18.1. Read also the next verse. A fool has no delight. etc.

For the transgression of a land there are many Princes thereof (that is,
there are often channges) but by a man of understanding and knowledge a realm
likewise indureth long: or rather thus; but when a man is wise and skillful,
(to wit, in the godly governing of his realm) he does by that means prolong
it. (To wit, his reign or government.) Chap. 28.2.

Frette not thy self because of the malicious, neither be envious at the
wicked: For there shall be no end to the evil man, (that is, no good and
happy end) the light of the wicked shall be put out. Chap. 24.19.20.

G
GO not forth hastily to strife (or to suit it at law) least that which thou
would do, (unto him) do in the end, fall upon thy self; when thy
neighbor has put thee to shame. Chap. 25.8. And then it follows in the next
verse. Debate with thy neighbor etc. Read in D.

God overthrows the wicked that they are not: but the house of the righteous
shall stand. Chap. 12.7. Or thus. The wicked overthrow themselves, etc. To
wit, by their provoking of GOD by their sins to their own destruction.

Good understanding makes acceptable, but the way of the disobedient is hated.
Chap. 13.15. Or thus, Grace, (that is, gracious or dutiful behavior, through
the grace and mercy of God) gives good success, but the way of the
disobedient is roughe. That is to say, it is not prosperous. Read in T.
Thorns etc.

Go to the Pismire (or ant) o sluggard: behoulde her ways, and be wise.

Albeit she have no guide, governor, nor ruler:

She prepares her meat in summer, and gathers her meat in harvest.

How long will thou lie o sluggard? when will thou arise out of thy sleep? Yet
a little sleep a little slumber (or a few short sleeps, a few short
slumbers, to wit, as the sluggard deemeth them though they might a bundantly
suffice) a little fowlding of the hands to sleep, or to lie still.

Therefore thy poverty comes as a right (or speedy) traueler, and thy
necessity like an armed man. Chap. 6.6.7.8.9.10.11.

H
Hatred stirs up contentions (to wit, such as are accompanied with
tauntinges and reuilinges etc.) but love covers all trespasses. That is, it
will not reprove sin after that manner, but with pity and compassion and in
all holy discretion, Chap. 10.12.

He also that is slothful (or negligent and remiss) in his work, is even a
brother to him that is a great waster (or stroy-good) Chap. 18.9.

Hear counsel and receive instruction that thou may be wise at the latter
end, Chapter 19.20.

Heaviness in the heart of man does bring it down: but a good word rejoices it.
(or a good, that is to say, a prosperous matter) rejoices it. To wit, the hand
of the diligent, whereof read in the verse before. See in T. The hand etc.
Chap. 12.24.25.

Hell and destruction are before the Lord: that is, he knows them thoroughly
and holds a sovereign power over them: how much more the hearts of the
sons of men? Chap. 15.11.

He loves transgression that loves strife: and he that seeks to make
breach (or division) inlargeth the gate thereof. That is, of all kind of
transgression. Chapter 17 19.

He shall before vexed that is suertie for a stranger: but he that hates such
as do strike hands, (to wit, rashly) is fure. Or without fear, to wit, of
the creditor, Chap. 11, 15.

He that A
HE that answers a matter before he hear it (that is, before he do
advisedly hear and consider of it) it is a folly and shame unto him. Chap.
18.13.

He that B
HE that begets a fool (begets him) to his own sorrow: neither shall the
father of a fool have any joy. That is, he shall have no true cause of joy in
him so long as he continues in his folly, that is, wicked and ungodly. Chap.
17.21.

He that C
HE that causes the righteous to go a stray by an evil way, shall fall into
his own pit: but the entier (or perfect, that is, they that continue in the
straight ways of the Lord) shall inherit good things, Cha. 28.10

He that covers a transgression seeks love, but he that repeateth a matter,
(that is, which reuiueth a matter of reproach, in his anger which before lay
dead and was forgotten,) separateth a chief friend. That is, he alienateth
his mind and affection from him. Chap. 17.9.

He that curses his father or his mother, his light shall be put out in
obscure darkness. Chap. 20.20.

He that delicatly brings up his servant from his youth, at length he will be
even as his son. That is, he will grow over bold and saucie, forgetting
himself to be a servant, and he will prove contemptuous and injurious against
his masters children. Chapter, 29.21.

He that despises the word shall be distroied, but he that fears, (that is,
reverently regards) the commandment, shall be rewarded. Chap. 13.13.

He that destroys hisfather or chaseth away his mother is a lewd and
shameful child. Chap. 19.26. Or as follows. A child which causes shame
and reproach consumes his father (that is, his fathers goods) and causes his
mother to fly from him.

He that diggeth a pit shall fall therein, and he that rowleth a stone it shall
return upon him Chap. 26.28.

He that dissembleth hatred with lying words, and he that inuenteth (or
brocheth) a slander is a fool, Chap. 10.18.

He that F
HE that finds a wife finds a good thing, and receives favor of the Lord.
(or thus) and that favor which is from the Lord has promoted him. Chapter,
18.22.

He that follows after righteousness and mercy, shall find life,
righteousness and glory. Chap. 21.21.

He that G
HE that gathers in summer is a wise son, but he that sleeps much in
harvest is a son of confusion (or) a son that makes ashamed. To wit,
himself and those that depend upon him, through his improuident folly. Chap.
10.5.

He that gives to the poor shall not lack, but he that hides his eyes (that
is, he that will not tender the miseries of the poor) shall have many curses.
To wit, not only from men by imprecationes, but specially from God as the
auenger of the unmerciful, Chap. 28.27.

He that goes about as a slaunderer (or a talecarier and backbiter)
discovers a secret but he that is of a faithful heart concealeth a matter.
To wit, every such matter as ought in good duty to be concealed. Chap. 11.13.

He that H
HE that hates will counterferte with his lips, but in his inward part
(that is, in his heart) he lays up (or plotteth) deceit.

Though he speak favorably trust him not, for there are seven abominations
in his heart.

Hatred maybe covered by deceit, but the malice thereof shall be discovered in
the congregation. Chapter 26.24.25.26.

He that has a good eye shall be blessed: for he gives of his bread to the
poor. Ch: 22.9.

He that has knowledge in deed (or knows knowledge, that is, how it
should be used) spares his words: for a man of understanding is of an
excellent (or of a cool and temperat) spirit.

Yea even a fool when he holds his peace is counted wise, and when he
stops his lips prudent. Chapter 17.27.28.

He that has mercy on the poor lends unto the lord: and he will recompense
unto him that which he has given. Chapter 19.17.

He that hides his sins shall not prosper: but he that confesses and
forsakes them shall have mercy. Chapter 28.13.

He that I
HE that increases his riches by usury and interest gathers them for him
that will be merciful to the poor. Chap. 28.8.

He that is despised, and has a servant of of his own, (or is his own
servant) is better then he that boasts him self, and lacks bread. Chap.
12.9.

He that is destitute of wisdom (or wants heart) despises his neighbor:
but a man of much understanding (that is, a very discreet man) will keep
silence. That is, he will not do as the other does, Chapter. 11.12.

He that is first in his own cause (that is, the plantine) seems to be just:
but when his neighbor, (that is, the defendant) comes, he (that is, the
judge) tries him. Chapter 18.17. A notable description of a right course of
proceeding to judgment.

He that is greedy of gain troubles his own house, but he that hates
gifts shall live. Chapter 15.27. To wit a blessed life.

He that is hasty to anger commiteth folly, and a busy body is hated. (or
thus) therefore to a prudent man it, (that is, hastiness to anger) shall be
odious or hateful. Chapter 14.17.

He that is merciful rewards his own soul, but a cruel man troubles his
own flesh. Chapter 11.17. Read also the next two verses in T. The wicked works
etc.

He that is of a large heart (that is, he that is proud and licentious) will
make much strife; but he that trusts in the Lord shall be fat. that is, he
shall prosper, Chapter 28.25.

He that is partener with a thief hates his own soul yea and he that
hears cursinge (that is, any execrable and notorious wickedness) and
declares it not. Chapter 29.24. So far ought every man to be from joining or
consenting with the wicked in any ungodly practices.

He that is flow to anger is better then the mighty man, and he that rules
over his mind, then he that wins a city. Chapter 16.32.

He that is flow to wrath is of great wisdom: but he that is of a hasty
spirit exalts (or lifts up) folly. Chapter 14.29.

He that is wise in his business, (or thus) he that attends to the word
shall find (that is, atteine to) good, and blessed is he that trusts in the
Lord. Chapter 16.20.

He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, they are both
a like abomination to the Lord. Chapter 17.15.

He that K
HE that keeps his mouth and his tongue keeps his soul from afflictions.
Chapter 21.23.

He that keeps his mouth keeps his life, but he that prostituteth his
lips, it shall be destruction to him. Chapter 13.3.

He that keeps the commandment keeps his soul: but he that despises his
ways (that is, the ways of God) shall die. Chapter 16.19.

He that keeps the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof: so he that
waits upon his master shall come to honor. Chapter. 27.18.

He that keeps the law is a prudent son: but he that feeds, (or is
acompanion with) gluttons, shameth his father. Chap 28.7.

He that L
HE that loves his soul possesses his heart, he keeps understanding that
he may find goodness. Chapter 19.8.

He that loves instruction loves knowledge: but he that hates correction is
a fool. (or brutish). Chapter 12.1.

He that loves pastime (or iolitie) shall be a poor man: and he that loves
wine and oil, (that is, he that is over delitious and dainty) shall not be
rich. Chap. 21.17.

He that loves pureness of heart: for the grace of his lips, the king
shall be his friend. Chapter 22.11.

He that M
HE that mocketh the poor reprocheth him that made him so: (that is, he
reprocheth the Lord God who makes either poor or rich whom it pleases him)
and he that rejoices at destruction shall not be unpunished. Chapter 17.5.

He that O
HE that oppresses the poor reprocheth him that made him: but he that has
mercy on the poor honors him. That is to say God, who makes whom he will
poor, as before. Chapter 14.31.

He that oppresses the poor to increase himself, and he that gives to the
rich shall suerly come to poverty. Chapter 22.16.

He that P
HE that passes by, and angrilie medleth with the strife that belongs not
unto him, is as one that takes a dog by the ears. Chapter 26.17.

He that praises his friend with a loud voice rising early in the morning,
it shall be counted to him as a curse. (That is, it shall not be accepted. A
just reward of officious flattery. Chapter 27.14.

He that R
He that rebukes a man shall find more favor at the length, or as Trem: He
that rebukes a man after me (that is, to cause him towalke in the ways of God
according to the instructions of K. Solomon) he shall find more favor then
he that flattereth with his tongue. Chapter 28.22.

He that regards instruction is in the way of life: but he that refuses
correction causes to go out of the way. Or thus: The way of life is his that
regards instruction: but the way of him that refuses correction couseth to
err. Chapter 10.7.

He that reproves the wise and obedient ear is as a golden earing and an
ornament of fine gold. Chapter 25.12. Read in A. A wise reprouer etc.

He that rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house. Chap.
17.13.

He that robs his father and mother, and says it is no transgression, is
the companion of a man that destroys. (That is, he that wastes his fathers
goods and mocketh at all admonition is worthy to have like punishment with the
murderer according as his sin is of like nature. Ch, 28. See Deuteronomy. 24.21.18.
etc.

He that S
HE that says to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people curse,
multitudes shall abhor him. But to them that rebuke him shall be pleasure,
and upon them shall come the blessing of goodness (or of the goood man: He
(that is to say, the good and godly man) will kiss the lips of him that
answers upright words. That is, he will greatly reverence such a one. Chap.
24.24.25.26.

He that seeks carnestly (to do) good gets favor: but he that seeks
evil (or as touching him that seeks evil, that is, to work mischief) it
shall come unto him. Chapter 11.27.

He that sends a message by the hand, (that is, by the ministry and se
ruice) of a fool, does as if he should cut off the feet (to wit, of the
messenger after that he has commanded him his service) and so drink the
fruit of cruelty. For it were better and more safe, (specially in matters of
great consequence) not to send at all, then to send a fool, whether he be
ignorant, or having meet knowledge, be known to be unfaithful. Chap. 26.6.

He that sows iniquity shall reap affliction, and by therod of his own
anger he shall fall. Chap. 22.8.

He that spares his rod hates his child, but he that loves him nourtureth
him betime. Chap. 13.24.

He that speaks truth will show righteousness: but a false witness uses
deceit. Chap. 12.17. Or thus. He that shows that which is right speaks the
truth: (this does a very faithful witness, he regards not only what is
true, but also what is meet to be spokon as Ier. 4.2.) but a witness of
falshoodes (that is, an arrant false witness, such a one as we call a knight of
the post, who has set his faith to sale) utters deceit. That is, he does for
advantage sake either disguise at his pleasure or utterly falsify or deny the
truth.

He that T
HE that takes away the garment in the cold season is like vinegar poured upon
nitre, or like him that sings songs to a heavy heart. Chap. 25.20. (Or as
Trem. according to the, usual signification of the first word of the sense
noe, and as all things seem most aptly to agree thus. As he that putteh on a
garment in the cold season, or vinegar upon niter, so is he that sings songs
to a troubled mind. That is, he comfort the heavy heart, as the garment
causes warmth to the cold body, and as vinegar resolves niter and makes it
fit for use, whether for scouring or any other service.

He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread; but he that follows
after vain things, (That is, which spends his time unthriftily) is
destitute of understanding. Chap. 12.11. And Chap. 28.19. he shall be filled
with poverty.

He that troubles his own house shall inherit the wind: and the fool shall
be servant to the wise in heart. Chap. 11.29.

He that trusts in his own heart is a fool, but he that walks in wisdom
(that is, he that walks in the fear of God and makes him his stay) shall be
delivered. Chap. 28.26.

He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer is
abominable. Chapter 28.9.

He that VV
HE that walks on forward in his integrity is righteous: and blessed shall
his children be after him. Or thus. The righteous man walks on forward in his
integrity, and blessed, etc. Chap. 20.7.

He that walks on in his righteousness fears the Lord: but he that is
lewd in his ways despises him. Chap. 14.2.

He that walks uprightly (or entierly) shall be saved: but he that is stoward
in either of his ways, (to wit, either on the right hand or on the left;
either in excess or in defect, that is, in any extreme wickedness) shall
once fall. (Or) fall in one of them. Chap. 28.18.

He that walks uprightly (or entirely, as before) walks boldly, but he that
peruerteth his ways, shall be known. (Or made an example. To wit, by some
judgment of God that other may learn to beware. Chap. 10.9 as it follows
verse 10. He that winketh, etc.

He that walks with the wise shall be wise; but he that is a companion with
fools shall be afflicted, (or rather) will wax worse. Chap. 13.20.

He that winketh with the eye, (that is, the close dissembler) who works
sorrow, and the foolish in talk shall be beaten. Or, shall bring trouble upon
himself. (That is, both the one and the other shall be punished. Chap. 10.10.

He that withdraws corn, (or) As touching him that withdraws corn, the
people will curse him: but blessing shall be upon the head of him that sets
it forth to sell. C. 11.26

H I
HIgh talk (or excellent speech) be comes not a fool, (that is, to utter
it) (or) is nothing pleasant to a fool, (to wit, when he beaneth it from the
mouth of an other:) much less lying talk (is pleasing) to him that is well
disposed. (Or besemeth) a Prince, or chief man. Chap. 7.17.

H O
Honor the Lord with thy riches, and with the first fruits (or chief) of all
thine increase. So shall thy barnes be filled with abundance and thy presses
shall gush out with new wine. Chap. 3.9.10.

House and riches are inheritance from fathers (or ancestors) but a prudent
wife comes from the Lord. Chap. 19.14.

I
IF a wise man contend, (or reason the matter) with a foolish man, whether he
be angry or laugh, yet there is no rest. Cha. 29.9. as Luke. 7.31. etc.

If he that hates thee be hungry, give him bread to eat, and if he be thirsty
give him water to drink: For thou shall (as it were) heap coals upon his head,
(that is, thou shall this way best win his love if he will be gained, or
execute the best revenge in leaving him to the judgment of God, if he will
continue his malice) and the Lord will recompense thee. To wit, all which
thou may seem to have cast away upon thine enemy. Chap. 25.21.22.

If thou be faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small. Or after an
other pointing of the sentence thus. If thou behave thy self faintly (or
remisly and negligently,) thy strength shall be small (or streighted) in the
time of straightness. Or adversity. Deliver them that are drawn to death;
(that is, such as are violently and not by due course of justice haled to
death) for will thou withdraw thy self from such as are going aside to death
(or slaughter?)

If thou say, behold, we knew it not: shall not he that pondereth the hearts
understand? and he that keeps thy soul, shall not he know? and will not he
also recompense every man according to his works? Chap. 24.10.11.12. A
precept to those that have lawful power in their hand to rescue the oppressed:
and also to such as be in favor with chief magistrates that they do solicit
their cause: finally to every one of the servants of God that they mutually
help one an other against the injuries of the wicked and ungodly.

If thou have found honey eat that which is sufficient for thee, least being
full of it thou do vomit it:

So make thy foot precious (to wit, by withdrawing it) from thy neighbors
house, least he be glutted with thee and hate thee. Chap. 25.16.17.

In all labor there is abundance (or some profit arising by it) but when the
lips only talk, all goes to wrack, Chapter 14.23.

Incline thine ear and hear the words of the wise, and apply thine heart
unto my knowledge:

For it shall be a pleasant thing, if thou keep these things in thy belly,
and if they be directed together in thy lips: If thy confidence shall be in
the Lord; and if also thou will do that which I have this day made known unto
thee.

Have I not written to the excellent things (or most princely sayings)
consisting in councels and knowledge;

Making known unto thee that which is certain, even the words of truth, that
thou may answer with words of truth to them that shall send unto thee? etc.
Chapter 22.17.18.19.20.21.

In many words (or) By a multitude of words, (that is, though he that is
faltie use never so many words to excuse himself) iniquity cease not:
(that is, the fault is never the less for that) therefore he that is wise
refraineth his lips. To wit, as one being content to take a rebuke when his
falt is laid open before him. Chapter 10.19.

Instruction is evil to him that forsakes the way, (that is, he accounts it
evil, he cannot like of it no more then the rogue or vagabond person likes to
be directed to go to the place where he should be, to follow the duties of
some honest calling) and he that hates correction shall die. Chapter 15.10.

Intend (or practice) not any hurt (or mischievous device) against thy
neighbor who dwells without fear by thee.

Strive not with any man causeles, when he has done thee no harm, Chapter,
3.29.30.

In the fear of the Lord there is an assured strength, (or a strong
assurance,) and his children shall have hope. Or rather thus, for he will be to
his children as a place of reskue. Or succor. Chapter 14.26.

In the house of the wise man there is very desirable (that is very precious)
treasure and oil: but a foolish man deuoureth it. Chapter 21.20.

In the light of the Kings countenance is life, and his favor is as a full
cloud of the latter rain. Chap. 16.15.

In the lips of him that has understanding wisdom is found: but the rod must
be at the back of him that wants heart. That is, of him that is destitute
of wisdom Chap. 10.13.

In the mouth of the foolish man is the rod of pride, (that is, such proud and
naughty speeches which are as a rod to cause him self to be beaton with all)
but the lips of wise men do preserve them. To wit, themselves from
punishment through their wise ordering of their speeches. Chapter 14.3.

In the multitude of people is the honor of the king; but for want of people
comes the destruction of the prince. Chapter 14.28.

In the prosperity of the righteous (that is, when they prosper or when it
goes well with them) the city rejoices (to wit, all godly minded Citizens)
Yea with shouting) or singing do they rejoice) when the wicked perish. to wit,
whether by the ordinary visitation and hand of God or by any extraordinary
judgment. For it goes well with the sheep when the Wolf is worried etc.
Chapt. 11.10.

In the transgression of a man is an evil snare, but the righteous do sing
and rejoice. To wit, as having the liberty and peace of a good conscience. Chapter
29.6.

In the transgression of the lips is the snare of a wicked man, but the just
shall come out of adversity Chapter 12.13.

Joy comes to a man by the answer of his mouth: and o how good is a word
(or a thing) in his due season. Ch 15.23.

I passed by the field of the slothful man, and by the vinyarde of the man
destitute of heart (that is, of understanding.)

And behold it was all grown over with thistles: and nettles had covered the
face thereof, and the stone-wall thereof was broken dowen.

Then I beheld, I considered it well, I looked upon it, I received instruction.

Yet a little sleep, a little slumber (or thus) By a few short sleeps, by a
few short slu^bers, by a little whiles fowlding of the hands to lie down (or)
in playing the slug still,

Therefore (or in the mean while) thy poverty comes as a speedy traveler
(or wayfaring man) and thy necessity like an armed man, (to wit to take the
sluggard unarmed and in his naked bed so as there can be no resisting) Chapter,
24.30.31.32.33.34. Read in G. Go to the pismire etc.

It is a man's honor to cease from strife, but every fool will be meddling,
(or) will make himself business. Chap. 20.3.

It is an abomination for Kings to commit wickedness: for the throne is
established by justice. Chap. 16.12.

It is a pastime to a fool to do wickedly: but wisdom to a man of
understanding, that is, it is his delight to exercise or practice that which is
according to true wisdom. Chapter 10.23.

It is a snare to a man (to wit, such a snare at will entrap him to
destruction) to devour that which is sanctified and after vows to inquire (to
wit, with a mind to elude or call them back again. Chapter 20.25.

It is better for a man to meet a bear, robbed of her whelps, then a fool in
his folly. Or thus, as the words will well bear. Let a man meet a she
bear robbed of her whelps, and not a fool in his folly. (That is, while he
is in his rage.) As though he should say: this were more perilous and
unavoidable then that. Chapter 17.12.

It is better to dwell in a corner of the house roof (to wit, of the flat
roof as the people of Israel used to build) then with a contentious woman in
a wide house. (Or) in a house of society. That is, fit and comodious for man
and wife to dwell comfortably therein. Chapter 21.9. And the same again. Chapter 25.24.

It is better to dwell in the wilderness then with a contentious and angry
woman. Chapter 21.19.

It is joy to the just to do judgment; but it is a destruction (or as one
would say, it is a death) to the workers of iniquity. To wit to do that
which is equal and right. That is to say, they utterly abhor and shun it.
Chapter 21.15. Read in E. Enter not etc.

It is naught, it is naught, (that is, it is very naught, the worst that ever
I handled etc.) says the buier: but when he is gone a part, he boasts
himself. To wit, of his good penniworth; how like ye my bargain says he,
have I not hucked well etc. Here therefore is the falt: the correction of it
follows.

There is gold (says K: S:) and plenty of precious stones (to wit, in the
hands of the buyer and seller) but the lips of knowledge are the most
precious jewel. (or the instrument and implement or merchandise of greatest
price) to wit, when as men have a conscionable regard of that which they
speak both in buying and selling, and in all other their contracting and
dealing one with an other Chapter 20.14.15.

It is not good to accept the person of the wicked, to cause the righteous to
fall in judgment, Chapter 18.5.

It is not good to eat overmuch honey, neither is it any glory for men to
search after their own glory, Ch: 25.27.

Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of fools, Chapter
19.29. Readin A. A wicked witness etc.

Justice exalts a nation: but sin is a shame (or reproach) to any nation. Or
people. Chapter 14.34.

K
Keep thine heart with all diligence: for thereout comes life. Chapter 4.23.
Read in A. Above. etc.

L
LAy no wait o wicked man against the house of the righteous; spoil thou not
his resting place. For be it that a just man fall seven times yet he rises
again: (to wit, by the holy help and hand of God) but the wicked they fall
together (or all at once) in their mischief. That is, God casts them down
by an irrecouerable and deadly downfall. Chapter 24.15.16.

Let an other man praise thee and not thine own mouth: a stranger and not
thine own lips. Chapter 27.2.

Life is in the way of righteousness, and in that path way is no death. That
is, immortality and everlasting deliverance from death and from all fear of
death is there to be found. Who therefore should not be effectually moved to
enter that path and to walk constantly in it? Chapter 12.28.

Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thin eyes, (that is, be
diligent in following the duties of thy calling) and so be thou satisfied with
bread. Or, thou shall be satisfied with bread. Chapter 20.13.

M
MAke no friendship with an angry man, neither go thou with the furious man:
Least thou learn his ways, and receive destruction (or a snare) to thy soul.
That is, such a snare as should endanger thy soul to the heavy displeasure
of God, Chapter 22.24.25.

Many devices are in man's heart: but the council of the Lord it shall stand.
Chap. 19.21.

Many do seek the face of the ruler: but every man's judgment, comes, from
the Lord. Chapter 29.26.

Many men, (or thus) As touching the multitude (or greater part of men) every
one makes boast of his goodness: but who can find a man of faithfulness?
That is to say, a man that is very faithful indeed. Chapter 20.6.

Many reverence the face of the Prince. Or thus; Many make suit to the prince:
(or to him that is francke and liberally minded:) and every man is friend to
him that gives gifts. Or, that is bountiful, Chapter 19.6. But it is
contrariwise with the poor man who is cast off on all hands, as it follows
in the next verse. Read in A. All the brethren etc.

Mercy and truth: Or we may read thus: Clemency and faithfulness preserve the
king, and he establishes his throne by clemency. Or mercy. Chapter 20.28.

Much food is in the field of the poor: but the field is destroyed without
discretion. Or as follows. Much food comes to the poor by tillage: but
there is that consumes himself through neglect of his duty. He means even
some of such as have (as we speak) much to take to, Chapter 13.23.

My son, be wise and rejoice my heart that I may answer him that would
reproach me in any matter. Chapter 27.11. Mark here how notably the good bringing
up of children pleads for the credit and estimation of Parents.

My son, eat honey for it is good, and the honey comb which is sweet to the
roof of thy mouth: So know that wisdom will be to thy soul if thou shall
find it; for there shall be a reward and thy hope shall not be cut off. Chapter
24.13.14.

My son, fear the Lord and the King, and have no fellowshippe with them
that are seditious (or loose and licentious) for their destruction shall rise
up suddenly; and who knows the ruin of them both? That is, both of the
inordinate and licentious themselves, and also of those that shall sort and
company with them. Chapter 24.21.22.

My son, give me thy heart, and let thine eyes delight in (or heedefully
observe) my ways: For a whore is as a deep ditch, and a strange woman (that
is, such a one as estrangeth her self from the holy ways of God: as Chap.
2.16.17.) Is as a narrow pit. Also she lies in wait as for a pray, and
increases transgressors among men.

To whom is woe? To whom is alas? (or sorrow.) To whom is much strife? To
whom is babbling? To whom are wounds without cause? (that is, even such as he
may thank no body for but himself) to whom is the rednes of the eyes? Even
to them that tarry long at the wine; to them that go and seek after mixed wine.

Look thou not upon the wine when it waxes red, and utters his color in
the cup, and goes down pleasantly (or rather thus) and moves it self (or
sparteleth and springs, to wit, in the cup) as being of the right (or best)
kind.

In the end thereof, it will bite like a serpent, and sting like a cookatrice
(or viper.)

Thine eyes will look upon strange women, and thine heart will speak lewd
things.

And thou shall be as one that lies in the midst of the sea, yea as one that
lies in the top of the mast. That is, greatly reeling and staggering too and
fro.

They have stricken me (will thou say) but I was not sick, they have beaten
(or pummeled) me, but I felt it not: when (therefore) I shall awake, (to wit,
as one haning slept away the former drunkenness) I will to it again, I will
seek it yet more. Chap. 23.26.27.28.29.30.31.32.33.34.35. A lively description
of the beastly insatiableness and miserable condition of the drunken man.

My son, hear thy fathers instruction, and forsake not thy mothers teaching:
for they shall be a comely ornament to thy head and as chains for thy neck.
Chap. 1.8.9.

My son, hearken unto my words, incline thine ears to my sayings.

Let not them (that is, the wicked, to wit, by any persuasions of theirs to
the contrary) cause that they (to wit, my words) should depart from thine
eyes, but keep them in the midst of thy heart.

For they are life unto those that find them, and healthful to the whole flesh
of every of them.

Above every watch watch over (or keep) thine heart, for from it are the
outgoings (or issues, that is. the actions) of life.

Put away from thee a froward mouth, and remove wicked lips far from thee.
Let thine eyes behold the right (or look right forth) and let thine eie-lids
look directly before thee.

Ponder the path of thy foot, yea let all thy ways be ordered aright: (or
well setteled and stayed:) Turn not to the right hand nor to the left, but
remove thy foot from evil. That is, from every by-path of sin. Chapter 4.
verses. 20.21.22.23.24.25.26.27.

My son, if sinners intise thee consent thou not. Chap. 1.10. etc. And verses
15.16. My son walk thou not in the way with them, refrain thy foot from
their path: For with their feet they run to evil, and they make have to
shed blood, etc.

My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, and I also; (that
is, I shall wholly or thoroughly rejoice, even I that am thy father.) yea my
reins shall rejoice, when thy lips speak righteous things.

Let not thy heart be envious against sinners: but let it be in the fear of
the Lord continually: Or, let it imitate those that are constant in the fear
of the Lord: For surely there is a reward, and thy hope shall not be cut off.
Chap. 23.15.16.17.18.

My son, if thou be surety for thy neighbor, (or friend) and have stricken
hand with a stranger, Thou have snared thy self with the words of thy mouth,
thou art taken with the words of thine own mouth. (To wit as it were in the
net of the fouler, or in the trap of the hunter.)

Do this now o my son, and deliver thy self, seeing thou art come into the
hand of thy neighbor: (To wit, of him for whom thou art become suertie, for
whom, and by tendering of whose credit, thou have endangered thine own self,
and stand bound to pay the debt if he neglect to do it:) Go thou, humble
(or submit) thy self, (to wit, unto the creditor, that if need be thou may
find him favorable) and earnestly solicit, (or do thou mightily importune)
thy neighbor, (that is, him for whom thou art surety, to wit, least he
break day, etc.

Give no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eie-lids.

Deliver thy self as a roe (that is, as a swift dear) from the hand of the
hunter, (to wit, as one all ready taken by the heel) and as a bird from the
hand of the fowler. Chap. 6.1.2.3.4.5.

My son, bear no more the instruction. that causes to err from the words
of knowledge. Or as follows. Leave off (or cease) my son, to err from the
words of knowledge, to the end thou may hearken to instruction. That is,
that thou may be a true and profitable scholar in the schoolehouse of God;
which possibly cannot be till thou renounce the vanity of thine own
erroneous ways. Chap. 19.27.

My son despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither be thou grieved at
his correction. Or let it not be tedious unto thee, that is, anoide either
extremity, and labor to make a good and holy use of every visitation,
blessing the Lord in them. etc.

For the Lord corrects him whom he loves, even as a father does the child
in whom he delights. Or, to whom he wishes well. Chap. 3.11.12.

N
O
OF a Prince that hearkeneth to lies, all his servants are wicked. Chap. 29.12.

O how much better is it to get wisdom then gold; and to get understanding
(o how much more) to be desired above silver! Chap. 16.16.

Only by pride does man make contention, but with the well advised is wisdom.
Chap. 13.10.

Open rebuke is better then secret (or concealed and hidden) love. That is,
such love as is idle, and fails in the necessary dnetie of it. The wounds
(that is, the most sharp rebukes) of a lover (that is, of a loving friend,
such a one as loves indeed) are faithful: but the kisses of an enemy (or of
him that hates, though he pretend friendship) are to be prayed against. (Or,
to be had in execration how pleasant or fauning soever they be. Chapter 27.5.6.

O thou my son, hear and be wise; and let thine heart go this way. (To
wit, which I shall now show thee.) Keep not company with those that be
drunken with wine, nor with those that glut themselves with meat: For the
drunkard and the glutton shall be poor and drowsinesse (to wit, that which
follows and accompanies drunkenness and gluttony) clotheth with rags.
That is, makes such as take that course, to go in ragged coats.

Obey thy father that has begotten thee, and despise not thy mother when she
shall be old.

Buy the truth but sell it not; even the truth of wisdom and instruction
and understanding. Or in this sense. Buy all these and sell none of them but
keep them by thee as jewels for ever to be known by.

The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice, and he that begets a
wise child, (that is, such a child as in time imbraceth the holy wisdom
and fear of God) has joy of him. (Wherefore thou for thy part,)

Let thy father rejoice, and thy mother: (to wit, for thy wisdom and godliness
which they shall perceive in thee:) yea let her that bare thee rejoice. Chapter 23.
verse. 19.20.21.22.23.24.25.

P
PLeasure is not comely for a fool, much desse that a servant should bear
rule over princes. That is, it is not meet that such a one should bear rule
who stands in more need to be ruled himself Chap. 19.10.

Poverty and shame (or reproach) shall be to him that refuses (or withdraws
himself from) instruction: but he that regards (that is, which continuoth in
regarding or observing correction, to wit, so as he will end his life
thereafter) shall be honored. Chapter 13.18.

Prepare thy work without, and make ready thy things in the field, (or
thus) and get that for thy use (or commodity) which is in the field (that is,
do the most necessary things first) and after also thou shall build thy
house. Chapter 24.27.

Pride goes before destruction, and an high mind before the fall. Chapter 16.18.

Proud, hautie, and scornful is his name, who in his wrath works
arrogancy. That is, who carries himself proudely in his anger. Chapter 21.24.

Q
R
Remove not the aunciente bounds, neither enter thou into the fields of the
fatherless: to wit, with a mind to disposesse them of their right:

For their redeemer (or a uenger) is mighty, he will plead their cause
against thee. Chapter 23.10.11.

Riches avail not in the day of wrath: (that is, when God shall enter into
judgment with the wicked rich man) but righteousness deliueeth from death. That
is, they that love and practice righteousness in the obedience of the true
justifying faith, find favor with God, and shall escape from death to life
Chapt. 11.4.

Riches gather many friends, but the poor man is separated from his neighbor,
Chap. 19.4. and verse. 6. Read in M. Many reverence etc.

Righteous lips are the delight of Kings (to wit, of good Kings, and when
they be affecte as they ought to be) and he (that is, the good King) loves him
that speaks right things. Chapter 16.13.

Righteousness preserves him that is entire (or sound and upright) in the
way: but wickedness overthrows the man of sin. that is, such a one as has
given him self up to sin. Chapter 13.6.

Rob not the poor because he is poor, (as though he should say, let even his
poverty be as letters of protection to safe conduct him from all injurious
dealing) neither oppress the afflicted, in the gate, (that is, in the place of
judgment and under color of law:

For the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that
spoil them: that is, he will utterly spoil them. Chap. 22.22.23.

S
Say not, I will recompense evil, but wait upon the Lord, and he will save
thee Chapter 20.22.

Scornful men bring the city into a snare, (or) set it on fire. Towit, as
being the bellows of contention) but wise men (to wit, such as have wise regard
of common peace and tranquilitte) turn away wrath That is, they meet with and
prevent seditions etc. Ch, 26.8.

See thou a man diligent in his business? He shall stand before kings, he
shall not stand before the base sort. Chapter 22.29.

See thou a man hasty in his words (or matters and business,) there is
more hope of a fool then of him. Chapter 29.20.

See thou a man wise in his own eyes (that is, in his own conceit, standing
as it were in his own light as we say,) there is more hope of a fool then of
him, Chapter 26.12.

Slouthfulnes causes deep sleep to fall upon a man (whereby comes want)
and the deceitful person shall be hungry. Or afamished. That is, one
punishment shall be for both these sins, as vsualle meeting in one and the
same person Chapter 19.15.

Smite a scorner, and the folish (or simple) man will be made wary: and by
reproving him that is prudent, he (that is, the simple man) will understand
knowledge. The meaning is that either way the simple man will be helped
notwithstanding he be of meet capacity. Chapter. 19.25. Read again in W.
When the scorner etc.

Speak not in the ear of a fool, for he will despise thee with the wisdom
of thy sayings, Chapter 23.9.

Surely it is not good to conde^n the just, nor that princes should smite such
for equity. Or thus in an other construction. neither is it equal to smite
such as are well disposed. Chapter 17.26.

T
TAke his garment that is suerty for a stranger and a pledge of him that is
suerty for strange woman, Chap. 20.16. And again Chapter 27.13. The meaning
is, that God permits that suchas will be so rash, and foolish
(notwithstanding his admomtion to the contraris) that they should pay well for
it.

Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall proceed a vessel for
the finer. Or thus. As by taking away etc.

So by talding a way the wicked from before the King, his thorn shall he
established in righteousness. Chap. 25.4.5.

Teach (or as we may read it) Catechize a child in the trade of his way (or
concerning that course of life which be is to enter into, That is, how he is to
walk in good dut is both toward God and man in the faith and obedience of the
Gospel) and even when he shall be old he will not depart from is. Chapter 22.6. A
notable and most gracious encouragement for all christian Parents to bring up
their children even from their young years in the nurture and information of
the Lord.

That which is to be desired of a man is his goodness, Or thus: That which a
man ought chiefly to desire, is his goodness: (that is, that he may be kind
and bountiful, then the which nothing beseems a man more): but a poor man
is better then a liare Chapter. 19 22.

That which the wicked fears shall come upon him: but God will grant the
desire of the righteous. Chapter 10.24. The next verse may be a further exposition
of this. Read in A. As the whirlwinde. etc.

The B
THe beginning of strife is as one that opens the waters: therefore ere the
contention be meddeled with, leave off. Or thus. He that is the beginning of
strife, is as one that opens a passage for the waters (to wit, of such as are
dammed or banked up) wherefore ere it break forth (or spread it self) leave
off the contention. Chapter. 17.14.

The beutie (or ornament) of young men is their strength, (or valor) and the
glory of the aged is the gray head. (Or thus) and the graynesse (or
whiteness) of the hair is a seemly (or reverend) gracing to the aged. Chapter
20.29.

The blessinge of the Lord it makes rich, and he does add no sorrow with
it. Chapter 10.22.

The blewnesse (to wit, of the flesh) and the wound (or stroke that fetches
blood) yea stripes that pierce to the bowelles of the belly (that is, which
make the heart akeas we say) serve to purge (or are the instruments for the
purging, that is, for the curing and amending of) the evil man. He meaenth
such a one as we call stark naught or a very bad one. And thus we may see how
necessary severity is allowed and commended of God. Chapter 20.30.

The C
THe crown of the wise is their riches, but the foolishness of fools is
folishnesse. To wit, still: that is, fools are never the wiser though they be
rich, and therefore their riches is no crown or ornament but rather a reproach
unto them, seeing, having riches they neither know nor regard to use them
well, but are vassals unto them. Chap 14.24.

The D
THe deceitful man shall not roast that which he has taken in hunting: he that
is diligent (inioyeth) the precious riches (or wealth) of man. Chapter 12.27.

The desire of the righteous is only good (that is prosperous) but the hope of
the wicked is indignation. That is, howsoever they hope for good, that falls
out which grieueth and vexes them as a just punishment from the wrath and
indignation of God. Chapter 11.23.

The desire of the slothful slaieth him, in so much as his hands refuse to
work.

He evermore coueteth, gredilie; but the righteous gives and spares not. Or
withholdeth not. To wit, his hands either from giving according to his
ability, or from diligence in his honest labor. Chapter. 21.25.26.

The discretion of a man causes him to defer his anger (or makes him long
suffering) and it is his glory to pass by an offense. Chapter 19.11.

The E
THe ear that harkeneth to the correction of life, shall remain among the
wise. Chapter 15 31.

The evil man is snared by the wickedness of his lips, but the just shall
come out of adversity. Or thus, In the transgression of the lips is the
snare of an evil man etc. as before. Ch: 12.13.

The evil shall bow (or in the present tense, do bow) themselves before the
good, and the wicked at the gates of the righteousse. This does God of his
mercy bring to pass many times, how contrary so ever it be to the liking
of the wicked. Chapter 14.19.

The eyes of the Lord are in every place beholding the evil and the good.
Chap. 15.3.

The eyes of the Lord preserve knowledge, (that is, he preserves all such as
have carewisely to understand, and to do the will of God) but he overthrows
the words of the transgressor. That is, whatsoever he undertakes, according
to the folly of his own heart. Chapter 22.12.

The excellent that formed all things both rewards the fool, and also
rewards transgressors. Ch: 26.10. A sentence of great difficulty from the
variety of the hebrewe construction. Read in A. As a throne etc.

The F
THe fear of man lays a snare (that is, his own fear is a snare to
himself) but he that trusts in the Lord shall be exalted. (That is, he shall
be lifted up and set as it were on a high place out of danger. Chapter 29.25.

The fear (or rather) The terror of the King is like the roaring of a young
Lion (that is, it is most fierce and terible) he against whom he is angry,
sins against his own soul, (that is, he puts himself in the peril of
his life by provoking him) Chapter 20.2.

The fear of the Lord increases the days: but the years of the wicked
shall be diminished. Ch: 10.27.

The fear of the Lord is a well spring of life to avoid the snares of
death. Chap. 14.17.

The fear of the Lord is the beginning (or as the word also signifies, the
excellency and chiefetie) of knowledge, but fools despise wisdom and
instruction. Chapter 1.7.

The fear of the Lord is the instruction of wisdom and before honor goes
humility. Chapter 15.33. Or rather thus, The instruction of wisdom goes before
the fear of the Lord, and humility before honor. But how then may it be
said as in the sentence next before, that the fear of the Lord is the
beginning of knowledge. Answer. Instruction is the means and instrument to
give wisdom; but knowledge is not heartily embraced until God by his holy
Spirit, does, work a reverend regard of it.

The fear of the Lord tends to life (or is for the maintenance and
nourishment of life that is to say, of spiritual life:) he that is once
satisfied therewith shall contine we so, neither shall he be visited with
evil. Chap. 19.23.

The fining pott is for silver (that is, for the trying and fining of sluer)
and the furnace for gold, yea every thing according to his dignity (or
answerable to that use for the which it is praised) But though thou should
bray a fool in a mortar among wheat brayed (or as between the mil or querne
stones) with a pestell, yet would not his foolishness depart from him. Chap.
27.21.22. Behold therefore how deeply and strongly naughtiness is settled in
our corrupt nature which can not by any means be beaten out but by the
almighty grace of the spirit of God.

The foolish do inherit folly (that is, they hold is and rejoice in it as in
an inheritance) but prudent men make knowledge their crown. Chap. 14.18.

The foolish make a mock of sin) or rather as follows) Sin (or giltines
of sin) is a mean to set fools at one (or to bring the^ into a fools
paradise as one would say,) but among the righteous, that which is acceptable,
to wit, that which God allows, works content and agreement among them, Chap.
14.9.

The foolish man will believe euerything, but the prudent man will consider his
steps, Chapter 14.15.

The foolishness of a man peruerteth his way and his heart fretteth against
the Lord. Read in A. As well. etc. Chap. 19.3.

The froward in heart finds (or attaineth to) no good thing: and he that has
a naughty tongue (or is guilefull and crafty in his tongue, that is, he who
has a glibbe tongue to carry matters this way and that way to serve his own
turn) he shall fall in evil. Chapter 17.20.

The fruit of the righteous is the fruit of the tree of life, and he that
wins souls is wise. Or thus. For he being wise instructs souls. To wit,
in the way of life and salvation. Chap. 11.30.

The G
THe gathering of treasure, (word for word, the work of treasures, that
is, about the gathering of treasure,) by a deceitful tongue, is as vanity
tossed (or driven) to and fro: they seek death. To wit, which seek riches so.
Chap. 21.6.

The glory of God is to hide a thing, but it is the honor of kings to search
out a matter. The heavens in height and the earth in deepnesse, and the heart
of kings cannot be searched out. (Or there is no searching out of them.) Chapter
25.2.3. The first of those proverbs which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah
copied out.

The good man shall give (or deliver over) his inheritance to childres children
(that is, God wilso bless his posterity.) And the riches of the sinner are
laid up for the righteous. C. 13.22.

The H
THe hand of the diligent shall bear rule, but the idle (or deceitful hand)
shall be under tribute. Chap. 12.24.

The heart knows the bitterness of the own soul, (that is, of it self)
and no strange thing shall intermingle it self with the joy thereof. That is,
as enery man is affected either well or ill, so he likes or disliketh,
keeps or shunneth company, etc. Chap. 14.10. Read the 9. verse. The foolish
make a mock of sin etc. This seems to render a reason of that.

The heart of him that has understanding seeks knowledge (that is, it
continues in seeking) but the mouth of sooles is fed with foolishmesse. Chap.
15.14.

The heart of man purposes his way: but the Lord does direct (or order and
dispose) his steps. Chap. 16.9.

The heart of the righteous studieth (or meditateth) what to speak, but the
mouth of wicked men belcheth out (that is, rudely and rashly babbleth out)
evil things. Chapter 15.28.

The heart of a wise man guides his mouth wisely and he adds (or furthereth)
doctrine by his lips. Chap. 16.23.

The heart that is declined (or he whose heart is turned back) shall be satiate
with the own ways, but a good man (will depart) from him. That is, he will be
shie of his company. Chapter 14.14.

The hope that is deferred makes the heart to faint; but when the desire (that
is, the thing desired) comes, it is as a tree of life. Chap. 13.12.

The house of the righteous has much treasure (or strength: that is, it is
firmly established) but by the revenues of the wicked man, his house is
disturbed. Chap. 15.6.

The house of the wicked shall be destroyed: but the tabernacle of the
righteous shall flourish. Chap. 14.11.

The I
THe instruction of a wise man is as a welspring of life to turn away, (that
is, it teaches us to turn away or depart from) the snares of death. Chap.
13.14.

The K
Hhe kings heart is in the hand of the lord as the rivers of water, he turns
it whithersoeuer it pleases him. That is, he makes it sail as it were a still
flowing stream to strue his own most holy purpose and counsel in all
things. Chap. 21.1.

The kings wrath, is like the roaring of a young Lion, but his favor is like
the dew upon the grass. Chap. 19.12.

The L
THe labor of the righteous tends to life, (that is, to the necessary and
comfortable main tenance of life in the fear of God) but the reuenews of the
wicked to sin. That is, they are consumed to serve their wicked lusts. Chapter
10.16. The liberal person (in heb. The soul of blessing that is, he that is
heartily beneficial) shall have plenty (in Heb. shall be fat. i. shall prosper)
and he that waters abundantly shall pour forth the more. In Heb shall cast
forth, that is, God will bless him with such increase that he shall be able
so to do. Chap. 11.25.

The light of the eyes rejoices the heart, and good hearing (that is, the
hearing of good things) makes the bones fat. Chap. 15.30. Read the next
verse. in T. The ear. etc.

The light of the Lord is the soul of man: Or rather thus. The soul of man is
as a light (or candle) of the Lord (that is, which the Lord has lighted and
set up in him) wherewith he (that is to say man) searches all the bowels of
the belly. That is, by the light of his understanding he finds out very
secret things. Chap. 20.27. This may be more particularly referred to the king
of whom we read in the 16. verse next before. Read in A. A. wise King. etc.

The light of the righteous shall rejoice, (that is, it shall be bright; their
prosperity and happiness shall be glorious) but the candle of the wicked
shall be put out. That is, all their pomp shall vanish and come to nothing. Chapter
13.9.

The lip of truth (that is, which speaks the truth) is established for
ever, but a lying tongue indureth but a moment. Or while I might never so
little move my foot. Or in the turning of a hand. etc. Chap. 12.19.

The lips of the righteous do feed many: but fools shall die for want of
wisdom. In Heb. Forwant of heart. Chap. 10.21.

The lips of the righteous do know (or regard) that which is acceptable:
(and consequently they find favor) but the mouth of the wicked speaks
froward things. Even such as procure their own overthrow. Chapter 10.32.

The lips of the wise do spread abroad knowledge: but the heart of the
foolish that which is not right. That is, they set their minds to spread abroad
false doctrine, etc. Chapter 15.7.

The Lord has made all things for his own sake, yea even the wicked for the
day of evil. Chap. 16.4.

The Lord has made even both these, the ear hearing, and the eye seeing.
Chap. 20.12. See in the letter A. A child, etc.

The Lord is far from the wicked: but he eareth the prayer of the righteous.
Chapter 15.29.

The Lord will destroy the house of proud men: but he will establish the
border of the widow, Chapter 15.25.

The Lord will not famishe the soul of the righteous, but he thrusts away
the substance of the wicked. Chapter 10.3.

The lot causes contentions to cease, yea it ends the strife betwixt the
mighty. To wit, in such cases as can not by ordinary course of trial be
judged and compounded C. 18.18. Whereof read verse 17. in H. He that is first.

The Lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is from the
Lord. Chapter 16.33.

The lying lipes are abomination to the Lord; but they that deal truly are
his delight, Chap. 12.22.

The M
The memorial of the just shall (continue) as ablessing, (that is, God shall be
praised in the honorable and thankful remembrace of them) but the name of the
wicked shall rott) that is, there shall be no gratfull mention made of them in
the church of God; nay they shall hear their just and deserved reproach. Chap.
10.7.

The mouth of a righteous man is a well spring of life (that is, he is
plentiful in gracious speech to his own comfort and to the edification and
refreshing of other) but iniquity covers the mouth of the wicked. (that is,
his own hurtful speeches and actions do as it were choke and smother
himself. Read in B. blessings. etc. Chap. 10.6.11.

The mouth of strange women, is as a deep pit, he with whom the Lord is
grievously angry (or whom he has in detestation) shall fall there. Chapter 22.14.

The mouth of the just man will be fruitful in wisdom: but it (that is
wisdom) is ent off from the tongue (that speaks) froward things. That is, to
say, wisdom can no more fructify and prosper there then tho bough which is
proyned and out off from the body of the tree. Chapter 10.32. Look the 32. verse
The lips of the righteousdo know, or (shall find) favor etc.

The N
THE name of the Lord is a strong tower the righteous runs unto it, and is
exalted. That is, he is set in a high safe place. Chapter 18.10.

The P
THe path ( (or causie-way (of the righteous is to decline from evil: he
keeps oule that keeps his way. For on either hand of this causie which god
has pitued for the righteous, are nothing but deep gulfs and quagmires to
swallow up those that slip aside. Chapter 16.17.

The patient abiding of the righteous shall be gladness: but the hope of the
wicked shall perish. Chap. 10.28.

The person that is full despises an honey comb: but unto the hungry soul
every bitter thing is sweet. Chapter 27.7.

The person that trauelleth trauelleth for himself, Or rather thus is the
latter part of the sonte^ce requires. He that is trouble in brings trouble
upon himself: for his mouth, (that is; the troublesome speech of his mouth)
reboundeth (or recoileth) back upon him. Chapter 16.26.

The pleasure (or favorable good will) of the King is toward a wise servant,
but his wrath shall be against him that is lewd, or that causes shame. To
wit, to himself and others by his foolish dealing Chap. 14.35.

The poor man and the crafts man (in such sense as we use to call artificers
handicraftes men) lives by his day labor, and every other that uses a
more liberal and gainful skill) they meet together, the Lord lighteneth the
eyes of them both, that is, God makes this difference and did inction of
callings and gives to every one their knowledge and skill and what soever good
success they have and therefore either sort are admonished to use their
labor and skill to the glory of God and their own mutual comfort in him.
Chapter 29.13. Read Exodus: 31.1.2.3.4.5.6. and Isay 28.24. etc.

The poor man is hated even of his own neighbor, but the friends of the rich
are many. That is, both far and near.

He that sins thus, (to wit, hating the poor man) shall be despised of his
neighbor, but he (or as touching him) that shows mercy to the poor,
blessed is he. Chapter 14.^0.21.

The poor man speaks with prayers (or by way of entreaty and
supplications.) but the rich man answers roughly, Chap. 18.23.

The preparation of the heart (or as the word signifies, the mustering of the
thoughts and devices thereof) are in man: but the speech of the tongue is from
the Lord. That is, no thought takes effect but by his blessing. Chapter 16.1 We
are therefore to commit the ordering of both thoughts, words and works unto
him. Read in C. Commit etc, And in A. All the ways.

The pride of man does bring him love, but honor supporteth (or holds up) him
that is humbled in spirit. That is to say, God gives honor, and honorably
esteeming them will uphold them. Chapter 29.23.

The R
The reward of humility (or of mekenes) and of the fear of the Lord is riches
and honor and life. Chapter 22.4,

The rich and the poor meet together, the Lord is the maker of them all, Chapter
22.2. That is, he does not only give the^ their being but also to be even such
as they are.

The riches of vanity (that is, which are gotten by any unjust and deceitful
means) shall be diminished: but he that gathers with the hand (that is, by
honest labor) shall increase them, Chapter 13.11.

The rich man is wise in his own conceit (that is, be thinks himself so
much the wiser or better man as he is richer) but the poor man that has
understanding can try him. or search out what is in him. Chapter. 28.11.

The rich man's riches are his strong city, and as an high wall in his
imagination. Chapter 18.11.

The rich man's riches are his strong city, and that which fears (or
daunteth) the needy is their poverty. Chapter 10.15.

The rich rules over the poor, and the borrower is made a servant to the man
that lends, Chapter 22.7.

The righteous eats to the contentaon of his mind: but the belly of the
wicked shall want. Chapter 13.25.

The righteous escapes out of trouble and the wicked comes in his stead,
Chapter 11.8.

The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor: but the way of the
wicked deceaueth them. Chapter 12.26.

The righteous knows the cause of the poor, (that is, he minds it and
searches it out with a mind to succor them in the way of justice, as Job.
29.16) but the wicked regards not to know it. Chapter. 29.7. Read Luke 18.4.

The righteousness of the upright (or entier and perfect man) directs his
way: but the wicked falls in his own wickedness. Chapter 11.5. And again in the
next verse. The righteousness of the just shall deliver them: but the wicked
shall fall in his own wickedness. Read also Chapter 26.27. He that diggeth etc.
and Chapter 11.17.18.19. and Chapter 12.20. and. 13.6. and. 21.7.

The righteous shall never be moved: but the wicked shall not dwell in the land.
(To wit, so constantly rooted and settled as the other, Chapter 10.30.

The righteous teaches the house of the wicked, but God overthrows the
wicked for their evil. Or rather thus. He that overthrows the wicked for
their evil, (or to their own hurt, that is to say, the just God) makes the
righteous wise by the house of the wicked. That is; by the example of his
judgments executed upon them, be teaches them to beware. Chapter. 21.12.

The robbery of the wicked shall abide with them (or be as it were at host
with him, to wit, as an evil guest which owes him a mischief) be cause they
refuse to execute judgment, Chapter 21.7. Read Isai: 33.1. and Haback:
2.8.9.10.11.12.

The rod and correction gives wisdom, but a child set at liberty makes his
mother ashamed. Ch: 29.15. The reason whereof may well be comprehended in the
next verse, in the words following. When the wicked increase, (to wit, as well
in age and stature as in number) transgression increases: but the righteous
shall see their fall. And therefore also to good purpose are Parents exhorted
to use correction as it follows in the 17, verse. Correct thy son. etc.

The S
The Sacrifice of the wicked (that is, all his religion being outward and
without faith and repentance) is abomination to the Lord: but the prayer of
the righteous (that is, his spiritual worship performed in truth though not
with so great ostentation as the wicked use) is acceptable to him. Chapter 15.8.

The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination; how much more when he brings
it with a wicked mind? Or in a wicked manner, that is, profanely and
contemptuously, as the people in the time that Malachi prophesied, Chapter 21.27.
Read Mal: Ch: 1.

The sinner despises his neighbor: but he that has mercy on the poor is
blessed. 14.21. Look before. The poor man is hated etc.

The slothful hides his hand in his bosom (or platter) it grieueth him to
put it (or he is as one tired with putting it) to his mouth again. Chapter 26.15.
And again Ch: 19.24.

The slothful hides his hand in his bosom (or platter as before) and
brings it not back to his mouth again. That is to say, there are a number
that do so cocker themselves in their sluggishnesse, that minding nothing but
to eat and drink, and to make much of themselves, can yet hardly find in
their heart to take any pains about that which is for man's necessity: such as
are all voluptuous Epicures, carpett knights etc. It is a lively and taunting
description of such kind of people: as are also the rest that follow: all
tending to provoke unto diligence and watchfullnesse in all good and holy duties
to the glory of God and to the common benefit of others and our selves. etc.

The slothful man says, a fierce lion is in the way; a lion is even is the
streets. Chap. 26.13.

The slothful man says, a lion is without, I should be slain in the
streate. (That is, he thinks it would be so, if he should but set his foot
without doors, specially about any good and holy work. Chapter. 22.13.

The slothful man turns himself in his bed, as the door turns on the
henges. That is, he keeps his bed as if he were fastened to it, Chapter 26.14.

The slothful man which will not plow because of winter, he shall beg in
summer because he (shall have) nothing, to wit, to relieve and help
himself. Ch: 20.4.

The sluggard (or slothful man as before) is wiser in his own conceit then
seven men that can render a sensible reason. Chapter 26.16.

The soul of the slothful man lusts, but shall have nothing: but the soul
of such as be diligent shall be made fat. That it, they shall be stored with
plenty. Chapter. 13.4.

The soul of the wicked wishes evil (to wit, through that envy and malice
which reigns in him,) his neighbor can not seem worthy to be favored in
his eyes. Chapter 21.10.

The spirit of a man will sustain his in firmitie (that is, will yield him
comfort in all his affections) but awounded spirit who can sustain it? Chapter
18.14.

The steps of man are from the Lord, (that is, they are ruled and moderated
by him): but what does man understand of his (that is, the Lords) way? Chapter
20.24. A sentence of exceeding weight to move all men to be wise unto sobriety
and to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God. Read Chapter 1.91.2.3.4.9.
and Iere: 10.23. and Job. 26.14. Ps. 139.6.

The T
THe talking (or words) of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood (that is,
to betray innocent blood) but the mouth of the righteous will deliver them. To
wit, them whose life the wicked seek how they may intrappe. Chapter 12.6.

The thoughts of the diligent are altogether profitable: but all the thoughts
of him that is rash (or headdy) tend to mere poverty Chapter 21.5.

The thoughts of the just are right; but the councels of the wicked are
deceit. That is very deceitful. Ch: 12.5.

The thoughts of the wicked are abomination to the Lord: but the pure have
pleasant words. Ch, 15.26. Read. Chapter 25.11, 12. A word spoken etc.

The congue of the just man is as the most choice (or fined) silver but the
heart of the wicked is very little worth. Chap. 10.20.

The tongue of the wise uses knowledge aright: but the mouth of fools bableth
out foolishnes. Chap. 15.2.

The treasures of wickedness profitte nothing: but righteousness delivers
from death. Chap. 10.2.

The V
THe understanding of them that have it is a well spring of life, (to teach
many in the way of life:) but the instruction of fools is (a well spring) of
folly. Chapter 16.22.

The unthrifty man (or such a one as is an inordinat and lawless person) a
very wicked man (or as we may say, one of no reckoning, a man good for
nothing, of a reprobate mind) he walks with a froward mouth.

He makes a sign (or twinkleth) with his eyes; he signifies (or speaks
after a sort) with his feet, he instructs with his fingers: that is to say,
he is altogether addicted to that which is naught: which K. S. does lively set
forth by noting the propension and bending of all his bodily parts and members
that way: Like to the earnest archer who having delivered his arrowe out of the
bow, shows how feign he would have his arrowe even hitte the mark if it
might be, by bowing his body this way and that way all the while his shaft is
flying.

Lewd (or froward) things being in his heart, he imagines (or practices)
that which is evil at all times; (that is, so often as he can get any
opportunity:) he raises up (or sends) contentions. That is, matter of
contention and strife which is a special mischief against human society.

Therefore shall his destruction come speedily; he shall be destroyed suddenly
(or suddenly crushed in pieces) without recovery. So that an irrecouerable
punishment belongs to the desperate and graceless sinner. Chap. 6.13.14.15.

The uprightness (or integrity) of the just shall guide them (or lead them
forth, to wit in the way of happiness) but the frowardness of transgressors
shall destroy them. Chap. 11.3. Read verses 5.6. The righteousness of the
upright, etc.

The VV
THE way of a fool is right in his own eyes: but he that he arkeneth to
counsel is wise. Chap. 12.15.

The way of a slothful man is as a hedge of thorns: but the way of the
righteous is plain, (or as a causied way. Chap. 15.19.

The way of life is on high (or upward) to the prudent, that he may avoid from
hell beneath. (Or which is downward. Chap. 15.24.

The way of some is perverted and strange, (Or thus.) Who so is inco^stant (or
mutable) in his way, he is also strange (to wit, from pureness or sincerity)
but he is pure whose work is right. Chap. 21.8.

The way of the Lord (that is, the course which the Lord takes in his
administration and government) is strength to the upright (or entire man: that
is, it is for their safety and preservation) but it is destruction to the
workers of iniquity. That is, so God uses to deal with the wicked. Chap.
10.29.

The way of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: but he loves him that
follows righteousness. Chap. 15.9.

The ways of man (that is, of every man,) are before the eyes of the Lord, and
he pondereth all his paths. Chap. 5.21.

The wicked man desires defense (or safeguard) from evil, but the root of the
righteous (that is, that only wherein they are rooted and grounded, to wit,
the merciful and provident care of the Lord) gives it. Chap. 12.12.

The wicked fly when none pursues: but the righteous are as the young Lion
that is bold. Chap. 28.1.

The wicked (or harmefull man) gives heed to the troublesome lip, (that is,
to him whose talk tends to the troubling and molesting of men,) and a man of
falsehood (i. a liar) hearkeneth to the tongue of misery. That is, to the
miserable or wretched tongue, which causes misery, etc. Chap. 17.4.

The wicked overthrow themselves so that they be not: but the house of the
righteous shall stand. Chap. 12.7. Read in G. God overthrows etc.

The wicked shall be a ransom for the just, and the transgressor in stead of
the righteous. Chap. 21.18.

The wicked shall be cast away for his malice: Or rather thus. The wicked
thrusts forth himself (or inforceth himself) to his own hurt: but the
righteous has hope, (or as the word signifies, finds a refuge or reskue) in
his death. that is, in his greatest peril. Chap. 14.32.

The wicked thought (or deed) of a fool is sin; (that is, a sin worthy to
be condemned:) but the wickedness of a scornful man is abomination, That is
to say, it is greatly to be abhorred above the sin of the foolish and
ignorant man. Chap. 24.9.

The wicked works a deceitful work, (that is, the fruit and reward thereof
shall be far other then he looks for) but the reward of him that sows
righteousness is sure. Or true and faithful. That is, it shall be the same
which according to Gods merciful and bounteous promise they look and wait
for: according to that which follows in the next verse. He that is firm (or
constant) in the work of righteousness (that is, in giving to every one their
due, yea in showing mercy and liberality to the poor and oppressed) (sows)
to life: but he that follows evil, does it to his own death. Chap. 11.18.19.

The wisdom of the prudent is to understand, (or wisely to take heed to) his
way: but the foolishness of fools (tends) to deceit. Chap. 14.8.

The wise in heart shall be called prudent, and the sweetness of the lips (that
is, gracious utterance of speech, or holy eloquence) increases, (or
furthereth) doctrine. Chap. 16.21.

The wise in heart will receive commandments: but the foolish in talk, (that
is, he which from the stubbornness of his heart murmureth against good
precepts and instructions) shall be beaten. (or procures his own trouble)
Chap. 10.8.

The words of a talebearer are as flatterings, (or like to the words of such
as are much broken with afflictions, that is to say, he plays the
counterfette notably, creeping as it were into the mouth of men to get
something; and therefore vvhispereth here and there pretending much good sooth,
etc.) but they go down into the bowels of the belly. That is, the words of
such are as poison to hurt very deadly. Chap. 18.8. And Chap. 26.22.

The words which the mouth of an excellent man (speaks) are like deep
waters; the welspring of wisdom is as a flowing floode. Chap. 18.4.

The wrath of a king is as messengers of death, but a wise man will pacify it.
Chap. 16.14. But on the contrary: verse 15. Read in the letter I. In the
light of the kings countenance is life, etc. Read also Chap. 19.12. The Kings
wrath, etc.

There is a way which (seems) right before man, but the issue (or end)
thereof, (is the issue) of the ways of death. Chap. 14.12. The which sentence
is further declared in the 13. and 14. verses next following. Read in E. Even
in laughing, etc. And, The heart that declineth, etc. Read also the same
repeated again. Chap. 16.25.

There is no wisdom, neither understanding nor counsel against the Lord.

The horse is prepared (or made fit) for the day of battle but salvation is
from the Lord. Chap. 21.30.31.

There is that boasts himself to be rich and has nothing, and that feineth
himself poor having great riches. Chap. 13.7.

There is that scatters and yet is more increased. and (there is) that
spares more then is right (or that withouldeth himself from that which is
right) only to poverty. that is, and yet he comes to mere poverty. C.
11.24.

There is that speaks words like the prickings (or stabbings) of the sword;
but the tongue of wise men is health. That is, it speaks those things which
may be compared to a healthful medicine Chapter 12.18.

There shall no trouble be cast upon the just (to wit, by hap hazard or chance
medley as we say,) but the wicked shall be full of evil. That is, God will
many ways above that they look for, plague and punish them C. 12.21.

These six things does the Lord hate, yea seven are abomination to his
soul,

The hautie eyes, a lying tongue; and hands that shed innocent blood:

An heart that imagines (or contrineth) wicked devises; feet that be swift in
running to mischief:

A false witness that breaths forth (or craftily forgeth and co^pacteth lies
and he that raises up ( or causes (coutentions (to come) betwixt brethren.
Chapter 6.16.17.18.19.

They that are froward in heart are abomination to the Lord: but they that are
perfect (or enter) in the way, are his delight. or such as he favorably
accepts. Chapter, 11.20.

They that forsake the law praise the wicked: but they that keep the law set
themselves (or, are as it were in conflict) against them. Chapt. 28.4.

Thine own friend and thy fathers friend, (to wit, whose friendship
descends as it were hereditarily to the) forsake thou not, neither go to thy
brothers house in the day of thy calamity: better is a neighbor that is
near, then a brother far off Chapter 27.10.

Thorns and snares (or thornie snares) are in the way of the froward; (to wit,
to prick and snare themselves withal as a fruit of their pride etc. but he
that keeps his soul (that is to say, from sin) shall be far from them. Chapter
22.5.

Through wisdom the house is builded, and by understanding it is established.

By knowledge also thy chambers shall be filled with all precious and pleasant
riches. Chapter 24.3.4.

Tough hand be to hand (that is, though they join in mutual help and
assistance) the wicked shall not be unpunished, but the seed of the righteous
escapes. Or is delivered. To wit, though one cannot help and succor an other
they being oftentimes sin^^^ and dispersed: For God is their deliverer and
auenger. Chapter 11.21.

Thou shall not remove the ancient bounds which thy fathers have made. Or set
and disposed. 22.28.

To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord then sacrifice.
Chapter, 21.3.

To have respect of person is not good, a man should (then) transgress for a
morsel of bread. Chapter 28.21. And Chap. 24.23. it is one of those things which
are said to belong to the wise.

Travel not too much to be rich; (or toil not thy self that thou might
grow rich) cease from thy wisdom, to wit, from thy natural wisdom in
compassing sea and land (as it were) to get riches. Will thou cause thine eyes
to fly toward them? to wit, as the greedy foul hastes her flight to the
pray; they are not (that is, by and by they are gone; to wit, as birds skarred
before they canbe seized on) for they do speedely betake themselves to their
wings and as an eagle they fly into the air, C. 23.4.5

Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not to thy own wisdom. In
all thy ways acknowledge him and he will direct thy goings. Chapter 3.5.6.

Here follows the whole thirty Chapter as belonging wholly to this letter.
THe words of Agur the son of Iakeh, a collection or Prophesi: the spech (or
saying) of man (that is, al excellent speech or holy doctrine and prophecy
which any man utters) is of Ithiel, of Ithiell (I say) and of vcal. That is,
of him to whom these names do most properly agree; even of almighty GOD by
the gracious presence and power of his grace; that is, to say in plain words,
GOD is the author of all prophecy. Which proposition he confirms first from
his own example as follows.

Surely (says Agur) I am a beast rather then a man; neither have I the
understanding of man. That is, which is worthy and beseeming a man according
to that excellency wherein God first created Adam. Agur therefore in these words
acknowledges, and bewaileth his natural corruption and deprauation, and also
teaches all men by his example what we are to do, both in these words and
further as it follows.

Neither (says he) have I learned wisdom, or attained to the knowledge of holy
things. That is, either of God or of his will or of any thing belonging to his
heavenly kingdom: he means that he has no true and perfect knowledge nor any
pure desire to know any of these things by natural iustinct, or mother wit as
we say: to the further disabling whereof it follows in the next words as it
were in a general challenge against all men.

Who (to wit, of all the sons and posterity of Adam) has ascended unto heaven
and descended? who has gathered the wind in his fists? who has bound the
waters in his garment? Who has established any of the ends (or bounds) of the
earth? what is his name? and what is his sons name? if thou can tell? As
though he should say none cant each man knowledge nor renew his heart unto God
but he that has done and can do all these things: that is, none but God
himself, and he whom God has sent his only son Jesus Christ through the most
powerful grace of his holy spirit by the ministry of his blessed word: the
commendation and use whereof follows in the next verse.

Every word of God (or the whole word of God) is very pure, he is a shield
to those that trust in him. Or that make him their refuge.

Put thou nothing to his words, least he reprove thee, neither be thou found a
liar.

Two things do I desire of thee; withholde them not from me until I die.
That is so long as I live.

Remove far from me vanity, and every lying matter: give me not poverty
nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me: (or with food measured out
and appointed for me:) Least I be full, and make a lie and say, who is the
Lord? or least I be poor and steal, and lay hold of the name of my God. To
wit, as one that abuses it to serve his own turn by forswearing and cursing
himself that he may seem guiltless and go still in the name and account of
an honest man etc.

Accuse thou not a servant to his master, (or as the word is more general,
hurt him not with the tongue;) least he curse thee, and thou be found to have
offended. To wit, by thy false or uncharitable accusation, whereby the poor
servant is wronged and provoked to wish evil against thee: the which thing as
Agur gives to understand does both provoke the lord to displeasure and also
is justly reproachful among men. And note herin, how great care the Lord has
of cherishing society, when as he can not bear that he which is in the lowest
state and condition among the rest should be vncurteousely dealt withal.

There is a generation which curses their father, and does not bless their
mother:

There is a generation which is pure in the own eyes (or conceit) though it
be not washed from the filthiness of it.

There is a generation whose eyes are very hautie, and whose eyelides do
lift up themselves alofte:

There is a generation whose teeth are as swords, and their chawes as knives
to eat up the poor from the earth and the needy from among men.

The horse-leach has two daughters (that is, a two forked tongue) Give, Give,
(that is, it is insatiable in sucking of blood, And beside this)

There are three things that will not be satisfied, yea four which say not
hoe, (or it is enoughe)

The grave, and the barren womb; the earth also is not satisfied with water,
and the fire says not hoe, or enoughe)

The eye which mocketh his father or despises the obedience of his mother
(that is to obey his mother) the ravens of the valie shall pick it out, and
the young eagles shall eat it. It seems that Agur means that these
ravening fowls shall strive for it, and the one take it from the other.

There be three things hid from me, yea four which I know not:

The way of an eagle in the air, the way of a serpent upon a rock, the way of
a ship in the heart of the sea (that is, in the deep sea) and the way of a
man with a maid.

The way of an adulterous woman is on this wise (to wit, as follows): she
eats, and wipeth her mouth; and says, I have not committed iniquity. That
is, she sins warily and pretends great innocence if she be charged with
her sin, and therefore it is hard to find it out. But God sees it and will
bring both the adulteress and the adulterer to judgment, commit they their
sin in never so great secret, and how impudently so ever they face it out.

The earth is moved (or trembles and shakes) under three things, yea under
four, which it is not able to bear: Under a servant when he reigns and a
fool when he is filled with meat: Under the hateful woman when she is
married, and under a handmaide when she is made heier to her mistress.

These four be small things of the earth; yet they are wise, yea verie-wise
(or full of wisdom: to wit, as having been taught to be wise):

The pismiers a people not strong, yet prepare they their meat in summer:

The conies (or rather the mice of the mounteines) a people not mighty, yet
make they their houses in the rock:

The grasshopper has no king, yet all his company goes forth by bands:

The spider takes hold with her hands, and she is in Kings palaces. How
much more then does it beseem man, who glories in his wise dome as the most
noble creature, to show forth his wisdom by a singular providence and wary
circumspection joined with a concordable consent and expert diligence in all
good office and duty, both for comfort in peace, and for defense against that
which would annoie?

These three things order well their going, yea four are comlie in going.

An old lion the strongest among beasts, which turns not back at the sight
of any.

He that is well trussed in the loins, (to wit, the lusty grayehounde or
horse, it is the periphrasis of some strong and stately beast) or a goat; and
a King against whom there is no rising up. That is to say, godly fortitude and
courage beseems well the Prince, and holy obedience and submision is the
safety of the subject: to the which purpose is that which follows in the
next two verses which be the last of this chapter.

If thou have been foolish in lifting up thy self (to wit, against the King or
any in high place above thee) yea if thou have but thought it; lay thy hand
upon thy mouth. For as when one churneth milk he brings forth butter, and as
the crushing of the nose causes blood to come forth, so the pressing (or
enforcing of wrath) brings forth strife. Chapter 30.32.33. Read Eccles. 10.20.

V
Understanding is a well spring of life etc. Read in. T. The understanding.
etc.

Unto the horse belongs a whippe, to the Ass a bridle, and a rodd to the
back of fools. Chapter 26.3.

VV
WHen a wicked man dies his hope perishes; yea his hope of chief strength
(that is, his strongest or stoutest hope, his hope of greatest confidence)
perishes. Chapter 11.7.

When pride comes then comes shame, (to wit, to the proud man) but with the
lowly is wisdom. (That is, such wisdom whereby he auoideth shame, yea for
the which he is honored.) Ch: 11.2.

When righteous men rejoice (to wit, as being set up and advanced by God to
bear rule over the rest) there is great glory (or much store of things for
ornament, namely to good men): but when the wicked rise up (that is, when they
are advanced) every man is priede into. The meaning is, no man almost can
hold his own with quiet because of their covetous oppression and tyranny.
Cha. 28.12.

When the righteous are increased (or made great, to wit, in authority and
honor) the people rejoice: but when a wicked man bears rule, the people
sighe. Chap. 29.2.

When the scorner is punished the foolish becomes wise; also when the wise
is instructed that he may understand, he (that is, the foolish and silly man,
or one of weaker capacity and net hardened in wickedness) will receive
knowledge. The meaning is, that a more simple witted man will rather learn by
the example and instruction that is given to another then if he should himself
be overwhelmed with the multitude of words or over sharply dealte withal.
Ch: 21.11. Read also Chapter 19.25. in S. Smite a scorner etc.

When the ways of a man please the Lord, he will make even his enemies to be
at peace with him. Ch: 16.7.

When the wicked do increase (to wit, either in continuance of years or in
greatness of place and honor) transgression increases: that is, they grow
in sin and proceed to greater impieties and to more gross inhumanities and
injustice) but righteous men shall see their fall. Ch: 29.16.

When the wicked man comes then also comes contempt: That is so soon as a
man shows himself to be a wicked man he makes himself despised): and with
the vile man reproach. That is, shame does accompany the man that deals vilie
or ignominiously. Ch: 18.3.

When the wicked rise up, a man hides himself: but when they perish,
righteous men are increased. That is, they flourish and prosper. Chapter 28.28.

When thou sit to eat with a ruler, consider diligently that which is
before thee (that is feed not gredily or unadvisedly:) Otherwise thou should
dest (as it were) putt a knife to thy throat (that is, thou should do thy
self a mischief) if thou would give over thy self (or yield) to thy
appetite.

Be not desirous of his deintie meats, for it is deceiuable meat. (That is,
it will quickly make a man forget himself and all good duty. etc: 23.1.2.3.

Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool, seeing he has no heart to
get wisdom? as though he should say, it is to no purpose in all the world;
no abundaunce will do a man good if his mind stand not to seek after true
wisdom: and again, he is unworthy of any outward blessing that esteems
wisdom of no worth. Chapter 17.16.

Where no wise councellers are the people fall: but where there is an excellent
counceller (that is, one of great wisdom and much experience) there is health.
Ch: 11.14.

Where there be no oxen the cribbe is clean, (that is, empty, he means,
there is want of all things when husbandry is neglected) but much increase
comes by the strength of the ox. Chapter 14.4.

Where there is no vision (that is, no true and faithful preaching of the
word of God) the people are spoiled (or rifled and left naked) but he that
keeps the law, blessed is he. That is, whosoever he be that hears and
obeys the doctrine of the word of God which is preached and interpreted unto
him. Chapter 29.18.

Who can say, I have made my heart clean; I am clean from my sin? Chapter.
20.9.

Wicked men will not understand (or regard) judgment (that is, what is
equal and right) but they that seek the Lord will understand (or consider)
all things (to wit, least for want of aduisement they should do that
which is unequal or unmeet, Chap. 28.5.

Wine is a mocker, and strong drink is raging; (that is, it makes them that
give themselves to the immoderat drinking of it ridiculous and unruly)
wherefore he that is deceived thereby (or makes his vagary in it, that is, in
bibbing of it) is not wise. Ch: 20.1.

Wisdom is high to a fool (that is, it is above his reach to conceive
rightly of matters of wisdom) he can not open his mouth in the gate. That is,
in the place of judgment. Chapter 24.7.

Wisdom is in the face of him that has understanding (that is, his sober and
well stayed countenance is a sign that he has a wise heart) but the eyes of
a fool (are wandering) toward the corners of the world. And this declares
the inconstancy and lightness of his mind. Chapter 17.24.

Wisdom rests in the heart of him that has understanding; and that which
is within fools, (to wit, their foolishness) will make it self known (it
cannot long be hidden.) Ch: 14.33.

Wise men lay up knowledge (that is, they do carefully treasure or hourd it up
in their hearts for good and profitable uses as need shall require both for
themselves and others) but destruction is near to the mouth of a fool. That
is, he is ready to utter that which may easily hurt himself and others too.
Ch: 10.14.

Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house, lest he be weary of thee and
hate thee. Chapter 25.17. Read in I. If thou have found honey. etc.

Withholde not correction from the child; if thou smite him with the rod he
shall not die: (to wit, as a malefactor for his wickedness, which otherwise
would by all likelihoode increase to his destruction: yea which is more)

Thou shall smite him with the rodd, and deliver his soul from hell.

Withholde not goodness (that is, beneficence) from the owners thereof (to
wit, from such as stand in need of it; in regard of which their necessity
and by reason of thy stewardship God has entitled them as the just object of
thy merciful liberality) when there is power in thy hand to do it: (that is,
when thou art able to be beneficial and helpful.

Say not unto thy neighbor, go and come again, and to morrow I will give
thee; if thou now have it. Ch: 3.27.28.

Without council thoughts come to naught: but by the excellency of
councellers (to wit, when from great wisdom and experience they give council)
a thought arises (that is, it prospers or is established. And then it
follovveth: Joy comes to a man by the answer of his mouth (to wit, of a
wise counceller) and o how good (that is, o how commodious) is a word (or a
thing) in his due season! Chap. 15.22.23.

Without wood (or when wood fails) the fire is quenched, and without a
talebearer strife cease: (or is whist).

As is the dead coal to burning coals, and sticks to the fire, so is a
contentious man for the kindlinge of strife. Chapter. 26.20.21.

With the fruit of his mouth shall every man's belly be satisfied, and by the
increase (or that which comes) of his lips, he shall be filled Chapter 18.20.
And verse. 21. Death and life are in the power of the tongue. Read in D. Read
also in A. Aman shall be satiatie. etc. And again. A man shall eat good
things, etc.

Here follows the whole last Chapter as principally belonging to this letter:
or rather in the greatest part of it being set down in the order of the
whole alphabet from the 10. verse to the end of the chapter as we read it in
the hebrewe text.
THe words of Lemuel the King; a prophecy (or collection and gathering
together of holy doctrine) where with his mother taught him.

What (shall I say) my son? and what o son of my womb? yea what (shall I
say) o son of my vows? that is, for whom I do specially pray and vow
thanks unto God as having thee most dear in my desiers. Here therefore is
most lively contained a most godly and tender affectioned care of a mother
tovvarde her best beloved son as one desirous even by the spirit of God to
give him the best instruction: let us therefore very diligently hearken to
her most holy doctrine: first, touching public gonernment to the 10. verse;
and then what manner of wife she would have her son to make his more
private and particulare choice of, and how they should mutually behave
themselves the one to the other and toward their children and whole family.

Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to those which bring Kings to
destruction. That is, to harlottes or any woman that is not thy lawful wife.

Far be it from Kings o Lemuel, far be it from Kings to drink wine; (to
wit, inte^perately) and from princes (far be) the desire of strong drink;
that is, all intemperate desire which would cause the evil effects following:

Least he drink and forget the decree and change (that is, pervert) the
judgment of any of the children of affliction. That is, of any that are
afflicted.

Give ye strong drink to him that is ready to perish, and wine to them that
have grief of mind.

Let him drink that he may forget his poverty and remember his misery no
more.

Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of all the children of destruction.
That is, of those that are even now appointed or given over to be cut off by
death.

Open thy mouth, judge righteously; and plead the cause of all the poor and
needy. And henceforth follows the praise and description of a gracious woman
meet to be the wife of a prince or noble ruler in the land.

Who shall find a virtuous woman seeing her price does far exceed the
pearls? (or carbuncles) That is all otherpretious things of this world.

The heart of her husband trusts in her, neither shall the spoil be wanting.
that is, through her good huswiferie he shall have so great abundance as if he
had been sodenlie enriched by the spoils of some enimte surprised.

She will do him good, and not evil; all the days of her life.

She seeks wool and flax, and works it out to the liking of their own
hands.

She is like the ships of the marchante, She brings her food from a far.

And rising while it is yet night (that is, very early in the morning) she
gives her household victual, and task to her maids. That is, she allows
them meat and work enough.

She considers a field (that is, the commodity which comes by the field)
and gets it (to wit, by lavvfull hire or purchase) and with the fruit of
her hands (that is, by the industrious labor of her hands) she plainteth a
vineyard.

She girdeth her lions with strength, and strentheneth, her arms:

She tastes that her merchandise is good, her candle therefore is not put out
by night. That is, till the evening be well spent.

Sheputteh her hands to the wherle, and her hands take hold of the spindle.

She opens her hands wide to the poor yea she puts forth both her hands
to the needy. That is, she is very liberal both in giving and sending to
them according as she either sees or understands what their need is.

She fears not for her family because of the snow (that is, lest any of her
house should take could and so fall into agues or sickness for want of meet
clothing to keep them warm against the extremity of winter) for her whole
househould is clothed with double apparel. that is, with garments well lined.

She prepares her self carpetting stuff, (or stuff for fine hangings or
couerings of beds etc.) fine silk (or linesi-cloth such as is fine fustion
etc.) and purple colored is her gament:

Her husband is known in the gates, when he sits with the Elders of the
land.

She makes fine linen cloth and sells it, and girdling, which she delivers
to the merchant man.

Strength and honor (or gracious and seemly behavior void of delicate
softnes and nicenes) is her clothing, and she laugheth touching the day
following. That is, she cares not for the morrow, but therefully depends
upon the provident care of the Lord, in hope of blessing and prosperous
success from him, walking in his holy ways: yea being content to leave all
by death or any other way if need so require.

She opens her mouth with wisdom, (that is, very wisely) and the law of
grace (or the doctrine of clemency or benignity and gentleness) is upon her
tongue. That is, it rules and guides her tongue so as she does not use any
shreude or bitter speech, neither deals she tumuliuously, but is both in
word and deed a teacher and example of holy sobriety and modesty: a grave
worthy to be diligently observed of women; who are wont very easily and
commonly to fault in the loosenes and licentiousnes of the tongue. But let us
hear further.

She ouerseeth the ways of her household, and eats not the bread of
idleness. That is, she will not live idly and vnprositably.

Her children rise up and call her blessed, (that is, they spoake honor ably of
her; giving witness to her great grace and virtue) her husband also praises
her, saying.

Many daughters have done virtuously but thou surmountest them all.

Favor (that is the vain and doting liking of men) is deceitful, and beutie,
(that is, the external cause of such doting favor,) is vanity (that is, it is
a very vain thing) but the woman that fears the Lord she gets her self
praise.

Give her of the fiuite of her hands, and lether own works praise her in the
gates. That is, openly, and with the general consent of all men.

X
Y
Y Ronsharpeneth iron, so does a man sharpen the face of his friend. Or rather
thus. As a man sharpeneth iron with iron, so does the face of his friend (that
is, his presence and familiarity) sharpen a man. To wit, both to the more
clear understanding of matters which by himself alone he could not so well
see into, and also to the increase of comfort and encouragement to the
enterprising and following of such good actions as are to be performed by him.

To God only wise be all glory and praise both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
PSALM. 127. A song of degrees: that is, A very excellent song for Solomon.


Containing in it this most notable doctrine to teach King Solomon in his time
and thenceforth both high and low in all times that the whole prosperity,
increase, and welfare, both of private families and also of the Church and
common wealth, as well in peace as in war, depends altogether upon the
gracious favor and blessing of God: without the which al means whatsoever,
are vain and void of all good and comfortable effect. And therefore that in
all things, both with means, and above all means, God is humbly to be sought
of his people, by faithful zealous and constant prayer; walking dutifully
before him in those holy ways which he has prepared for us to walk in, and
to the which he has promised his blessing.

It may besonge to the tune of the ten commandments.
EXcept the Lord the house do build,
The builders do but build in vain:
Like vain it is to watch cities,
If God do not the same maintain.
Think it but vain to rise betimes,
Eke think it vain to ly down late:
Though men do eat their bread with care,
Their care can not uphold their state.
Gods favor is the only spring,
From whence all bliss to us does flow:
Seek to him then; on him depend,
Such shall have rest both high and low.
Mark also what I shall you tell,
A thing right worthy great regard:
None can give children but the Lord,
The fruit of womb is his reward.
As heritage God does them give,
Indovving parents with their aid;
To be as shaftes in strong man's hand,
To the end they should not be dismaide.
O blessed they whose quiuers have,
Such warlike arrows in good store:
They shall prevail against their foes,
And vanquish them at their own door.
Faults escaped.
Page 26. lin. 25. for they, Read thy. Page 65. lin. 27. for, that is actions.
Read that is the actions. Page 73 lin. 15. for vsualle, Read usually. and lin.
22. for meat, read mean. Page 74. lin. 8. for strange woman, read a strange
woman. Page 80. lin. 7, put out and. And in the same page, lin 11. put out ( or.
Page 83. lin. 26. for were a, read were in a. Page 84. lin. 26. put out the,
Page 87, lin. 30. for oule, read his soul. Page, 88, lin, 11, for, The person
that trauelleth for himself, read The person that trauelleth, trauelleth for
himself. page, 89, lin, 26, for prird, read pride. page, 93, lin, 30, for, even
is the, read even in the. page, 95, lin, 6, for (that is the Lords way) read
(that is the Lords) way. page, 96, lin, 2, for (or fined silver) read or fined)
silver. page, 111, lin, 14, for (or enforcing of wrath) read (or enforcing of)
wrath.

Printed at London for Robert Dexter, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Brazen Serpent. 1596.


