ENQVIRIES TOUCHING THE DIVERSITY of LANGVAGES, and RELIGIONS through the
chief parts of the world.

WRITTEN By Edw. Brerewood lately professor of Astronomy in Gresham College in
LONDON.

LONDON Printed for JOHN BILL. 1614.

The CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS in this book.
CHAP. PAGE. 1 Of the ancient largeness of the Greek tongue. 1. 2 Of the
Decaying of the ancient Greek tongue, and of the present vulgar Greek. 8. 3
Of the ancient largeness of the Roman tongue in the time of the Roman Empire.
13. 4 That the Roman tongue abolished not the vulgar languages, in the foraine
provinces of the Roman Empire. 20. 5 Of the beginning of the Italian, French
and Spanish languages. 30. 6 Objections touching the extent of the Latin
tongue and the beginning of the mentioned Languages with their solutions, 39. 7
Of the ancient languages of Italy, Spain, France and Afrique. 45. 8 Of the
largeness of the Slauonish, Turkish, and Arabique languages. 58. 9 Of the
Syriaque and Hebrew tongues. 62. 10 Of the sundry parts of the World inhabited
by Christians. 66. 11 Of the parts of the World possessed by Mahumetans. 79. 12
Of the sundry regions of the World inhabited by Idolaters. 86. 13 Of the Jews
dispersed in several parts of the World. 92. 14 Of the Quantity and
proportion of the parts of the earth, possessed by the several sorts of the
above mentioned religions. 118. 15 Of the diverse sorts or sects of Christians
in the world, and of their several Regions. And first of the Grecians. 124. 16
Of the Syrians, or Melchites. 129. 17 Of the Georgians, Circassians and
Mengrellians. 134. 18 Of the Muscouites and Russians. 136. 19 Of the
Nestorians. 139. 20 Of the Indians or Christians of St. Tho. 144. 21 Of the
Iacobites. 151. 22 Of the Copthi or Christians of Egypt. 155. 23 Of the
Habassines. 163. 24 Of the Armenians. 170. 25 Of the Maronites. 175. 26 Of the
several Languages wherein the Liturgies of Christians in several parts of the
World are celebrated. 184.
TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER in God, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy COUNCIL.
Most Reverend,
THe argument of this discourse being religion, to whom could it be more fitly
presented then to your Grace, having (under his most Excellent Majesty)
worthily the chief care hereof. Besides, the Author of this work, whilst he
lived, so much honored your sincere and religious courses in managing the
public affairs of your eminent place, that had he thought of the publishing
thereof, no doubt but he would have presumed to gain some luster unto it from
your gracious Patronage. Succeeding him in his temporal blessings, I do
endeavor to succeed him in his virtues, dutiful affection toward your grace,
and prayers to the almighty, for the good of his Church, to increase daily
your honors, and happiness.

Your Graces in all humble observance to be commanded ROB. BREREVVOOD.

A PREFACE TO THE READER showing the occasions the Author had to write the
ensuing Discourse, and briefly describing the general state of Protestants in
Europe for a supply to the same work.
SVCH as are delighted with profound speculations, and the diligent search^ng
out of hidden verities, they have not all the same proiectes, but their various
cogitations are usually fixed upon diverse ends. Some (says a devout Father)
know that they may be known, and this is vanity: some know, only that they
may know, and this is curiosity: others know to edify, and this is charity.
How distasteful the vanity of the first sort was unto the learned, and
judicious Author of this ensuing discourse, his private and retired course of
life, his settled, and constant unwillingness, whilst he enjoyed his earthly
tabernacle, to expose any of his accurate labors to the public view of the
world, may sufficiently testify: and yet to avoid the fruitelesse curiosity
of the second rank, he was ever most ready in private either by conference, or
writing to instruct others repayring unto him, if they were desirous of his
resolution in any doubtful points of learning within the ample circuit of his
deep apprehension.

From this his modest, and humble charity (virtues which rarely cohabite with
the swelling windenesse of much knowledge) issued this spisse and dense, yet
polished; this copious, yet concise; this concise yet clear and perspicuous
Treatise of the variety of Languages and Religions through the chief regions
of the world. Praefac. in paraph. in Epist. ad Romans
Erasmus giving the reason why S. Paul writes to the Romans in the Greek,
says, it was the large extent then of this language, that his instructions
might more generally be understood; to make the truth of Erasmus assertion more
evident, he was entreated to point out particularly the amplenesse, and
multitude of such Regions, wherein this learned tongue was aunciently most
vulgar. In Mithrid.
Gesner, and Viues affirming that the Spanish, Commen^ in^. 19. and ciuit. cap.
7.
Italian, and French tongues are but the latin depraved, and corrupted by the
inundation of the Goths, Euor^a in psalm. 138 and Tractat. 7. in Joan.
and Vandals over the Southern parts of Europe, and Saint Augustine
intimating that the latin was commonly spoken in some parts of the skirts of
Affricke which border upon the Mediterrane sea; it was demanded of him, whether
in the forenamed Countries about the more ancient times of the primitive
Church, the latin was the common language, and whether the decay of it, was
the original of the vulgar tongues used by their Inhabitants in after ages.

And forasmuch as Guido Fabritius does clearly demonstrate the vulgar tongue
of Jury in the days of our blessed Saviors pilgrimage here upon earth to be
the Syriacke, which (says Prae. ad Sy^iacum Test.
Matius) grew out of the mixture of the ancient Chaldee, and Hebrew, and was
so different from the later, Prae^^, ad G^^m. ^yria
that the one could not be understood by the other: he was questioned in which
of these languages the Hebrew or Syriacke the public reading of the sacred
Scriptures in those times were prformed.

Lastly, whereas there are many Christians in Greece, Asia, Muscouia, Egypt,
and Aethiopia, it was desired of him that he would more distinctly set down
the Countries wherein they lived, their superiors to whom they are subject,
and their differences from the Roman Church, that it might more manifestly
appear, how idle are the common vaunts amongst the ignorant of her amplitude,
as though all the Christian world save a few Protestants shut up in some
obscure corner of Europe, professed the same faith she embraces and were
within the territories of her Jurisdiction. The falsehood of which glorious
boastings are in part most lively discovered in this learned Tractate,
describing the diverse conditions of Christians in the East, North and Southern
Regions of the earth which have no subordination unto the Papal Hierarchy,
but not in the West, where Protestants have cheifely their aboade; and
therefore to make it a more complete work, it will not be amiss
compendiously to declare their multitudes, amplenesse, and several habitations
in this Europaean world.

To begin with the remotest parts hereof Eastward; in the kingdom of Polonia,
as it is this present, confining on the West at the rivers of Warta, and Odera
with the Marchesates of Silesia and Brandeburge, on the East at the rivers of
Nieper and Bresnia with Moscouia, on the South at the River of Niester with
Moldauia, at the Ne commemorem dit^onis amplitudinem (inquit Erasmus de Regno
Poloniae loquens) complectentis Russos etiam A^bos, and L^tuanos quibus omnibus
latissime imperat a vistula flumine ad Tauricam Cheron^sum, a mari Balthico ad
Caparthum montem Sigismundus Rex. Eras epist ad Polo. Se^r tar. praefix expo in
orat. do.
Caparthian mountains, with Hungary, on the North with the Baltique sea,
having under its dominion Polonia, Lituania, Liuonia, Podolia, Russia the
less, Volhimia, Masouia, Prussia, which united as it were within one roundish
enclosure, are in circuit about 2600. miles, and of no less space then Spain,
and France laid together, in this so large and ample kingdom the Protestants
in great numbers are diffused through all quarters thereof; having in every
Province their public Churches, and congregations orderly severed and bounded
with Diocesses, whence are sent some of the cheifest amd most principal men of
worth unto their General Synods, which within these few years they have
frequently held with great celebritie, and with no less Christian prudence and
piety.

For whereas there are diverse sorts of these Polonicke Protestants, some
embracing the Waldensian, or the Bohemick, others the Augustane, and some the
Heluetian confession, and so do differ in some outward circumstances of
Discipline, and ceremony: yet knowing well that a kingdom divided cannot
stand, and that the one God whom all of them worship in spirit is the God of
peace and concord, they jointly meet at one General Synod, and their first
Act always is, a religious and solemn profession of their unfeigned consent in
the substantial points of Christian Faith, necessary to salvation. Thus in
General Synodes at Anno. 1570.
Sendomire, 1573.
Cracouia, 1578.
Petricoue, 1^^3.
Wlodislaue, 1^95. See the Acts of the Synods themselves
Torune, (unto which resorted in great troops Christians of all Orders, States,
and degrees, out of all Provinces of this most potent kingdom) they declared
the Bohemicke, Helueticke and Augustane confessions severally received amongst
them to agree in the principal heads of Faith, touching the holy Scripture,
the sacred Trinity, the Person of the son of God, God and man, the
providence of God, Sin, Freewil, the Law, the Gospel, Justification by
Christ, Faith in his name, Regeneration, the catholic Church, and Supreme
head thereof Christ, the Sacraments, their number and use, the state of souls
after death, the resurrection and life eternal, they decreed, that whereas in
the forenamed confessions there is some difference in phrases, and forms of
speech concerning Christ's presence in his holy supper, which might breed
dissension, all disputations touching the manner of Christ's presence should be
cut off; seeing all of them do believe the presence it self, and that the
Eucharisticall elements are not naked and empty signs, but do truly perform
to the faithful receiver that which they signify, and represent, and to
prevent future occasions of violating this sacred consent, they ordained that
no man should be called to the sacred ministry without subscription thereunto,
and when any person shall be excluded by excommunication from the congregation of
one con^ession, that he may not be received by the congregation of another;
Lastly, forasmuch as they accord in the substantial verity of Christian
doctrine, they profess themselves content to tolerate diversity of
ceremonies, according to the diverse practice of their particular Churches, and
to remove the least suspicion of rebelling, and sedition, wherewith their
malicious, and calumniating adversaries might blemish the Gospel, although
they are subject unto many grievous pressures, from the adherents of
Antichrist, yet they carnestly export one another to follow that worthy and
Christian admonition of Lactantius: Defendenda Religio est, non occidendo, sed
moriendo, non saeuitia sed patientia, non scelere, sed fide, illa enim bonorum
sunt, haec malorum.

This is the state of the professors of the Gospel in the elective Monarchy of
Polonia, who in the adjoining countries on the South Transiluania and Hungary,
are also exceedingly multiplied. In the former by the favor Gabriel Bartorius
now Prince of that Region, who not many years, since has expulsed thence all
such as are of the Papal faction, in a manner the whole body of the
Inhabitants (except some few rotten and putred limbs of Arrians,
Antitrinnitarians, Ebionites, Socinians, Anabaptists, who here as also in
Polonia, Lituania Borussia have some public Assemblies) are professed
Protestants: in the later, a greater part, specially being compared only with
such as are there addicted to the Romish superstition.

But hence Eastward in the kingdom of Bohemia consisting of 32. thousand
parishes, (now become in a manner hereditary to the house of Austria, as
likewise the kingdom of Hungary) and its appurtenances, the Marchesates of
Lusatia, Morauia, the Dukedom of Silesia, all which jointly in circuit
contain 770. miles, the Protestants are esteemed two third parts; and in
Austria it self, and the countries of Goritia, Tirolis, Cilia, the
principalities of Sueuia, Alsatia, Brisgoia, Constans, now annexed thereunto,
the most part of the people, and especially of the Nobiles fere omnes (qui in
subditos su^s, et clientes iudicia exerce^t, eorumque nonnulli vitae, et necis
^^^ent pot^sta^e ^^^mouarum opininum veneno inflecti sunt. Thesau. polit. Apot.
6.
Nobility are the same way affected, and are in regard of their number so
potent, that they are fearful unto their malignant opposites. And almost they
are of the same number, and strength in the neighbor countries of the
Archduke of Gratzden (a branch of the house of Austria, namely in Stiria,
Carinthia, Carniola, save since the year 1598. they have not had in these
countries the public exercise of their Religion by the importunate and
clandestine solicitations of the Jesuits: who notwithstanding in respect of
the number, and* potencie of the Illustres domini Ordinarij, necnon
prouinciahum pars maxima nihil non agit, vt manner nobis (ministris Euangel^^)
liceret sed Iesuitam instigationes quam totius prouinciae supplicationes plus
poterant. Histo. persecut Grae. car^^s.
Nobility on the Protestant party even in Gratts the prime City of Styria,
could not effect their desires, until in the year forementioned under
pretense of conducting the Archdukes sister into Spain to be wife unto the
now Philip the third sundry Ambassadors from the Princes of Italy, the Pope,
and the King of Spain attended with many soldiers had full possession of the
city, and presently fourteen Ministers of the Gospel in one day were by force
and violence thence eiected.

But the condition of the Protestants residing amongst the Cantons of Heluetia,
and their confederates the city of Geneua, the town of S. Gall, the Grisons,
Valesians, or seven communities, under the Bishop of Sedune, is a great deal
more happy, and settled; in so much that they are two third parts, having the
public and free practice of Religion: for howsoever of the 13. Cantons, only
these five, Thesaur. Pol. Apot. 49.
Zuricke, Schaf^use, Glarona, Basile, Abatistella are entirely Protestant; yet
these in strength, and amplenesse of territory much exceed the other seven,
and hence Zuricke the chief of the five, in all public meetings, and
Embassages has the first place.

Already then we find the state of Orthodox professors of the Gospel to be
such, that we need not complain of their paucitie, and if we further
proceed to view the many regions of the Empire, we shall have cause to
magnify the goodness of God for their multitudes.

The whole Empire, excluding Bohemia, and Austria (because the King of the one
is rather an Arbiter in the election of the Emperor, then an Elector, in this
sole case giving his voice when the other six Electors are equally divided, and
the Archduke of the other has only a kind of extraordinary place in the Diet
amongst the Ecclesiastical Princes, as sometimes the Duke of Loraine had)
consists of three Orders, or States, the Princes Ecclesiastical, the Princes
Temporal, and the free Cities. The last of these before some of them come to
be possessed by the French, Polonian, Heluetians, and others were in number
about Liberae civitates quae non alium principe^ praeter Imperatore^ agnoscunt,
and suis vtuntur quaeque legibus, olim erant 88. lam vero pauc^o res sunt,
alijs a Galliaru^, and Poloniae Regibus, and alijs occupatis. These. polit.
apot. 6.
88. and although in regard of this multitude, at this present they are much
diminished; yet the remainders of them are so potent, that a few of them,
termed the Hanse-Citties seated in the Notherne part of Germany inclusiuely
between Dantisck eastward, Hamburg westward, and joined in an offensive, and
defensive league, have been able to make good their opposition against some
mighty neighbor Princes infringing immunities.

These with the rest of the Protestantiu^ parts sequuntur liberae Civitates,
seculares Principes fere^ omnes; Catholico^um a secularibus Principes pauci, v^
(...) Cl^^^nsis. Thesaur. Pol. Apot 6.
Free Cities (which are of some number, and strength) do all in a manner
either in whole, or part (for in some of them as in Ratisbone, Argentine,
Augusta, Spire, Worms, Francfort upon Moen both Papists and Protestants make
public profession) embrace the sincere doctrine of the Gospel. And if we
pass over the Ecclesiastical Princes, who (excepting the three Electour
Ar^hbishops, of Colen Mentz, and Triuers, the Archbishops of Wer^zburg, and
Saltsburg, and some elect Bishops or Administrators of bishoprics being
laymen, and of the reformed Religion) are of small power; all the Princes
Temporal of the Empire (none of note excepted besides the Duke of Bauaria) are
firmly Protestants. Now what the multitudes of subjects are professing the
same faith with these Princes, we may guess by the amplenes of the dominions
under the government of such only as for their commands are chief, and most
eminent amongst them; As of the Prince Elector Palatine, the Duke of Saxony,
the Marquess of Brandeburge, the Duke of Wirtenburg, Landgraue of Hesse,
Marquess of Baden, Prince of Anhalt, Dukes of Brunswicke, Holst, Luenburg,
Meckleburge, Pomerane, Sweyburge, Nauburge* amongst whom the Marquess of
Brandeburge has for his Dominion, not only the Marchasate it self containing
in circuit about 520. miles, and furnished with fifty cities, and about
threescore other walled Towns; but likewise part of Prussia, for which he is
feudatarie unto the king of Poland, the Region of Prignitz, the Dukedom of
Crossen, the Signories of Sternberg, and Cotbus, the County of Rapin, and
lately the three Dukedomes of Cleue, Gulick, and Berg, of which the two former
have either of them in circuit 130. miles.

Near adjoining unto these three last Dukedomes, are those Provinces of the
low Countries governed by the States, namely Zutphen, Vtrech, Oberyssel,
Groningham, Holland, Zeland, West-frizland, in which only Protestants have the
public (for otherwise Arrians, Anabaptists, Socinians are here privately
tolerated) and free exercise of their Religion, as also in the neighbor
dominion of the Earl of East- Freezland.

But to pass from these united Provinces under the States unto France; in this
mighty kingdom, those (as they usually style them) of the Religion, besides
the Castles, and fortes that do belong in property unto the Duke of Bullen,
the Duke of Rohan, Count of Laual, the Duke of Trimouile, Mounsieur
Chastillion, the Mareshall of Digners, the Duke of Sully, and others, are
seized of above 70. Towns having Garrisons of soldiers governed by Nobles and
Gentlemen of the Religion; they have 800. Ministers receiving pensions out of
the public Finance, and are so dispersed through the chief provinces of the
kingdom, that in the Principality of Orange, Poincton almost all the
Inhabitants, in Gasconynie half; in Languedoc, Normandy, and other western
Provinces, a strong party profess the Evangelical truth. Which multitudes,
although they are but small, and as it were an handful in comparison of all
bearing the names of Papists throughout the spacious continent of France; yet
in regard of such as are entirely Popish, they have some proportion.

For to omit a great part of French Papists, who in heart believe the
sincerity of the Gospel, but dare not make profession thereof for worldly
respects, as to obtain great Offices, to avoid penalties, and injustice in
their litigious suites; almost all the lawyers, Vide instruct and Missin's des
Roys Tres ch^s^^ns and ^eleurs Ambassadeu^s, concernant le Councile de Trent.
Bor^ellum l. 4 de decret Ecclesiae Gallicae. ^ ti. 21.22 Dua reuam li. 2 de
benefi cap. 10 11. ^ 5 cap. 11.
and learned sort who no doubt have many adherents of less knowledge, hold,
That the Bishop of Rome was aunciently the first and chiefest Bishop according
to the dignity of precedencie, and order, not by any divine Institution, but
because Rome was the chief City of the Empire; That he obtained his primacy
over the Western Church by the gift and clemency of Pipine, Charles the
great, and other Kings of France, and has no power to dispose of Temporal
things; That it belongs to Christian Kings and Princes to call
Ecclesiastical Synods, and to establish their decrees, to make Ecclesiastical
laws for the good of the Church, reform the abuses therein, and to have the
same power and authority over sacred persons in causes Ecclesiastical, as was
exercised by Josias, and Constantine the Great, who said he was a Bishop over
the outward things of the Church; That the laws whereby their Church is to be
governed are only the Canons of the more ancient Councels, and their own
National Decrees, and not the Decretals of the Bishops of Rome; That the
Council of Constance assembled by Sigismund the Emperor, and with a
concurrent consent of other Christian Princes, decreeing a General Synod to
be superiors unto the Pope, and correcting many enormious abuses in the Roman
Church which yet remain in practice, was a true oecumenicall Council, and so
likewise the Council of Basil; That the Assembly of Trent was no lawful
Council, and the Canons thereof are rather to be esteemed the Decrees of the
Popes who called and continued it, then the Decrees of the Council it self,
because in this Assembly Bishops only (contrary to the practice of the
Council of Basil) had decisiue voices, and the greatest parts of Bishops were
Italian the Popes vassals; and besides, nothing was then determined that was
not at Rome fore-determined by the Pope; That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
ought to be administered under both kinds, and at the least a great part of
divine service is to be performed in their vulgar tongues; Thus are the greater
number of Lawyers and learned men in France affected, and those who are
thoroughly popish are for the most part men of the basest sort wholly leauened
with the bitter slanders and calumniations of malicious Friars.

Now if to all the forenamed kingdoms, Principalities, Dukedomes, States,
Cities abounding with professors of the truth, we add the Monarchies of
Great Britannie, Denmark, Sweden, wholly in a manner Protestant, we shall
find them not much inferior in number and amplitude to the Romish party;
especially if we consider that the very bulk and body hereof, Italy, and
Spain, are by a kind of violence, and necessity, rather then out of any free
choice and judgment detained in their superstition; namely by the jealousy,
cruelty, and tyrannous vigilance of the inquisition, and their own ignorance,
being Vide indice^ libro. prohi. ed^t. iussu Clem. 8. Et Azou. lin. 8. Morel.
Ins^t. cap. 26.
by Clement the 8. utterly debarred from all reading of the Sacred Scriptures,
whereby they might come to the knowledge of the Truth.

And if any shall except that the Protestants in diverse Countries before
mentioned cannot be reputed as one body, and of one Church, by reason of many
differences, and hot contentions amongst them, let such remember, that
howsoever some private men in this holy society rather then of it, preferring
their novel and passionate fancies, before the peace of the Church, purchased
with Christ's precious blood, and the public weal of Christian Monarchies,
unnatural toward their own dear Mother, rending that womb wherein they were
newborn by the lauer of Regeneration, forgetful of their heavenly embassage,
which is not only to reconcile men unto God, but men with men, so far
neglecting their own eternal salvation, as to be unmindful of that most
undoubted truth, He that is not in charity, is in death, trampling under foot
that glorious legacy of their Lord and Master, My peace I give unto you, my
peace I leave with you, have in heat of contention, and bitterness of their
souls strained and racked their weak understandings, to make differences
between themselves, even in the maine Articles of Faith, and branded one
another with blasphemy, and heresy, yet these unchristian and uncharitable
dissensions are not to be imputed to the whole sacred community of Orthodox
Churches, whose harmony and agreement in necessary points of Faith, are only
to be esteemed by their confessions which by public authority they have
diuulged unto the world.

How many are the differences both in doctrine and discipline between the
Proctors for the Papal faction, touching Discipline? some teach their
cheefetaine the Pope may err, others that he cannot: some that he is subject
unto a General Council, others that he is above it: some that all
Ecclesiastical authority is immediately in the Prelates of the Church, others
that it is only in the Pope, and from him derived unto inferior Bishops: some
that he has temporal authorities over Princes, others not; concerning
doctrine, some at firm that predestination both by grace, and glory is merely
from Gods free pleasure, others from foreseen desert and merit, some that all
the books or part of them belonging unto the old Testament which were not in
the Canon of the Jewish Church are Apocriphall, others canonical even in the
matters of Faith: some that there is no original sin inherent in us, but
only imputed, others that it is both inherent and imputed: some that we are
most freely justified, by the means of Faith, Hope, etc. others by the value,
and merit of these virtues: some that faith is only a general assent unto
divine truths, others that it is a special persuasion touching the remission
of our sins through Christ, some that we appear righteous in Gods sight,
partly through imputed, partly through inherent righteousness, others only by
inherent: some that eternal life is due unto our works only by virtue of Gods
free and gracious promise, others through the merit of the work done: some
that all the moral good works of Infidels, and Ethnicks are sins, others
that they are without sin; some that the B. Virgin was conceived without
original sin, others the contrary, and that with such eagerness, that the
one condemn the other of heresy: yet because these contentions are between
private men, and they all (in Spain and Italy, but not in France, as has
been (hewed) accord in the chief points of doctrine publicly established in
the Council of Trent, they boast much of their unity.

Although then some private men unworthy to take the word of peace and
reconciliation into their virulent and contentious mouths, led more by
passion, and their own selfe-pleasing conceit, then by the sacred rules of
truth, and piety, have labored to sow the tares of dissension in the vineyard
of the Lord, and hereby have made crooked some few branches cleaving unto
them: yet the general societies of Orthodox Churches in the public
confessions of their faith, do so agree, that there is a most sacred harmony
between them in the more substantial points of Christian Religion necessary
to salvation.

This is manifest out of the confessions themselves, which are these, the
Anglicane, the Scotiane, French, Heluctian former, and later, the Belgie,
Polonie, Argentine, Augustane, Saxonicke, Wirtenbergicke, Palatine, Bohemicke
or Weldensian confession: for there is none of the Churches formerly pointed
out in diverse places of Europe which does not embrace one of these confessions,
and all of them harmoniously conspire in the principal Articles of Faith, and
which nearest concern our eternal salvation; as in the infallible verity and
full sufficiency of the Scriptures, divine essence and unity of the
everlasting Godhead, the sacred Trinity of the three glorious persons, the
blessed incarnation of Christ, the omnipotent providence of God, the absolute
supreme head of the Church, Christ, justification by Faith through Christ, and
the nature of a lively faith, repentance, regeneration and sanctification, the
difference between the Law, and the Gospel, touching freewill, sin, and
good works, the Sacraments their number and use, the notes of the Church, the
divine authority of Magistrates, the resurrection, and state of souls after
death.

And for the chief point of difference which is conceived to be between the
professors of the Gospel about the presence of Christ in the sacred Eucharist;
such as are parties in this contention ingenuously confess, that de reipsa,
touching the thing it self there is no oppositio^ but only we vary in some
ordinances, and circumstances of the thing. We agree reipsa, in the matter it
self, although we differ according to the diversity of Gods gifts in
expressing aptly and clearly what we conceive concerning this matter. We all
acknowledge that the holy Symboles, or signs, are not inanes significationes,
barely significatiue, but what by divine institution they represent and
testify unto our souls, is as truly and certainly delivered unto us from God
as the symboles themselves. But the question is, whether as the sign with the
thing signified is present in respect of our body, and not rather in regard of
our well receiving it by faith. Moreover, whether as both the sign, and thing
signified are exhibited to all, so all receive both, some to life, others to
their perdition. So that we all believe the true communication of the true
body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, only concerning the manner of
communication is the controversy. But who can rightly judge that for this the
sacred union and fellowship of Churches, is to be dissolved.

There being so excellent a foundation and firm groundworke of unity between
the Protestants, how worthy a work would it be for Christian Princes to
imitate the professors of the Gospel in the kingdom of Polonia, and by a
general Assembly of moderate, and impartial Judges and sensible of the
bleeding wounds religion receives by sects, and discords, make up the ruins
and breaches of Churches, caused hitherto through private contention, and to
sement them together (if it shall please God out of the riches of his mercy to
prosper their heroical and religious endeauours) with an everlasting bond of
concord. There were never greater hopes of the success of so noble and
^ncomparable a work, then in this age which has affoorided us the blessing of
our most gracious Sovereign, so religiously studious of public peace, and so
exquisitelie enabled with many rare endowments to promote so pious and renowned
an action.

In the mean time, if any in these private distractions concerning matters of
Religion excited by the malice of Satan, and his wretched instruments, shall
doubt which way to take, let him follow the grave and divine instructions of
that excellent light of the Church S. Augustine; who first exhorts us not to
busy our selves overmuch in enquiring after those things quae nihil certi
habent in Scriptura, which have no firm footing in the Scriptures, but in
receiving, or rejecting them to follow the custom, and practice of particular
Churches wherein we live; otherwise (says Epist. 86.
he) If we will dispute of these things, and contend one with another: orietur
interminata luctatio, there will hence arise an endless strife. And his second
admonition is, that for the establishing of our consciences in points of faith
necessary to obtain eternal life, we would follow our blessed Saviors
commandment: Search the Scriptures, Why ( In Psalm. 21.
says this devout and learned Father speaking to contentious Christians) do
we strive? we are brethren. Our Father has not dyed intestate: he has made
his last will: he is dead, and risen again. There is contention still about an
inheritance as long as the Testament is not made known, but when it is
published in judgment all are silent to hear it. The Judge attentively
listneth unto it, the Aduocats hold their peace: the cryers command silence,
and the whole multitude present, stand in a suspense, that the words of a dead
man lying in his grave without sense and life may be rehearsed. Are the words
of a dead man and interred, so powerful and aualeable, and shall the Testament
of Christ sitting in heaven be impugned? Open it, let us read, we are brethren,
why do we strive? Our father has not left us destitute of his last will: he
that made it lives for ever; he hears our voice and acknowledges his own
voice. Let us read, why contend we? Having found the inheritance let us lay
hold of it aperi, lege: open and read.

OF THE ANCIENT LARGENES of the Greek tongue. CHAP. 1.
GREECE, as it was ancientlie known by the name of Hellas, was enclosed
betwixt the Bay of Ambracia, with the river Arachthus, that falls into it on
the West, and the river Peneneus on the North, Strabo. l. 8. no^ long a
principio.
and the Sea on other parts. So that Acarnania and Thessalie, were toward the
Contine^t, the utmost regions of Greece. But yet, not the Countries only
contained within those limits, but also the kingdoms of Macedon, and Epirus;
being the next adjoining provinces ( Macedon toward the North, Epirus toward
the West) had aunciently the Greek tongue for their vulgar language: for
although it belonged originally to Hellas alone, yet in time it became vulgar
to these also.

Secondly, it was the language of all the Isles in the Aegaean sea; of all
those Islands I say, that are betwixt Greece and Asia, both, of the many small
ones, that lie between Candie and Negropont, named Cyclades (there are of them
53.) and of all above Negropont also, as far as the Strait of Constantinople.

Thirdly, of the Isles of Candie, Scarpanto, Rhodes, and a part of Cyprus, and
of all the small Islands along the coast of Asia, from Candie to Syria.

Fourthly, not only of all the West part of Asia the less, (now called
Anatolia, and corruptly Natolia) lying toward the Aegaean sea, as being very
thick planted with Greek Colonies: Sen^e. Co^sol. ad Helu. c. 6. Pl^n. l. 5.
c. 29. Isocrat. in Panegiric. long. post. med. Lucian. in Dialog. de Amorib.
no^ long. ab Init.
of which, some one, Miletus by name, is registered by Seneca, to have been the
mother of 75. by Pliny, of 80. Cittyes; But on the North side also toward the
Euxine sea, as far (says Isocrates) as Sinope, and on the South side
respecting Afrique, as far (says Lucian) as the Chelidonian Isles, which are
over against the co^fines of Lycia with Pamphylia. And yet although within
these limits only, Greek was generally spoken, on the Maritime coast of Asia,
yet beyond them, on both the shoares Eastward, were many Greek Cities (though
not without Barbarous Cities among them.) And specially I find the North coast
of Asia, even as far as Trebizond, to have bin exceedingly well stored with
them. But, it may be further observed likewise out of histories, that not only
all the maritime part of Anatolia could understand and speak the Greek tongue,
but most of the inland people also, both by reason of the great traffic,
which those rich Countries had for the most part with Grecians, and for that on
all sides, the East only excepted, they were environed with them. Yet
nevertheless, it is worthy observing, that albeit the Greek tongue prevailed
so far in the Regions of Anatolia, as to be in a manner general, yet for all
that, it never became vulgar, nor extinguished the vulgar languages of those
Countries. For it is not only particularly observed of the Galatians, by
Hierome, Hiero^. in P^oem l. ^. com. Epist. ad Galat. Strab. l. 14.
that beside the Greek tongue, they had also their peculiar language, like
that of Trier: and of the Carians by Strabo, that in their language were found
many Greek words, which does manifestly import it to have been a several
tongue: but it is directly recorded by Lib. citato long. post. med. et Plin. l.
6. c. 1.
Strabo, (out of Ephorus) that of sixteen several nations, inhabiting that
tract, only three were Grecians, and all the rest, (whose names are there
registered) barbarous; and yet are omitted the Cappadocians, Galatians, Lydians,
Maeonians, Cataonians, no small provinces of that Region. Even as it is also
observed by Pliny, and others, that the 22. languages, whereof Mithridates king
of Pontus, Plin. l. 7. c. 24. Val. Max. l. ^. c 7 Gell. l. 17. c. 17.
is remembered to have been so skillful, as to speak them without an
interpreter, were the languages of so many nations subject to himself, whose
dominion yet we know, to have been contained, for the greatest part, within
Anatolia. And, although all these be evident testimonies, that the Greek
tongue was not the vulgar or native language of those parts, yet, among all
none is more effectual, then that remembrance in the second Chapter of the
Acts, Act. 2.9. and 1^.
where diverse of those Regions, as Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, Phrygia, and
Pamphylia, are brought in for instances of differing languages.

Fifthly, Of the greatest part of the maritime coast of Thrace, not only from
Hellespont to Byzantium, (which was Dousa. I^in. Constantinopolit. page 24.
that part of Constantinople, in the East corner of the City, where the
Serraile of the Great Turk now stands) but above it, all along to the
out-lets of Danubius. And yet beyond them also; I find many Greek Cities to
have been planted along that coast, Scylax Carimand. in Periple. Iornand de
Reb. Getic. c. 5
( Scylax of Carianda is my Author with some others) as far as the Strait of
Caffa, and specially in Taurica. Yea, and beyond that strait also Eastward,
along all the sea coast of Circassia, and Mengrelia, to the river of Phasis,
and thence compassing to Trebizond, I find mention of many scattered Greek
Cities: that is, (to speak briefly) in all the circumference of the Euxine Sea.

Sixthly, (from the East and North to turn toward the West) it was the language
of all the West, and South Islands, that lie along the coast of Greece, from
Candie to Corfu, which also was one of them, and withal, of that fertile
Sicilie, in which one Island, I have observed in good histories, above 30.
Greek Colonies; to have been planted, and some of them goodly cities, Scrab
L. 6. in medi^.
specially Agrigentum and Syracusa, which later Strabo has recorded to have
been 180. furlongs, that is, of our miles 22. and in circuit.

Seventhly, Not only of all the maritime coast of Italy, that lies on the
Tyrrhene Sea, from the river Garigliano, ( Liris it was formerly called) to
Leucopetra, the most Southerly point of Italy, for all that shore being near
about 240. miles, was inhabited with Greek colonies: And thence forward, of
all that end of Italy, that lies toward the Ionian sea, about the great
baies of Squilacci and Taranto (which was so thick set with great and goodly
Cities of Grecians, that it gained the name of Magna Graecia) but, beyond that
also, of a great part of Apulia, lying toward the Adriatique sea. Neither did
these maritime parts only, but, as it seems the Inland people also toward
that end of Italy, speak the Greek tongue. For I have seen a few old
coins of the Brutians, and more may be seen in Goltzius having Greek
inscriptions, wherein I observe they are named (...), Goltz. in Num^smat.
Magnae Greciae Tab. 24.
with an ae, and two tt. and not as the Roman writers term them, Brutij. And
I have seen one piece also of Pandosia, an inla^d City of those parts, with
the like. Neither was the vulgar use of the Greek tongue, utterly extinct in
some of those parts of Italy, Galat in descriptione Callipolis.
till of late: for Galateus a learned man of that Country, has left written,
that when he was a boy, (and he lived about. 120. years ago) they spoke
Greek in Callipollis a City on the East shore of the Bay of Taranto. But yet
it continued in Ecclesiastical use in some other parts of that region of
Italy much later: Bar. lib. 5. de Antiquit. Calabriae.
for Gabriel Barrius that lived but about 40. years since, has left recorded,
that the Church of Rossano (an Archiepiscopall City in the upper Calabria)
retained the Greek tongue and ceremony till his time, and then became Latin.
Rocca Tract. de Dialectis in Italica li^gua.
Nay, to descend yet a little nearer the present time, Angelus Rocca that writ
but about 20. years ago, has observed, that he found in some parts of
Calabria, and Apulia, some remainders of the Greek speech to be still retained.

Eighthly, and Lastly, that shore of France, that lies toward the
mediterraine sea, from Rodanus to Italy, was possessed with Grecians, for
Strab. l. 4. non long. a princip. Thuscid. l 1.
Massilia was a Colonie of the Phoceans, and from it many other Colonies were
derived, and Strab. loco citato. Plin. L. 3. C. 5.
placed along that shore, as far as Nicaea, in the beginning of Italy, which
also was one of them.

And yet beside all these forenamed, I could reckon up very many other
dispersed Colonies of the Greeks both in Europe, and Asia, and some in
Afrique, for although I remember not, that I have read in any history, any
Colonies of the Grecians to have been planted in Afrique, any where from the
greater Syrtis Westward, except one in Cirta, a City of Numidia, placed there
by Micipsa the son of Masinissa, as is mentioned in Strabo: yet thence Eastward
it is certain some were: Strab. L. 17.
for the great Cities of Cyrene, and Alexandria, were both Greek. And it is
evident, not only in Loco iam citato. Ptolo^. Tab. 3. Africae. Mela. l. 1. C.
8.
Strabo and Ptolemie, but in Mela, and other Latin writers, that most of the
Cities of that part carried Greek names. And Lastly, Hierome has directly
recorded, that Libia, which is properly that part of Afrique adjoining to
Egypt, was full of Greek Cities.

These were the places, where the Greek tongue was natiuely and vulgarly
spoken, Hieroni^. Loco supra citato.
either originally, or by reason of Colonies. But yet for other causes, it
became much more large and general. One was the love of Philosophy, and the
liberal arts, written in a manner only in Greek. Another, the exceeding
great trade and traffic of Grecians, in which, above all nations, except
perhaps the old Phenicians (to whom yet they seem not to have been inferior)
they employed themselves. A third, beyond all these, because those great
Princes, among whom all that Alexander the Great had conquered, was divided,
were Grecians, which for many reasons, could not but exceedingly spread the
Greek tongue, in all those parts where they were Governors: among whom, even
one alone, Seleucus by name, is registered by Appian, to have founded in the
East parts under his government, Appian. L. de Bel^s Syriac.
at least 60 Cities, al of them carrying Greek names, or else named after his
father, his wives, or himself. And yet was there a fourth cause, that in the
after time greatly furthered this enlargement of the Greek tongue, namely the
employment of Grecians in the government of the provinces, after the translation
of the Imperial seat to Constantinople. For these causes I say, together with
the mixture of Greek Colonies, dispersed in many places (in which
fruitfulness of Colonies, the Grecians far passed the Romans) the Greek
tongue spread very far, especially toward the East. In so much, that all the
Orient (which yet must be understood with limitation, namely the Oriental
part of the Roman Empire, or to speak in the phrase of those times, the
dioces of the Orient, which contained Syria, Palestine, Cilicia, and part of
Mesopotaneia and of Arabia) is said by Hierome, Hieror. bisuper.
to have spoken Greek: which also Isidore, specially observes, in Egypt, and
Syria, to have been the Dorique dialect. I^^dor. Origin. L. 9 C. 1.
And this great glory, the Greek tongue held in the Apostles time, and long
after, in the Eastern parts, till by the inundation of the Saracens of Arabia,
it came to ruin in those provinces, about. 640 years after the birth of our
Savior, namely, in the time of the Emperor Heraclius (the Arabians bringing
in their language together with their victories, into all the regions they
subdued) even as the Latin tongue is supposed to have perished by the
inundation and mixture of the Goths, and other barbarous nations in the West.

Of the Decaying of the ancient Greek tongue, and of the present vulgar
Greek. CHAP. 2.
But at this day, the Greek tongue is very much decayed, not only as touching
the largeness, and vulgarnesse of it, but also in the pureness and elegancy
of the language. For as touching the former, First, in Italy, France, and
other places to the West, the natural languages of the countries have usurped
upon it. Secondly, in the skirts of Greece it self, namely in Epirus, and that
part of Macedon, that lies toward the Adriatique sea, the Sclauonique tongue
has extinguished it. Thirdly, in Anatolia, the Turkish tongue has for a great
part suppressed it. And Lastly, in the more Eastward, and South parts, as in
that part of Cilicia, that is beyond the river Piramus, in Siria, Palestine,
Egypt and Libia, the Arabian tongue has abolished it: Abolished it I say,
namely, as touching any vulgar use, for, as touching Ecclesiastical use, many
Christians of those parts still retain it in their Leiturgies. So that, the
parts in which the Greek tongue is spoken at this day, are (in few words) but
these. First Greece it self (excepting Epirus, and the West part of Macedon.)
Secondly, the Isles of the Aegaean sea. Thirdly, Candie, and the Isles Eastward
of Candie, along the coast of Asia to Cyprus (although in Cyprus, diverse other
languages are spoken, beside the Greek) and likewise the Isles Westward of
Candia, along the Coasts of Greece, and Epirus, to Corfu. And Lastly, a good
part of Anatolia.

But as I said, the Greek tongue, is not only thus restrained, in comparison
of the ancient extention that it had, but it is also much degenerated and
impaired, as touching the pureness of speech, being ouergrowne with
barbarousnesse: But yet not without some relish of the ancient elegancie.
Neither is it altogether so much declined from the ancient Greek, Bellon.
Obseruat. L. 1. c. 3 Turcogroec. L. 3. and 5.
as the Italian is departed from the Latin, as Bellonius has also observed,
and by conferring of diverse Epistles of the present language, which you may
find in Crusius his Turcograecia, with the ancient tongue, may be put out of
question, which corruption yet, certainly has not befallen that language,
through any inundation of barbarous people, as is supposed to have altered the
Latin tongue, for although I know Greece to have been ouerrunne, and wasted,
by the Goths, yet I find not in histories, any remembrance of their
habitation, or long continuance in Greece, and of their coalition into one
people with the Grecians, without which, I conceive not, how the tongue could
be greatly altered by them. And yet certain it is, that long before the Turks
came among them, their language was grown to the corruption wherein now it is,
for that, in the writings of Cedrenus, Nicetas, and some other late Greeks,
(although long before the Turks invasion) there is found, notwithstanding they
were learned men, a strong relish of this barbarousnesse: Insomuch that the
learned Grecians themselves, Ge^^ach. in epist. ad Crusi^m. TurcoGrae^. L. 7.
page 489.
acknowledge it to be very ancient, and are utterly ignorant, when it began in
their language: which is to me a certain argument, that it had no violent nor
sudden beginning, by the mixture of other foreign nations among the^, but has
gotten into their language, by the ordinary change, which time and many common
occasions that attend on time, are wont to bring to all languages in the world,
for which reason, the corruption of speech growing upon them, by little and
little, the change has been insensible. Yet it cannot be denied (and ^
Zygomalos in Epist. ad Cius. Turcog. page
some of the Grecians themselves confess so much) that beside many Roman
words, which from the translation of the imperial seat to Constantinople,
began to creep into their language, as we may observe in diverse Greek writers
of good antiquity, some Italian words also, and Slauonian, and Arabique, and
Turkish, and of other nations, are gotten into their language, by reason of the
great traffic and commerce, which those people exercise with the Grecians.
For which cause, as Bellonius has observed, Bello^. Obseruat. L. 1. C 3.
it is more altered in the maritime parts, and such other places of foraigne
concourse, then in the inner region. But yet, the greatest part of the
corruption of that language, has been bred at home, and proceeded from no
other cause, then their own negligence, or affectation. As First, (for
example) by mutilation of some words, pronouncing and writing (...) for (...)
for (...) etc. Vide Crus. Turcograec. page 44.224.242.391 398.399. etc.
Secondly, by compaction of several words into one, as (...) for (...) for
(...) etc. Thirdly, by confusion of sound, as making no difference in the
pronouncing of three vowels, namely (...), and two dipthongues (...) and (...),
all which five they pronounce by one letter i, as (...), they pronounce icos,
icon, stithi, lipi. Fourthly, by translation of accents, from the syllables to
which in ancient pronou^cing they belonged, to others. And all those four
kinds of corruption, are very common in their language: for which reasons, and
for some others, which may be observed in Crusius, Burrana, Burran. in Coron.
pretiosa.
etc. the Greek tongue, is become much altered (even in the proper and native
words of the language) from what anciently it was. Yet nevertheless it is
recorded by some, that have taken diligent observation of that tongue, Gerlach.
apud C^us. l. 7. Turcograec. page 489.
in the several parts of Greece, that there be yet in Morea, (Peloponnesus)
betwixt Napoli and Monembasia ( Nauplia and Epidaurus they were called) some 14
towns, the Inhabitants where are called Zacones (for Lacones) that speak yet
the ancient Greek tongue, but far out of Grammar rule: yet, they understand
those that speak grammaticallie, but understand not the vulgar Greek. Bellon.
Obseru. l. 2. c. 111.
As Bellonius likewise remembers another place, near Heraclea in Anatolia,
that yet retains the pure Greek for their vulgar language. But the few
places being excepted, it is certain, that the difference is become so great,
betwixt the present and the ancient Greek that their liturgy, Burdouitz. in
epist. ad Chitrae. apud Illu^ in Lib de Statu Ecclesia^. page 47.
which is yet read in the ancient Greek tongue, namely that of Basil, on the
Sabbaths and solemn days, and that of Chrysostom on common days, is not
understood (or but little of it) by the vulgar people, as learned men that have
been in those parts, have related to Vid. Chitrae. loc. citato, and
Turcograec. Crusij. page 327. and 415. etc.
others, and to my self: which may be also more evidently proved to be true
by this, because the skillful in the learned Greek, cannot understand the
vulgar.

Of the ancient largeness of the Roman tongue in the time of the Roman Empire.
CHAP. III.
THe ordinary bounds of the Roman Empire were, on the East part Euphrates, and
sometimes Tigris: On the North the Rivers of Rhene and of Danubius, and the
Euxine sea: On the West the Ocean: On the South the Cataracts of Nilus, in the
utmost border of Egypt, and in Afrique the mountain Atlas. Which, beginning
in the West, on the shore of the Ocean, over against the Canarie Islands,
runs Eastward almost to Egypt, being in few places distant from the
Mediterrane sea, more then 200 miles. These I say, were the ordinary bounds of
that Empire in the Continent: for, although the Romans passed these bounds
sometimes, specially toward the East and North, yet they kept little of what
they wan, but within those bounds mentioned, the Empire was firmly
established. But here, in our great Isle of Britain, the Pictes wall was the
limit of it, passing by Newcastle, and Carleil, from Tinmouth on the East sea,
to Solway frith on the West, being Spartian. in Hadriano and in Seuero.
first begun by the Emperor Adrian, and after finished or rather repaired,
by Septimius Seuerus.

To this greatness of Dominion, Rome at last arrived from her small
beginnings. And small her beginnings were indeed, considering the huge dominion
to which she attained. For first, the Circuit of the City wall, at the first
building of it, by Romulus in Mount Palatine, could not be fully one mile: for
the Hill it self, as is observed by Andrea Fuluio, And* Fulu. l. 2. Antiq.
Romans Ca. 3.
a Citizen and Antiquarie of Rome, has no more in circuit: And, that Romulus
bounded the Pomerium of the City (which extended somewhat beyond the wall)
with the foot of that hill in compass Gellius has left registered. Gell. L.
13. C. 14. Strab. L. 1.
Secondly the Territory and liberties of Rome, as Strabo has remembered,
extended at the first, where it stretched farthest scarce six miles from the
City. And thirdly, the first Inhabitants of Rome, as I find recorded in
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Dionys Hal. l. 2. Antiq. Romanar.
were not in number above 3300, at the most. Yet, with Time, and fortunate
success, Vopisc. in Aureliano,
Rome so increased, that in Aurelianus his time, the circuit of the City wall,
was 50. miles, as Vopiscus has recorded: And the Dominion, grew to the
largeness above mentioned, containing about 3000 miles in length, and about
1200 in breadth: and lastly the number of free Citizens, even in the time of
Marius, that is long before foreign Cities and Countries, began to be
received into participation of that freedom, was found to be 463000. as
Eusebius has remembered: Eusebius. in Chronico. ad Olymp. 174.
Of free Citizens I say, (for they only came into Cense) but if I should
add, their wives, and Children, and servants, that is, generally all the
Inhabitants, Lipsius de Magni^. Romana. l. 3. c. 3.
a learned man has esteemed them, and not without great likelihood of truth,
to have been no less, then 3. or 4. millions.

Beyond these bounds therefore of the Roman Empire, (to speak to the point in
hand) the Roman tongue could not be in any common use, as neither, to speak of
our kings dominions, in Ireland, Scotland, nor Northumberland, as being no
subjects of the Roman Empire. And that within these bounds, it stretched far
and wide, (in such manner as I will afterward declare) two Principal causes
there were. One was, the multitude of colonies, which partly to repress
rebellion in the subdued Provinces, partly to resist foreign invasions, partly
to reward the ancient soldiers, partly to abate the redundance of the City, and
relieve the poorer sort, were sent forth to inhabit in all the Provinces of
the Empire: Another, was the donation of Roman freedom, or Communication of
the right and benefit of Roman Citizens, to very many of the Provincial, both
Cities, and Regions. For first, all Italy obtained that freedom in the time
of Sylla and Marius, Appian. l. 1. Civil long ante med.
at the compounding of the Italian war, as Appian has recorded: All Italy I
say, as then it was called, and bounded, with the Rivers of Rubicon and Arnus,
that is, the narrower part of Italy, lying betwixt the Adriatique and the
Tyrrhene seas. Secondly Julius Caesar in like sort infranchized the rest of
Italy, that is the brother part, named then Gallia Cisalpina, as is remembered
by Dion. Dion. l. 41.
But not long after, the foreign Provinces also, began to be infranchized,
France being endued with the liberty of Roman Citizens by Galba, as I find in
Tacitus; Ta cit. l. 1. Historia^. Plin. l. 3. ca. 3.
Spaigne by Vespasian, as it is in Pliny. And at last, by Antonius Pius, all
without exception, that were subject to the Empire of Rome, as appears by the
testimony of Vlpian in the Digests. Digest. l. 1. Tit de Statu hominum Leg. In
Orb Romano.
The benefit of which Roman freedom, they that would use, could not with
honesty do it, remaining ignorant of the Roman tongue.

These two as I have said, were the principal causes of enlarging that
language: yet other there were also, of great importance, to further it. For
first, concerning Ambassages, suites, appeals, or whatsoever other business of
the Prouincials, or forraines, nothing was allowed to be handled, or spoken in
the Senate at Rome, but in the Latin tongue. Secondly, the Laws whereby the
provinces were governed, were all written in that language, as being in all of
them, excepting only municipall Cities, the ordinary Roman law. Thirdly, the
Digest. l. 42 Tit. de re iudicata. Leg. Decret.
Praetors of the Provinces, were not allowed to deliver their Judgments save
in that language: and we read in Dion Cassius, of a principal man of Greece,
that by Claudius was put from the order of Judges, Dion. l. 57. Val. Maxim. l.
2 c. 2.
for being ignorant of the Latin tongue: and to the same effect in Valerius
Maximus, that the Roman Magistrates would not give audience to the Grecians,
(less therefore I take it to the Barbarous nations) save in the Latin tongue.
Fourthly the general schools, erected in sundry Cities of the Provinces,
whereof we find mention in Tacitus, Tacit. l. 3. Annal. Heron. in ^p st. ad
Rusticum. Tom. 1.
Hierome, and others (in which the Roman tongue was the ordinary and allowed
speech, as is usual in universities till this day) was no small furtherance to
that language. And, to conclude that the Romans had generally (at least in the
after times, when Rome was become a Monarchy, and in the flourish of the
Empire) great care to enlarge their tongue, together with their dominion, is by
Augustine in his books de Ciuitate Dei, August. de Ciuit. De^. lib. 19. c. 7.
specially remembered. I said it was so in the after times, for certainly, that
the Romans were not very anciently, possessed with that humor of spreading
their language, appears by Liuie, in whom we find recorded, that it was
granted the Cumanes, Liu. Histor. Romans l. 4^
for a favor, and at their suite, that they might publicly use the Roman
tongue, not fully 140 years before the beginning of the Emperors: And yet was
Cuma but about 100 miles distant from Rome, and at that time the Romans had
conquered all Italy, Sicilie, Sardinia, and a great part of Spain.

But yet in all the Provinces of the Empire, the Roman tongue found not alike
acceptance, and success, but most enlarged and spread it self toward the
North, and West, and South bounds, for first, that in all the regions of
Pannonia it was known Velleius is mine Author: Vellei. lib. 2. Strab. lib. 3.
and 4.
Secondly, that it was spoken in France and Spain, Strabo: Thirdly, that in
Afrique, Apulei in Floridis.
Apuleius* And it seems the sermons of Cyprian, and Augustine, yet extant,
(of Augustine it is manifest) that they preached to the people in latin. But in
the East parts of the Empire, as in Greece, and Asia, and so likewise in
Afrique, from the greater Syrtis Eastward, I cannot in my reading find that
the Roman tongue ever grew into any common use. And the reason of it seems to
be, for that in those parts of the Empire it became most frequent, where the
most, and greatest Roman Colonies, were planted. And therefore over all Italy,
it became in a manner vulgar, wherein I have observed in Histories, and in
registers of ancient inscriptions, to have been planted by the Romans at
several times above 150 Colonies: as in Afrique also nere 60, (namely 57) in
Spain 29. in France, as it stretched to Rhene 26, and so in Illyricum, and
other North parts of the Empire, between the Adriatique sea, and Danubius
very many. And yet I doubt not, but in all these parts, more there were, then
any history or ancient inscription that now remains has remembered.

And contrariewise in those Countries, where fewest Colonies were planted, the
Latin tongue grew nothing so common: as for example here in Britain, there
were but four: those were Eboracum
York, Debuna.
Chester, Is^a.
Ca^rusk in Monmouth-shire, and Camalodunum.
Maldon in Essex (for London, although recorded for one by Onuphrius, Onuphr.
in Imper. Romans
was none, as is manifest by his own Tacit. l. 14. Annal.
Author, in the place that himself alleges) and therefore we find in the
British tongue which yet remains in Wales, but little relish (to account of)
or relics of the Latin. And, for this cause also partly, the East provinces
of the Empire, sauoured little or nothing of the Roman tongue. For first in
Afrique beyond the greater Syrtis, I find never a Roman Colonie: for Onuphrius,
Onuphr. lib. iam citato.
that has recorded Vide Digest. l. 50. Tit. de Censibus Leg. s^^endum.
Indicia Cyrenensium for one, alleging Vlpian for Author, was deceived by some
faulty Copy of the Digests. For the corrected copies have Zernensium, and for
Indicia, is to be read in Dacia, as is rightly observed (for in it the City of
Zerne was) by Pancirellus. Secondly in Egypt, there were but two: Pancirell.
id Comment. Notit. Imper Orien^alis Cap. 138*
and to be brief, Syria, only excepted, which had about 20 Roman Colonies,
but most of them late planted, especially by Septimius Seuerus, and his son
Bassianus, to strengthen that side of the Empire against the Parthians (and yet
I find not that in Syria, the Roman tongue, ever obtained any vulgar use) the
rest, had but very few, in proportion to the largeness of those regions.

Of which little estimation, and use of the Roman tongue, in the East parts,
beside the want of Colonies forementioned, and to omit their love to their own
languages, which they held to be more civil then the Roman, another great
cause was the Greek, which they had in far greater account, both, for
learning sake (insomuch that Cicero confesses, Graeca (says he) leguntur in
omnibus fere gentibus, Cicer. in (...) pro Archi^ poeta.
Latina suis finibus, exiguis sane, continentur) and for traffic, to both
which, the Graecians, above all nations of the world were anciently given: to
omit, both the excellency of the tongue it self, for sound and copiousnes, and
that it had forestalled the Roman in those parts. And certainly, in how little
regard, the Roman tongue was had in respect of the Greek, in the Eastern
Countries, may appear by this, that all the learned men of those parts,
whereof most lived in the flourish of the Roman Empire, have written in
Greek, and not in Latin: as Philo, Josephus, Ignatius, Iustine Martyr,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Eusebius, Athanasius, Basil, Gregory Nyssene,
and Nazianzene, Cirill of Alexandria, and of Jerusalem, Epiphanius, Synetius,
Ptolemie Strabo, Porphyrie, and very many others, so that of all the writers
that lived in Asia, or in Afrique, beyond the greater Syrtis, I think we have
not one Author in the Latin tongue: and yet more evidently, may it appear by
another instance, that I find in the third general Counsel held at Ephesus,
Consil. Ephesi^. Tom. 2 Cap 13. Edit. Bin.
where the letters of the Bishop of Rome, having been read by his Legates, in
the Latin tongue, it was requested by all the Bishops, that they might be
translated into Greek, to the end they might be understood. It is manifest
therefore, that the Roman tongue was neither vulgar, nor familiar in the East,
when the learned men gathered out of all parts of the East understood it not.

That the Roman tongue abolished not the vulgar languages, in the foraine
provinces of the Roman Empire. CHAP. IIII.
OF the weak impression therefore of the Roman language in the East, and
large intertainement of it in the West, and other parts of the Empire, and of
the causes of both, I have said enough. But in what sort, Galat. de Situ (...)
98.
and how far it prevailed, namely, whether so far, as to extinguish the
ancient vulgar languages of those parts, and it self, in stead of them, to
become the native and vulgar tongue, as Galateus has pronounced touching the
Punique, V^r L. 3 de Trad^n^ discipl^n and ad August de Cauit. Deid. 19. ^. ^.
and Viues with many others of the Gallique, and Spanish, I am next to consider.

First therefore, it is certainly observed, that there are at this day,
fourteen mother tongues in Europe (beside the Latin) which remain, not
only not abolished, but little or nothing altered, or impaired by the Romans.
And those are the 1 Irish, spoken in Ireland, and a good part of Scotland: the
2 British, in Wales, Cornewaile, and Britain of France: the 3 Cantabrian
near the Ocean, Scaligan Diatrib de ling Europ^^.
about the Pyrene, hills, both in France and Spain: the 4 Arabique, Merul.
Cosm part. 2. L, 2. C. 8.
in the steepie mountains of Granata, named Alpuxarras: the 5 Finnique,
Scalig. loco. citato.
in Finland, and Lapland: the 6 Dutch, in Germany, Belgia, Denmark, Norwey,
and Suedia: the old 7 Cauchian, (I take it to be that, for in that part the
Cauchi inhabited) in East Frisland, for Ortel. in Tab. Fris. Oriental.
although to strangers they speak Dutch, yet among themselves they use a
peculiar language of their own: the 8 Slauonish, in Polonia, Bohemia,
Moscouia, Russia, and many other regions, (whereof I will after entreat in due
place) although with notable difference of dialect, as also the British, and
Dutch, in the countries mentioned have: the old 9 Illyrian, in the Isle of
Veggia, on the East side of Istria in the day of Liburnia: the 10 Greek, in
Greece, and the Islands about it, and part of Macedon, and of Thrace: the old
11 Epirotique Scalig. loco citato.
in the mountain of Epirus: the 12 Hungarian in the greatest part of that
kingdom: the 13 Iazygian, Bert. in Descript. Hungar.
in the North side of Hungaria betwixt Danubius and Tibiscus, utterly differing
from the Hungarian language: And lastly, the 14 Tarturian, of the Precopenses,
between the Rivers of Tanais and Borysthenes, near Maeotis and the Euxine
sea, for, of the English, Italian, Spanish, and French, as being deriuations,
or rather degenerations, the first of the Dutch, and the other three of the
Latin, seeing I now speak only of original or mother languages, I must be
silent: And of all these fourteen it is certain, except the Arabique, which
is known to have entered since, and perhaps the Hungarian, about which there is
difference among Antiquaries, that they were in Europe in time of the Roman
Empire, and six or seven of them, within the Limits of the Empire.

And indeed, how hard a matter it is, utterly to abolish a vulgar language, in
a populous country, where the Conquerers are in number far inferior to the
native inhabitants, whatsoever art be practiced to bring it about, may well
appear by the vain attempt of our Norman Conqueror: who although he
compelled the English, to teach their young children in the Schools nothing
but French, and set down all the Laws of the Land in French, and enforced all
pleadings at the Law to be performed in that language (which custom continued
till King Edward the third his days, who disanulled it) purposing thereby to
have conquered the language together with the land, and to have made all
French: yet, the number of English far exceeding the Normans, all was but
labor lost, and obtained no further effect, then the mingling of a few French
words with the English. And even such also was the success of the Franks among
the Gauls, of the Goths among the Italians and Spaniards, and may be
observed, to be short in all such conquests, where the Conquerors (being yet in
number far inferior) mingle themselves with the native inhabitants. So that,
in those Countries only the mutation of languages has ensued upon conquests,
where either the ancient inhabitants have been destroyed or driven forth, as
we see in our Country to have followed of the Saxons victories, against the
Britains, or else at least in such sort diminished, that in number they
remained inferior, or but little superior to the Conquerors, whose reputation
and authority might prevail more then a small excess of multitude. But (that
I digress no further) because certain Countries are specially alleged, in
which the Roman tongue is supposed most to have prevailed, I will restrain
my discourse to them alone.

And First, that both the Punique and Gallique tongues, remained in the time of
Alexander Seuerus the Emperor (about 230 years after our Saviors birth)
appears by Vlpian, who lived at that time, and was with the Emperor of
principal reputation, teaching, that Digest. l. 32. lege. Fidei commissa.
Fidei commissa might be left, not only in Latin, or Greek, but in the
Punique or Gallique, or any other vulgar language. Till that time therefore, it
seems evident, that the Roman tongue had not swallowed up these vulgar
languages, and it self become vulgar in stead of them. But to insist a little
in either severally. First, touching the Punique, Aurelius, Victor has
recorded of Septimius Seuerus, Aur. Victor in Epitom. Sep ^m. Sever.
that he was, Latinis literis sufficienter instructus, but Punica eloquentia
promptior, quippe genitus apud Leptim prouintiae Africae. Of which Emperors
sister also, dwelling at Leptis (it is the City we now call Tripolie in
Barbary) and coming to see him, Spartian* in Seuero. post m^d.
Spartianus has left written, that she so badly spoke the Latin tongue, (yet
was Antonin in Itinerario. Hieron. in Proem. l. 2. Com. Epist. ad Galat^n fine.
Leptis a Roman Colonie) that the Emperor blushed at it. Secondly long after
that, Hierome has recorded of his time, that the Africans had somewhat altered
their lanuage, from the Phaenicians: the language therefore then remained, for
else how could he pronounce of the present difference? Thirdly, Augustine
(somewhat younger then Hierom, though living at the same time) writes, not
only, that August. de C^u. Dei. L. 16. C. 6.
he knew diverse nations in Afrique, that spoke the Punique tongue, but also
more particularly in Id. Sermon. 25. de verb. Apost
another place, mentioning a known Punique proverb, he would speak it (he
said) in the Latin, because all his auditors (for Hippo where he preached was
a Roman Colonie) understood not the Punique tongue: And some Id. Expos. in
Chrat. epist ad Roman.
other passages could I allege out of Augustine, for the direct confirmation
of this point, if these were not evident and effectual enough. Lastly, Leo
Africanus, Leo 1. Africa, Lt. descript. Africae. cap. de Ling. Africanis.
a man of late time, and good reputation, affirms that there remain yet in
Barbary, very many, descended of the old inhabitants, that speak the African
tongue, whereby it is apparent, that it was never extinguished by the Romans.

Secondly, touching the ancient Gallique tongue, that it also remained, and was
not abolished by the Roman in the time of Strabo, who flourished under
Tiberius Caesar's government, it appears in the fourth book of his
Geographie, S^rab. l 4. ^^ princip.
writing that the Aquitani differed altogether in language from the other
Gauls, and they somewhat among themselves. Nor after that in Tacitus his time,
Tacit. in (...) Agricola.
noting that the language of France, differed little from that of Britain.
No, nor long after that, in Alexander Seuerus his time, for beside the
authority of Vlpian before alleged out of the Digestes, it is manifest by
Lampridius also, Lamprid. in Alexand. Seuero, long post med.
who in the life of the said Alexander, remembers of a Druide woman, that when
he was passing along, in his expedition against the Germans, through
France, cried out after him in the Gallique tongue (what needed that observation
of the Gallique tongue, if it were the Roman?) go thy way (quoth she) and
look not for the victory, Strab. l. 4. l^^^ante med.
and trust not thy soldiers. And though Strabo he alleged by some, to prove
the vulgarnesse of the Latin tongue in France, yet is it manifest, that he
speaks nof of all the Gauls, but of certain only, in the province of
Narbona, about Rhodanus, for which part of France, there was special reason,
both for the more ancient and ordinary conuersing of the Romans, in that
region above all the rest: for of all the seventeen provinces of France, that
of Narbona was first reduced into the form of a Province: And the City of
Narbona it self, being a Mart town of exceeding traffic in those days, was
the Vel. Pa^^^cul l. ^.
first foraine Colonie, that the Romans planted out of Italy, Carthage only
excepted: And yet furthermore, as Pliny has recorded, many towns there were
in that province, Plin. l. 3. c. 4.
infranchized, and endued with the liberty and right of the Latins. And yet
for all this, Strabo says not, that the Roman tongue was the n^^iue or vulgar
language in that part, but that for the more part they spoke it.

Thirdly, concerning the Spanish tongue: Howsoever Viues writ, that the
languages of France and Spain were utterly extinguished by the Romans, and
that the Latin was become Vid. Annot. ad August. de. ^^^ De^. l. 19. c. 7.
Vernacula Hispani^, as also Galliae and Italiae; and ^d l. 3. de tradend.
Dis^^p.
some others, of the same nation vaunt, that had not the barbarous nations
corrupted it, the Latin tongue would have been at this day, as pure in
Spain, as it was in Rome it self in Tullies time: yet nevertheless, manifest
it is, that the Spanish tongue was never utterly suppressed by the Latin. For
to omit that of Strabo, Marm. S^^^l. de Reb. Hispaniaed. 5. c. 4.
that there were diverse languages in the parts of Spain, as also in Strab. l.
3. paul. a principio. Id l. 4. in princip.
another place, that the speech of Aquitaine was liker the language of the
Spaniards, then of the other Gauls: It is a common consent of the best
Historians, and Antiquaries of Spain, Marian de Reb. Hispan. l. 1. c. 5.
Marm^punc; S^cul. de reb. Hispan l 4 c^l^m. and Al^b.
that the Cantabrian tongue, which yet remains in the North part of Spain
(and has no relish in a manner at all of the Roman) was either the ancient,
or at least one of the ancient languages, of Spain. And although Strab. l. 3.
c. 1
Strabo has recorded, that the Roman tongue was spoken in Spain, yet he
speaks not indefinitely, but adds a limitation, namely, about Baetis. And
that in that part of Spain, the Roman tongue so prevailed, the reason is
easy to be assigned, by that we find in Pliny. Plin. 3. c. ^. Ve^^ (...) l.
2.
Namely, that in Baetica, were eight Roman Colonies, eight Municipall Cities,
and 29 others endued with the right and liberty of the Latins.

Lastly, to speak of the Pannonian tongue, ( Pannonia contained Hungary,
Austria, Stiria, and Carinthia) it is certain, that the Roman did not
extinguish it: For first, Patercu^us (who is the only author that I know
alleged for that purpose) says not, that it was become the language of the
Country, for how could it, being but even then newly conquered by Tiberius
Caesar? but only, that in the time of Augustus, by Tiberius his means the
knowledge of the Roman tongue was spread in all Pannonia. And Secondly, Tacitus
after Tiberius his time, Ta^^ d^^^o^i^, Germ. prope fin.
has recorded, that the Osi in Germany, might be known to be no Germans, by
the Pannonian tongue, which Lib. cod. ^^ruma med.
a little before in the same book, he plainly acknowledged to be spoken even
then in Pannonia.

And as for these reasons it may well seem that the Roman tongue became not
the vulgar language in any of these parts of the Empire, which yet are
specially instanced, for the large vulgarity of it So have I other reasons to
persuade me, that it was not in those parts, nor in any other foreign
Countries subject to the Empire, either generally or perfectly spoken. Not
generally (I say) because it is hard to conceive, that any whole Countries,
specially because so large as the mentioned are, should generally speak two
languages, their own native and the Roman. Secondly, there was not any law
at all of the Romans, to enforce the subdued nations, either to use vulgarly
the Roman tongue, or not to use their own native languages (and very extreme
and unreasonable, had such Lords been, as should compel men by laws, both to
do, and to speak, only what pleased them.) Neither do I see any other
necessity, or any provocation, to bring them to it, except for some special
sorts of men, as Merchants, and Citizens, for their better traffic and
trade, Lawyers for the knowledge and practice of the Roman Laws, which carried
force throughout the Empire (except privileged places) scholars for learning,
soldiers, for their better conuersing with the Roman Legions, and with the
Latins, Trauailers, Gentlemen, Officers, or such other, as might have occasion
of affairs and dealing with the Romans. But it sounds altogether unlike a
truth, that the poor scattered people, abroad in the Country, dwelling either
in solitary places, or in the small towns, and villages, either generally
spoke it, or could possibly attain unto it. An example whereof, for the better
evidence, may at this day be noted; in those parts of Greece, which are subject
to the dominions of the Turks and Venetians: for as Bellonius has observed,
the people that dwell in the principal towns, Bellon. Obs^runt. l. 1. c. 4.
and Cities, subject to the Turk, by reason of their trade, speak both the
Greek and Turkish tongues, as they also that are under the Venetians, both the
Greek and Italian, but the Country people under both governments, speak only
Greek. So likewise in Sardinia, as is recorded by G^sner. in Mithrid^ts. in
Lingua Sardi^ and Rocca de Dialect in L^ng. Sard^^.
others, the good towns by reason of the Spanish government and trade, speak
also the Spanish tongue, but the Country people the natural Sardinian language
only: And, the like by our own experience, we know to be true, in the
Provinces subject to our King, namely both in Wales and Ireland. It seems
therefore that the Roman tongue was never generally spoken in any of the Roman
Provinces forth of Italy.

And certainly much less can I persuade my self, Porcac^^. l. dello
Isole^^^d described Sardigna.
that it was spoken abroad in the Provinces perfectly. First, because it seems
impossible for foreign nations, specially for the rude and common people, to
attain the right pronouncing of it, who as we know do ordinarily much mistake
the true pronouncing of their native language: for which very cause, we see the
Chaldee tongue, to have degenerated into the Syriaque among the Jews, although
they had conuersed 70 years together among the Chaldeans. And moreover, by
daily experience we see in many, with what labor and difficulty, even in the
very schools, and in the most docible part of their age, Vide August. in
Enarrat. Psalm. 123. and 138. and l. ^. de doctrine. Chris. c. 13. and Tract. 7.
in Joan.
the right speaking of the Latin tongue is attained. And to conclude, it
appears by Augustine in sundry places, that the Roman tongue was imperfect
among the Africans, (even in the Colonies) as pronouncing ossum for os, floriet
for florebit, dolus for dolor, and such like, insomuch that he confesses, he
was feign sometimes to use words that were no Latin, to the end they might
understand him.

Of the beginnig of the Italian, French and Spanish languages. CHAP. V.
THe common opinion, which supposes that these Nations in the flourish of the
Roman Empire, spoke vulgarly and rightly the Latin tongue, is, that the
mixture of the Northern barbarous nations among the ancient Inhabitants, was
the cause of changing the Latin tongue, into the languages which now they
speak, the languages becoming mingled, as the nations themselves were. Who,
while they were enforced to attemper and frame their speech, one to the
understanding of another, for else they could not mutually express their
minds (which is the end for which nature has given speech to men) they
degenerated both, and so came to this medly wherein now we find them.

Which opinion if it were true, the Italian tongue must of necessity have it
beginning about the 480 year of our Savior: Because, at that time, the
Barbarous nations began first to inhabit Italy, under Odoacer, for although
they had entered and wasted Italy long before, as first, the Goths under
Alaricus, about the year 414: Then the Hunnes together with the Goths, and
the Herula, and the Gepidi, and other Northern people under Attila, about An.
450, Then, the Wandales under Gensericus, crossing the sea out of Afrique about
An. 456. (to omit some other inuations of those barbarous nations, because they
prospered not) yet none of these, settled themselves to stay and inhabit
Italy, till the Heruli as I said under Odoacer, about An. 480 on a little
before, entered and possessed it near hand 20 years, He being (proclaimed by
the Romans themselves) King of Italy, about 16 years, and his people
becoming inhabiters of the Country. But, they also, within 20 years after
their entrance, were in a manner rooted out of Italy, by Theodoricus King of
Goths, who allotted them only a part of Piemont above Turin to inhabit: for
Theodoricus being by Zeno then Emperor, invested with the title of King of
Italy, and having overcome Odoacer, somewhat before the year 500, ruled
peaceably a long time, as King of Italy, and certain others of the Goths
nation succeeded after him in the same government, the Goths in the mean
space, growing into one with the Italians, for the space near hand of 60.
years together. And although after that, the dominion of Italy, was by Narses
again recovered to the Empire, in the time of Justinian, and many of the
Goths expelled Italy, yet far more of them remained, Italy in that long
time, being grown well with their seed and posterity. The Heruli therefore,
with their associats were the first, and the Goths the second, of the
barbarous nations, that inhabited Italy. The third and the last, were the
Langbards, who coming into Italy about the year 570, and long time obtaining
the dominion, and possession, in a manner of all Italy, namely about 200
years, and during the succession of 20 Kings or more, were never expelled
forth of Italy, although at last their dominion was sore broken by Pipin King
of France, and after, more defaced, by his son Charles the great, who first
restrained and confined it, to that part, which to this day, of them retayneth
the name of Lombardie, and shortly after utterly extinguished it, carrying away
their last King captive into France. Now although diverse Blond in Ital.
Illustrata in Marchia Triuisana.
antiquaries of Italy there be, which refer the beginning of the Italian
tongue, and the change of the Latin into it, to these third inhabitants of
Italy the Langbards, Tinto della Nobilta. diuerona. l. 2. ca. 2. and alij.
by reason of their long and perfect coalition into one with the Italian
people: yet certainly, the Italian tongue was more ancient then so, for besides
that there remains yet to be seen (as me^ Lips. de Pronuntiat Ling. lat. cap.
3. and Merul. par. 2. Cosmogr. l. 4. c. 18.
worthy of credit report) in the K. of France his Library at Paris, an
Instrument written in the Italian tongue, in the time of Justinian the first,
which was before the coming of the Langbards into Italy: another evidence
more vulgar, to this effect, is to be found in Paulus Diaconus his miscellane
history: Paul Diacon. hist. Miscel. l. 17. long ante med.
where we read, that in the Emperor Mauritius his time, about the year 590,
when the Langbards had indeed entered, and wasted Gallia Cisalpina, but had not
invaded the Roman dition in Italy, that by the acclamation of the word Torna,
Torna, (plain Italian) which a Roman soldier spoke to one of his fellows
before, whose beast had ouerturned his burden) the whole army (marching in the
dark) began to cry out, torna, torna, and so fell to flying away.

But the French tongue, if that before mentioned were the cause of it, began a
little before, in the time of Valentinian the 3, when in a manner, all the West
part of the Empire fell away, (and among the rest, our Country of England,
being first forsaken of the Romans themselves, by reason of grievous wars at
their own doors, and not long after, conquered and possessed by the Saxons,
whose posterity for the most part we are) namely, about the year 450: France
being then subdued, and peaceably possessed, by the Franks and Burgundions
nations of Germany: the Burgundions occupying the Eastward and outward parts
of it, toward the river of Rhene, and the Franks all the inner region. For
although France before that had been invaded by the Wandali, Sueui, and
Alani, and after by the Goths, who having obtained Aquitayn for their seat
and habitation, by the grant of the Emperor Honorius, expelled the former into
Spain about An. 410: yet notwithstanding, till the Conquest made by the Franks
and Burgundions, it was not generally, nor for any long time mingled with
strangers, which after that Conquest began to spread over France, and to
become native Inhabitants of the Country.

But of all, the Spanish tongue for this cause, must necessarily be most
ancient: for the Wandali and Alani, being expelled France, about the year
410, began then to invade and to inhabit Spain which they held and possessed
many years, till the Goths being expelled by the Franks and Burgundians, out
of France into Spain, expelled them out of Spain into Afrique (the Barbarous
nations thus like nails driving out one another) and not only them, but with
them all the remnants of the Roman garrisons, and government, and so becoming
the entier Lords and quiet possessours of all the Country, from whom also the
Kings of Spain that now are, be descended. Notwithstanding, even they also,
within less then 300 years after, were driven by the Saracens of Afrique into
the northern and mountainous parts of Spain, namely Asturia, Biscay, and
Guipuscoa, till after a long course of time, by little and little they
recovered it, out of their hands again, which was at last fully accomplished
by Ferdinand not past 120 years ago, there having passed in the mean time,
from the Mores first entrance of Spain at Gibraltar, till their laft
possession in Granada, about 770 years.

Whereby you may see also, when the Roman tongue began to degenerate in
Afrique, (if that also, as is supposed spoke vulgarly the Latin tongue and if
the mixture of barbarous people were cause of the decay, and corruption of it)
namely, about the year 430, for about that time, the Wandali and Alani, partly
wearied with the Gottish war in Spain, and partly invited by the Governor
Bonifacius, entered Afrique, under the leading of Gensericus, a part whereof for
a time, they held quietly, for the Emperor Valentinianus gift: But shortly
after, in the same Emperors time, when all the West Provinces in a manner fell
utterly away from the Empire, they also took Carthage; and all the Pronince
about it, from the Romans. And although the dominion of Afrique was regained
by Bellisarius to the Empire almost 100 years after, in Justinians time, yet
in the time of the Emperor Leontius, (almost 700 years after our Saviors
birth) it was lost again, being anew conquered, and possessed by the Sarracens
of Arabia (and to this day remains in their hands) bringing together with
their victories, the language also, and religion, ( Mahumetanisme) into all
that coast of Afrique, even from Egypt to the Strait of Gibraltar, above 2000
miles in length.

About which time also, namely during the government of Valentinian the 3.
Bulgaria, Seruia, Boscina, Hungary, Austria, Stiria, Carinthia, Bauaria and
Sueuia (that is, all the North-border of the Empire, along the river Danubius)
and some part of Thrace, was spoiled and possessed by the Hunnes, who yet
principally planted themselves in the Lower Pannonia, whence it obtained the
name of Hungary.

Out of which discourse you may observe these two points. First, what the
Countries were, in which those wandering and warring nations after many
transmigrations from place to place, fixed at last their final residence and
habitation. Namely the Hunnes in Pannonia, the Wandales in Afrique, the East
Goths and Langbards in Italy the West Goths in Aquitaine and Spain, which
being both originally but one Nation, gained these names of East and West
Goths, from the position of these Countries which they conquered and
inhabited, the other barbarous nations of obscurer names, being partly consumed
with the war, and partly passing into the more famous appellations. And
Secondly, you may observe, that the maine dissolution of the Empire, especially
in Europe and Afrique, fell in the time of Valentinian the third about the
year 450. being caused by the barbarous nations of the North (as after did the
like dissolution of the same Empire in Asia, by the Arabians in the time of
Heraclius about the year 640) and together with the ruin of the Empire in the
West by the inundation of the foresaid barbarous Natitions, the Latin tongue
in all the Countries where it was vulgarly spoken (if it were rightly spoken
any where in the West) became corrupted.

Wherefore if the Spanish, French and Italian tongues, proceeded from this
cause, as a great number of learned men, suppose they did, you see what the
antiquity of them is; But to deliver plainly my opinion, having searched as
far as I could, into the originals of those languages, and having pondered
what in my reading, and in my reason I found touching them, I am of another
mind (as some learned men also are) namely, that all those tongues are more
ancient, and have not sprung from the corruption of the Latin tongue, by the
inundation and mixture of barbarous people in these provinces, but from the
first imperfect impression and receiving of it, in those foreign Countries.
Which imperfectness notwithstanding of the Roman tongue in those parts,
although it had, as I take it beginning from this evil framing of foreign
tongues, to the right pronouncing of the Latin, yet I withal easily believe,
and acknowledge, that it was greatly increased, by the mixture and coalition of
the barbarous Nations. So that me thinks, I have observed three degrees of
corruption in the Roman tongue, by the degenerating whereof, these languages
are supposed to have received their beginning. The first of them, was in Rome
it self, where, toward the latter end of the Common wealth, and after, in the
time of the Empire, the infinite multitude of servants (which exceedingly
exceeded the number of free borne Citizens) together with the unspeakable
confluence of strangers, from all provinces, did much impair the pureness of
their language, and as Isidore has observed brought many barbarismes and
solaecismes into it. Insomuch, that Tertullian in his time, Isidor. Origin. l.
9. c. 1. Tertul. in Apologet. adu. Gentes cap. 6.
when as yet none of the barbarous nations had by invasion touched Italy (for
he lived under Septimius Seuerus government) charge the Romans to have
renounced the language of their fathers. The Second step, was the imperfect
impression (that I touched before) made of the Roman tongue abroad in the
foreign provinces among strangers, whose tongues could not perfectly frame to
speak it aright. And certainly, if the Italians themselves, as is remembered
by Cicero failed of the right and perfect Roman pronounciation, Cicer. l. 3 de
Oratore.
I see not how the tongues of strange Nations, such as the Gauls and Spaniards
were, should exactly utter it. And the Third, was that mixture of many
barbarous people (to which others attribute the beginning of the languages in
question) which made the Latin, that was before imperfect, yet more corrupt
then they found it, both for words and for pronouncing: So that, I rather
think the barbarous people to have been a cause of increasing the corruption,
and of further alteration and departure of those languages from the Roman,
then of beginning them. And me thinks I have very good reasons so to be
persuaded beeside all the arguments about mentioned, which I produced, both for
the remaining of the vulgar languages and for the imperfect speaking of the
Roman tongue in the provinces. First, because the Goths Wandales, Langbards,
as also the Franks and Bargundions language was, by the consent of Irenic.
Exeg. German. l. 1. ca. 31. Lacing. l. 10. de Migration. Gent. Gorop. Origin.
Antwerp. l. 7. Gesner. in Mithridate. Rhenan. l. 2. Rer. German. Leunclau. in
Pandect. Tur^e.. 71. et Al^ multi.
learned men, the Germane tongue, which has but small affinity or agreement,
with either the Italian, French or Spanish tongues. Secondly, because among all
the ancient writers (and they are many) which have written of the miserable
changes, made in these West parts of the world, by those infinite swarms of
barbarous people, I find not one, that mentions the change of any of these
languages to have been caused by them: which me thinks some ancient writers
among so many learned, as those times, and those very Countries, abounded
withal, and whose writings yet remain, would certainly have recorded. But
though we find mention in soundrie ancient writers, of changing these
languages into the Roman (whom yet I understand of that imperfect change
before touched) yet nothing is found of any rechanging of those languages from
the Roman, into the state wherein now they are. But it is become a question
only of some late searchers of Antiquity, but of such, as determine in this
point, without either sound reason or good countenance of Antiquity.

Objections touching the extent of the Latin tongue and the beginning of the
mentioned Languages with their solutions. CHAP. VI.
THese reasons perhaps (joined with the other above alleged whereby I
endeavored to prove that the latin tongue perfectly spoken, was never the
vulgar language of the Roman provinces) may persuade you as they have done
me, that the barbarous nations of the north, were not the first corrupters of
the latin tongue, in the provinces subject to Rome, nor the beginners of the
Italian, French and Spanish tongues: yet some difficulties I find (I confess)
in writers touching these points, which when I have resolved my opinion will
appear the more credible.

One is out of Plutarch in his Platonique questions, Plutarch. in quest.
platonic. quaest. 9.
affirming that in his time all men in a manner spoke the latin tongue.

Another before touched that Strabo records the Roman tongue to have been
spoken in Spain and France, Strab. l. 3. and 4. Apul in Floridis.
and Apuleius in Afric, which also may appear by sundry places in Augustine,
whose sermons seem (as Cyprians also) to have bin made to the people in that
language.

A third, how it falls if these vulgar tongues of adulterate latin be so
ancient, that nothing is found written in any of them of any great antiquity?

A fourth, how in Rome and Latium, where the Latin tongue was out of question,
native, the latin could so degenerate, as at this day is found in the Italian
tongue, except by some foreign corruption?

To the first of these I answer, either that as Divines are wont to interpret
many general propositions, Plutarch is to be understood de generibus
singulorum, not de singulis generum: So that the latin tongue was spoken
almost in every nation, but not of every one in any foreign nation: Or else,
that they spoke the latin indeed, but yet imperfectly and corruptly, as their
tongues would frame to utter it.

To the second I answer: first, that Strabo speaks not generally of France
or Spain, but with limitation to certain parts of both, the Province of
Narbon in France, and the tract about Boetis in Spain. Secondly, that although
they speak it, yet it follows not, that they speak it perfectly and aright,
(except perhaps in the Colonies) so that I will not deny but it might be spoken
abroad in the Provinces, yet I say it was spoken corruptly, according as the
peoples tongues would fashion to it, namely in such sort, that although the
matter and body of the words, were for the most part latin, yet the form and
sound of them varied from the right pronouncing: which speech notwithstanding
was named Latin, partly for the reason now touched, and partly, because they
learned it from the Romans or Latins, as the Spaniards call their language
Romance till this day, which yet we know to differ much from the right Roman
tongue: Nithard. d^ dissens filio^ Ludon. P^ l.
and as Nithardus (nephew to Charles the great) in his history of the
dissension of the sons of Ludouicus Pius, calls the French then usual
(whereof he sets down examples,) the Roman tongue, which yet has no more
agreement with the latin then the French has that is now in use. Thirdly, to
the objection of Cyprians and Augustines preaching in latin, Antonin. in
Itinerario, Plin. Iun. in Epist. l. 8. ad Ca^^^^
I answer that both Plin. Sec. Histor. not. l. 5. c. 4.
Hippo, whereof Augustine was Bishop, and Velleius. l. 1. Appian. l. de Bell.
Punicis is fine.
Carthage, whereof Cyprian was Archbishop, were Roman Colonies, consisting for
the most part of the progeny of Romans, for which sort of Cities, there was
special reason. Although neither in the Colonies themselves (as it seems)
the Roman tongue was altogether vncorrupt, both for that which I alleged
before out of Spartianus of Seuerus his sister dwelling at Leptis, and for that
which I remembered out of Augustine for Hippo, where they spoke Enar^. Psalm. 138.
Ossum and ^. 2. de doc. Christ c. 13.
Floriet, and Tract. 7. ^^ Ioannem.
Dolus, for Os and Florehit and dolor, (and yet were both Leptis and Hippo
Roman Colonies): And yet it appears further by Augustine, that in their
translations of the Scriptures, and in the Psalms sung in their Churches, they
had these corruptions, where yet (as it is like) their most corrupt and vulgar
latin had not place.

To the third I answer, that two reasons of it may be assigned: One, that
learned men would rather write, in the learned and grammatical, then in the
vulgar and provincial latin. Another, that the works of unlearned men would
hardly continue till our times, seeing even of the learned ancient writings,
but few of infinite, have remained. Furthermore it is observed of the Germane
tongue, by Tschudas and of the French by Genebrard, Tschud. Des. ^^pt Alpinae
cap. 36. Genebr. l. 4. Chron. Secul. 11.
that it is very little above 400. years, since books began to be written in
both those languages, and yet it is out of all doubt, that the tongues are much
ancienter.

To the fourth I say, that there is no language, which of ordinary course is
not subject to change, although there were no foreign occasion at all: which
the very fancies of men, weary of old words (as of old things) is able enough
to work, which may be well proved by observations and instances of former
changes, in this very tongue (the latin) whereof I now dispute. Quint^^. Just
Orator. l. 1. ca. 6.
For Quintilian records, that the verses of the Salij which were said to be
composed by Numa could hardly be understood of their Priests, in the latter
time of the common wealth, Fest. in Dictio^. Latin loqui.
for the absoluteness of the speech And Festus in his book de verborum
significatione, who lived in Augustus Caesar's time, has left in observation,
that the Latin speech, which (says he) is so named of Latium, was then in
such manner changed, that scarslie any part of it remained in knowledge. The
laws also of the Roman Kings and of the Decemuiri, Fulu. Visin not. ad Anton.
August. de L^g^h. et Sen^tusconsult
(called the Laws of the twelve Tables) collected and published in their own
words by Fuluius Vrsinus are no less evident testimonies, if they be compared
with the later latin, of the great alteration of that language.

Furthermore, Polyb. l. 3.
Polybius has also recorded, that the articles of league, betwixt the people
of Rome and of Carthage, made presently after the expulsion of the Kings from
Rome, could very hardly in his time be understood, by reason of the old
forsaken words, by any of the best skilled antiquaries in Rome. In which time
notwithstanding, they received very few strangers into their City, which
mixture might cause such alteration, and the difference of time was but about
350. years. And yet to add one instance more, of a shorter revolution of
time, and a cleerer evidence of the change, that the Roman tongue was subject
to, and that, when no foreign cause thereof can be alleged: There remains
at this day (as it is certainly Vid. Paul. Merul. Cousin. par. 2. l. ^. c. 18
et. Celsu. C^^tad. in Tract^ de Orig. ling. Vulgaris. Ital Cap. 7. etc.
recorded) in the Capitol at Rome, though much defaced by the injury of time,
a pillar (they call it Columnam rostratam, that is, decked with beakes of
ships) dedicated to the memory of Duillius a Roman Consul, upon a nauale
victory obtained againg the Carthaginians, in the first punicke war, not past
150. years before Ciceroes time, when the Roman tongue ascended to the highest
flourish of Elegancie, that ever it obtained: And thus the words of the Pillar
are, (those that may be read) as I find the^ observed, with the later latin
under the^. Exemet. Leciones. Macistratos. Castreis. Exfociont. Exemit.
Legiones. Magistratus. Castris. Effugiunt. Pucnandod. Cepet. Enque. Nauebos.
Marid. Consol. Pugnando. Cepit. Inque. Nauibus. Mari. Consul. Primos. Ornauet.
Nauebous. Claseis. Paenicas. Sumas. Primus. Ornauit. Nauibus. Classes. Punicas.
Summas. Cartaciniensis. Dictatored. Altod. Socieis. Triresmos. Carthaginiensis.
Dictatore. Alto. Socijs. Triremes. Naueis. Captom. Numei. Naualed. Praedad.
Poplo, etc. Naues. Captum. Nummi. Nauali. Praeda. Populo, etc.

Where you see in many words, e for i, c. for g, o for u, and sometime for e,
and d, superfluously added to the end of many words. But (to let foreign toungs
pass) of the great alteration that time is wont to work in languages, our
own tongue may afford us examples evident enough: wherein since the times
near after, and about the Conquest, the change has been so great, as I my
self have seen some evidences made in the time of King Henry the first,
whereof I was able to understand but few words. To which purpose also, a
certain remembrance is to be found in Holinsheds Chronicle, in the end of the
Conquerours reign, in a Charter given by him to the City of London.

Of the ancient Languages of Italy, Spain France and Afrique. CHAP. VII.
But if the discourse of these points of Antiquity, in handling whereof I have
declared, that while the Roman Empire flourished, it never abolished the vulgar
languages, in France, or Spain or Afrique, howsoever in Italy. If that
discourse I say, move in you perhaps a desire, to know what the ancient vulgar
languages of these parts were: I will also in that point, out of my reading and
search into Antiquity, give you the best satisfaction that I can.

And first for Italy: Certain it is, that many were the ancient tongues in
the several Provinces of it, tongues I say, not dialects, for they were many
more. In Apulia, the Mesapian tongue: In Tuscanie and Vmbria, the Hetruscan,
both of them utterly perished: Inscript. ver. page 143.144.145.146.
Yet in the book of ancient Inscriptions, set forth by Gruter, and Scaliger,
there be some few monuments registered of these languages, but not understood
now of any man. In Calabria both the higher and lower, and far along the
maritime coast of the Tyrrhene sea, the Greek. In Latium (now Campagna di
Roma) The Latin. In Lombardie, and Liguria, the old tongue of France
whatsoever it was. Of which last three, the two former are utterly ceased to be
vulgar: and the third, no where to be found in Italy, but to be sought for in
some other Country, And although, beside these five, we find mention, in
ancient writings of the Sabine, the Oscan, the Tusculan, and some other tongues
in Italy, yet were they no other then differing dialects of some of the former
languages, as by good observations, out of Varro, Festus, Seruius, Paul.
Diaconus, and others, might be easily proved.

Secondly, of France what the ancient tongue was, has bin much disputed, and yet
remains somewhat uncertain; Some thinking it to have been the Germane others
the Greek, and some the Walsh tongue. But, ^^lard. 1. de Bello Gallic. in
principio. Strab. l. 4. in princip.
if the meaning of these resoluers be, that one language, whatsoever it were,
was vulgar in all France, they are very far wide, Caesar and Strabo having
both recorded, that there were diverse languages spoken in the diverse parts.
But, to omit the speech of Aquitaine, which Strabo writes to have had much
affinity with the Spanish: And, of that part, (in Caesar called Belgia) that
at the river of Rhene confined with Germany, which for that neighborhood,
might partake much of the German tongue: To omit those I say, the maine
question is, about the language of the Celtae, which as inhabiting the middle
part of France, were least of all infected with any foreign mixture. And
certainly, that it was not the Greek, appears out of Caesar, Caes. l. 5. de
Bello Gallic. long post. med.
writing to Q. Cicero, then besieged by the Gauls) in Greek, lest the Gauls
should intercept his letters: And secondly, no less evidently by Varro, Varro
ap. Hieron. in praefat. l. 2. Comment. epist. ad Galat. and apud Isidorum l. 1^
Orig. cap. 1.
writing of the Massilians that they spoke three languages, the Roman, the
Greek, and the Gallique tongue: And thirdly, the remnants of that tongue, may
serve for Instance, whereof many old words, are found dispersed in ancient
writers, that have no affinity at all with the Greek. The Greek therefore,
was not the ancient native language of the Gauls; Neither was it the Germane:
for else it had been but an odd relation and reason of Caesar's, Caes. l de
Bello Gallico. Tacit l de Mor. Germanor. prope finem. Sueton. in Caligula c. 47.
that Ariouistus a German Prince, had lived so long in Gallia, that he spoke
the Gallique tongue: And that of Tacitus, that the Gallique tongue proved the
Gothines to be no Germans: and that of Suetonius, that Caligula compelled many
of the Gauls to learn the Germane tongue. Hottom. in Fran. cogall. c. 2.
But Hottoman (of all that I have read) speaking most distinctly, touching the
original and composition of the French tongue, divides it as now it is
spoken, equally into two parts, of which he supposes the one (and I think it
is rather the greater part) to have original from the Latin tongue: and the
other half, to be made up, Perion. l de Cognat. Ling. Gal. and Graecae
Postell. l. de 12. Ling.
by the German and Greek, and British or Walsh words, each almost in equal
measure. Of the deduction of the French words from the Greek, you may read
Perionius, Postell, and others: Of those from the Germane, Tschudus, Goropius,
Isacius etc. Of the Walsh Lhuid, Tschud. in Descr. Rhet. Alp. c 38. Gorop. in
Francicis.
Camden etc. Which last indeed for good reason, seems to have been the
native language of the ancient Celtae, rather then either the Greek or Dutch
tongues: for of the Greek words found in that language, the neighborhood of
the Massilians, Isac. in Glossa^rio, Prisco-gal Lhuid in Descript. Britan.
Camden in Britannia. Strab. l. 4.
and their Colonies, inhabiting the maritime coast of Province, together with
the ready acceptance of that language in France, (mentioned by Strabo) may be
the cause: As likewise of the Germane words, the Franks and Burgundions
conquest, and possession of France, may be assigned for a good reason: But of
the British words none at all can be justly given, save, that they are the
remnants of the ancient language. Secondly, it seems to be so by Tacitus,
Tacit. in Iulio Agricola.
writing, that the speech of the Gauls, little differed from that of the
Britains. And thirdly, by Caesar, Caes l 6. de Bell. Gallico.
recording, that it was the custom of the Gauls that were studious of the
Druides discipline, often to pass over into Britain to be there instructed:
wherefore seeing there was no use of books among them, as is in the same place
affirmed by Caesar, it is apparent that they spoke the same language.

Thirdly, the Spanish tongue as now it is, consists of the old Spanish,
Latin, Gottish, and Arabique (as there is goood reason it should, Spain
having been so long, in the possessions of the Romans, Goths, and Mores) of
which, the latin is the greatest part, (next it the Arabique) and therefore
they themselves call their language Romance. And certainly I have seen an
epistle written by a Spaniard, whereof every word was both good Latin and good
Spanish, and an example of the like is to be seen in Merula. Merul. Cosmogr.
part. 2. l. 2. c. 8.
But the language of Valentia and Catalonia, and part of Portugal, is much
tempered with the French also. Now the ancient and most general language of
Spain, spoken over the Country before the Romans conquest, seems to me out
of question, to have been, the Cantabrian tongue, that namely which yet they
speak in Biscay, Guipuscoa, Navarre, and Asturia, that is to say, in the
northern and mountainous parts of Spain, near the Ocean, with which the
Vasconian tongue also in Aquitaine, near the Pyrene hills, has as there is
good reason (for out of those parts of Spain the inhabitants of Gascoigne
came) much affinity and agreement. And my reason for this opinion is, that in
that part of Spain, the people have ever continued without mixture of any
foreign nation as being never subdued by the Carthaginians, nor by the Mores,
no, nor by the Romans, (for all their long warring in Spain) before Augustus
Caesar's time, and for the hillinesse, and bareness, and unpleasantness of the
Country, having nothing in it, to inuit strangers to dwell among them. For
which cause, the most ancient Nations and languages are for the most part
preserved in such Countries: as by Thucydides is specially observed, Thucyd. l.
1. paul. a princip.
of the Attiques, and Arcadians, in Greece, dwelling in barren soiles: Of which
nations the first, for their Antiquity, vaunted of themselves that they were
(...), and the second, (...), as if they had been bred immediately of the
Earth, or borne before the Moon. Another example whereof we may see in Spain
it self, for in the steepy mountains of Granata, named Alpuxarras, the
progeny of the Mores yet retain the Arabique tongue (for the Spaniards call it
Arauiga) which all the other remnants of the Mores in the plainer region had
utterly forgotten, and received the Castilian (till their late expulsion out of
Spain) for their vulgar language. The like whereof, is also to be seen in the
old Epirotique speech and nation, which yet continues in the mountainous part
of Epirus, being (for the tongue) utterly extinguished in all the Country
beside. And (to let foreign instances go) in the Britains or Welsh-men in
the hilly part of our own Country. What the reason thereof may be, I will not
stand now curiously to enquire: whether that being inured to labor, to
watching, to sundry distemperatures of the air, and much other hardness (for
otherwise their living will not be gotten of such barren ground) they prove
upon occcasion good and able soldiers? Or, that the craggie rocks and hills
(like fortresses of natures own erecting) are easily defended from foreign
inuaders? Or that their unpleasant and fruitless? soil, has nothing to
inuit strangers to desire it? Or, that wanting richesse, they want also the
ordinary companions of richesse, that is proud and audacious hearts, to provoke
with their injuries other nations to be revenged on them, either by the
conquest or desolation of their Countries? But whatsoever the cause may be,
certainly in effect so it is, that the most ancient Nations and Languages, are
for the most part to be found in such unpleasant and fruitless regions:
Insomuch that the Biscaynes who gave me occasion of this digression, vaunt of
themselves among the Spaniards, that they are the right Hidalgos, (that is
gentlemen) as some also report of the Welsh-men here in Britain to say of
themselves, which yet I that am their neighbor, (to confess a truth) never
heard them say.

Now lastly touching the Punique tongue, as I am not of Galateus his opinion,
Galat. de (...)
that it was utterly extinguished by the Romans: So neither can I be of the
fantasy (for it is no better) that G^sner in Mithridate i^ Ling. Afric. and
Arab. Roccha de dialect. in Ling. Arabica Postell. de Ling. 12 in ling. Arab.
Mas. in Gram Syriaca. prop. Init. Bibliand. de ration. Linguar. Schidler. in
Lex. Pontaglotto in voce (...) Mart. Galeott. de doctr. promiscua. cap. 6. and
alij multi.
many other learned men are: namely, that it was the Arabique, that is to say
the same language, that is vulgar in Afrique at this day. For it is well known
to the skillful in histories, that the Puniques were of another offspring (not
of Arabian race) and that it is not yet a thousand years, since that tongue
was by the Arabians together with their victories brought into Afrique. And as
certain also it is, that the remnants of the Africans progeny, as Leo Afric.
l. 1. Descrip. Afr. cap. de Ling. Africae. Flo. in Epitom Liu l. 51. Strab. l.
17.
Leo Africanus has recorded, have a different language from the Arabique. But
the Punique tongue seems to me out of question, to have been the Chananitish
or old Hebrew language, though I doubt not somewhat altered from the original
pronuntiation, as is wont in tract of time, to befall Colonies, planted among
strangers far from home. For first, Carthage it self, the Queen of the
Cities of Afrique (and well might she be termed so, that contained in circuit
24 miles, as Florus in his abridgement of Liuie has recorded, and by the utter
wall 360 furlongs (that is 45 miles) as it is in Strabo: And held out in
emulation with Rome as is noted by Pliny, 120 year, and to conclude (before
the second Punique war) had in subjection all the coast of the mediterrane
sea, Plin. l. 15. c. 18.
from the bottom of the greater Syrtis in Afrique, to the river Ebro (Iberus)
in Spain, which is about 2000. miles of length) that the same Carthage I say,
and diverse other Cities of Afrique (of which Pliny names Vtica and Leptis, as
being the printipall) were Colonies of the Phoenicians, and namely of the
Tyrians, is not only by Strabo, Strab. lib. citato. Mela. l. 1. c. ^ Liu. lib.
33. Plin. l. 5. c. 19. Appian. l. de Bell. Pun^cis in principio Curtius. l. 4.
et A^^ plures.
Mela, Liuie, Pliny, Appian, and many other certain Authors, acknowledged,
and by none denied, but also the very names of Poeni and Punici, being but
variations or mutilations of the name Phoenicij import so much, and lastly
their language assures it. For Hierome writing, that their language was grown
somewhat different from the Phoenician tongue, does manifestly in those words
imply, it had been the same.

And what were the Phoenicians but Chanaanites? The Phoenicians I say, of whose
exceeding mercha^dizing we read so much in ancient histories, what were they
but Chanaanites, whose very (...)
name signifies merchants? for, the very same nation, that the Graecians
called Phoenicians ((...)) and the Romans in imitation of that name Poenos and
Punicos, for the exceeding store of good Palms, (...), in the Greek,
signifies the Palm, for as touching the deduction of the name Phoenicia,
either from (...) by Montanus, or from (...) by Postellus, signifying the
delicacy of the inhabitants by the first, and their observation or adoration of
the fire, by the second, they are but late sprung fantasies, and have not any
ground of reason at all: for as much, as in all the Hebrew writings of the
Bible, that country is never termed by any name sounding toward Phoenicia, but
in the Greek only. But in many old coins that I have seen, I have noted the
Palm tree as the special cognizance of Phoenicia, (as I have also the Olive
branch and Conies to be of Spain: the Horse of Mauritania: the Elephant, or the
spoil of the Elepha^t of Afrique: the Camel, of Arabia: the Crocodile, or the
bird Ibis, of Egypt: and diverse other specialties for other countries:) And
namely I have seen, sundry old coins of the Emperor Vespatian, of several
devises and imagerie, stamped for a memorial of his conquest of Iudaea, and
taking of Jerusalem (for the inscription is in every of them, Iudaea capta) and
in each of them I specially observed a woman sitting in a sad and mournful
fashion, with her back to a Palm tree: wherein, I make no doubt, but the
desolate woman signifies Iudaea, and the Palm Phoenicia, even as Phoenicia is
immediately toward the north, at the back of Iudaea.
wherewith that country abou^ded: Arias Mont. lib. Chanaan. ^a. 3. Postel. in
deserio. Syriae. c. de Syriae No^inib.
Insomuch that in monuments of antiquity, the Palm tree is observed for the
Ensign of Phoenicia: the same nation I say, called themselves, and by the
Israelites, their next neighbors, were called, Chanaanites. And that they were
indeed no other, I am able easily to prove. For first, the same woman that in
Matthew is named a Canaanite, Math. 15.22.
is in Mark called a Syrophoenician. Marc. 7.26.
2. Where mention is made in Joshua, Ios. 5.1.
of the Kings of Canaan, they are in the Septuagints translation named, (...).

3. To put it out of question. All that coast, from Sidon to Azzah, (that was
Gaza) near to Gerar, is registered by Genesis 10.19.
Moses, to have been possessed by the posterity of Chanaan: Of which coast the
more northren part above the promontory of Carmell, or rather from the river
Chorseus, ( Kison the Jews called it) that nere the promontory of Carmel,
Strab. l. 16. no^ long. ante med. Plin. l. 5. c. 12. Pt^lem. Tab. 4. A^ae.
Dionys Alex. in Periegesi.
enters the sea, to the city of Orthosia, above Sidon northward, is by Strabo,
Pliny, Ptolomy and others, referred to Phoenicia, (although Strabo extend that
name, along all the maritime coast of Palestina also, to the confines of
Egypt, as Dionysius Periegetes also does, placing Ioppa and Gaza, and Elath in
Phoenicia) which very tract, to have bin the several possessions of Zidon, and
Cheth, and Girgashi, and Harki, and Aruadi, and Chamathi, six of the eleven
sons of Canaan, (the other five inhabiting more to the south in Palestina)
they that are skilful in the ancient Chorography of the Holy land, cannot be
ignorant. Seeing therefore out of this part of the land of Canaan (for in this
part Tyrus was) the Carthaginians, and other colonies of the Phaenicians in
Afrique came, it is out of all doubt, that they were of the Chananites
progeny: August expos: ^^^hoat. epist. ad Roman. in med.
and for such in very deed, and no other, they reputed and professed
themselves to be: for as Austine has left recorded, who was borne and lived
among them, the country people of the Puniques, when they were asked touching
themselves what they were, they would make answer that they were Channai,
meaning, as Austine himself does interpret them, Canaanites.

Certain therefore it is that the native Punique langauge was not the
Chanaanitish tongue: but that I added for explication this clause, (or the old
Hebrew, meaning by the old Hebrew that which was vulgarly spoken among the
Jews before the captivity) you will perhaps suspect my credit, and be
offended, for I am not ignorant, how superstitiously Divines for the most part
are affected toward the Hebrew tongue: yet when I had set down the Africans
language to have been the Canaanitish tongue, I thought good to add for
plainness sake (or the old Hebrew) because J take them indeed to be the very
same language, and that Abraham and his posterity, brought it not out of
Chaldaea, but learned it in the land of Chanaan. Neither is this opinion of
mine, a mere paradox and fantasy, but I have Postel. lib. de Phoenic. lit. c.
2.. 5. Arias Monta. L. Chanaan. ca. 9. G^^ebrard. l. 1. Chron. an. D^lunij 131
Scal^^. ^d se^. in di^t. ^^rte. and in ep ^d V. ^ert^e ad Tomson.
three or four of the best skilled in the language and antiquities of that
nation, that the later times could afford, of the same mind: And certainly, by
Isa. 19.18.
Isaiah it is called in direct terms, the language of Chanaan: And it is
moreover manifest, that the names of the places, and cities of Chanaan, (the
old names I mean by which they were called before the Israelites dwelt in
them, as is to be seen in the whole course of the books of Moses and of
Ioshuah) were Hebrew names: touching which point, although I could produce
other forceable reasons, such as might, (except my fantasy delude me) vex the
best wit in the world to give them just solution, yet I will add no more, both
to avoid prolixity, and because I shall have in another place fitter occasion.

But to speak particularly of the Punique tongue which has brought us into
this discourse, and which I proved before to be the Canaanitish language: it is
not only Augu. in ser. 35. de verb. Dom. in Eua^gel. sec. Luca^.
in one place pronounced by Augustine (who knew it well, no man better) to have
near affinity with the Hebrew tongue, which also the As in the Punique tongue
Salus three, Augustine. in expos. inchoat. epist. ad Roman. Heb. (...). Edom,
blood. Enar. Psalm. 136. Heb. (...). Mamon, lucre, De Sermon. Dom. in Mont. l.
2. c. 14. Heb. (...). Bal. the Lord. Quaest. in Iudie. cap. 16. Hebr. (...).
Samen, Heaven. Ibid. Heb. (...). Mess, to anoint. Tract. 15. in Joan. Heb.
(...). Alma, a Virgin. Hieron. in c. 7. Isai. Heb. (...). Gadir. a fence or
wall. Pliny. l. 4. c. 22. (...). and some other that diligence might observe.
Punick words dispearsed in the writings of Augustine, and of others, (as many
as come to my remembrance) prove to be true. But more effectually in Aug l. 2*
co^t. litter Petiliani ^ap. 104.
an other place, to agree with it in very many, yea almost in every word.
Which speech seeing they could in no sort have from the Israelites, being not
of Abraham's posterity (both because no such transmigration of them is remembered
in the holy histories, and for that the Punique colonies, are specially
mentioned to have been deduced from Tire, which never came into the possession
of the Israelites) but from the Canaanites whose offspring they were: It
follows thereupon that the language of the Canaanites, was either the very
same or exceeding near the Hebrew. And certainly touching the difference that
was between the Hebrew and the Punique, I make no doubt, but the great
distance from their primitive habitation, and their conversation with strangers
among whom they were planted, and together with both, the length of time, which
is wont to bring alteration to all the languages in the world, were the causes
of it. And although that Punique speech in Plautus, which is the only
continued speech of that language, Plau^. i^ P^e nulo. Act. 6.
that to my knowledge remains extant in any Author, have no such great
conuenience with the Hebrew tongue, yet I assure my self the faults, and
corruptions that have crept into it by many transcriptions, to have been the
cause of so great difference, by reason whereof, it is much changed, from what
at the first it was, when Plautus writ it, about 1800. years ago: And
specially because in transcribing thereof there would be so much the less care
taken, as the language was less understood, by the writers, and by the
readers, and so the escapes less subject to observation and controlement.

Of the largeness of the Slauonish, Turkish, and Arabique languages. CHAP.
VIII.
MAny are the nations that have for their vulgar language the Slauonish tongue
in Europe, and some in Asia. Among which the principal in Europe, are the
Slauonians themselves, inhabiting Dalmatia and Liburnia, the West Macedonians,
the Epirotes, the Bosinates, Seruians, Russians, Bulgarians, Moldauians,
Podolians, Russians, Muscouites, Bohemians, Polonians, Silesians. And in Asia
the Circassians, Mangrellians, and Gazarites. Gesner. in Mithrid. in Ling.
Illyrica. Boccha in Append. de dia^^ct in Illyrica.
These I say are the principal but they are not all: for Gesner and Roccha
reckken up the names of 60. nations, that have the Slauonian tongue for their
vulgar language. So, that it is known to be vulgarly spoken over all the East
parts of Europe (in more then a third part of the whole) even to the utmost
bonds of it the rivers of Droyna and Tanais; Greece and Hungary, and Wala^hia
only excepted. Indeed the regions of Seruia, Bosina, Bulgaria, Rascia,
Moldauia, Russia and Moscouia, namely all the nations of the Eastern parts,
which celebrate their divine service after the Greek ceremony, and profess
ecclesiastical obedience to the Patriarch of Constantinople write in a diverse
^o^^ of Character, from that of the Dalmatians, Croatians, Istrians, Polonians,
Bohemians, Silesians and other nations toward the west (both which sorts of
characters are to be seen in Postels book of the Oriental languages) of
which, this last is called the Dalmatian or Illyrian character, and was of
Posteli. ^^ ling. Dalma^ Rocch. in ^iblioth. Vatican pagin. 16 and alij.
Hieromes devising, that other bering for the most part much resemblance with
the Greek, is termed the Seruian character, and was of Roccha. lib. citato page
168.
Cyrils invention: for which cause, as Roccha has remembered, they term the
language written in that character Id. page 17^.
Chiurilizza. But yet notwithstanding the difference of characters in the
writing of these nations, they speak all of them (the difference of dialect
excepted) the same language.

But yet is not the Slauonique tongue (to answer your question) for all this
large extent, the vulgar language of the Turkish Empire. For of the Turks
dominion only Epirus, the west part of Macedon, Bosina, Seruia, Bulgaria,
Rascia, and part of Thrace, and that he has in Dalmatia and Croacia, (beside
the Mengrelli in Asia) speak vulgarly the Slauonian tongue. But no where for
the more precise limitation, neither in Asia nor in Europe, is that language
spoken more southward, then the north Parallel of 40. degrees: some part of
Epirus only excepted: I mean it is not spoken as the vulgar language of any
nation more southward. For else, being acceptable and usual, as it is, in the
Great Turks Serrail at Constantinople, and familiar with most of the Turkish
soldiers, by reason of their garrisons and other great employment in those
parts toward the confines of Christian Princes, all which parts as before I
said ( Hungary and Walachia excepted) speak that language: for these reasons
I say, it is spoken by diverse particular men, in many places of the Turkish
dominion, and the Ianizares and officers for the most part can speak it, and
many others also of the better sort, but yet the general and vulgar language
of his dominion (excepting those places before mentioned) it is not.

But in Anatolia, although the old languages still remain, being for the most
part corrupt Greek, as also in Armenia, they have their peculiar language, yet
is the Turkish tongue very frequent and prevails in them hoth: which being
originally none other then the Tartarian tongue, as Michouius, Michou. l. 1. de
Sarmatia. cap. 15. Rocch de dialect. in Ling. Tur^ica.
and others have observed, yet partaketh much, both of the Armenian and
Persian, by reason of the Turks long continuance in both those regions, before
they settled the seat of their Dominion, and themselves among the Grecians, for
which cause it is not without mixture of Greek also, but chiefly and above
all other of the Arabique, both by reason of their religion written in that
language, and their training up in schools unto it, as their learned tongue.
And yet although the Turkish be well understood both in Natolia and Armenia,
yet has it neither extinguished the vulgar languages of those parts neither
obtained to it self (for ought I can by my reading find) any peculiar
province at all, wherein it is become the sole native and vulgar language, but
is only a common scattered tongue, which appears to be so much the more
evidently true, because the very Cities that have been successively the
seats of the Ottaman Sultans; namely Iconium (now Cogna) in Lycaonia, then
Prusa in Bithynia; thirdly, Adrianople in Thrace; and lastly, Constantinople,
are yet known to retain their old native language, the Greek tongue:
Although the Turkish tongue also be common in them all, as it is likewise in
all other Greek Cities both of Greece and Asia.

But in the East part of Cilicia beyond the river Pyramus, as in all Syria
also, and Mesopotamia and Palestina, and Arabia and Egypt, and thence Westward
in all that long tract of Afrique, that extends from Egypt to the Strait of
Gibralter, I say, in all that lies betwixt the Mountain Atlas, and the
mediterrane sea (now termed Barbary) excepting Marocco, and here and there
some scattered remnants of the old Africans in the Inland parts, the Aribique
tongue is become the vulgar language, although somewhat corrupted and varied in
dialect, as among so many several nations it is impossible but it should be.
And although I be far from Postell. in praefat. Grammat. Arabic. Ludouic.
Reg. l. 8. de Vicissitud. Rer. ad finem.
their opinion, which write (too ouerlashingly) that the Arabian tongue is in
use in two third parts of the inhabited world, or in more, yet I find that it
extends very far, and specially where the religion of Mahumed is
professed. For which cause (over and besides the parts above mentioned, in
which it is (as I said) become the native language) in all the Northern part
of the Turkish Empire also, I mean that part that lies on the North side of
the Mediterrane sea, as likewise among the Mahumetane Tartars, it is thought
not the vulgar tongue, yet familiar with very many, both because all their
religion is written in that language, and for that Bellon. Obseruard. 3. c. 12
every boy that goes to school, is taught it, as in our schools they are
taught Latin and Greek: Insomuch, that all the Turks write their own
language in Arabique characters. So that you see the common languages of the
Turkish Empire, to be the Slauonish, the Greek, the Turkish and Arabique
tongues, serving severally for the parts that I mentioned before.

Of the Syriaque and Hebrew tongues. CHAP. IX.
THE Syriaque tongue is certainly Masius in prae^at. Grammat. Syric. Sixth
Senen. Biblioth. Sanctae. l. 4 in voce. Thargum. Canin. in praef^t. Institat.
Syr^c. Ar. Montan. de ratione Mazzoreth in Apparat. ad Bibl. Reg. Fabrit. in
praefat ad Lexic. Syrochalda^cum. Genebrard. l. 2 Chronog. ad An. 3690.
Bellarmin. l. 2. de verbo Dei ca. 14 and 15. etc. Posseum. Apporat sacr. in
Dictione. By(...)
thought to have had beginning, in the time of the Captivity of the Jews in
Babylon, while they were mingled among the Chaldeans. In which long revolution
of seventy years, the vulgar sort of the Jews, forgot their own language,
and began to speak the Caldee: But yet, pronouncing it a miss, and framing it
somewhat to their own Country fashion, in notation of poincts, affixes,
Coniugarions, and some other properties of their ancient speech, it became a
mixed language of Hebrew and Chaldee: a great part Chaldee for the substance of
the words, but more Hebrew for the fashion, and so degenerating much from both:
The old and right Hebrew, remaining after that time, only among the learned
men, and being taught in schools, as among us the learned tongues are
accustomed to be. And yet, after the time of our Savior, this language began
much more to alter, and to depart further, both from the Chaldee and Hebrew, as
receiving much mixture of Greek, some also of Roman and Arabique words, as in
the Talmud (named of Jerusalem) gathered by R. Iochanan, about 300 years after
Christ, is apparent being far fuller of them, then those parts of the Chaldee
paraphrase on the holy Scriptures, which were made by R. Jonathan, a little
before Christ, and by R. Aquila, whom they call Onkelos, not long after.

But yet certain it is, both for the great difference of the words themselves,
which are in the Syriaque tongue for the most part Chaldee, and for the
diversity of those adherents of words, which they call praefixa, and suffixa,
as also, for the differing sound of some vowels, and sundry other
considerations: Certain it is I say, that the unlearned Jews, whose vulgar
speech the Syriaque then was, could not understand their (...) and (...), that
their lectures of Moses and the Prophets, used in their synagogues in the
Hebrew tongue. And that seems to have been the original reason, both of the
public speeches and declarations of learned men to the people, usual in their
synagogues on the Sabboaths, after the readings of the Law and of the Prophets,
whereof in the Act. 13.15.
new Testament we find some mention, and also, of the translations of
Jonathan, and Onkelos, and others, made into their vulgar language, for that
the difference betwixt the Hebrew and the Chaldee was so great, that the tongue
of the one nation could not be understood by the other. First, the tongues
themselves, which yet remain with us, may be evident demonstrations, of which
we see that one may be skillful in the Hebrew, and yet not understand the
Chaldee, and therefore neither could they, whose speech the Chaldee then was
(although much degenerated) understand the Hebrew. Secondly, we find, that
when Nehem. ca 8 v. 7.8.9.
Ezra at the return from the Captivity, read the book of the law before the
people, others were feign to interpret that which was read unto them. And
Thirdly, the answer made to Rabshakeh, by the officers of K. Hezekiah, may put
it out of question, willing him Reg. l. 2. ca. 18. v. 26.
to speak unto them in the Chaldee tongue, that the common people of Jerusalem
(in whose hearing it was) might not understand what was spoken. But yet it
might be, that as at this day the Jews use to do, so also in Christ's time of
conuersing on the Earth, they might also read the Chaldee Targ^min (and
certainly some Iunius in Bellarm. Cont. 1. l. 2. c. 15.. 11
learned men affirm they did so) together with the Hebrew lectures of Moses
and the Prophets, for certain it is, that Jonathan Ben Vziel, had before the
birth of our Savior translated, not the Prophets only into Chaldee, for it is
his Paraphrase that we have at this day on the Prophets (and the language
which we now call the Syriaque, was but the Jewish Chaldee, although in the
after times, by the mixture of Greek, and many other foreign words it
beecame somewhat changed, from what in the times before and about our Saviors
incarnation it had been) but the Pentateuch also: at least, if that be true,
which Sixtus Senensis has recorded, Sixth. Senens. Biblioth. Sanct. l. 4.
indiction. Syr^ editio. Galatin. de Arcan. Catholicae Ve^^ l. 1. c. 3.
namely, that such is the tradition among the Jews, and which Galatine
writes, that himself has seen that translation of Ionathans, beside that of
Onkelos, for of that part of the Chaldee Paraphrase, which we have in the
Complutense, and K. Philips Bibles, on the Books of Moses, Onkelos is the
Author: of that on Iosuah, the Judges, the book of the Kings and of the
Prophets, Jonathan. Of that on Ruth, Hester, Job, the Psalms and the books of
Solomon, R. Joseph Caecus.
the beginning of both which he sets down, differing one from another, in
the first words. Which (namely touching the public reading of the Chaldee
Targamin, either together with the Hebrew text or instead of it) I may as well
conceive to be true, as that the foreign Vid. Salmeron. De Canonica.
scriptura. Prolegom. 3. in Tomo. 1. and de interpretat. Septuagint. Prol. 5.
Jews, Tertull. in Apologetico. ca. 19.
dwelling in Alexandria, and other parts of Egypt, in Asia also, and other
Greek provinces abroad, used publicly in stead of the Hebrew, which now they
understood not, the Septuagints Greek translation, as is evident in Tertullian:
And of some others of them in the Constitutions of Novel 146.
Justinian. Which Jews for that very cause: are sundry times in the Act. 6.1.
and 9.29. and 11.20. Scalig. in Chron. Eusebius. ad An^um. MDCCXXXIV. and Iu^.
contra. Bellarm Controu. 1. l. 2. c. 15.. ^1. and Drus. Praetoritor. l. 5.
Annot. ad. Act. Ap. 6.1.
Acts of the Apostles, termed (...). For by that name, in the judgment of
learned men the natural Grecians are not meant, which are always named (...),
not (...), But, the Jews dispersed among the Gentiles, that used to read the
Greek Scriptures in their Synagogues.

And here shall be the period of my first Enquiry, touching Languages, and
beginning of the second, concerning the sorts of Religions, abroad in the
World. In discoursing whereof you must be content, to accept of modern
Authors, because I am to entreat of modern matters: And, if I hap to step
awry, where I see no path, and can discern but few steps before me, you must
pardon it. And yet this one thing I will promise you, that if either they that
should direct me, mislead me not, or (where my reason suspects, that my guides
wander, and I am mislead) if my circumspect observing, or diligent inquiring,
may preserve me from error, I will not depart a hair from the way of Truth.

Of the sundry parts of the World inhabited by Christians. CHAP. X.
ALL Europe is possessed by Christians, except the utmost corners of it, toward
the East, and the North, for the small company of Mahumetanes, inhabiting
their Michou. de Sarmatia. l 2. c 3.
peculiar villages about Wilna in Litunia, or the scattered Boem de Morib. gent
l 3. c. 7. Boter Relat. Par. 3. l. 1. Ziegl tr. in Schondia* c de Lapponia.
Damian. a Goas Tract. de Lappijs. Michou. l. 2. de Sarmatia. c. 5. Munster.
Cosmog. l. 4 c. 37. Boter. Relation pa 1. l. c. de Bothnia.
remnants of Idolaters, in the same province, and in Samogitia, are not worthy
mentioning. But toward the North, Lappia, Scricfinia, Biarmia, Corelia, and the
North part of Finmarke (all which together pass commonly under the name of
Lapland, and make a region about 900 miles in circuit) are inhabited by
Idolaters: and toward the East, all the Region betwixt Tanais and Borysthenes,
along Maeotis and the Euxine sea (the true native Country of the ancient
Goths) being more then twice as large as the former, and withal much better
peopled, is inhabited by the Tartars called Crimaei or Precopitae, who are all
Mahumetans, excepting only a small remainder of Christians, in some parts of
Taurica.

But, in all the Turks dominion that he has in Europe, enclosed after a
peninsular figure, between Danubius and the Sea, and containing in circuit
about 2300 miles (for Moldauia, Walachia and Transiluania, I rekon not for
parts of his dominion) namely, from above Buda, on Danubius side, and from
Ragusa, on the sea side Eastward, to the utmost bounds of Europe, as also in
the Isles of the Aegaean sea, Christians are mingled with Mahumetans. All which
dominion yet of the Turks in Europe, though so much in circuit as I said, is
nevertheless (measured by squares) no greater then Spain, the continent of
it, being no way answearable to the circumference: both, because it runs far
out in sharp angles, toward the West and South, namely in Hungary and Moraea,
and is beside, in Greece in many places, extraordinarily indented with the sea.
And in this dominion of the Turks in Europe, such is notwithstanding the
mixture of Mahumetans with Christians, that the Christians Boter. Relat. pa. 2.
l. 4. nel Relation. del gran. Turco. Georgeuitz. de Affliction. Christian. sub
Turca l. 1. ca. de Tributis.
make two third parts at least, of the Inhabitants: for the Turk, so that
Christians pay him his yearly tribute (which is one fourth part of their
increase, and a Sultanie for every poll) and speak nothing against the
religion and sect of Mahumet, permits them the liberty of their religion,
And even in Greece it self, although more dissolute then any region of Europe
subject to the Turk, (as having been anciently more wasted with intestine
discord, and longest groaned under the Turks oppression) there remain yet
nevertheless in Chitrae de ^tatu Ecclesi^r non long ab initio.
Constantinople, the very seat of the Turkish Empire, above 20 Churches of
Christians, and in the City of Salonichi (Thessalonica) above 30, (whereas in
this later the Mahumetans have but 3) beside very many Churches abroad in the
Province under suffragan Bishops, Gerlach in epist. ad Crus. Turcograeciae. l.
page
of whom the Metropolitan of Salonichi, has no less then 10, belonging to his
Jurisdiction, as there are also recorded yet to remain under the Metropolitans
of Philippi, 150 Churches: of Athens, as many: of Corinth, 100, together with
sundry suffragan Bishops under each of them.

But in Afrique, all the Regions in a manner, that Christian religion had gained
from Idolatry, Mahumetanisme has regained from Christianity: Insomuch, that
not only the North part of Afrique, lying along the Mediterrane sea, Council
Carthag. 4. and Council. African. seu Carthag. 6.
namely, betwixt it and the Mountain Atlas, even from Spain to Egypt, where
Christianity sometime exceedingly flourished, as the we read Synodes of above
200 Bishops to have been gathered, and Martin. Polon. Supput. An. 475.
300 Catholic Bishops to have been there expelled, by Gensericus K. of the
Wandales: And in some one Province alone, Victor. l 1. de Persecut. Vandalec.
Zengitana by name, (it is that wherein Carthage stood) to have been 164
Bishops under one Metropolitan:) Not only that North part of Afrique I say, is
at this present utterly void of Christians, excepting a few Towns belonging
to the King of Spain, (of which only Septa and Tanger are Episcopal Cities:)
but even in all the vast continent of Aphrique, being about thrice as large as
Europe, there is not any Region entierly possessed by Christians, but the
kingdom of Habassia, no, nor yet, (which is more lamentable) any other, where
Christians are mingled, either with Mahumetans, but only Egypt: or where with
Idolaters, but the kingdoms of Pigafet. hist. Regni Congens. l. 2. c. 2.
Congo and Angola: which two about 120 years ago ( An. 1491) began first to
receive Christianity: All the rest of Afrique, being entirly governed, and
possessed by Pagans, or Mahumetans. To which, if I should add, those few
places in Afrique, before mentioned, near the Strait of Gibraltar, which the KK.
of Portugal and Castile, have conquered from the Mores, with the other few
dispersed fortresses, which the Portugalles hold in other places on the coast
of Afrique (altogether even betwixt Spain and India are but 11 or 12) I know
not where to find, even among all the native Inhabitants of Aphrique, any
Christians more. For, as for the large region of Nubia, which had from the
Apostles time, (as is thought) professed the Christian faith, it has again
above 100 years since, forsaken it, and embraced in stead of it, partly
Mahumetanisme, and partly Idolatry, and that by the most miserable occasion
that might befall, namely famine of the word of God through lack of Ministers:
for as Albarez has recorded, Aluarez. Hist. Aethiopic. ca. 137.
at his being in the K. of Habassia his Court, there were Ambassadors out of
Nubia, to entreat him for a supply of Ministers, to instruct their nation, and
repair Christianity gone to ruin among them: but were rejected.

And yet are the Christians of Egypt, namely those of the native Inhabitants,
but very few in respect of that infiniteness of people, wherewith Egypt does,
and ever did abound, as being esteemed, not to pass Boter. Relat. pa. 1. l. 3.
cap. de 1 popoli del Egitto. Thom. a Ies. de Conuers. gent. l. 7. par. 1. c. 5.
50000. And, as touching the Kingdom of Habassia, neither is it all
Christians, but a great part of Gentiles, namely toward the West, and South
bounds of it, and some part Mahumetans, toward the East border: neither so
large and spatio^s, as many men's relations have made it thought to be. For
although I cannot assent to them, who assign to that great Kingdom, but about
Boter. Relat. pa. 1. l. 3. c. de Abassia.
662 leagues of compass, by which reckoning (suppose they were Spanish
leagues) it should be little larger then Germany, (for I know full well, by
infallible observations, that sparing limitation of theirs, to be untrue) yet,
neither can I yield to them, who esteem it Horat. Malaguz. nel discor so de ^.
cinque massimi Signo^i.
greater, then the vast dominions of the Emperors of Turkey or of Tartarie
etc: Or, to them, that extend it from the one Tropique, to the other, and from
the red sea, almost to the west Ocean. For first, certain it is (that I may
speak a little of the limits of this kingdom) that it attaineth not to the red sea (Eastward) neither within the straits of Babel mandel, nor without:
for within those straits, Boter. (...) pro^im. cita^o.
along the Bay of Arabia, there is a continual ledge of mountains, known to
be inhabited with Moors, betwixt that Bay, and the dominion of Habassia: So
that, only one Port there is, along all that coast, Somman. dei regni Oriental.
apud Ramos vol 1. page, 324*
( Ercoco by name) where those mountains open to the Sea, that at this present
belongs to it. Neither without those Straits does it any where approach to
the Ocean. All that coast, as far as Mozambique, being well known to be
inhabited with Arabians.

And as touching the west limits of Habassia, I can not find by any certain
history or relation (unskillful men may rumor what they will, and I know also
that the common Charts represent it otherwise) I cannot find I say, that it
stretches beyond the river Nilus, so far comes it short of the West Ocean.
For it is known, that all the west bank of Nilus, from the river of Zaire to
the confines of Nubia, Boter. Rel^^. p 1 lib. 3. ca. Loango. A^^zichi.
is possessed by the Anzichi, being an idolatrous and man-eating nation, and
subject to a great Prince of their own, thus then it is with the breadth of the
Empire of Habassia, betwixt East and West: And now to speak of the length of
it, lying north and South, neither does it approach northward on Nilus side,
further then the south end of the Isle of Meroe, ( Meroe it self is inhabited
by Mahumetans, and the deadly enemies of the king of Habassia) nor on the Sea
side farther then about the port of Suachem. And toward the south, although the
bounds of that kingdom, be not perfectly known, yet that it approaches nothing
near the circle of Capricorn, as has bin supposed, is most manifest, because
the great kingdoms of Moenhemage, and Benomotapa, and some others, are situate
betwixt Habassia and that circle. But, as near as I am able to conjecture,
having made the best search that I can, in the itineraries and relations, that
are extant of those parts, the south limit of that Empire, passes not the
south parallel of six or seven degrees at the most, where it confineth with
Moenhemage. So that to make a respective estimate of the largeness of that
dominion, by comparing it with our known regions of Europe, It seems equal
to Germany and France, and Spain, and Italy laid together: Equal I say in
dimension of ground, but nothing near equal in habitation or multitude of
people, which the distemperature of that climate, and the dry barrennes of the
ground, in many regions of it, will not allow. For which cause the torride parts
of Afrique, are by Piso in Strabo resembled to a Libbards skin, Strab. l. 2.
the distance of whose spots, represent the dispersednesse of habitations or
towns in Afrique. But if I should absolutely set down the circuit of that
whole dominion, I esteem the limitation of Pigafetta, Pigafett. de Regn. Cong.
l. 1. c. 10.
nere about the truth, namely, that it has in circu^ference 4000. miles (about
1500. in length, and about 600. in breadth:) being enclosed with Mahumetans on
the north, and east, and with Idolaters, on the West and South.

Such then as I have declared, is the condition of Christians in the continent
of Afrique: but the Inhabitants of the Isles along the west coast of Africa, as
namely Madera; the Canaries, the Isles of Cabo verde, and of S. Thomas, and
some other of less importance, are by the Portugals and Castilians
instruction, become Christian: but on the East side of Afrique, excepting only
Paul. Venet. l. 3. c. 38.
Zocotora, there is no Christian Isle.

Even such is the state of Christians in the firm land, and the adjacent Isles
of Afrique. And it is not much better in Asia, for excepting first the Empire
of Russia, (and yet of it, a great part is Idolatrous, namely the region
between the rivers of Pechora and Ob, and some part of Permia) secondly, the
regions of Circassia, and Mengrelia, lying along Moe^tis and the Euxine sea,
from Tanais Eastward as far as the river Phasis. Thirdly, the province of
Georgia, and fourthly the mountain Libanus in Syria, (and yet the last of
these is of the Turks dominion) excepting these few I say, there is not any
region in all Asia, where Christians live several, without mixture, either of
Mahumetans, or of Paga^s, for although Vitriacus a man well experienced in some
parts of the orient, Jacob. a Vitriaco. Histor. Orient. c. 77.
(as being Bishop of Acon and the Popes Legate in the East, at what time
Palestina and Syria were in the hands of Christians) has left registered, that
the Christians of the Easterlie parts of Asia, exceeded in multitude the
Christians of the Greek and Latin Churches: yet in his time (for he writ
almost 400. years ago) Christianity began to decline, and since his time, it
has proceeded infinitely to decay, in all those parts of Asia: first, by the
inundation of the idolatrous Tartars, who subdued all those regions, and after
by the intertaining of Mahumetanisme in many of them. The time was indeed, (and
but about 400. years ago) when the King of Tenduc, whom the histories of
those times name Presbyter Johannes, a Christian, but a Nestorian Prince, ruled
far and wide, in the Northeast part of Asia: as having under his dominion,
beside Tenduc, (which was his own native and peculiar kingdom) all the
neighboring provinces, which were at that time for a great part, Christian:
but after that his Empire was brought to ruin, and he subdued by Chingis a
rebel of his own dominion (and the first founder of the Tartarian Empire)
which happened about the year 1190. the state of Christian Religion became in
short time strangely altered in those parts, Paul Venet. l. ^. cap. 8.
for I find in Marcus Paulus, who lived within 50. years after Vitriacus, and
was a man of more experience in those parts then he, as having spent
seventeen years together in Tartarie, partly in the Emperors Court, and
partly in travailing over those Regions, about the Emperors affairs, that
except the Province of Tenduc, which as I said was the kingdom of Presbyter
John's residence (for it was the Prince of that kingdom, Scaliger. de
En^^^ndat. tempor. l 7. Annot. in comput Aethiop.
which is rightly and usually, For Scaligers imagination, that it was the King
of the Habassines, that enlarged his dominion so far in the north east of
Asia, till he was driven into Afrique by the Tartars, has neither any
foundation at all in history, nor probability in reason. Namely that a King in
Afrique should subdue the most distant parts of all Asia from him, and there
hold residence, all the regions betwixt belonging to other Princes. Moreover it
is certainly known of Presbyter John of Asia, that he was a Nestorian, whereas
he of Habassia was, and still is, a Iacobite. Besides, it has been recorded
from time to time, of the Christians of Habassia, that they were circumcised,
which of those of the East, was never reported by any, etc.
by the ancie^ter historians named Presbyter John, howsoever the mistaking
fantasies of many, have tra^sported it out of Asia into Africa and by error
bestowed it on the K. of Habassia,) except that Province of Te^duc I say,
whereof Paul, Ven^t. l. 1. ca. 64.
Marcus Paulus confesses the greater part, to have professed the Christian
religion at his being in Tartary, the rest of the inahbitants, being partly
Mahumetans, Vtriae. Histor. Orient c. 78. Otho Phrisingen s. l. 7. c. 33. and
Alij.
and partly Idolaters: in all the other provinces of those parts beside, that,
he observes the Christians to be but few, as namely in the kingdoms of L.
1. c. 45.
Tanguth, of L. 1. c. 47.
Chinchintales, of L. 1. c. 48.
Succhuir, of L. 2. c. 39.
Caraiam, of L. 1. c. 38.
Cassar, of L. 1. c. 40.
Carcham, of L. 1. c. 62.
Ergimuli, of L. 1. c. 63.
Cerguth, of Egrigaia, and in the other regions of Tartary mentioning no
Christians at al. Two cities only I find in him excepted, the one was L. 2.
c. 61.
Cingiangifu in Mangi, (that is China) where he notes, that many Christians
dwelt, and the other L. 2. c. 64.
Quinsay, in which later yet, (although the greatest city in the world) he has
recorded to be found but one Church of Christians. But, these places excepted
before mentioned. I can find no certain relation, neither in Paul Venetus,
nor any other, of any Christians of the native inhabitants, in all the East of
Asia, but Idolatry keeps still her old possession, and ouerspreadethall.

But yet indeed, in the more Southerly parts of Asia (especially in those
where Christianity was first planted, and had taken deepest root) as Natolia,
Syria, Palestine, Chaldaea, Assyria, Mesopotamia, Armenia, Media, Persia, the
North part of Arabia, and the South of India, Christians are not only to be
found, but in certain of those regions, as in Natolia, Armenia, Syria,
Mesopotamia, somewhat thick mingled with Mahum^tans: as they are also in the
South of India not far from the Promontorie of Comorijn, in some reasonable
number, in the kingdom of Contan, of Cranganor, and of Choromandeb, but
mingled with Idolaters. But yet, is not this mixture of Christians with them of
other religions, in any part of Asia, after the proportion of their mixture in
Europe (where I observed the Christians to make the prevailing number) but they
are far inferior, to the multitude of the Mahumetans, and of the Idolaters,
among whom they are mingled, and yet touching their number, decrease every
day, in all the parts aforesaid, India only excepted. Where since the
Portugales held Goa (which they have erected into an Archbishopricke) and
entertained Malabar, and some other parts of India, what with commerce, and
what with amity, the number of Christians is greatly multiplied, in sundry
places of that region, but yet not so, as to compare in any sort, with the
Mahumetans, and much less with the Idolaters among whom they live.

Thus it is with Christians in the firm Land of Asia: but in the Islands about
Asia, Christianity is as yet but a tender plant: for although it has made
some entrance into the Isles called Philippinas, namely into 30 of them, for so
many only of 11000 termed by that name, are subject to the King of Spain.
Th. Ies. de Conu. gent. l. 1. c. 1. by the industry of the Castilians, as also
by the preaching of the Portugales, into Ormuz in the Bay of Persia, and into
C^ilan in the Sea of India, and some few other of the infinite multitude of
Islands, dispersed in that Eastern sea, yet has it hitherto found in all
those places, rather some fair beginning, then any great proceeding. Only in
Iaponia Christianity has obtained (notwithstanding many hindrances and
oppositions) more prosperous success. Insomuch that many years since, there
were recorded to have been by estimation, about Plat. de Bono Stat Religiosi.
l. 2. c. 30.
200000 Christians in Iaponia.

Lastly, in America, there be four large regions, and those of the most
fruitful and populous part of it, possessed and governed by the Spaniards,
that is, Nu^ua Espana, Castilla del Oro (otherwise termed Nu^bo Reino) Peru,
and part of Brasile, the first three, by the Castilians, and the fourth, by the
Portugales, all which together, may by estimation, make a region as large as
Europe. In which, as also in the Islands, specially in the greater Islands of
Hispaniola, Cuba, Iamaica, and Puerto rico, the Christian religion is so
largely spread, that Amand. Ziriean Chron. circ. An. 1519.
one has presumed, to equal in a manner, the Christians of America, to those
of the Latin Church in Europe: And Surius. in Chron. ad. An Christ. 1558.
another, has left recorded, that within a few years after the entrance of
the Gospel among them, there were no less then seven Millions, or as others
reported fourteen Millions, that in the sacrament of baptism had given their
names to Christ. But especially in the kingdom of Mexico (or Nueua Espanna)
Christian Religion obtained that plentiful and prosperous success, that we
find recorded of sundry of the Preachers, employed about the conversion of
that people, that they baptized each one of them, Vid. epist. Petri Gaudens. in
Comment. Sedulij ad vitam. S. Francisci. pa. 229. et Epist. Martin. 2 Valentia.
Ibid. page 232. et Epist. Episcopi Mexicani. page 235.
above 100000. and that in few years* Insomuch that (as is storied by Surius)
It is to be found among the records of Charles the fifth, that some old Priest
has baptized 700000. another, 300000, and certain others very great
multitudes. But yet, what manner of Christians many of those proselytes were, I
am loath to remember, or report (and it may be by this time, they are better
affected and instructed then they were) for certainly, Ouiedo, and Benzo, men
that had long lived, and were well experienced in those parts, have left
recorded, the first of Ouied Hiftor. Ind. Occidental. l. 17. c. 4.
Cuba, that there was scare any one, or but very few, that willingly became
Christians, Benzo. histor. Nou. Orbis. l. 2. c. 19.
and both Ouiedo of them, and Benzo of the Christians of Nueua Espanna, that
they had nothing almost belonging to Christianity, but only the bare name of
Christians, being so utterly mindelesse, and careless of Christian religion,
that they remembered not any thing of the covenant and profession, they made in
their baptism: Only, they kept in mind, the name they received then, which
very name also, they forgot soon after. But all the rest of America except the
regions before mentioned, which compared to the parts possessed by the
Castilians and Portugales (to make estimation by the Mappes that we have of
those regions, for the North and West coasts of America, are not yet perfectly
discovered) may be as six to one, is possessed by Idolaters.

Of the parts of the World possessed by Mahumetans. CHAP. XI.
Having declared the amplitude of Christianity, I will proceed to show the
state of other religions in the world, and with all, what parts of it, the
professors of those religions do severally inhabit; and lastly, what
proportion they may have each to other, and all of them to Christians. To
endeavor therefore your satisfaction in this behalf. There are four sorts or
sects of Religion, observed in the sundry regions of the World. Namely,
Idolatry, Mahumetanisme, Iudaisme, and Christianity. Of Christians I have
already spoken: now therefore will I relate for your better contentment, of
the other three; and first of Mahumetans.

Mahumetans then possess in Europe, as I said before (having in that part but
small mixture of Christians) all the region betwixt Tanais and Boristhenes (
Don and Nieper they are now called) being about a twentieth part of Europe:
beside Mathi^a Michou. de Sarmat. l. 2. c. 3.
some villages in Lituania about Wilna, where the use of their religion is by
the King of Poland permitted them, for in Greece, Macedon, Thrace, Bulgaria,
Rascia, Seruia, Bosina, Epirus, the greatest part of Hungaria, and some part of
Dalmatia (which may be together about one foureteenth part of Europe) although
the government be wholly the Turks, yet Mahumetans scarcely pass one third
part of the Inhabitants.

But in Afrique Mahumetanisme is spread exceeding far, for, first to consider
the maritime coast: It possesses all the shore of the Atlantique Ocean, from
Cape Blanco to the Strait of Gibralter, being about 1100 miles. Secondly, on
the shore of the mediterrane, all from that Strait to Egypt, about 2400
miles, excepting only on the one coast, and on the other, some seven towns,
in the possession of the Spaniards. Thirdly, on the East side of Afrique all
the coast of the Bay of Arabia, even from Suez to C. Gardafu., about 1600
miles, excepting only one port ( Ercoco) being of the dominion of the King of
Habassia. And thence (doubling that Cape) Southward, all the shore of the
Aethiopique sea, as far as Mozambique (that is over against the midst of
Madagascar) about 1800 miles. And in all the coasts of Afrique hitherto
mentioned, being altogether about 7000 miles (that is, by some excess more
then half the circumference of Afrique) the professors of Mahumeds religion,
have both possession and dominion, together with the Paul. Venet. l. 3. c. 39.
Linschot. l. ^. c. 3.
maritime parts, of the great Isle of Madagascar, and many other Islands along
the coast of Afrique. And yet, even beyond Mozambique also, as far as to the
Cape das Corrientes (it is under the circle of Capricorn) although they have
there no rule, yet they are found mingled with Idolaters. But yet
nevertheless, observed it is, that along the East shore of Afrique, namely
from Suachem to Mozambique (being toward 3000 miles of the mentioned coast)
Mahumetans possess only the Margent of the land, or the sea shore, and have
gotten but little footing in the inland parts, except in the kingdoms of
Dangali and Adel, confining together, the first within and the second without
the strait of Babel Mandel, which yet are but small provinces. And this also
(to extenuate their number) is also true, that from the kingdom of Adel, and
Cape Guardafu, to Mozambique, there is found among the Mahumetans, some mixture
of Idolaters, although the dominion be only in the Mahumetans hands.

But yet on the North and West parts of Afrique, it is far otherwise, and
far worse: Mahumetanisme having ouerspread all the maine land of Afrique,
between the Mediterraine sea and the great river Neger: and along the course
of Nilus, as far as the Isle of Meroe, which lies also about the same
parallel with the river Niger, and is possessed by Mahumetans. And yet, Leo.
Afri^. l. 1 cap. de Religion. Afror.
beyond Niger also, it has invaded and obtained, all the kingdoms of the
Nigrites that border on that river. So that all Barbary and Biled elgerid, and
Libya deserta, and the region of Negroes, are become of that religion.
Excepting first some maritime parts toward the Atlantique sea, namely from C.
Blanco southward, which are inhabited by Gentiles. Secondly, the kingdom of
Borno, and some part of Nubia: And thirdly, certain scattered multitudes of
the old African progeny, that still retain their ancient gentilisme, and are
found in diverse places here and there in the mountains and wilder parts of
Barbary, of Biled-elgerid, and of Libya. These I say, being excepted, all
Afrique beside, from the mediterrane sea, some what more southward then the
river Niger, is ouerspread with Mahumetans: which (adding these before
mentioned, along the east coast of Aethiopia) may by estimation, take up four
nine parts of Afrique.

And yet in Asia, Mahumetanism is farther spread, being embraced and maintained
chiefly, by four mighty nations, namely, the Arabians, Persians, Turks, and
Tartars. Arabia was indeed the nest, that bred and fostered that unclean bird,
and had it been the cage also, for ever to enclose it, it had bin but too much
space and liberty, for Arabia is in circuit above 4000. miles, and except a
small mixture of Christians in Eltor, a port town toward the inmost angle of
the bay of Arabia, and Petra, ( Krac now it is called) a midland town, and two
Monasteries about the Hill of Sinai, all is possessed with Mahumetans. But from
Arabia that poison has in such sort dispersed it self through the veins of
Asia, that near the one half, is at this day corrupted by it. For although it
has not hitherto attained to the north coast of Asia, which is partly
inhabited by Christians, namely, from the river of Dwyna to Pechora, and partly
by idolaters from Pechora to the East Ocean: nor yet to the east coast, which
from the most northerly part of Tartary, to the most southerly part of India,
Boter. Rel. pa. 3. l. 2. cap. de Mahometan^.
(except some few places in the kingdom of Siam) Idolaters in l^ke sort
generally obtain: yet nevertheless, it is as I said, namely, that a very
great part of Asia, is infected with that pestilence. For first, all the
southerly coast of Asia, from the Bay of Arabia to the river Indus, is
possessed by Mahumetans: and if we proceed further along that shore, even
beyond the river of Indus also, the great kingdoms of Cambaia, and Bengala,
for a great part of them, and about one fourth part of the inhabitants of
Malabar, are observed to be Mahumetans. And secondly, to consider the inland
parts: all from the westerly bounds of Asia, namely the river Tanais, with the
Euxine, Aegaean, and Mediterane seas, as far Eastward, as the mountain
Imaus, (which is more then half the length of Asia) is possessed by them:
Except, first the Guaguin. Descr. Tartar. in Kyrges^orum Horda.
Kirgessi near Imaus, who are Idolaters: and secondly, the mixture of
Christians among them, who yet have very small proportion (for their multitude)
to Mahumetans, in any province, of all the mentioned vast circuit, for
howsoever Burchardus about 320. years ago, has left recorded of those parts
of Asia, that there were to be found in them 30. Christians for one Mahumetan.
Descr. ter. sanct. pa. 2. c. 2.. 9. yet certainly, that in these present times
the excess of multitude is grown great on the Mahumetans side in respect of
Christians, the experience of many puts out of question. And, if we shall
proceed yet farther eastward, in the inland parts of Asia, and pass in our
speculation, beyond the mountain Imaus, even there also sundry provinces are
observed, as Paul. Venet. l. 1. c. 41.42.43.
Peim, Cotam, Lop, where Mahumetans are the maine and sole inhabitants, and
many more, as Id. l. 1. ca. 38.40.47.62.63.64. etc.
Cassar, Carcham, Chinchintilus, Tanguth, Ergimul, Cerguth, Tenduc, etc. where
they are mingled among idolaters, which may for a great part, counteruaile
those regions of Asia, which Christians and Idolaters take up on this side that
mountain. So that, in my estimation, having about these points co^ferred
history with Geography in the most circumspect and considerate manner that I
was able, about nine parts of 20. of Asia, are possessed by Mahumetans.

Thus then is Mahumetanisme spread over the one half almost of the firm land
of Asia. And yet moreover in the Islands also that are about Asia, that religion
has found large intertainment. For not only a good part of the small Nicol.
de co^^i. Viag nelle Indie. Ba^bos. ^p. Ramus. Vol. 1. de Viaggi. p: 313*
318.319. Boter. Relat p. 3. l. 2 de Mahometani,
Isles of Maldiuia, namely those of them that are inhabited, (for they are
above 7000. in all, and most without habitation) are possessed with Mahumetans,
but moreover, all the ports of the Isle of Ceilan, (except Colombo which the
Portugalls have) the Sea coasts of Sumatra, the ports of Iaua, with the Isle of
Sunda, the ports of Banda, of Borneo and of Gilolo, with some of the islands
Malucos, are in the hands of Mahumetans.

Of the great spreading and enlargement of which religion, if the causes were
demanded of me, I should make answer, that beside the justice of almighty
God, punishing by that violent and wicked sect, the sins of Christians (for
we see that by the conquests of the Arabians, and Turks, it has chiefly seized
on those regions, where Christianity in ancient time most flourished, both in
Afrique and Asia, and partly in Europe) one cause J say, of the large spreading
of their Religion, is the large spreading of their victories. For it has ever
been the condition of the conquered, to follow for the most part the religion
of the conquerors. A second, their peremptory restraint, (even on the pain of
death) of all disputation touching their religion, and calling any point of it
into question. A third, their suppression of the study of Philosophy, by the
light whereof, the grosnesse and vanity of many parts of their religion might
be discovered, which is inhibited to be taught in their universities, and so
has been, about these 400. years, whereas till then, it greatly flourished
among the^, in Cordoua, in Fess, in Maroccho, in Bagded, and other cities. And
yet, as Bellonius and Bellon. Obser. l. 3. c. 30. Georgeuitz. l. 2. de Ritib.
Turcar. cap. de Scholis.
others write, the Turks fall now again, to those studies afresh. A fourth
cause may well be assigned, the sensual liberty allowed by it, namely, to
have many wives, and the like promise of sensual pleasures, to succeed after
this life (to the Religious obseruers of it,) in Paradise, wherewith men for
the greatest part, as being of things wherewith their sense is affected, and
whereof they have had certain experience, are more allured and persuaded, then
with promises of spiritual delights, presented only to their hopes, and for
which present and sensible pleasures must in the mean time be forsaken.

Of the sundry regions of the world inhabited by Idolaters. CHAP. XII.
NOW touching Idolaters, they possess in Europe, a region as I before
observed, about 900. miles in circuit, (although the ordinary Geographical
charts represent it, (but falsely) more then twice so large) containing Lappia,
Corelia, Biarmia, Scricfinia, and the north part of Finmarch. All which
together, may by estimation make about one sixtieth part of Europe, or a little
more, more I mean in magnitude rather then in multitude, for it is indeed a
little greater then so. Beside which provinces, there are also to be found in
diverse places of Beem. de Morib. gent. l. 3. c. 7. Boter. Relat. p. ^ l. 1. c.
Litunia
Lituania, and Samagotia, some scattered remnants of Idolaters.

But in Afrique their multitude is very great, for from C. Blanco on the coast
of Libya, the most westerly point of all Afrique (being about the north
latitude of twenty degrees) even all the coast of Afrique southward, to the cape
of Buena Esperanza: And thence turning by the back of Afrique as far as the
cape of Mozambique, being (over against the midst of Madagascar) in the
south latitude of fifteen degrees: all this coast I say, being not much
less, then half the circumference of Afrique, is inhabited by Idolaters.
Only, on the East side, from Mozambique to Cape de Corrientes (which is the
south latitude of 24 degrees) they are mingled with Mahumetans: And on the west
side, in the kingdom of Congo, and the north part of Angola, with Christians:
But yet in both these places of their mixture, idolaters are the greater
multitude.

But now, if we consider the inland Region of Afrique, all between the river
Nilus, and the West sea of Aethiopia, from about the north parallel of ten
degrees, to the south parallel of 6. or 7. degrees, but from that parallel of
6. or 7. degrees, even all Aethiopia southward, on both the sides of Nilus,
from the east sea of Aethiopia, to the West, even to the most southerly point
of all Afrique, the cape of Buona Speranza, is possessed by idolaters:
excepting only some part of Congo and Angola before mentioned, toward the west
sea, inhabited by Christians, and the utmost shore of the East sea, from
Mozambique northward, which is replenished with Mahumetans: And yet, beside all
the regions before mentioned, even all the kingdom of Leo African. l. 7. ca.
de Borno Regno.
Borno, and a great part Aluarez. hist. Aethiop. c. 30.
of Nubia is possessed by them; to speak nothing of the infinite multitudes of
the Leo Afric. l. 1. c. de vitij^ Afror.
ancient Africans, dispersed in sundry tracts of Barbary, of Biled-elgerid, and
of Libya Deserta, which still continue in their ancient paganism. So that
(over and beside these last) very near abouth half Afrique, is possessed by
idolaters.

And yet in Asia idolaters abound more then in Afrique, even as Asia is larger
then Afrique for the continent, and for the people, beter inhabited, for of
Asia also, very near about the one half, or rather a little more is possessed
by idolaters. For first if we consider the maritime parts, all from the river
of Pechora, Eastward to the Ocean, and then turning downward, to the most
southerly point of India, (and of all Asia) the cape of Cincapura, and from
that point returning westward, by the south coast, to the outlets of the river
Indus, all that maritime tract I say, is entirely possessed by idolaters. Saving
only, that in the nearer part of India, between Indus and Ganges, there is
among them some mixture both of Mahumetans and Christians: and in the further
part, the city and territory of Malacca, is held by Portugalls, and some part
of the sea coast of the kingdom of Siam, by Moors. So that by this account, a
good deal more then half the circumference of Asia, is possessed by
Idolaters. And, although in the inland parts their proportion be somewhat
less, then in the Maritime, yet if we consider well, the whole dimension of
Asia, we shall find by good estimation, as before I said, that the one half,
or rather a little more, is replenished with Idolaters: for the better
declaring of which point, you may understand, that as Strabo and Ptolomie, have
observed, of the mountain Taurus, Strab. l. 2. Ptole^ in Tab. Orb. general.
that beginning in the west parts of Asia (in the confines of Lycia and
Pamphilia over against the Chelidonian isles) it runs Eastward even to the
Ocean, keeping between the parallels of 30. and 40. degrees, and so dividing
the north part of Asia from the south. Even so must we observe of the mountain
Vid. Ptolem. in Tab. o^bis. ^niuer. et Mercator in Tab. general^ Asiae.
Imaus that beginning on the shore of the north Ocean, it runs along
through the midst of Asia to the south, keeping still about the same
meridian, namely about the longitude of 30. degrees, and crossing (at right
angles in a manner) the mountain Taurus deuideth the east part of Asia from
the west. Imaus therefore in this sort dividing Asia into two parts, not much
unequal, divides also in a manner, between the idolaters and Mahumetans of
Asia, for although the hither part of Asia, west of Imaus, and possessed of
Mahumetans, take up more in the longitude of the earth, namely east and west:
yet the further part east of Imaus, spreads more in latitude, north and
south, which may make some recompense toward that excess. But, if withal we
subtract those parts of the hither Asia, that are covered with the Persian, and
Caspian seas, beside large parts of the Euxine and Mediterrane, the further
Asia (I think) will fully equal it. Now, although many Mahumetans be also
found on the other side of Imaus toward the northeast of Asia, both several in
sundry provinces, and otherwise mingled with idolaters or Christians, or with
both, as before was partly observed: Yet many more whole regions of Idolaters,
(to counteruaile those Mahumetans) are found on this side Imaus, both, toward
the South, in the Kingdoms of the nearer India, and toward the North, betwixt
Imaus and the river Pechora, all which coast of Asia is inhabited by Idolaters,
And lastly, in the midst betwixt both, the Kirgessi, and some other of their
neighbor Nations. And not only in the firm land of Asia, is idolatry thus
spread: but in those many thousand Islands that lie dispersed in the vast Ocean,
on the East and Southeast parts of Asia: Paul. Ven. l. 3. c 8. Id, l. 3. cap.
42.
which over against China, are recorded upon the report of Mariners, long
practiced in those seas, to be 7448, and, about Paul. Ven. l. 3. c 8. Id, l. 3.
cap. 42.
India, to be 127000: And which might for their largeness, if they were all
laid together, make a Continent as large as three four parts of Europe. In
those Islands I say, Idolatry ouerspreaddeth all, excepting only those few,
which I before observed, to be possessed by the Spaniards, and by the Arabians.

Finally, of all other parts of the Earth yet discovered, Idolatry spreads
farthest in America, which being but little less, then the Eastern continent,
(that we term the old world) is at least six parts of seven, inhabited with
heathenish and idolatrous people. For, except the regions above mentioned,
possessed namely by the Portugalles and Castilians, (and yet the inner, and
wilder tracts even of those, remain still for a great part, in their ancient
paganism) and many notwithstanding their baptism, Th^a Ies de Con. ge^t. l.
^. c. 1.
withal worship Idols together with some later Conuerts made in the region
about and above the Bay of California, of who^ as yet, histories make so little
report, that of their number I can make no estimate: And lastly 2, or 3
fortresses, held by the Spaniards, on the coast of Florida, with the English
colonies in Virginia, and the French in Canada, these I say being excepted, all
the rest of America, being as I said about six seventh parts remains in their
old Idolatry.

And thus have I declared the three principal sects as touching Religion, that
are at this present found in the several parts of the world, with their
particular regions. But beside these, observed there are, two or three
irregular Nations, being, for their religion mingled as it were, of some of the
former sects. As first, in Asia, the Cardi, inhabiting in the Mountainous
Country above Mozal, between Armenia, and Mesopotamia. Secondly the Drusi,
dwelling in Syria, about the skirts of Libanus, the religion of both which
Nations, (such as it is) partaketh somewhat, both of Mahumetanisme and
Christianity. And thirdly, the Morduites in Europe, possessing the middle
confines betwixt the Precopite Tartars, and the Muscouites, that are in a
manner as touching their religion, mingled of all three sects: for they are
both baptized like Christians, and circumcised like Mahumetans, and withal
worship Idols.

Of the Jews dispersed in several parts of the World. CHAP. XIII.
NOw, will I entreat a little, of the Professors of the fourth sort and sect
of religion, that is found in the world, namely of Iudaisme, for, although the
Jews have not for their mansion, any peculiar Country, but are dispersed
abroad among forrayne Nations, for their ancient Idolatries, and their later
unthankfulness, in rejecting their Savior the son of God: So that even in
Jerusalem, there be not to be found at this time, an hundred households of
Jews: Boter. Relat* pa. ^. l. 2. c. de Gindei.
(Only of all the towns of Palestina, Tiberias (which Amurath the great Turk
gave to Aluarez Mendez a Jew) and Staff^letto, are somewhat peopled with them)
Neither have they at this present, for any thing that is certainly known, any
other region in the world, several to themselves: Yet, because there be some
provinces, wherein they are observed specially to abound, as others also,
whence they are excluded and banished, I will consider a little of their
present condition.

The first Country of Christendom, whence the Jews were expelled, with out
hope of return, was our Country of England, whence they were banished, Anno
1290 by King Edward the first. Not long after they were likewise banished
France An. 1307. by Philippus Pulcher: Only of all the Countries of France, in
the Jurisdiction of Auignon (the Popes state) some are remaining. Out of
Spain, An. 1492, by Ferdinand, and shortly after out of Portugal, An, 1497 by
Emanuel. Out of the Kingdom of Naples and Sicilie, An. 1539. by Charles the 5.
In other regions of Europe they are found, and in some of them in great
numbers, as in Germany, Bohem, Polonia, Lituania, Russia, and part of Italy,
specially Venice and Rome. In Greece also a great multitude, wherein two
Cities (beside all them of other places) Constantinople and Thessalonica are
esteemed to be about 160000 Jews. As also they are to be found by plentiful
numbers, in many parts of the Turks dominion, both in Asia, and Afrique. And
for Asia, specially in Aleppo, in Tripoli, in Damascus, in Rhodes, and almost
in every City of great trade and traffic in the Turk^sh Empire: As likewise
in diverse parts of the Persian government, in Arabia also, and lastly in India,
(namely about Cranganor) and in some other more remote regions. And, to come to
Afrique, they are not only foundin the Cities of Alexandria, and Cair in
Egypt, but, as in many other regions and places of Afrique, so principally, in
the Cities of Fess, and Tremisen: and specially, in the Hills of Sensaua, and
Demen in the Kingdom of Maroccho many of which last, are by Leo Africanus,
specially noted to be of that Sect, Leo African. l. 2. c. 36. etc.
which the Jews name For of the Jews, as touching their religion, there be
in these times three fects. The first which is the greatest of them, is named
(...) who beside the holy scriptures, embrace the Talmud also for Authentical,
and for that cause, they are also termed (...). The second are called (...)
which receive only the scriptures. And the Third (...) that is, the Samaritans
(at this day but very few) which, of all the holy Scriptures, admit only the
Pentateuch or books of Moses.
Karraim, and by the other Jews of Afrique, are reputed no better then
heretics.

But yet, beside these, and such like dispersions of the Jewish Nation, that
may be elsewhere in the world, there is a fantasy of many learned men, not
unworthy some diligent consideration, that the Tartars of Scythia, who about
the year 1200, or a little before, became first known abroad in the world by
that name, and hold at this day a great part of Asia, in subjection; That those
Tartars I say, are of the Postell. Descript. Syriae. cap. 1.

Genebrad. Chron. l. 1. Bote^ Relat. pa. 1. l. 2. c. vl^ima part della
Tartaria and pa. 3. l. 2. c. de Gindei.


Israelites progeny: Namely of the ten Tribes, which by Salmanazar, and some of
his predecessors, were carried captive into Assyria. Which although it be as I
said no other then a vain and cappriccious fantasy, yet, has it, not only
found acceptance and entertainment, with sundry learned and understanding
men: but reason and authority are produced, or pretended to establish it for a
truth. For first, It is alleged that the word Tatari, or Totari, (for so
indeed they are rightly called, as Leunclau. in Pandect. Hist. Turcic.

(...) Heb. (...) Sir.


learned men observe, and not Tartari) signifies in the Syriaque and Hebrew
tongues, a Residue or Remainder such as these Tartars are supposed to be of
the Ten Tribes. Secondly, because, (as the Patrons of this fantasy say) they
have always embraced (the ancient character of Iudaisme) Circumcision. And
thirdly, 2 Esdras 13. v. 41.42.43.44.45.
the authority of supposed Esdras, (the very spring I take it, whence has
flowed this stream of opinion) is alleged. Namely, that the Ten Tribes
took this course to themselves, that they would leave the multitude of the
heathen, and go forth into a farther Country, where never mankind dwelt.
That they might there keep their statutes, which they never kept in their own
land. And that they entered in at the narrow passages of the River Euphrates.
The most high showing them signs, and staying the Springs of the flood, till
they were passed over. And, that their Journey was great, even of a year and a
half, and the region is called Arsareth.

But, to the first of these arguments, I may answer, that the Tartars obtained
that name, neither from Hebrew nor Syriaque original, and appellation, but,
from the river Tartar, says Leunclauius, Leunclau. in Pand. histor. Turcic.. 3.
and Boem. de Morib gent. l. 2. c. 10. Haitti. lib. de Tartaris. cap. 16.
others. Or else from the Region, as says Haitho, where the principal of them
anciently dwelled. Secondly, that the name (...) or (...) in the Hebrew, or
Syriaque signification, importing a residue or remainder, can but full ill (as
it seems) be applied to the Tartars in relation of the Israelites, whom they
exceedingly surpass in multitude, as ouerspreading half the vast continent of
Asia, or thereabout. For all the Nations of Asia, from the great rivers of
Wolgha and Oby, Eastward, and from the Caspian sea, the river Oxus, the
Countries of India and China, northward, are contained under the Appellation of
Tartars: and yet without these bounds many Tartars there are, both toward the
West, and South. And what if the innumerable people of so many Nations, as are
known to inhabit and ouerspread the huge continent of America, be also of the
same offspring? Certainly, if I be not greatly deceived, they are no other.
For first that their original must be derived from Asia is apparent, because,
(as he that reads the relations and histories of those Countries of America
may easily observe) they have no relish nor resemblance at all, of the Arts,
or learning, or ciuility of Europe: And their color restifieth, they are not
of the Africans progeny (there being not found in all that large Continent,
any black men, except a few about the River of S. Martha, in a small Country
called Quarequa, which by force and violence of some tempest, are supposed to
have been transported thither, from the parts of Guinie or Aethiopia.)
Therefore it seems, that they had their original from Asia. Which yet, will
appear more credible, if it be observed, which by the Spaniards discoueries is
well known to be true, namely, that the West side of America respecting Asia,
is exceeding much better peopled then the opposite or East side, that
respects toward Europe. And, as for these reasons it is very likely, that
America received her first inhabitants, from the East border of Asia: So is it
altogether unlike, that is received them from any other part of all that
border, save from Tartarie. Because, in America there is not to be discerned,
any token or indication at all, of the arts or industry of China, or India, or
Cataia, or any other civil region, along all that border of Asia: But in their
gross ignorance of letters, and of arts, in their Idolatry, and the
specialties of it, in their inciuilitie, and many barbarous properties, they
resemble the old and rude Tartars, above all the nations of the Earth. Which
opinion of mine, touching the Americans descending from the Tartars, rather
then from any other nation in that border of Asia, after the near vicinitie of
Asia to America, this reason above all other, may best establish and persuade:
Because it is certain, that that Northeast part of Asia possessed by the
Tartars, is if not continent with the West side of America, which yet remains
somewhat doubtful: yet certainly, and without all doubt, it is the least
disioyned by sea, of all that coast of Asia, for that those parts of Asia and
America, are continent one with the other, or at most, disioyned but by some
narrow channel of the Ocean, the ravenous and harmefull beasts, wherewith
America is stored, as Bears, Lions, Tigers, Wolves, Foxes, etc. (which men as
is likely, would never to their own harm transporte out of the one continent
to the other) may import. For from Noah's Arc, which rested after the deluge,
in Asia, all those beasts must of necessity fetch their beginning, seeing they
could not proceed by the course of nature, as the imperfect sort of living
creatures do, of Putrefaction: or if they might have Putrefaction for their
parentage, or receive their original (by any other new sort of generation) of
the earth without special procreation of their own kind, then I see no
nececessitie, why they should by Gods special appointment, be so carefully
preserved in Noah's Arc (as they were) in time of the deluge. Wherefore, seeing
it is certain, that those ravenous beasts of America, are the progeny of
those of the same kind in Asia, and that men, as is likely, conueighed them
not (to their own prejudice) from the one continent to the other, it carries
a great likelihood and appearance of truth, that if they join not together,
yet are they near neighbors, and but little disioyned each from other, for
even to this day, in the Isles of Cuba, Iamaica, Hispaniola, Burichena, and all
the rest, which are so far removed from the firm land, that these beasts
cannot swim from it to them, the Spaniards record, Joseph Acosta De N^tur.
Nou Orb. l. 1. c. 21.
that none of these are found. Wherefore it seems (to digress no farther)
that the nation of the Tartarians, spreading so exceeding far, as it does,
cannot certainly be the posterity of those captive Israelites.

Neither (to answer the second objection) does their circumcision in any sort
enforce it: for, neither was circumcision, among the Tartars ancienter then
Mahumetanisme, but was received among them together with it, as Michouius has
remembered, Michou. de Sa^matia. l. 1. ^. ^.
so that to this day, it is not entertained (for ought I can find in History)
among those Tartarians, which have not received Mahumetanisme, but remain in
their ancient Idolatry, as for the most part, both the Tartars of Cataia,
beyond the mountain Imaus toward the East Ocean, and the Tartars of Sarmatia,
toward the North, on both sides the river of Oby, do. Neither if it should be
granted, that circumcision had been auncienter among them then Mahumetanisme,
were that an argument of any importance, to prove them to be of the
Israelites progeny. Because it is certainly known, tha^ the ceremony and
custom of circumcision has been and still is usual among many nations, of
whom there was never any suspicion, that they descended from the Israelites,
Diodor. Sic^^^ part 2 c. 1 Philo. Iudae* l. de C^^umcisione.

Strab. l. 16. Herodot. l. 2. parum. a Med. Strab. l. 16. long. post med.


for Diodorus has recorded of the Colchians, Philo Iudaeus, and Strabo, of the
Egyptians, Herodotus of both those nations, and of the Aethiopians besides,
that they used circumcision, and that that custom among the Egyptians and
Aethiopians, did seem very ancient, even as it is also by both those nations
retained till this day. And yet, beside these countries already mentioned, the
like is also recorded of the Troglodites by Strabo, and by Diodor. Sic. l 3. c.
3.

Agatharchid. l de Mar. Rubr. c. 49. ap. Phot. in Bibliotheca Cyprian. l. de
circumcision. in principio. Niceph. Callist. l. 8. ca. 35. Ierem 9.26. Hieron
in Comment locitam citati.


others: Of the Phaenicians, and Arabians, by Cyprian and Nicephorus. And (to
leave this accumulating of humane testimonies) it is not obscurely acknowledged
by the Prophet Jeremy, to have been usual (beside the Israelites) with the
Egyptians, Edomites, Ammonites, Moabites, and the inhabitants of the desert,
that is the For, that the Ismaelites and Sarracens are the same nation, is
manifest by Hierome, and Sozomen, and others, which being anciently termed
Scenitae (as Ammianus has observed) namely of the Graecians, (...), because
they dwelled in tents (for such to be the manner of their habitation, is not
only affirmed by Loco iam citato.
Hierome, but signified (and not obscurely) by Psalm. 120.5. vid. etiam Ierem.
49.28.29.
David lamenting his dwelling in the tents of (...) by which name Arabia
deserta is termed in the Hebre^) were of their dwelling in the desert, by the
Arabians themselves named Sarracens (for Sarrasignifieth, a desert, and Sakan
to inhabit, in the Arabique tongue) or else, if not of their place, yet at
least (as Scaliger in Animadu. Eusebius. pa. 17. An. 88.

Fuller. Miscel^an. Theolog. l. 2. ca. 1^.


learned men certainly think) of their property, they might obtain that name
of Sarracens, namely, because they lived much by rapine (for that the word
Saracke in Arabique does import) to which above all nations they ever were, and
still are addicted. For the deduction of the name Sarracens, from By Sozomen ^.
6. ca. 38.
Sara, as if they claimed desce^t from her, being indeed Hagarens, (the
progeny of Hagar) is a mere fancy and fable. They claim it not.
Ismaelites, or Sarracens of Arabia: Of which nations, Hierome also (to whom
those regions were well known, (as Epiphanius also of the most of them) has
left testified, that they retained circumcision, Hieron. Comment. in sa^. ca.
21.

Sozomen. Histor. l. 6. c. 38. Ammian. l. 22. post med.


even in his time. Touching some of which, although it may be probably
coniectured, that they received it (in some sort) from the Israelites: if not as
their progeny (which yet in some sense may be said of the inhabitants of the
desert, being the posterity of Ismael the son of Abraham: and likewise of the
Edomites, being the seed of Esau the son of Isaac) yet at least, by imitation
of Abraham's family, to whom also in blood they were allied, as the Ammonites
and Moabites, the posterity of Lot, Abraham's brothers son, and who had lived
long in his familiarity and family. Although I say of these nations it may be
coniectured, that their ceremony of circumcision was taken up, by imitation of
the Israelites: yet that the same rite, or custom was also derived originally,
from them to the whole nation of the Arabians (which was exceeding great) or to
the Egyptians, or other neighboring provinces, I know not why any should
conceive, or if they do, yet appears it to be otherwise, because they
circumcised not in the eight day, which is the inviolable custom of the
Israelites: Ambros. l. 2. de Abraham. Patriarcha. c. 12.
but the Egyptians in the foureteenth year, as is recorded by Ambrose, and
the Arabians in the thirteenth (and some of them both sexes, as Sard. de Riti.
gent. l. 1. c. 10.
learned men have recorded. Even as the Bellon. Obser. l. 3. c. 28. Georgenitr.
l. 2. de Ritib. Turcar. c. de Circu^cisione.
Turks also at this day, who received the rite of circumcision from the
Arabians, are known to circumcise in the eight or twelfth, or fifteenth year
or sooner, or later, as opportunity may serve. Of these nations I say, how
circumcision should proceed from the Israelites to them, I cannot conceive: no
more then I can of the great nation of the Pigafet. de Regn. Cong. l. 1 c. 5.

Boter Rebat. pa. 1. ^. c. Loange.


Anzichi, on the West side of Nilus beyond Nubia, or of the inhabitants of
Ma^^y^ Ocean. ^ecad. 4. c 1.
Iucatana in America, whereof the first yet are, and the second (till they came
under the government of the Spaniards) were mere Idolaters, for of these also,
the second had, and the first still have circumcision in use.

And although these instances, utterly dissolve the force of this reason,
touching the Tartarians circumcision (though it were admitted to have been
anciently in use among them, as being usual with many other nations, of whom
no suspicion at all can be conceived, to be of the Israelites progeny) yet
this may furthermore declare them, not to be of that race, because namely,
nothing else was to be found among them, that might savor of Israel. For
First, they were mere Idolaters, and without knowledge of the true God, as is
recorded by Marcus Paulus, Paul. Venet. l. 3. c 47.

Haith. l. de. Tartar. c. 1.


by Haitho, and others. Secondly, they had no remembrance of the law at all.
Thirdly, they neither observed the Sabboath, nor other rites and ceremonies of
the Israelites, but touching their matrimonies, married without impeachment the
very Vicent. Spec. Historialis. l. 32 c. 6.

Paul. Venet. l. 1. c. 55.

Guiliel de Rubric. Itin. Tartar. c. 9.


wives, and sisters of their fathers: and touching their feeding, abstained not
at all, from unclean beasts, but fed on the flesh of Sigism. com. Rer. Moscou.
Gu. l. de Rubricis Itinerar Tartar. l. 5. Boem. de Motib. gentium. l. 2. c. 10.
horses, dogs, cattes, and dead carrion, and drank their blood, all utterly
forborne and forbidden among the Israelites. Fourthly, they have no records,
nor regard of their ancestors and lineage, from whom, or by whom, they are
descended, whereof Israelites were ever curious. Fifthly, they have no
affinity of language at all, with either the Hebrew or Chaldee tongues,
neither had any use of those letters, nor of any other, till together with
Mahumetan religion, the Arabique characters came in use among some of them.
Neither (in a word) do I find any thing at all, wherein the Tartarians
sauored of Israelites, for touching their abstinence from swines flesh, which
we find recorded of them, neither is it general among them, but peculiar to
those that are Mahumetans: Nor if it were so, were that any good argument,
because we know that the ancient Herodot. l. 4.
Scythians, and Aelian. de Animalib. l. 10. c. 17.
Egyptians, and Arabians did, and almost all Mahumetans at this day do the
same, which yet are well known to be in no sort descended of the Israelites.

Now touching the authority of forged Esdr. 2.13.
Esdras, which has stirred up as it seems this vapourous fantasy, in the
brains of new fangled antiquaries: neither does that which he writes of the
ten tribes, agree at all with the Tartars: nor, if it did, could yet the
circumstances of that history agree with the truth. It agrees not with the
Tartars I say, for whereas they are noted in that revelation, to be Verse. 39.
a peaceable people, and that they Verse. 41.
left the multitude of the heathen, that they might keep their statutes, which
they never kept in their own land: neither of both those properties, has any
conuenience or agreement at all with the Tartarians. For how are they a
peaceable people, that with their wars have troubled and ouerturned almost all
Asia, and sundry countries of Europe, and hold a great part of the former in
subjection to this day? Or how kept they the statutes of the Israelites, that
were mere idolaters, and utterly ignorant of all Jewish laws and ceremonies?
And touching the history it self of the Israelites departure out of Assyria,
as it is set down in that Apocryphal Esdras (howsoever it might otherwise
agree with the Tartars) there is no wise or considerate man, I think, that can
bring his understanding to give credit to it. For first it contradicts the
undoubted canonical histories of the Chronicles, 1. Chro. 5.26. 2. Kin. 17.23.
and of the Kings, in both which it is recorded of them, that they were carried
away into Ashur, and disposed in several parts of the Empire, namely If (...)
be Cholchi, and (...) Iberia, and (...) Armenia, so called for the
mountainousnes of it) and (...) Gauzania in Media, then all confined together,
and bounded the north side of the Assyrian Empire, which stretched northward,
but to that Isthme between the Euxine and the Caspian seas: So that, the
Israelites were by that means, seated farthest off from their own country,
and placed in the parts of the Empire most wast and desolate of inahbitants, as
the confines of warring nations usually are. But if Calach be Calacine, and
Chabor the hill Chaboras, (being part of Taurus, and seuering Assyria, from
Armenia, and Media) and Hara the other hilly parts in the north side of
Assyria, as seems more agreeable to the observations of Benjamin Tudelensis,
for about those parts, he found in his trauail, the greatest multitudes of the
Israelites, then in the places aleaged, I would understand by Ashur, not the
Empire or dominion, but the peculiar kingdom of Assyria.
Calach, and Chabor, and Hara, and Gozan, unto this day, which limitation of
time (unto this day) must at least of necessity import, the time wherein that
history (of their remaining in Ashur) recorded in the books of the Kings, and
of the Chronicles was written. Of which later, either Esdras himself was the
Author, as in the judgment R. Dau. Kimchi and R. Shelomo ex sententia senioru^
apud Sixth. Senens. Biblioth. Sanctae lib. 1.
of learned men he is reputed, and therefore could not (as it seems) be the
Author of that apocryphal history: Abulens. in praef. Paralipo^. in Quaestio^.
5.
or, at least, if Esdras were not the Author, yet, that the Author (whosoever
he was) lived and writ that history of the Chronicles, after the return of the
Jews from the captivity, or in the end of it, (that is in Esdras time,) is
evident by the end of the book: where Cyrus his benignity, for restoring of
the Jews, and his proclamation for their return to Jerusalem is recorded, and
that in the very same words, wherein Esdras in the beginning of his own book
has registered them. At that time therefore, it is evident, that the Israelites
were not departed out of the dominions of Ashur. No nor long after that in
Josephus his time: Joseph. Antiq. l. 11. c.
who has recorded that even then the ten Tribes remained beyond Euphrates,
and were there grown into innumerable multitudes: neither yet many hundred
years after Josephus was dead: for R. Benjamin a Jew, that lived but about
440. years ago, and travailed diligently those parts of the world, and many
other to visit his dispersed countrymen, has in his Itinerary left observed,
not only, that he found exceeding far greater multitudes of the Israelites,
Benjamin in Itiner. page 57.58.59.70.71.74 75.76.77.78.80.81.86.
to be then remaining in those provinces of the ancient dominion of Ashur, then
he found in other places, possessing Page 75. and 87
large regions, and Page 76. etc.
many cities, so that in the cities of some one Region Page cad.
300000. Jews were by him numbered, observing specially, that in the parts of
Media, many thousand Israelites of the progeny of them that Salmanaser led
into captivity, were then remaining, but withal, he sets down particularly
and precisely, the very places of those regions, where certain of the Tribes
were seated, and there grown into great multitudes: As namely, in Page 77.
one place, the Tribes of Ruben, Gad, and Manasse: And in Page 87.
an other, the 4. Tribes of Dan, Asher, Zebulon, and Naphtali.

But yet if there were neither authority of holy Scripture, nor experience to
refell this fable, and the fancies that have sprung of it: yet ordinary reason,
at least of men that are not ignorant of Geography and are meanly skilled in
the affairs of the world, may easily discern the futility of it. For first,
what need was there of such a miracle, 2. Esdr. 13.
as to And the most high the^ showed them signs, and stayed the springs of the
flood (Euphrates) till they were pas^ed over. ^ecs. 44.
stay the course of Euphrates, for the Israelites passage from Assyria, or
Media toward Tartary, the river lying far to the west, both of the one region
and of the other, and no way crossing or impeaching their journey, which lay
northward between that river and the Caspian Sea? Or, how might those poor
captive Israelites, disarmed as they were, and dispersed in sundry Provinces of
the Assyrian Empire, and being under the oversight and government of Assyrian
presidents, be able to leave the places, where by the Kings commandment they
were to inhabit? Or, They took this counsel to themselves that they would
leave the multitude of the Heathen. v. 41.
if the Israelites were able by force to depart, and free themselves from the
dominion of the king of Ashur, yet were they so wise also, as to forsake the
places where they were peaceably settled, and venture their small remainders
upon perils and uncertainties, namely, to find out a place where never mankind
dwelt? Or, if their stomach served them so well, and their wit so ill, as in
such manner to forsake Assyria, And go forth into a country where never
mankind dwelt. v. 41.
yet were they also able to make themselves way (even a way as he says, of
18. months passage) through the fierce and mighty nations of Scythia, whom
neither the conquerours of the Israelites, the Assyrians I mean, nor the
Persians (and I might add also the Grecians and the Romans) were never able to
subdue, but were in the after times subdued by them? for that the parts of
Scythia should be without Inhabitants (and in Scythia it must be where they
would find that country where never mankind dwelt, or else it is not in
Tartary) is scarce credible, as whereof we read in histories, Justin. hist. l.
2. in princip.
to have co^tended with Egypt for antiquity of habitation, and to have
prevailed, and for the abundance of people, to be termed Hominum Officina.
Insomuch that the greatest occasion of swarming abroad of those nations of
Scythia, and of their ouerwhelming of Asia and Europe, with their infinite
multitudes and colonies, is in histories recorded, to be lack of room for
habitation in their own countries.

And lastly, to make an end of this tedious discourse, with the end of their
imagined tedious journey: what ancient Geographer or Historian is there, (set
our Esdras aside) that ever remembered of such a Region as Arsareth, where they
are said to have seated themselves. True it is indeed that I find the city of
Arsaratha, Beros. lib. 3. Ptolem. Geog. l. 5. c. 13. et in Tab. 3. Asiae.
mentioned both in Berosus fragments, and in Ptolomie placed near the issue of
the river Araxes into the Caspian sea: and, it was perhaps one of the
Israelitish colonies, planted in the confines of the empire of Assyria: for it
may well be that Arsaratha, is but (...), or (...), that is the City, or the
hill of the remainder: or perhaps (...) (the last letter of the first word cut
of in the Greek pronunciation for sounds sake) the Land of the remainder: but
the tale of eighteen months journey, will no more agree with this city, then
the region of Arsareth does, with Geography or History.

So that me thinks this forged story of the Israelites voyage and habitation,
in such remote regions where never mankind dwelt, sauoureth of the same
fantastical and Talmudical spirit, that Esd. 6.42.
an other tale of the same author does, touching the collection of all the
waters, into a seventh part of the earth, the other six being left uncovered:
or Cap. eod. verse. 50.
a third, of (the Elephant and the Whale) Behemoth and Leuiathan: namely, that
God appointed the sea to one of them, and the land to the other, because they
were so great that the Sea could not hold them both: for else belike, if the
Sea had been large enough, we might have gone a fishing for Elephants. For how
is the sea gathered into a seventh part of the earth, whose expansion is not
only by the most skillful Philosophers esteemed, but found by experience of
nauigations hitherto made, to ouerspred as nearly as may be discerned, about
half the compass of the Earth? Or, being of that breadth, and withal of the
depth, that it is known to be how should it not be spacious enough, to
receive Elephants and Whales together? The dimensions of the Elephant, even of
the greatest sort of Indian Elephants, (and the earth breeds none so large as
those of India) are, Aelian de Animalib. l. 12. c. 8.
says Aelianus, nine cubits of height (the length in that beast is equal to
the height) and five of breadth, the greatest that have been seen in Europe,
being Vid. Gilliu^ in Descript: 6, Elephant, c. 6. et Gorop l. 2. Origin.
Antuerptan.
observed to be far less. The dimension of the Whale indeed is far greater
(five times says Aelian. l. 16. ca. 12. Rondelet. de Piscib. l. 16. c. 11.
Arria^. de Reb. Indicis long ante finem.
Aelianus then the largest sort of Elephants) But yet his ordinary dimensio^
is, but 36. cubits long, and 8. cubits high, as Rondeletius has observed. But
admit notwithstanding some of them to be 50. cubits, of which length, Nearchus
in Arrianus is said to have measured one in the East Ocean: nay, to be 600.
foot long, and 360. foot thick, as Ap. Plin. l. 32. c. 1.
Iuba in Pliny related to be found in the Bay of Arabia, (where yet, as it is
well known by the foundings of nauigators, that sea is not by a good deal
360. foot deep) Or, let them be more yet, Plin. l 9. c. 3.
even four Acres long, (that is 960. foot) as Pliny has related of some in
the sea of India. For, although the two last reports be in truth no better
then fancies and fables, Basil. in Hexaemer. Homil. 7
which the impudence of some, has made the ignorance of others, to believe,
yet I will exclude none, but only Basil, as intolerably hyperbolical,
affirming namely that whales are equal to the greatest mountains, and their
backs when they show above the water, like to Islands. But admitting all the
rest I say, what proportion have those dimensions of the Whale and the
Elephant, to the huge breadth and depth of the Ocea^?

For if I may without offense intersert a short Philosophical speculaton: the
depth of the Sea (to speak nothing of the breadth, which every common map
does represent) is determined by Fabianus in Pliny, Fabian. apud Plin. l. 2.
c. 102 Cleomed. Meteot. l. 1. c. 10.
and by Cleomedes, to be 15 furlongs, that is, one mile and seven eight parts:
Or else, equal to the height of the greatest mountains, to whose height, and
the deepenesse of the Sea, the Geometricians (as Plutarch has recorded)
anciently assigned equal dimensions. Plutarch in Vita Aemilij Pauli.
Or yet rather (if you will any thing respect my opinion) it is a great deal
more. Scalig. de Subtilitate. Exercit. 38.
For, as for the shallow speculation of Scaliger, and And. Baccius de Thermis.
l. 1. c. 4. and Alij.
others, of the shallowness of the Sea, determining the height of Hills, far
to surpass the deepenesse of the sea: And that in very few places, it
attaineth 100 passes of depth, is indeed true in the narrow Channels and
Straits of the Sea: But in the free and large Ocean, it is by the experience of
Nauigators known to be as false as the Gospel is true. Indeed touching the
height of mountains, I find it pronounced by the great Mathematician
Eratosthenes in Theon, Theon. in Comment. Magnae Construction. Ptolom. l. 1.
that the highest sort of them, pass not in perpendicular erectnesse 10
furlongs (that is one mile and one fourth part) of which height also, it is
observed in Pliny, Plin. l. 2. c. 63. Plutarch. loc. supra citato.
that Dicaearchus by Dioptricall Instruments, found the Hill Pelius in
Thessalie to be, and in Plutarch, that Xenagoras (another Mathematician)
observed the height of Olympus, in the same Region, saving, that in this later,
there is an addition of 20 passes, for the whole number of passes, is 1270.
Neither do I find any greater perpendicular height attributed to Mountains, by
any ancient writer, Cleomedes excepted: Cleomed. l. 1. Meteor. c. 10.
who assigns to the height of Hills, as he does also to the depth of the Sea,
15 furlongs. (For Alhazen I omit, because he only restrains the height of
hills, Alhazen. de Crepuscul. propos. 1.
as namely, not to exceed 8 miles, without determining what their height should
be) But yet, all these, are to be understood, I take it, with relation to the
Mountains in and about Greece, with which themselves were acquainted, which
may in no sort compare with the huge Mountains of vast Continents, such as are
the Alps in Europe, Atlas in Afrique, Caucasus in India, the Andes in Peru,
and such other.

But, whatsoever the height of Hills may be above the common superficies of
the Earth, it seems to me after good consideration, that the depth of the
Sea, is a great deal more. For declaration of which point, I require to be
supposed, first, that the Earth at the first forming of it, was in the
superficies, regular, and sphericall: which the Holy Scripture directs us to
believe, because the water covered and compassed all the face of the Earth: And
secondly, that the face of the Land is in largeness and expansion, at least
equal to that of the sea: And thirdly, that the unevenness and irregularity,
which is now seen in the superficies of the Earth was caused (as is noted in
Damascen) either, Damascen. l. 1. de fide Orthodoxa c. 10.
by taking of some parts out of the upper face of the Earth in sundry places,
to make it more hollow, and laying them in other places, to make it more
conue^e* Or else (which in effect is equivalent to that) by raising up some,
and depressing others to make room and receite for the sea: that mutation
being wrought by the power of that word, Genes. 1.9.
Let the waters be gathered into one place, that the dry land may appear. For,
as for the fancy of Aquinas, Dionysius, Aquin. in Sum pa. 1. q. 69. a. 1.
Dionys. Carth Catharin. and Alij in Comment. cap. 1. Genes.
Catharinus and some other Divines namely, that that gathering of waters and
discovery of the Earth, was made, not by any mutation in the Earth, but by a
violent accumulation of the waters, or heaping them up on high, it is too
unreasonable. Because it is utterly against the nature of water, being a
flexible and ponderous body, so to consist, and stay it self, and not fall to
the lower parts about it, where in nature there is nothing at all to hinder it.
Or, if it be hindered and restrained supernaturally, by the hand and bridle of
the almighty, lest it should ouerwhelme and drown the Land, it must follow
thereof, that God in the very institution of nature, imposed a perpetual
violence upon nature: And this withal, that at the Deluge, there had been no
necessity at all, to break up the springs of the deep, and to open the
Cataracts of Heaven, and power down water continually, so many days and
nights together upon the Earth, seeing, the only withdrawing of that hand, or
letting go of that bridle, which restrained the water, would presently have
overwhelmed all.

But, to come to the Point. It seems upon the former suppositions (of which,
the holy scripture establishes the first, Experience of Trauailers, and
Nauigators the second, and Reason the third) that in making estimation of the
depth of the Sea, we are not to reckon and consider only, the height of the
Hills, above the common superficies of the Earth, unto which the extraordinary
depthes or whirlpooles, that are found in the Sea, do properly answer
(descending beneath the ordinary bottom of the Sea, as the Hills ascend above
the ordinary face of the Land) but, the advantage or height of all the dry Land
above the superficies of the Sea. Because the whole Mass of the Earth, that
now appears above the waters, being taken as it were out of the place, which
the waters now possess, must be equal to the place out of which it was
taken, and consequently it seems, that the height or elevation of the one,
should answer the depth or descending of the other. And therefore as I said,
in estimating the deepenesse of the Sea, we are not to consider only the
erection of the Hills, above the ordinary land, but the advantage of all the
dry land above the sea. Which later, I mean the height of the ordinary maine
Land, (even excluding the hills) is in my opinion more in large Continents
above the Sea, then that of the Hills, is above the Land. For first, that the
plain and common face of the dry Land, is not level, or equally distant from
the Center, but has great decliuity and descent toward the Sea, and accliuitie
or rising toward the Midland parts, although it appear not so to the common
view of the Eye, is to reason notwithstanding manifest. Because as it is found
in that part of the Earth, which the Sea covers that it descends lower, and
lower toward the midst of the sea, (for the Sea which touching the upper face
of it, is known to beleuell by nature, and euenly distant from the Center, is
withal observed to wax deeper and deeper, the farther one sayleth from the
shore toward the Maine) Even so, in that part which is uncovered, the coursings
and streamings of Rivers on all sides from the midland parts toward the Sea, By
which rule of the proceeding of Rivers by the decliuity of the earth and ever
sliding from the higher ground to the lower, till they come to the Sea, is
evident to be discerned, that in Continents, those Regions are the higher Land
from which Rivers stream, and those the lower ground, to which they proceed,
and consequently, that of all, those are the highest which receiving no foreign
Rivers, to which they give passage through them, do send forth the longest
Rivers on all sides to the regions round about the^. By which observation is to
be discerned, that Heluetia and Rhetia, sending forth the longest Rivers of
Europe, which on all sides descend from them and their confines, Danubius
toward the East, Rhene North, Rhodanus West, beside Ticinus, Addua, and others,
that fall into Padus South, are the highest land of Europe: As the Region of
Pamer, and Kirgessi, with some other near the crossing of the great mountains
Taurus and Imaus above India, whence are directed, the greatest and longest
Rivers of Asia, Indus and Ganges toward the South, Oxus and Iaxartus toward the
West, Oechardes North, Cantan East, is proved by the same reason, to be the
heighest part of Afrique and Asia, and in my opinion of all the Earth. And as
the region also about the springs of Nilus, from which beside Nilus, that
runs toward the North, are sent forth, the river of Magnice, toward the
South, of Zaire West, of Coauo and Zuama East, being ( Niger excepted) the
greatest rivers of Afrique, is by the same reason, proved to be, the heighest
part of that continent.
whose property we know is to slide from the higher to the lower, evidently
declare so much.

And although I am not able precisely to determine, what the ordinary decliuity
of the earth may be, yet, if that be convenient in the works of nature, which
is required in the works of Art, that imitateth Nature, it will be found true
that before I said: Namely, that in great Continents, through which Rivers have
long Courses, some of 1000, or 2000 miles, the height of the ordinary Midland,
above the face of the Sea, is more, then of the Hills above the common face of
the Earth, for Pliny in the deriuation of water, (...) 31.^6.
requires one cubit of declining, in 240 foot of proceeding (for he says vnum
cubitum in binos Actus and Actus as may Col^mell. de Re Rustica. l. 5. c^
be observed in Columella and others is a dimension of 120 foot long)
Vitruuius and Palladius in their conduction of waters, Vitrum Archirectur. l. 8
(...) Pallad. (...) Ru^^^ca l. 5. Tic. II.
require indeed somewhat less, namely, that in proceeding of 200 foot
forward, there should be allowed one foot of descending downward, which yet
in the course of 1000 miles (as Danubius or Wolgha, or Indus etc. have so much
or more) will make five miles of descent in perpendicular account: And in the
course of 2000, or more, (as Nilus, and Niger, and the River of Amazons have)
10 mile or more of like descent.

And, although I know well enough, that water being (as it is) heavy and
flexible, will slide away at any inequality, and therefore am altogether
persuaded, that this rule of Vitruuius touching conueiance of waters, is not to
be taken as a rule of necessity, to be observed in the deriuing of them, as if
water could not run without that advantage, (for in that respect the
Conueiers of waters of these times, content themselves even with one inch in
600 foot, as Philander also on Vitruuius, Philand in Vitruu. l. 8. c. 7.
has observed) but is rather to be understood as a rule of commodity, namely
with relation to the expedition and holesomenesse of the water so conveyed,
lest resting too long in the pipes it should contract from them some unwholesome
quality, or else through the slacknesse of motion, or long closeness, or
banishment from the air, it might gather some aptness and disposition to
putrefie. Although I say, such excess of advantage as in the artificial
conueance of waters the forenamed authors require, be not of necessity
exacted, in the natural deriuation of the^: yet nevertheless certain it is,
that the descent of rivers, being as it is continual, and the course of some
of them very long, and in many places swift, and here, and there headlong and
furious, the difference of height or advantage, can not but be great, betwixt
the springs of rivers and their outlets, betwixt their first rising out of the
earth, and their falling into the sea.

Unto which decliuitie of the land, seeing the deepenesse of the sea does in
proportion answer (as I before declared) and not only to the height of hills.
It remains that we esteem and determine that deepenesse to be a great deal
more, then it has been hitherto by Philosophers commonly reputed. And
although the deepenesse of the Sardinian sea (which indeed Aristotle
acknowledges for the deepest part of the mediterrane) be specially recorded
by Posidonius in Strabo, Arist. Meteor l. 2. c. 1. Strabo. l. 1. long post
medium.
to have been found but 1000 fadomes ((...)) which is but a mile and one fifth
part: yet what may the depth in that narrow sea be, compared to the hollow
deepenesse of the vast Ocean? Or rather (to turn this Instance to our
advantage) if in so narrow a sea as the mediterraine is (whose breadth attayneth
not where it is largest, 600 miles) the depth be so great, what may we
esteem the deepenesse of the huge Ocean to be, that is in many places above
five times as broad? especially, seeing that the broader that seas are, if
they be withal entire, and free from Islands, they are answerablie observed to
be the deeper.

But whether have I been carried by these Elephants and Whales? to what
heights and depths, of Mountains, and Seas? I pray you pardon me, for I see I
have digressed, that is, transgressed, now I return into the way again.

Of the Quantity and proportion of the parts of the earth, possessed by the
several sorts of the abou mentioned religions. CHAP. XIIII.
NOw, if out of the former long discourse, I should collect a short sum, and
estimate the proportion with respect to the whole earth, that each one of the
forementioned religions, have to the other. It being first supposed, which upon
exact consideration and calcalation, will be found to swerve very little from
the truth, that the proportions of Europe, Afrique, Asia, and America, are as
1.3.4 and 7. And that the professors of the forementioned religions, possess
the several portions and proportions, of each of them, which is before set
down: It will be found I say upon these suppositions (which the best
Gographie, and histories do persuade me to be true) that Christians
possess, near about a fixed part of the known inhabited earth: Mahumetans, a
fifth part (not as Pos^el in p^aefat. Grammat. Arabic. Ludouic. Reg^us de
Vicissitud. Rerum. l (...) ^ue.
some have exceedingly ouerlashed, half the world or more) and Idolaters, two
thirds, or but little less. So that, if we divide the known regions of the
world, into 30 equal parts. The Christians part is as five, the Mahumetans as
six, and the Idolaters as nineteen, for the poor dispersed and distressed
Christians, which are found in Asia and Afrique, mingled among Mahumetans, and
Idolaters, I receive not into this account, both because they are but thin
dispersed, in respect of the multitudes of Mahumetans and Idolaters in those
regions among whom they live (being withal under their dominion) and because
also, many Mahumetans, are found mingled among Christians in Europe, to
recompense and counteruaile a great part of that number.

Such therefore may be the general proportion of Christians to Mahumetans and
Idolaters, in the continents of the earth hitherto discovered, namely, in this
our neighbor continent of the East comprehending Europe, Afrique, and Asia,
and in that other continent of the West, called America, and in the Islands
belonging to them both. But if the South or Antarctique continent, be so large,
as I am verily persuaded it is (even no less, then that of the East before
mentioned, which contains Europe, Afrique and Asia together) then will the
Idolaters be found to surpass all the other religions, in exceeding great
proportion, for that the Inhabitants of that South continent, are Idolaters,
there is no question at all ( as I take it) to be made, both because in the
parts hitherto known, as namely in the region of Varro. l. 6. de Ling. Latina.
Beach, over against Iaua, they were found to be so: And also, because they are
known to be no other then Idolaters, that inhabit all those parts of the
other continents, that neighbor most toward them, from whom it is likely,
they should have received the change of their religion, if any were: for first,
in Asia, both India, and the Islands of the Indian sea, whereof some lie close
on the South continent. Secondly, in Afrique, the regions about the Cape of
Buona Speranza. And Thirdly, in America, the Countries that border on
Magaglians Strait, which are the nearest neighbors to the foresaid continent
of the South, are known to be all ouerspred with Idolaters.

Now that the South continent is no less then I before esteemed it, namely,
then that of Asia, Afrique and Europe altogether, although I might be probably
induced to believe so, because it is well known, both (touching latitude) to
approach in some parts near the equator, and (touching longitude) to run
along in a continual circuit about the earth, fronting both the other
continents: Yet have I also another reason of more certain importance, to
persuade me: Namely, because it is well known, that the land to the North side
of the line, in the other continents (the old and new world) yet altogether is
at least four times as large as that part of them which lies to the South.
Now, forasmuch as it is certain, For touching the first of these suppositions.
It is the property of water, ever to fall that way, where it finds
decliuitie. Wherefore, if the water, in the upper face of it, were higher in
one place then in another, it would necessarily fall, from the heigher position
to the lower, because it is heavy and flexible, and has nothing in the open
and free Sea, to let or hinder it. And consequently, would never rest settled
and stable, till the face of it were leuelled, in an even distance from the
ce^ter.
first by Archimedes his rule, Archimed. de Insidentib. Aquae l. 1. Propos. 2.
that the face of the sea, is in all parts naturally level, or equally distant
from the center of the water, for which equality, it has obtained the name of
Aequer and Aqua, Varro. l. ^. de Ling. Latina. Isidor. Origi^. l. 3. c. 12 and
Alij.
as Grammarians say: And touching the second if the earth were unequally
poysed on opposite sides of the center, then must it follow, that the least and
lighter mass of the earth should press down as forciblie, as the greater and
weightier, because it attaineth the center as well as it. But if it be
granted, which reason does enforce, that the weightier part of the earth,
should press downward, with greater force, and with more right challenge the
center, then the lighter part: it must follow, that the lighter mass or side
of the earth, must yield and give place to the weightier, so far, till the
center of that whole mass of the earth take possession of the center of the
world (for till then, one side will be still heavier then the other) and so the
opposite halfes of the earth, in respect of heaviness, be brought on all
sides, about the center, unto a perfect equilibration.
And secondly, by the Philosophers known rule, that the earth is equally
poised on both sides of her own center. And the third may be established, by
manifest demonstration. Because, a clod of earth, suffered to fall from any
point of the air, wheresoever, on the face of the sea (the same does water,
falling on even and plain land) when all is calm, and the air not troubled
with winds, nor the sea with waves, will descend by a perpendicular line, on
the face of the water. In such sort I say, that the line by which it falls
makes exactly equal and right angles on all sides, with the face of the water
whereon it falls. Therefore it is manifest, that the earth so falling,
te^deth directly to the center of the water Because no straight line insisteth
perpendicularly, on the face or circumference of any special body (as the water
is) except only those that proceed directly to the center of the sphaire: But
certain it is, that the earth is withal directly carried toward it own center,
therefore there is but one common center of the water and of the earth.
And thirdly, that the center of the earth and of the water are all one (both
of the^ being indeed no other the^ the center of the world) which though some
fantastical heads have called into question yet no sound philosopher ever
doubted of: It follows thereupon, that the earth should in answerable measure
and proportion, lift it self and appear above the face of the sea, on the
south side of the line, as it does on the north. And consequently, that what is
wanting in the South parts of the two foresaid continents toward the
counteruailing of the North parts (which is about three five parts of both the
other continents laid together) must of necessity be supplied in the
continents of the South. And yet I omit all the land, that may be about the
Arctique Pole, beyond the Scythian or Sarmatian sea, which must be also
counterpoysed in that Antarchtique continent, for nothing comes within the
compass of my understanding, to be hereto replied, except any would perhaps
imagine, that either the sea on the South side of the equator, is very
shallow, or that the land of that co^tine^t, may be much higher above the face
of the sea, the^ the land of the other two (and so equal in mass, though less
in circuit) or that the earth on the south side of the Equator, should be of a
more ponderous disposition, the^ on the North, in which cases, some
co^pensation of weightines, may be made for the want of extention. But of these
three, the experience of sailers evidently refelleth the first, who in equal
distance from the land, observe an equal deepenesse of the sea, in both South
and North latitude. And neither is there any experience, nor good reason that
can be alleged to establish either of the later: which, but that I have
already too much offended by digressions, I could prove I doubt not against
all exception. But this for a conclusion to this discourse, I dare pronounce
touching that South co^tinent, that it will certainly be found (in the after
times, when it shall be better discovered) much larger then any globe or map
hitherto extant, has represented it.

Such therefore (as I have declared) is the general state of Christianity at
this present in the world, and the proportion of it to other religions. But
because you require yet further to be specially informed of the diverse sorts
and sects of Christians that are abroad in the world, and withal of their
diverse regions and religions, at least of those principal characters of their
religion, wherein they specially differ each from other, I will here set down
my second period, touching the general differences of religions, and of the
several parts of the world where they are maintained: and will now proceed to
that particular consideration touching the sects of Christianity, and endeavor
to give you the best satisfaction that my poor reading, and observation may
enable me to perform.

Of the dinerse sorts or sects of Christians in the world, and of their
several regions. And first of the Grecians. CHAP. XV.
THE sects therefore of Christians, that carry name and report at this present
in the World, beside the Protestants and Romans in the West, of whom I will be
silent, because you know their condition better then my self, are 1 the
Grecians, 2 Melchites or Syrians, 3 Georgians, 4 Moscouites and Russians, 5
Nestorians, 6 Indians termed the Christians of St. Thomas, 7 Iacobites, 8
Cophites, 9 Armenians, 10 Habassines, and 11 Maronites. Of which eleven sects,
there be three Principal, namely the Grecians, Iacobites and Nestorians, with
which the rest have, for the most part, either some dependence and deriuation,
or nearer conuenience and agreement.

The Grecians acknowledge obedience to the Patriarch of Constantinople, under
whose Jurisdiction are in Asia, Bellon. Observation. l. 1. c. 35.
the Christians of Natolia (excepting Armenia the less, and Cilicia) of
Circassia, of Mengrelia, and of Russia: As in Europe also, the Christians of
Greece, Macedon, Epirus, Thrace, Bulgaria, Rascia, Seruia, Bosina, Walachia,
Moldauia, Podolia, and Moscouia: together with all the Islands of the Aegean
sea, and others about Greece, as far as Corfu, beside a good part of the
large dominion of Polonia, and those parts of Dalmatia, and of Croatia, that
are subject to the Turkish dominion.

Of which great extendment of the Greek Patriarchs jurisdiction, if you demand
the reason: I have observed sundry occasions, from whence it has proceeded.
For first, his original or Primitive authority assigned, or rather confirmed
to him, (as Bishop of the Jmperiall city) by the counsel of Chalcedon;
contained all the Provinces of Thrace, Council. Chalcedone^s. can. 23.
and of Anatolia, ( Isauria, and Cilicia, only excepted, which belonged to
the Patriarch of Antiochia) and they were in all, no less then 28. Roman
Provinces. Secondly, the voluntary submission of the Grecians upon their
separation from the latin Church, greatly increased it: for thereby not only
Greece, Macedon, ^spirus, Candie, and the Isles about Greece (in all seven
Provinces) came under his obedience, but also Sicil^e, and the East point of
Italy, named Calabria, revolted from the Bishop of Rome, and for a long time,
pertained to the Patriarch of Constantinople, Novel. Leon. De ordine
Metropolitan in Lib. 2. To^ri L^uris.
as appears in the Novel of Leo Sophus touching the order and precedence of
Metropolitans, belonging to that Patriarchie. And by the like ordination set
down by Andronicus Paloeologus, in Curopalates, Orientalis. Curopalat. de
Official. Palate. Consta^tinop. prope sinem.
where we find, the Metropolitans of Syracusa, and Catana in Sicilie, of
Rhegium, Seueriana, Rosia, and Hydruntum in Calabria, registered among the
Metropolitans of that Jurisdiction. Thirdly it was enlarged by the conversion
of the north regions to Christian Religion, performed by his Suffragans and
ministers, even from Thrace to Cromer. de. script. Polon. L. 1. Herdenst de
Bell. Mosc. l. 1. Gu^guin. Descript^on. Moscou. c. 2.
Russia and the Scythian Sea (the like whereof was the principal cause, that
so far enlarged the Bishop of Rome his Jurisdiction in the west parts of
Europe.) And fourthly, by the Turks conquests made upon the Western countries,
subject before to the Bishop of Rome: all which, while partly, the former
Bishops and Pastors fled, to avoid the Turks oppression (like the hireling that
forsakes the flock, when he sees the wolf coming) and partly, while the
Patriarch of Constantinople, to supply that default, was feign to provide them
of new ministers, they have been by little and little brought and trained to
the Greek religion.

Now as touching the proper characters of their religion, I must, for the
better designing and remembering of them, set before me some instance or
pattern, to compare it, and other sects of Religion withal: And that is most
fit to be the Roman Church, both because their differences with that Church
specially, are in writers most observed. So that, by that means my discourse
may be the shorter, and yet no less perspicuous to you, that know the opinions
of the Roman Church so well. The principal characters then of the Grecians
religion, (for none but the principal you require, and to mention every
slender difference of ceremonies, would be but tedious, and fruitless, (and is
beside without my compass) are these that follow.

1. Council. Florent. Sess. 18. and sequentib. Ierem. Patriarch Constant in
Resp. 1. ad Germanos. cap. 1.
That the holy Ghost proceeds from the father only, not from the son. 2.
Council. Florentin. prope Initium. Respons. Graecer ad cardinal. Guisan. Quest.
9.
That there is no purgatory fire. 3. Resp. cad. Graecor. Q. 5. Ierem. Patr.
Resp. 1. cap. 1.
That they celebrate the Sacrament of the Eucharist in both kinds. 4. Ierem.
Resp. cad. c. 10. and 21
And in leauened bread, and think it cannot be effectually consecrated in
bread unleavened. 5. Posseuin. de Rebus Mosco. uiae page 43.
That they reject extreme unction. 6. Id. lib. citat. page 40.
And confirmation. 7. Ierem. Respons. cap. 21.
That they deny the souls of holy men to enjoy the blissful vision of God,
or the souls of wicked men to be tormented in hell, before the day of
judgment. Th. a Ies. de Conu. gent. l. 6. c. 1. 8. Tom. vnionis inter nouel.
Constantin. Porphyrogen. in Tomo 1 Tur. Orientalis. lib. 2. Zonar. Annal. Tom.
3. in Im pe Leon's philosophi.
That they admit Priests marriages, namely, so that they may keep their wives
married before their ordination, but must not marry after ordination. 9. Resp.
Graecor. ad Guisan Quest 8. Posse^i^. de reb. Moscou.
That they prohibit utterly the fourth marriage, as a thing intolerable.
Insomuch, that (as we find recorded) their Patriarchs have for that cause
excommunicated some of their Emperors, although they had no issue left of
their three former marriages. Posseu l^b. (...) page 41 et 2.

^^llamont on ^oyag. l 2. c 21


10. That they reject the religious use of massy images, or statues, admitting
yet pictures or plain images in their Churches. Vil^am. on Vo^ag. l. 2. c. 21
^t Alij.
11. That they solemnize Saturday (the old sabbath) festiually, and eat therein
flesh, forbidding as unlawful to fast any Saturday in the year, except Easter
Eve. Posseuin. l. (...) p. 42.
12. That they observe four lents in the year. N^lus Episcop. Thes^al. de
Primatu Papae Barlaam de primatu Papae et Alij. Leo. 9. epist. 1. (...)
Episcop. Consta^tinop.
13. That they eat not of any thing strangled, nor of blood. Acrican. et in
pluribus (...).

S^^^bert. in Ch^onico ad An. ^^5^.

Possen. de Reb Mosco. p 38. (...).


14. And lastly, that they deny the Bishop of Romes primacy, and (reputing him
and his Church for schismatics) exclude them from their communion: And so have
done, as I find in Leo the ninth his Epistles, and in Sigebert, above these
500. years, And if you desire to see more differences of the Greek and Roman
Church, you may see them, (but they are of less importance then those I have
related in Posseuines book of the matters of Moscouia.
Of the Syrians or Melchites. CHAP. XVI.
SYrians are the same, that in some Histories are termed Melchites: being
esteemed for their number the Botar. Relat. pa. 3. l. 2. ca. de Melchiti.
greatest sect of Christians in the Orient. The first, Postel. in Descript.
Syriae. page 30.
being properly the name of their nation, And the second noting the property of
their religion. Surians they were named (to let vain fancies go) of the City
of Tire, which in the ancient language of the Phoenicians, Gellius. l. 14. c. 6.

Festus in D^^ctione sarra*


was called (...). and certainly, that Tire was ancie^tly called Sarra, is
recorded by the For Pos^els fantasy deriuing Suria from (...) is meerelie
vain, and being never so named in the Hebrew tongue, but always (...), by
which name also it seems ancie^tly to have been known, even among the
Grecians for (...) mentioned in Homer, are no other, as Possidonius in Strad.
l. 26. in fine.
Strabo expounds him, then the Syrians: Strabo himself also recording in other
places, that the Syrians Vitria histor. Oriental. c. 43 Niger in commenta^. 4.
Asiae.

Postell. in descrip. Syriae. page 50.


were called (...) in his time: And, that the Strad. l. 13. non long ante fine.
natural inhabitants of Syria, so called themselves. Yet nevertheless they
were vulgarly known by the name of (...) among the Grecians, because the City
of (...), being the maine mart town of all those parts, was the place, where
they had their trade and commerce, with those Aramites. But when the Phoenician
tongue began to degenerate into Chaldee, then the name of (...) was converted
into Tur, the letter (...) being turned into (...) and (...) in sound made
(...). As Vid. Scaliger as Fest. in dictione Sarra. et Guidon. Fabric. in
Grammatic. Chaldaea etc.
they that observe the differences of the Hebrew and the Chaldee, and the
transitions of the first into the latter, know to be ordinary.
Roman writers: and it is also acknowledged by Strab. l. 1 post med.

Burchard. descr. terrae Sanctae.


Vitriacus, Niger, Postell and others, that the place of Tire, (for the city
was utterly ruined three hundred years ago) is still called the port of Sur,
Hieron. in lib. de Nominib. Hebraicis. Plin. l. 5. c. 19.
which name it seems to have obtained, either because it was built on a
Rock, for so Burchardus that viewed the place has observed) which (...) in
the Phoenician tongue signifies: or else as Hierome deriues it, of the
straitness and scarcenes of room, as being seated in a small Island (but 19.
miles in circuit as Pliny notes) a small Territory for such a City: or
perhaps, because it was the strongest fortres (for that also (...) imports)
of all those Regions, as being founded on a rock, environed with the sea, (for
it was before Q Curt. l. 4.
Alexanders time Plin. loc. citabo.
700. paces distant from the firm land) mightily strengthened by
fortifications of Art, populous as being the Metropolis of Phoenicia, and
exceeding rich as sometime the City of greatest traffic in the World.

Of this city then, both the region and inhabitants of Suria obtained their
names: but Melchitae as I said they were termed, merely in respect of their
religion, wherein namely they altogether followed the examples and decrees of
the Emperors. For whereas after the Council of Chalcedon, infinite perplexity
and trouble began to arise in the East parts, principally about the opinion of
Eutyches and Dioscorus, of one only nature in Christ, which that council had
condemned, but notwithstanding found many that maintained it, and rejected the
Council, in those Eastern countries: And thereupon the Emperor Leo began to
exact, (as diverse other of his Successors afterward did) the suffrages and
subscriptions of the Eastern Bishops, for the better establishment of the
Council. Niceph. Callist Histor. Ecclesiast. l. 18. c. 52.
Then began they that embraced and approved the authority of that Council,
because they followed the Emperors decrees, made in behalf of it, to be
termed by their adversaries, Melchitae, of Melchi, says Nicephorus, (rather
(...)) which in the speech of Syria signifies a King: (as one would say of the
Kings Religion) whereas they that opposed themselves to the Council, were
distracted into no less then twelve several sects, and not long after into
many more, as the same Lib. 18. c. 45.
Nicephorus has recorded.

Now although the Syrians or Melchites, are for their religion merely of the
Grecians opinions. As: 1. That the Holy Ghost proceeds only from the father.
1.2.3.4.5. Jacob a Vitriaco Hist. Orient. ca. 75.
2. That they celebrate divine service as solemnly on the Sabbath, as on the
Lords day. 3. That they keep that day festival, eating therein flesh, and
fast no Saturday in the year but Easter Eve. Villamont ^n voyag. l. 2. c. 22.
4. That their Priests and Deacons contract not marriage, being already in
Orders, but yet retain their wives before married. 5. That the fourth
Matrimony is utterly unlawful. Villamont. loco citato.
6. That they communicate the Eucharist in both kinds. 7. That they acknowledge
not Purgatory. 8. That they observe four Lents in the year, etc. And in a
word, although they be merely Vitriac. loco iam citato.

Salignici^. Itiner. Tom. 8. c. 1 Bamugart. Peregrin. l. 2. c. 9. (...) Alij.


of the same Religion and communion with the Grecians: yet are they not of the
jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople, but of the Archbishop of
Damascus, by the title of the Patriarch of Antiochia. For Antiochia it self
(where yet the name of Christians was first heard in the world, and was long
known by the name of (...)) lying at this present in a manner wast, or broken
and dispersed into small villages, of which, only one, of about 60 houses,
with a small Temple belongs to Christians, Bellon. ob^eru. l. c.

Chitrae. de stat. Ecclesiar. page 5.


the Patriarchall seat was translated thence to Damascus (where as is reported
are Bote^. Relat. pa. 3. l. 2. c. de Maro^^ti.

Cru^. Tur^o. grar. l. 4 p. 296. ex relatione Gerlachij.


above 1000 houses of Christians) and there remains. For although Boter loco
(...) citato.
the Patriachs of the Maronites, and of the Iacobites, whereof the former
keeps residence in Libanus, and the later in Mesopotamia, entitle themselves
Patriarchs of Antiochia, and by the Christians of their own sects, be so
acknowledged: yet do the Melchites, who retain the ancient religion of Syria,
acknowledge none for patriarche, but the Archbishop of Damascus, reputing both
the other for schismatics, as having departed from the obedience and communion
of the true Patriarch. And yet, beside all these, a fourth there is, of the
Popes designation, that usurps the title of the Patriarche of Antiochia. For
Boter. Relat. p. 3. l. 1. ca. del Patriarcha latino d^ Constantinopoli.
ever since the Latins surprised Constantinople, (which was about the year
1200) and held the possession of the east Empire about 70. years, al which
time the Patriarchs of Constantinople, were consecrated by the Pope: As also,
since the holy Land, and the Provinces about it, were in the hands of the
Christian Princes of the West, which began to be about An. 1100. And so
continued about 80. years, during which season the Patriarchs of Antiochia
also, and of Jerusalem, were of the Popes consecration: Ever since then I say,
the Church of Rome, has, and does still create successively, imaginary or
titular Patriarchs (without jurisdiction) of Constantinople, Antiochia,
Jerusalem and Alexandria, so loath is the Pope, to loose the remembrance of any
superiority or title: that he has once compassed.


Of the Georgians, Circassians and Mengrellians. CHAP. XVII.
THe Georgians inhabit the Country, that was anciently named Iberia, betwixt
the Euxine and the Caspian Seas: enclosed with Sheruan (Media) East: with
Mengrelia, (Colchis) West: with Turcomania ( Armenia the greater) South:
Volaterran. l. 11. c. de Sect. Syriae Prateo l. de Sectis. Hae^et. in Verbo.
Georgiani. and Alij.
And with Albania (Zuiria) North. The vulgar opinion of Historians is, that
they have obtained the name of Georgians, from their devotion to St. George,
whom they principally honor for their Patron: and whose Image they always
bear in their military Ensigns. But yet, (as I take it) this vulgar opinion
is but vulgar error: Mela l. 1. c. 2. Plin. l. 6. c. 13.
because I find mention made of the nation of the Georgians in those parts,
both in Mela and Pliny, before St. George was borne, whosoever he was.
Touching the properties of whose religion this may be sufficient to observe for
all: That Paul. Venet. lib. 1 ca. 14.
it is the same both in substance and ceremonies with that of the Grecians
Chitrae. de statu Ecclesiat. page 23 and. 50. and Alij.
who yet are in no sort subject (neither ever were) to the Patriarch of
Constantinople: but all their Bishops (being 18) profess absolute obedience to
their own Metropolitan, without any other higher dependence or relation. Who
yet keeps residence far off, in the Monastry of St. Katherine in the Hill
of Sinai. Prateo. de Haeret. sect. verbo Georgiani. Bernard. Lucemburg. in
Catalog. Haeret. in Georgiani.

Next these, I must speak a little of their next neigbours, the Mengrelians
and Circassians, ( Colchi and Zychi they were anciently called) seated between
the Georgians and the River Tanais, along the Coast of Maeotis and the Euxine
sea, as being also Christians of the Greek communion, and beside, Bellon.
Obseru. l. 1. c. 35. Michou. de Sarmatia. l. 1. c. 7.
of the Patriarch of Constantinople his obedience, and Bellon. Obseru. l. 1. c.
35. Michou. de Sarmatia. l. 1. c. 7.
converted by his Ministers Cyrillus and Methodius, to Christian religion.
Which religion notwithstanding at this present is exercised among them, not
without some deprauation, and mixture of strange fantasies, Interiano della
vita de Zychi cap. 1.

Anan. Fabrica del Mondo Tratt. 2.

Boter. par 3* l. 2. c.


for the Circassians baptize not their Children till the eight year, and enter
not into the Church, (the Gentlemen especially) till the sixtieth (or as others
say, till the fortieth) year, but hear divine service standing without the
Temple, that is to say, till through age, they grow unable to continue their
rapines and robberies, to which sin, that Nation is exceedingly addicted. So
dividing their life betwixt sin and devotion, dedicating their youth to
rapine, and their old age to repentance.

(...) Metropolitan. Russ. in epist. ad Episcop. Romans apud Sigismund. de Rebus
Muscou. page 31.
Of the Muscouites and Russians. CHAP. XVIII.
THe Muscouites and Russians as they were converted to Christianity by the
Grecians. Zonar. Annal. Tom. 3. Cromer. de reb. Polon. l. 3. so have they ever
since continued of the Greek communion and religion. Guagin. descript. Muscou.
c. 2. Sacran. de error. b. Ruthenor c. 2.


1. Denying the Holy Ghost to proceed from the Son.

2. Sigism. lib. citato. page 41 Sacran. de Relig. Ruthenor. cap. 2. Scarga.
Polon. l. 3. c. 2.
Rejecting Purgatory, but yet praying for the dead.

3. Scargas. Polon. l. 3. c. 2. Guaguin. descrip. Moscou. c. 2.
Believing that holy men enjoy not the presence of God before the Resurrection.

4. Joan Metropol. Russ vbi supra page 32. Guagin descr. Muscou. ca. 2.
Celebrating the sacrament of the Eucharist, with leauened bread, and requiring
warm water to mingle with the wine.

5. Sigism. loc. citato. page 40.
And communicating in both kinds,

6. Sigism. loc. citato page 40. Guaguin. loc. citato.
But mingling both together in the Chalice, and distributing it together with a
spoone.

7. Guaguin. Ibid.
And receiving children after 7. years old to the communion, saying that at
that age they begin to sin against God.

8. Joan. Metropol. Russ. vbi supra. apud. Sigism. page 31. Guagin. loc.
citato. Sacran. de errorib. Ruthenor. c. 2.
Omitting Confirmation by the Bishop.

9. Sacran. loc. citato.
Denying the spiritual efficacy of extreme unction.

10. Sigism. lib. alleg. page 47. Posseuin. de Rebus Moscou. page 2.
Excluding the fourth marriage as utterly unlawful: whereas they approve not
the second, as perfectly lawful, Guaguin. Descript. Moscou. cap. 2.
but only permit it, but tolerate not the third, except on very important
considerations.

11. Sacran de errorib. Ruthenor. c. 2.
Dissoluing marriage by diuorcement upon every light occasion or displeasure.

12. Sigism. lib. citat. page 28. Scarga. de vno pastor l. 3. c. 2.
Admitting neither Deacons nor Priests to Orders, except they be married: but
yet Possein. de Reb. Moscou. page 1. Guaguin. loc. citat.
prohibiting marriage to them being actually in Orders.

13, Posseu. lib. allegato. p. 44.
Rejecting carved or massy Images, but admitting the painted.

14. Joan. Metropol Russ. vbi supr. p. 3^ Guaguin. loc. allegato.
Reputing it unlawful to fast on Saturdayes.

15. Posseu. ^^ Moscouia. page 42. Sacran. de error. Ruthen. cap 2.
Or, to eat of that which is strangled, or of blood.

16. Guaguin. loc. citat.
Observing 4 lents in the year.

17. Sigism. lib. citato page 3^. Boter Relat. par. 3. l. 1. c. de Moscouia.
Refusing to communicate with the Roman Church.

And (to conclude) excepting the difference in distributing of the Eucharist,
and exacting of marriage in their Priests and Deacons, there is not any
material difference in points of religion, that I find betwixt them and the
Grecians. With whom, they not only maintain Communion, but were also, and
that not long since, (and of right still ought to be) of the same Jurisdiction
and government, for Posteuin. Rer. Moscou. Com 1. page 1. Guaguin. Descrip.
Moscou. cap. 2.
their chief Metropolitan or Primate (who is the Archbishop of Mosco) was wont
to be confirmed by the Patriarch of Constantinople, but is now, and has been
about some 60 years, nominated and appointed by the Prince (the Emperor of
Russia) and upon that nomination, consecrated by two or three of his own
Suffragans: Of whom even all sorts together. Bishops and Archbishops, there are
but Posse^^ loco proxime citato Sigism. in Moscou. page 28.
eleven, in all that large Dominion of the Emperor of Russia.

Thus is it with these sorts of Christians hitherto related, touching their
religion, and governors. All which (as you may easily perceive) are of the
same communion, and in effect of the same religion with the Grecians: And
beside these, some large parts of the King of Polonia his dominion, for
Podolia, and for the most part Boter. Rel. pa. 1. l. 1. c. Russia. Guagu^n.
Description M^scou. c. 2.
Russia Nigra, or Rubra as some call it (the larger Russia subject for the
greatest part to the Duke of Muscouia they term Russia alba) are of the
Greek religion. And although the Bishops of South Russia, subject namely to
the King of Polonia, submitted themselves almost 20. years ago (An. 1594) to
the Bishop of Rome, as Baron. Tom. 7. Annal. in fine. and Posseuin. in
Apparsacr. in Rutheni. have recorded, yet was it not without special
reservation of the Greek religion and rites, as is manifest by the articles of
condition extant. ap. Th. a Ies. de Conu. gent. l. 6. pa. 3. ca. 1. page 328
and seq. tendered by them to the Church of Rome and accepted, before they would
accept of the union. So that it was not any reuolting from the Greek religion,
but only (in effect) from the jurisdiction of the Greek Patriarch, to the
Pope, and that also with sundry limitations. And in Sigism. de Reb. Moscou.
page 27 Guagu^in in loco iam citato.
Wilna (the Metropolis of Lituania.) Although the Archbishop profess obedience
to the Pope, yet are there also in that City, as Sigismund has observed, more
Temples of the Greek religion ( Sigism. de Reb. Moscou. page 27 Guagu^in in
loco iam citato.
there be 30 of them) then of the Roman. Sigism. de Reb. Moscou. page 27
Guagu^in in loco iam citato.
Epist. ad Chitrae. de Relig. Russor. So that if we should collect and put
together all the Christian regions hitherto entreated of: which are all of the
Greek communion: And compare them with the parts pofessing the Roman Religion,
we should find the Greek far to exceed, if we except the Roman new and
foraine purchases, made in the West, and East Indias.

Of the Nestorians. CHAP. XIX.
THe Nestorians, who have purchased that name, by their ancient imitation, and
maintaining of Nestorius his heresy, inhabit (though every where mingled with
Mahumetans, or with Pagans) a great part of the Orient, for besides the
cuntries of Babylon, and Assyria, and Mesopotamia, and Parthia, and Media,
wherein very many of them are found, that sect is spread and scattered far
and wide in the East, both Northerly to Cataya, and Southerly to India. So that
in Marcus Paulus his history of the East regions, and in Guil. de Rubr. It^.
Tart. c. Paul. Venet. 1 l. 1. c. 38.2. l. eod. c. 39.3 c. 40.4 c. 47.5. c. 45.
and 49.6. c. 48.7. c. 62.8 c 64. l. 2. c. 39. l. eod. c. 61 and 64. etc.
others, we find mention of them, and of no sect of Christians but them, in
very many parts and provinces of Tartarie: As namely in 1 Cassar, 2 Samarchan,
3 Carcham, 4 Chinchintalas, 5 Tanguth, 6 Suchuir, 7 Ergimul, 8 Tenduch, 9
Caraiam, 10 Mangi, etc. Insomuch, that beyond the river Tigris Eastward, there
is not any other sect of Christians to be found, for ought I can read, except
only the Portugales, and the conuerts made by them in India, and the late
migration of the Armenians into Persia.

The reason of which large spreading and prevailing of that sect so far in
the orient, if you enquire I find to that purpose, recorded by Paulus Diaconus
of Cosrhoes the King of Persia, Paul. Diacon. Histor. Miscel. l. 18,
that he for the mortal hatred he bare the Emperor Heracl^us, by whom he had
been sore afflicted with a grievous war, enforced all the Christians of the
Persian Empire to Nestorianisme permitting no catholics to remain in all his
dominions. By whose preaching, the Christian religion being far there
enlarged and propagated into the East (as it seems both because those of the
Persian dominion, were more Eastwardly then other Christians, and because it is
certain, that all of them till this day acknowledge obedience to the Nestorian
Patriarch in Mesopotamia, which Country was then part of the Persian dominion:)
It is no wonder if sowing their own tares and Christ's wheat together, they
propagated with the gospel also there own heresy. Shortly after which time,
the Sarracens of Arabia (Mahumetans) conquering Persia, and bringing their
religion, together with their victories into all that large dominion, there
remained but little outward means and slender hope of their repair and
reformation from any sound part of the Church, (from which they were more now
then before divided) except what affliction and time, and the grace of God might
work and repair in them.

Now touching their ecclesiastical government: The patriarch of the
Nestorians, to whom all those of the East parts, acknowledge obedience (a
number of whose suffragan Bishops and Metropolitans, Sand de Visibil. Monarch.
l. 7. An. 1556. Paul Venet. l. 1. ca. 15.
you have reckoned up in Sanders book de Visibili Monarchia, and whom they
call Iacelich, says Paulus Venetus Brochardus, and others, but mistake it (or
else they of the East pronounce it amiss) for Catholich, Brocard. Descript.
Tert. sanct. Leunclau. Pand. Histor Turc.. 3.
as is observed by Leunclauius) has his seat in the City of Muzal, on the
river Tygris in Mesopotamia, or in the Patriarchall Monastery of S. Ermes fast
by Muzal. Th. a Ies. l. 7. page 3. c. 4. In which City, though subject to
Mahumetans, it is Aubret. M^rae. Notitiae. Episcopor. Orb. page 35. Mas. in
Ortel. in Thesaur. in Seleucia. Plin. l. 5. c. 25. Strab. l. 26. longa^ite Med.
recorded, that the Nestorians retain yet, 15. temples, being esteemed about
40000 souls. Th. a Ies. l. 7. par. 1. c. 4. and the Iacobits. 3. which City
of Musal, I either take with Masius and Ortelius, to be the same, that
anciently was called Selutia (and in Pliny Seleutia Parthorum) both because
Seleutia was, as Strabo says, the Metropolis of Assyria, even as Guili^l.
Tyrius de Bell. sac^o. l 21 c. 8.
Musal is recorded to be: And also, because I find the ecclesiastical
jurisdiction of those parts, committed by the fathers of Council. Nicen. Arab.
l. 3. c 33 and 34.
the Nicene council, to the bishop of Seleucia, assigning him with all, the
name of Catholic, and the next place of Session in councels after the Bishop
of Jerusalem, which name and authority in those parts, the Bishop of Mozal now
has. Or if Seleucia, were some other city, Muzal, the patriarchall seat of
the Nestorians, is either a remainder of the ancient Niniue, as Vitriacus, and
Tyrius (who therefore in his history calls the Inhabitants of that City,
Ninevites) have recorded: Or at least, built near the Ruins of it: Namely,
over against it, on the other side of the river Tigris, as by Benjamin, who
diligently viewed the place, is observed, for Niniue (which he notes to be
dissolved into scattered villages, and castles) stood on the East bancke of
Tigris, on Assyria side: whereas Muzal is seated on the West bank on
Mesopotamia side, being yet both joined together, by a Bridge made over Tigris.
now distroyed, Vitriac. histor Oriental. c. 3^ Tir. de Bell. sacro. l. 21. c. 8.
as for certain reasons I am induced rather to think, yet at least, the
Patriarcall seat was from Seleucia translated to Muzal, for the opinion of
Scaliger, Scalig. ad Ch^on Eusebij An. M.D. CCXIII.
namly, that Seleucia was the same, that is now called Bagded, Benjamin. in
Itinerar. in Medio.
or new Babylon, my observations in Geographie and history, will not suffer
me to approve. First because Seleucia is remembered by Strabo to be 300
furlongs (37 miles and one or two) Pliny says, Strabo. l. 16. Plin. l. 6. c.
26.
a great deal more, distant from Babylon, whereas Bagdet is built close by the
ruins of it. Secondly, because I find the positio^ of Seleucia in Ptolomie to
be two third parts of a degree, Ptolom. Geog. l* 6. c. 18 and 20. Dion.
Histor. l. 10. Plin. l. 6. c. 26.
more North then that of Babylon whereas Bagdet is more South. Thirdly, because
in Dion, and others, Seleucia is named for a City of Mesopotamia, which Bagded
is not, but in the province of Babylon, as being beneath the confluence of
Tigris and Euphrates.

The Bishop of Muzal then, is Patriarch of the Nestorians. But yet at this
present, if the Boter. Relat. par 3. l. 2. c. de Nestoriani. Thom. a Ies. de
con^ers. gen^ l. 7 (...) c ^ and
relations of these times be true, there is a distraction of that sect: which
began about 60 years ago, in the time of Pope Julius the third: the
Nestorians in the North part of Mesopotamia (about the City of Caramit)
submitting themselves to another Patriarch of the Popes erecting (that
reuolting from the Bishop of Muzal, taking also on him, the title of the
Patriarch of Muzal, which the Pope bestowed on him) having first rendered and
professed obedience to the Sea of Rome, in which obedience it is said, that
those Nestorians about Caramit do still continue.

Now touching the specialties of these Nestorians religion, in relation to the
Roman: they believe.

First, Vtriac. Hist Orient. c. 78.
that there are two persons in our Savior, as well as two natures, but yet
confess, that Christ from the first instant of his conception, was perfect God
and perfect man. Th. a. Ies. Ibid.

Secondly, Id. loco citat^
that the blessed Virgin ought not to be termed (...) which yet now in some
sort they Bo^er. Relat pa. 3. l. 2. c. de Nestoriani* Thom. a Ies de conu gent.
l. 7. c. 2.
qualify, confessing her to be the Mother of God the Son, but yet refusing
to term her the Mother of God.

Thirdly, Boter. loco proxim. citat.
that Nestorians condemned in the third and fourth general councels, and
Diodorus Tar sensis, and Theodorus Mopsuestensis, condemned for Nestorianisme
in the fifth, were holy men: Rejecting for their sake, the third general
council held at Ephesus, and all other councels after it, and specially
detesting (the mall of Nestorianisme) Cyrill of Alexandria. Th. a. Ies. Ibid.

Vitriac. Histor. Orient. 78.

Villamont. en voyages. l. 2. c. 23.


4. They celebrate the Sacrament of the Eucharist, with leauened bread.

5. They communicate in both kinds.

6. They use not auricular confession.

Villam. loc citat.
7. Nor confirmation.

Et. 7. Sulak. Nestoria^. profess. Tom. 4. Biblioth. Vet Patrum. page 1054.
8. They contract marriage in the second degree of consanguinity. Th. a Ies.
Ibid.

9. Their Priests after the death of their first wives, have the liberty of the
second or third or oftener marriage. Th. a. Ies. Ibib.

Gulielm. de Rubric. Itiner. Tartar. C. 17.
10. They have not the Image of the Crucifix on their crosses.

Of the Indians or Christians of S t. Thomas. CHAP. XX.
THe Christians of India, vulgarly named the Christians of S. Thomas, because
by his preaching they are supposed to have been converted to Christian
Religion: (and his body as is thought, remains among the^, buried in the
city of Maliapar on the coast of Choromandel) inhabit in the nearer part of
India: namely in that great Promontory, whose base lying between the outlets
of the rivers Indus and Ganges, stretches out the sides far toward the South,
(well nigh 1000. miles) till meeting in the point of Comori, they make,
together with the base line forementioned, (betwixt Cambaia, and Bengala) the
figure almost of an equilateral Triangle. In the more southerly part of this
great promontory, I say, nearer to Cape Comori, about the cities of Coulan and
Cranganor on the west side, and about Maliapur and Negapatan on the East side,
do these Christians of Saint Thomas dwell, being esteemed before the Portugals
freque^ted those parts, about Sommar. ^. popoli Orie^^ap Ramus. Vol l. de
V^agg^. p. 332.
15000. or Barbosa eod. vol. page 312.
16000. families, or after another account Boter Rei. p. 3. l. 2. c. della.
noua Christianita d'India.
70000. persons. but on the west coast, the far greater number of them is
found, and especially their habitation is thickest, about Angamale, 15. miles
from the city Cochin northward, where their Archbishop keeps residence.

Now as touching their government: Their Archbishop till 20. years since or
little more, acknowledged obedience to the Patriarch of Mozal, Boter. Relat. p.
3. l. 2. c. dell^ vecchia Christi^n (...) d'India.

Th. a Ies de conu. G^nt. l. 7 pa. l. c. 4.


by the name of the Patriarch of Babylon, as by those Christians of India he is
still termed: and certainly, Pausan. in Attici^ante med.
that the Patriarch of Mozal For Mozal as I said before, is either Seleucia, or
succeeded into the dignity of it. And Seleucia is recorded to have been
inhabited by the citizens of Babylon, whereof it was a Colony: And such a
Colony, as in short time it Th. a Ies. de conu. gent. l. 7. part. 1. c. 4.
exhausted Babylon it self, of all the Inhabitans, passing, by reason of the
more commodious situation, to dwell at Seleucia. So that Seleucia being
inhabited by the Babilonians, and so becoming in stead of Babylon, the
principal city of the Provinces of Babilonia, and Assyria, the city Plin.
loco proxim. citato
obtained the name of Babylon of her inhabitants, (as well as Seleucia of her
founder) as Pliny has recorded: And the Patriarch of it, the title of the
Patriarch of Babylon. And although Apud Ramus vol. 1. de viaggi. p. 313.
Barbosa note, that subordination of the christians of India, to be to the
Patriarch of Armenia, (which no doubt he received from the Indians relation,
among whom he was) yet certain it is, that he means no other, then this
patriarch of Mozal: because those Armenians which he means, are by himself
observed to have for their vulgar language, the Arabique tongue, and to
celebrate their divine service, in the Chaldee, both which agree with the
Christians of Mozal, but neither of both with those of Armenia, whose language
both in the vulgar and sacred use, is known to be no other then the Armenian
tongue. As also, because the Indians are known to have bin Nestorians, to which
heresy the Armenians were most opposite, as being in a manner Iacobites. But
as it seems, that Patriarch is said to have been of Armenia, for the
nearenesse of Mozal to the confines of Armenia.
, Plin. l 6. c. 26
challenges their obedience, as being of his Jurisdiction appears by the
profession of Abil-Isu, a Patriarch of Mozal, of Pope Pius the fourth his
Inuesting (An. 1562) as is to be seen in Sanders book de visicili Monarchia.
Sander visib. Monarch. l. 7. page 642.
But then, the Archbishop of these Indians, reuolting from his former
Patriarch, submitted himself by the Portugalls persuasion, to the Bishop of
Rome, ^etayning notwithstanding, the ancient religion of his cuntry, which was
also permitted by the Pope. In so much, that in a Synod held in Goa, for that
purpose, he would not suffer any alteration to be made of their ancient rites
or religion, Linsel^ot. l. 1 cap. ^5.
as one that lived in those parts at that time has recorded. But that Bishop
being dead, his successor in another Synod, Posseuin. in Apparat. sacro in
D^amperi^^se conciliu^.
held by the Archbishop of Goa, at Diamper, not far from Maliapur, An. 1599.
made profession, together with his suffragans, and Priests, both of the Roman
obedience, and religion, renouncing in such direct sort, the Patriarch of
Mozal, and Nestorianisme, that they delivered up all their books, to the
censure of the Archbishop of Goa, and suffered their Liturgy, in the points
that relished of Nestorianisme to be altered, even in such sort as now it is to
be seen in the last Edition of Bibliotheca veteriem Patrum. Biblioth. vet. Pat
Auctorij Tom. 2. in fine.


But before this alteration of their religion was procured by the Portugals,
those Christians of India were Nestorians, Osorius de Rel. Emmanuel. l. 3.
Boter. Rel. p. 3. l. 2. ca. della vecchia Christianitad India.
as having the dependence that I related, on the Patriarch of the Nestorians,
they could not well be any other. Some specialties of whose religion I find
thus recorded.

1. That they distributed the Sacrament of the Eucharist in both kinds.

2. That they celebrated it with bread seasoned with salt, Odoard. Barbos. ap.
Ramus. Vol. 1. page 313.
( pane salato, says my Historian) and in stead of wine, (because India
affords none) in the juice of Raisons, softened one night in water and so
pressed forth.

Nauigat. Joseph: Indi, inter Relationes Noui orbis. c. 134.
3 That they baptized not their infants till they were 40. days old, except in
danger of death.

4. That they used not extreme unction.

Joseph. Ind. lib. citato. ca. 134.
5. That their Priests were married, but excluded from the second matrimony.
Osor. de Reb. Emanuel. l. 3.

Osor. loco ante citato. Posseu. in Appara. sacro. in Diamperiense consilium.
Thet. cos. l. 10. ca. 15.
6. That they had no images of Saints in their Churches, but only the cross.

7. That detesting (the Mall of Nestorianisme) Cyrill of Alexandria, they
honored Nestorius and Dioscorus as Saints, which yet me thinks were strange,
being of so contrary opinions, Joseph. Ind. vbi supra. c. 133.
as they were, the first, for two persons in Christ, as well as two natures:
the second, for one nature, as well as one Person; Posseu. loco lam citato.
but it may be that Dioscorus is by the relater mistaken for Diodorus, who was
indeed a great Nestorian, and for it condemned in the fifth general Council.

Posseu. loco citato.
8. That they denied the Primacy of the Pope.

Posseu. in Apparat. sacro in Nesto^iani.
9. That their new Testament which in their Churches they formerly read, (and
still do) in the Syriaque tongue, was by the Nestorians in sundry places, which
are now altered by the Romans, corrupted to the advantage of that heresy,
wherein yet, I think the reporter is deceived: because the same corruptions
objected to them, (whereof some are no corruptions at all, but agree rightly
with the original text, and much better then does the vulgar Latin, by
comparing whereof he examines them, and censures them for corruptions) the same
I say, are found in the Syriaque edition that we have, being so far from
being corrupted by the Nestorians, Widmanstad. in praef. Testa^* Syriaci.
that it was brought out of Mesopotamia into Europe (to be printed by Moses
Mardenus, from the Patriarch of the contrary sect, namely, of the Iacobites.
But yet notwithstanding, I am indeed certainly persuaded, that the Syriaque
translation of the new Testament (whosoever was the Author of it) is nothing
near of that Antiquity, The Imperfections of the Syriaque edition, consist
partly in sundry defects: namely 1. of all the Revelation: 2. of the Epistle of
S. Jude: 3. of the second epistle of S. Peter: 4. of the second and third
Epistles of S. John: 5. of the history of the Woman taken in adultery, in the
eight chapter of S. John's Gospel, containing the first eleven verses: and 6. of
the 7. verse of the fifth Chapter of the first Epistle of S. John. Of which,
the two last wants are no less found in sundry ancient Greek copies, as
Erasmus, Beza, Iunius and others have observed: And partly; beside these
defects, in some (very few) faulty translations.
which the Syrians (as Bellarmine and others report of them) pretend it to be,
Bellar. de Verbo Dei. l. 2. c. 4.
namely to have been the work of S. Mark. First, because S. Mark died in the
8. year of Nero, Hieron. de Scriptorib Ecclesi^sticis, in Ma c Erasmus. Beza.
Iunius. in. Annot. ad loc. praedict.
as Hierome with others has certainly recorded, after which time, many parts
of the new Testament, were written: as namely S. John's Gospel, the Acts of the
Apostles, (for all the History from the 24. chapter to the end, relates
occurents after S. Marks death) the Epistles of S. Paul to the Galathians,
Ephesians, Philippians, Collossians, to Philemon, and the second to Timothy.
Secondly, because that Syriaque translation is not to be found once mentioned,
in any of all those ancient and learned writers, that lived in those east
parts, and diligently sought out and observed the several editions and
translations of the holy scripture. And thirdly, because the dialect
discovers it to be of a far later age, then that of the Apostles: which
they will soon find to be so, (to omit some other evidences) that shall
compare the Syriaque words recorded in the new Testament by the Evangelists,
(which all are noted by Hierome and by others) with the Syriaque book: as for
example, Hieron. l. de Nominib. Hebr.
(...), Mat. 6.24. Mamouno. (...), Joan. 19.13. Gephiphto. (...), Mat. 27.33.
Gogoultho. (...), Act. 1.19. Chakal demo, (...), 1. Cor. 16.22. Moraneto. And
to be short, there is not almost any Syriaque word recorded in the new
Testament, which varieth not from that ancient pronouncing that was usual in
the Apostles time, either in consonants, or vowels, or both: which could not
be the alteration of any short course of time.

Of the Iacobites. CHAP. XXI.
THe Iacobites obtained that appellation, as Damascene and Nicephorus have
recorded, Damas. l. de h^eresib. post med. Niceph. Hist. Eccles* (...) l. 18.
c. 52.
of one Iacobus surnamed Zanzalus, of Syria, who living about Anno. 530. was in
his time a mighty inlarger of Eutiches sect, and maintainer of his opinion,
touching the unity of nature in our Savior: And his followers are at this day
in great numbers, known by the name of Iacobites, in Syria, in Cyprus, in
Mesopotamia, in Babylon and in Palestine. For, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, who
keeps his residence still in Jerusalem, (in which city, there yet remain
Chitrae. de stat. Ecclesia^. page 25.
ten, or more Churches of Christians) is also a Iacobite. But, although in all
these forementioned regions, these Iacobites are found, (where they be
esteemed to make about Namely 15. Crus in Turco^rae^. l. 4. p. 297.
160000. families) or rather 50000. as Leonard the Bishop of Sidon, Bote^.
Relat. pa 3 l. 2. c. de G^^kobiti.
the Popes visiter in those parts has recorded. ap. Th. a Ies. l. 7. p. 1. ca.
14. yet chiefly they inhabit in Aleppo of Syria, and in Caramit, and the
mountain Tur of Mesopotamia: But yet their religion under other titles, is
extended much farther, in so much that it is recorded to be spread abroad in
some Breitenbach Peregrin. c. de Iacobit^^. Vitria. hist. Orient* c. 76.
40. kingdoms.

All which Iacobites of the places before specified, have, and long have had, a
Patriarch of their own religion, (for I find the Paul. Diaco^. Hist. Miscell.
l. 18.
Patriarch of the Iacobites spoken of, Zonar. Annal. Tom. 3. in Heraclio.
in the Emperor Heraclius his time) to whom they render obedience. The
Patriarchall Church of which sect, is in the Mirae. in Notitia. episcopor Orb.
page 35. Boter. Relat. pa. 3. l. 2. c de Giacobiti.
Monastery of Saphran, near to the city of Merdin in the North part of
Mesopotamia: But the Patriarch himself, keeps ordinary residence, in the
city of Caramit, the ancient Metropolis of Mesopotamia, and which at this day,
consists for the greatest part of Christians, for that Caramit is the same
city, which the ancient writers called Amida, Caramit, is Kara Amida, that is
(in the Turkish tongue) black Amida, because it was walled with black stone.
Sabellicus, Sabell^c. Supplem. Histor. l. 18.
and others, have left observed, and Amida to have been anciently the
Metropolis of Mesopotamia, I find in the subscriptions of the ancient
councels plainly recorded. Council. Chalced. Action, 1, etc.


But till Eutichianisme so mightily prevailed in those parts, as to work in
them a detestation of the council of Chalcedon, and a departure withal, from
their ancient obedience: They belonged till then I say to the Jurisdiction of
the Patriarch of Antiochia, as being Notitia prouinciar.
provinces of the dioces of the Orient, which we find in the Council.
Constantinop. 1. prim. Con. 2.
second General council, to be the circuit and limitation of that Patriarchs
authority, which is the reason that the Patriarch of the Iacobites, keeping
ever the name of Ignatius, intitleth himself Patriarch of Antiochia: And that
the Mirae. Notit. ep^scop. Orbis p^^. 36.
Patriarch of Jerusalem, who is also as I said a Iacobite, acknowledges him
(as some record) for superior: Having therein (if it be so) but in some sort
returned to the ancient obedience, wherein the Bishops of Jerusalem stood to
the Patriarchs of Antioch^a, even till the time of the council of Chalcedon:
for then began Jerusalem, to be erected into a Patriachship: And (as we read
in the Co(...) A^^^^on. 7.
actions of that Council) with the consent and allowance of the Patriarch of
Antiochia, the three provinces of Palestina, which till then (An. 451.)
belonged to Antiochia, were withdrawn from it, and assigned to the Bishop of
Jerusalem for his Patriarchall Jurisdiction.

Now as touching the Characters of their Religion.

1. They acknowledge but one nature, 1.2.3* 4. Jacob a Vitriaco, Histor.
Oriental. c. 76. Villamont. l. 2. c. 22.
and but one will and one operation, ex catechism. Iacobitar. ap. Th. a Ies. l.
7. pa. 1. ca. 15. in Christ (as there is but one person) and in token of that,
they make the sign of the Cross, with one finger only, which the other
Christians of the East do with two.

2. They sign their Children before baptism, many in the face, 2. Bucebing.
Hist. Eccles. part. 2. pa. 33^. Sali (...) I^ner. To^ 8. c. 1.
some in the arm, with the sign of the Cross, imprinted with a burning Iron.

3. They use Circumcision Saligniac. Itin. Tom. 8. c. 1. even of both sexes.
Vitriac. vt ibi.

4. They confess their sins to God only, nor to the priest, Th^a Ie^^ pa.
1. c 14.4. Bucebing. loco citato. Al^ hons^. Castro. l. 4. conu^ He^es. Tit
Confeslie Baungar. Itiner. 2. c. 9.
and as others record, but very seldom, so that many communicate without
auricular confession. Leonam Sidon. ap. Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa. 1. c. 14.

5. They admit not of purgatory, nor of prayers for the dead. Th. a Ies. l. 7.
pa. 1. c. 23.

6. They consecrate the Eucharist in unleavened bread Salign. Itin. Hieros.
Tom. 8. c. 1. They minister the Sacrament of the Eucharist in both kinds.

7. The priests are married.

8. They believe all the souls of just men to remain in the earth till the
day of Judgment, expecting Christ's second coming, ex Catechism. Ia^obit.

9. They affirm the Angels to consist of two substances, fire and light. ex
Catechism. Iacobit.

10. They honor Dioscorus and Iacobus Syrus as Saints, but yet condemn
Eutyches, as an Heretic. Patriarch. Iacobit. ap. Th. a Ies. l. 7 pa. 1. c. 14.

These are the Properties (that I find registered) of the Iacobites religion,
namely of them, that are properly so called, and still retain the ancient
opinions of Iacobus Syrus. But it seems, that their principal error, and
which occasioned their first schism and separation from the Church, Namely the
heresy of Eutiches, touching one nature in Christ, is for the most part, long
since abolished, for as Vitriacus has long ago recorded, Vitriac. Histor
Orient. c. 76.
they denied to him (then the Popes legate in those parts, and demanding the
question) that they believed one only nature in Christ: And being further
asked, why then making the cross, they signed themselves only with one
finger, their answer was, that they did it in acknowledgement of one divine
Nature, as also they did it in three several places, in acknowledgement of
three persons in that one nature. And beside of late time, Leonard another
legate of Pope Gregory's the 13 in those parts, has recorded of the Patriarchs
profession made to himself, that although they held indeed but one personated
nature to be in Christ, resulting of the union of two natures not personated,
yet they acknowledged those two natures to be united in his person, without
any mixtion or confusion, and that they themselves differed not in
understanding, but only in terms from the Latin Church. Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa.
1. c. 14. And although (as it is storied by some writers of these times) some
there be among them that still retain that error, yet certainly, that it is
no general and received opinion among them, is most manifest, for we have
extant the confessions of the Tom. 4. Biblioth. Vete^. Patrum. page 1050.
Iacobites of Mesopotamia, and of those of Apud. Baron. in fine Tomi. 6. Annal.
Egypt, and Zag. Zaho. de Religion. and Morib. Aethiop. apud Damian a Goer.
of Aethiopia, and of Confess. Armenior. Number. 26.27.28.29, etc.
Armenia, that is to say, all sorts of Iacobites, out of which it is evident,
that that error of Eutiches, is clearly renounced, as articularly
acknowledging, that the humane nature of Christ was taken of the Virgin, and of
the same substance with ours, and remained, after the adunation with the deity
(without any mutation of properties) distinct from the divine nature: Vid.
Council. Chalcedon Action. 1 and Theodoret. de haeres. l. 4 in Eutiche.
All which the heresy of Eutyches denied.

Of the Copthi or Christians of Egypt. CHAP. XXII.
THe Sect of Christians named Cophti, are no other, then the Christians of
Egypt: And, it is the name of their Nation, rather, then of their Religion,
(in respect whereof, they are merely Iacobites) for as Masius has observed,
Mas. in Syror. Peculio.
the Egyptians in some ancient Monuments are termed Aegoph^i, whom vulgarly
we name Cophti, or Copti, and so they also name themselves, as may be seen,
in the Confessions of these Egyptians recorded in Baronius. Baron. in Le^at.
Eccles. Alexand. ad sed Apostolic. ^^om 6 Annal. in sine. O^ted in The^a^^o in
Aegyp^^s Sealig. ad Eu. seb^^ Chronic. ad An. M DC CXXXIV. D^us de Trib. secc.
Iudaeor. l. 2. c. 14. tit. de Philacterijs. Damascend. de haeresib. post med.
And certainly, that the Egyptians themselves, name their Country Chibth,
Ortelius after Theuet has recorded: As also it is observed by Scaliger, that
in the Talmud it is called (...). And, by Drusius, out of R. David, and R.
Shelomo, that Egypt is by them named (...), but not without some traiection of
letters (...) for (...) R. David in praef. l. Radic. R. Shelom. in Exodus 13.

But touching their Religion (to omit curiosities about the name) they differ
not, as I said from the Iacobites. Insomuch that, (as Damascen has observed)
the same sectaries, that first were termed Aegyptij, because among the
Egyptians, that heresy of one only nature in Christ, found the mightiest
patronage, were after of Iacobus Syrus above mentioned, named in Syria
Iacobites. And till this day Seuerus, Dioscorus and Iacobus, the principal
parents and patrons of the sect, are by the Egyptians honored in the
memorials of their Liturgies. Th. a Ies-l. 7. pa. 1. cap. 5.

^ ^oter. Rel. p. 3. l. 3. c de ^hristiani del ^^gitio.
1. Using Circumcision: Yet I am not very certain whether for religion, or,
(which I observed it before to have been) as an ancient custom of that
nation, which custom yet is reported Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa. 1. c. 6, Boter. p.
3. l. 3. c. de Christ. de Egitto, to be now abrogated among them, by the
persuasion of the Bishops of Romes Legates in a Synod held at Caire about 30
years ago, An. 1583.

2. The confer the inferior sacred orders (under priesthood) eue^ to infants
presently after baptism, altogether, their parents promising for them and
performing in their steads (till they be 16 years old or thereabout) what they
promise in their behalfes namely chastity, and fasting every Wednesday and
Friday and in the 4. lents of the year. Th. a Ies. l. 7. p. 1. c. 5. They
repute not baptism of any efficacy, except ministered by the Priest and in the
Church in what necessity soever. Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa. 1. c. 5.

3. Neither baptize their children before the 40 day, though they should die
without baptism. Th. a Ies. Ibid.

4. Min^string the Sacrament of the Eucharist in both kinds. 2 Theue^ in Cosm.
de Leuant. c. 48.


5. They minister the sacrament of the Eucharist in leauened bread. Th. a Ies.
Ibid.

7. Give the sacrament of the Eucharist to Infants presently after their
baptism. Id. Ibid.

8. To sick persons they neither minister extreme unction nor the Eucharist.
Id Ibid.

9. Athough they acknowledge the holy Ghost to proceed from the Father and the
Son, yet in relating of the Nicene Creed, they leave out those words (and from
the Son) as the Grecians do. Id. Ibid.

10. They admit not to Purgatory nor of prayer for the dead. Th. a Ies. l. 7.
pa. 1.23.

11. They contract marriages even in the second degree of consanguinity without
any dispensation Tecla. Abissin. ap. Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa. 1. c. 13.

12. They observe not the Lords days nor other feasts, except in the Cities.
Tecla. Abissin. Ibid.

13. In celebrating of the Eucharist, they eleuate not the Sacrament. Tecla.
Abissin. Ibid.

14. Reject all the general counsels after that of Ephesus, expressly
condemning the counsel of Chalcedon. Id. Ibid.

14. Read the Gospel of Nicodemus in their Liturgies. Prateol. de Heresib. in
Cophti.

15. Repute the Roman Church heretical, and avoid the communion and
conversation of the Latins no less of Jews. And although Baron. in fin. Tom.
6. Annal. have registered an Embassage from Marcus the Patriarch of Alexandria
to Pope Clement the 8. wherein he is said to have submitted and reconciled
himself and the Provinces of Egypt to the Pope, yet the matter being after
examined was found to be but a trick of imposture, as Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa. 1.
c. 6. has recorded.

16. Maintaining the opinion of one nature in Christ: Thom. a Jesus de Conu.
gent. l. 7. par. 1. c. 5.
yet in such sort, that although in the general position touching one nature
in our Savior, they follow Eutyches, yet in the special declaration, at this
day they differ very much from him. For they acknowledge him to be truly, and
perfectly both God and man: 3. Thom. a. Ies. loc. citato. Botor. loc. cit.
And, that the Divine and humane natures, are become in him one Nature, not by
any confusion or commixtion of them, as Eutyches taught: but only by
coadunation. Wherein, although they catholiquely confess, that there is no
mutation of properties in either nature, being united in Christ, from what the
divine and human natures severally obtain in several Persons: Yet, being not
well able (as it seems) to distinguish between the nature and the Person,
they dare not say there be in Christ two Natures, for fear they should slip
into Nestorius heresy of two Persons. Which heresy of one only Nature in our
Savior, beginning with Eutyches, although after dispersing it self into many
branches, has ever since the time of the Counsel of Chalcedon, by which
Eutychianisme was condemned and for it, the Patriarch of Alexandria Council.
Chalced. Action. 3.
Dioscorus deposed, been nourished and maintained, as by other Christians of
the East, so specially by the Egyptians. Insomuch, that not only sundry
Patriarchs of Alexandria, and Antiochia, (but specially of Alexandria) together
with many other Bishops of the East parts, their Suffragans, and adherents, are
recorded to have maintained and advanced, Euagr. l 3. c. 5.6.22.30.33. etc.
Leont. de Sect. Action. 5. Niceph. l. 16. c. 2.4. and 5. and l. 18. c. 45. and
sequent.
that heresy of Eutyches but we find moreover, many Synodes of those parts,
registered or remembered in Euagrius, Leontius, Nicephorus, and the book called
Synod 97.101.103, 108, 109 etc.
(...), brought to light by Pappus etc. wherein (in the behalf of that heresy)
the decrees of the Council of Chalcedon were condemned. In which counsel,
although we read of the greatest Confluence of Bishops, that ever met about
the Establishment of any point in Christian religion (and yet beside the 630
Bishops present in that Council, there are extant in the Ad sin Council.
Chalcedon. Tom. 2. Council. Binij,
Book of Councels, the suffrages of about 30 provincial Synodes, that by
their Epistles to the Emperor Leo, confirmed it, together with all the Bishops
of the West, by whom it was likewise received) yet notwithstanding all this,
that heresy so prevailed in the East parts, and specially in Egypt, whereof we
now entreat, that from that time to this it was never cleared of it. But as
there was never heresy that so grievously wounded the Church of God, as that
of Eutyches, (except perhaps Arrianisme) so was no part of the Church so
deeply and deadly wounded by it, as that of Egypt. So that, even at this day,
although the wound be in some sort healed, yet the wemme or scarre still
remains. For it is not many years, since by certain lesuits, Agents for the
Bishop of Rome, some conferences were had with the Patriarch of Alexandria and
his Synod, Boter. Relat. pa. 3. l. 3. c. de Christiani de Egitto.
wherein, although they confessed (if true relation be made of that conference)
that Christ is true God and true Man: yet did they purposely refrain from
mentioning two natures in Christ, lest they should by little and little slip
into the heresy of two persons.

Now as touching their Ecclesiastical government they are subject to the
Patriarch of Alexandria Chitrae. de ^at. Ecclesiar. page 21.
, whose Patriarchall seat is at this present translated, (and so long has
been) to the City of Caire, in Legatio Alex^ndrin ap. Ba^on. Tom. ^. in fine.
either of which Cities, ( Caire and Alexandria) there remain at this day, but
three Christian temples a piece. Whereas Burchardus records of his time
(about 320 years ago) that in one of them ( Caire) there were above 40. Burch,
descr. ter. sanct. par. 2. c. 3. But yet, to the Jurisdiction of this Patriarch
belong, not only the native Christians of Egypt, who are but very few,
considering the exceeding populousness of that Nation, (for they are esteemed
as I said before, not to pass 50000) which in Burchardus his time, are by him
recorded to have been above 300000. Id. pa. 2. c. 3. together with the small
Remainder of Christians, that are found about the Bay of Arabia, and in Mount
Sinai Eastward, or in Afrique as far as the greater Syrtis Westward* but the
Christians likewise of Aethiopia, acknowledge obedience to him. (...). cap. 1^5
For although Aluarez in his story of Aethiopia have related (as he does also
some other matters touching the ancienter condition of the Church, too grossly
and boldly) that the Christians of Nubia, till their defection from
Christianity, were of the Popes dependence and Jurisdiction, and received their
Bishops by his consecration, (and say nothing of the Patriarch of Alexandria)
yet certainly, that they were not so, is manifest, for besides that
Saligniacus (himself the Popes protonotary, and whose travail had taught him
some knowledge of the East parts, directly denies the Nubians professing of
obedience to the Bishop of Rome, observing, that they were governed by a
Prelate of their own, whom they termed the Priest of the law. Itiner. Tom. 8.
c. 2. Beside that direct testimony of his I say, there be other Evidences.
First, because there cannot be produced any Instance, out of any
Ecclesiastical history, either ancient or modern (as I am certainly
persuaded) to that effect. Secondly, because the fathers of the Nicene
counsel, as we find in Nicen. Council. l. 3. c. 36.
Gelasius Cizicenus, are known to have assigned Aethiopia, whereof Nubia is a
part, to the Patriarch of Alexandria his Jurisdiction. Thirdly, because the
Patriarchship of Alexandria, lies directly between Nubia and Rome, as being
immediately at the back of Egypt. Fourthly, because the Nubians were in
religion Iacobites, as a Roman Cardinal Vitriacus Brocardus, and others have
recorded, Vitriac. histor. ^rient. c. 76. Brocard. de^^ript. Terre. sanct.
and as their baptising with fire remembered by Burchardus and Saligniacus did
manifestly import Burch. descr. terr. sanct. pa. 2. c. 3. 7. Saligniac. Itin.
Tom, 8. c. 2. of which sect the Patriarch of Alexandria is known to be: which,
had the Pope the assignement or confirmation of their prelates, it is utterly
unlike they should have been. Fifthly, because in time of their necessity,
being left destitute of Bishops and Ministers, if they had pertained to the
Bishop of Rome his Jurisdiction, they would rather have had recourse to him,
for repair of the decayed and ruinous state of their Church who both
plentifully could, and no doubt readily would have relieved them, rather, then
suffered them to depart as they have done, from the Christian faith: To him I
say, they would rather have resorted for supply, then to the K. of Habassia
Aluarez. lo^o prox. citato.
(as they did) being of another patriarchall Jurisdiction. Certain therefore
it seems, that Nubia while it was Christian, belonged not to Rome but to
Alexandria: By whom, if the Nubians in their distresses were not relieved, no
man can wonder, that knows the great want and misery of the Church of Egypt.

Of the Habassines. CHAP. XXIII.
NOW touching the Habassines. or midland Aethiopians, whether they have
obtained that name, by reason of their habitations (in houses) which the
Egyptians called Auases, Strab. l. 2. et l.
as Strabo has observed, (for the ancient books have (...) not (...)) in
difference from them, which dwelling nearer the Bay of Arabia, were called
Trogloditae ((...)) because they dwelled in caves, Plin. l. 5. c. 8. Solin.
Polyhistor. c. 34.
not in houses, as Pliny and others have recorded: whether I say, for that
reason they have obtained the name of Abassins, or no, let more curious men
inquire. But, as touching their Religion, they are in manner mere Iacobites:
And their King (whom by error we call Prester John) is sundry times in
histories termed the Prince of Iacobites. And their leaving out of their
memorials (in Liturg. Aethiop. tom. 6. Biblioth. ve^. Patrum. page 59. et 65.
their Liturgy) the Council of Chalcedon, by which the heresy maintained after
by Iacobus Syrus was condemned whereas the Councels of Nice, of Constantinople,
and of Ephesus are remembered, does import so much. Zag. Zabo. de. Relig. et
Morib. Aethiop. ^ ap. Damian. a Goes.
And in very deed considering the dependence, that the Church of Habassia,
has of the Patriarch of Alexandria, it is almost impossible but they should be
so; for as Zaga Zabo an Habassine Bishop has left recorded, although they have
a Patriarch of their own, whom they call in their own language Abuna, (our
Father) and he chosen by the Habassine monks of S. Antonies order, remaining in
Jerusalem, yet are they limited to choose one of the Jurisdiction of
Alexandria, and a You may observe, which I in my reading have done, that all
the Patriarchs and other Bishops of the East, are monks of the Orders either
of S. Basil, or S. Anthony, for the Patriarchs of Constantinople, of Antiochia
and of Armenia, are monks of S. Basils order: the Patriarchs of Alexandria, of
Aethiopia, of the Iacobites, and of the Maronites, are of S. Anthonies, And the
Patriarch of the Nestorians either of both.
monk of S. Antonie he must be. And beside that, the confirmation, and
consecration of him, belongs to the Patriarch of Alexandria, and by him he
is sent with Ecclesiastical charge into Habassia. And (to be short) their
prayer, in their (...)* Aethiop. Tom. 6. Biblioth. Vet. (...)* p. 62.
present Liturgy, for the Patriarch of Alexandria, tearming him the Prince of
their Archbishops, and remembering him before their own Patriarch, evidently
declares their dependence and subjection to that Sea. Which supreme
Ecclesiastical power touching Aethiopia, to have belonged very anciently to
the Patriarch of Alexandria, may appear by the Arabique book of the Nicene
Council, translated by Pisanus, (...) l 3. can. 3^
where that authority is found assigned, to the Patriach of Alexandria,
touching that Abuna of Aethiopia, (by the name of Catholic) and withal, to
that Catholic or chief Bishop of Aethiopia, the seventh place in the
Sessions of general Councels, namely, next after the Bishop of Seleucia,
(whose seat was next the Patriarchs of Jerusalem) by the decree of the same
Nicene Fathers was allotted.

But if you desire a register of some special points of their Religion, 1. They
circumcise their children the 8. day, Z^g Zab. de R^lig. et morib. Aethiop. ap.
D^^^^^num.
after the manner of the Jews: Even females also as well as Males, wherein
they differ from the Jews. 2. They reverence the Sabbath (Saturday) keeping it
solemn equally with the Lords day. 3. They eat not of those beasts, which in
the old Law are censured for unclean. 4. They consecrate the Sacrament of the
Eucharist in unleavened bread: Aluarez Histor. Aethiop. cap 11.
Contrary to the custom of all the East, Aluarez. ibi.
the Armenians excepted. Nevertheless Tecla an Habassine monk and Priest,
says that they celebrate ordinarily in leauened bread, but on the day of the
Institution of the Lords supper (the thursday before Easter) they do it in
bread unleavened over all Habassia. an. Th. a Ies. l. 7. p. 1. c. 13. 5. And
communicate in both kinds, which they receive standing. And all of them as well
of the Laity as Clergy at leastwise every week, the Priest ministering the
bread, Tecla Abissin. ap. Th. ^ Ies. loc. alleg.
and the Deacon the wine with a spoone. Tecla. Abissin. Joel. Zag. Zab. de rel.
But yet only in the Temple, It being not lawful for any (not the K. or
Patriarch) elsewhere to communicate. After the receiving whereof it is not
lawful for them to spit that day till the setting of the Sun. Zag. Zab.
ibid. 7. And that even to their young infants, presently after they are
baptized: Tec^a Abissin. ap. Tho. ^ Jesus. de con^. verse. gen^l. pa. 1. ^. 13.
which in their males is 40. days after their birth, and in females 80.
(except in peril of death, for then they are presently baptized. Tecla.
Abissin. ibid.) til which time be complete, their women also enter not into the
Temple. Zag. Zab. ibid. 8. They profess but one nature and one will in Christ,
yet without any mixtion or confusion of the Divine and humane substances.
Tecla. ap. Th. a Jesuit. l. 7. pa. 1. c. 13. 9. Believe the reasonable souls
of men to be traduced from parents by seminall propagation. Zag. Zab. de
Relig. Aethiop. in fine. Th. a Ies. l. 7. p. 1. c. 8. 10. Believe the souls of
their infants departing before Baptism to be saved, because they are sprung from
faithful parents, and namely the virtue of the Eucharist, received by the
mother after conception to sanctify the child in her womb. Zag. Zab. Ibid.
Th. a Ies. l. 7. p. 1, c, 8. Aluar. hist. Aethiop. ca. 22. 11. They presently
upon commission of sin resort to the confessor, and at every confession,
(though it were every day) receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist. Zaga Zabo.
Ibidem. 12. They have only painted, not massy images in their Churches. Tecla.
vbi supra. 13. They accept only the three first general Councels, rejecting
that of Chalcedon, for determining two natures to be in Christ, and for
condemning Dioscorus the Patriarch of Alexandria Tecla. Abis. ib. 14. Eleuate
not the Sacrament in celebrating of the Eucharist, but keep it covered:
Aluarez. (...) loco.
neither reserve it after the communion. 15. To excommunicate obstinate sinners
is peculiar to their Patriarch, which yet is not usual among them except in
case of Murder Zab. Zab. ibid. 16* Their Priests and other inferior
Ecclesiastical ministers (as also monks) live by their labor, having no tithes
for their maintenance, nor being suffered to crave alms. Zag. Zab. loc.
citato. 17. But the conferring of Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical
benefices (except the Patriarchship) belongs only to the King Zag. Zab.
ibid* 18. Use neither confirmation, Zaga. Zabo. loco. citato. Aluarez. lib.
citato. c. 5.
nor extreme unction. 19 Admit the first marriage in their Bishops and
Priests, but not the second, except their Patriarch dispense. 20. Eat flesh
every Friday (as on other days) betwixt Easter and Whitsunday: Aluar. c. 13
as on every Saturday also through the whole year, Zaga Zabo, vbi supra.
except in Lent. 21. Baptize themselves every year on the day of the Epiphany,
in Lakes or Ponds.


Concerning which first and last points, namely, of their circumcision, and
annual baptismes, I have somewhat to observe: Namely, first, touching their
circumcision, that they observe it, not so much perhaps, of religion, as of an
ancient custom of their nation. For although their circumcising on the eight
day, seems to imply that they received it from the Jews, yet, their
circumcising of both sexes, as certainly argues, that they did not so. And,
if the Habassines be of the race of the ancient Aethiopians, the doubt may be
the less: because Herodotus and others have recorded it, Herodot. l 2. par. a
M^d^o.
for an ancient ceremony of that nation. Or, if they be not of the Ethiopian
race, Stephanus Py^ant. (...), in dictione (...).
but of the progeny of the Arabians, as by Vranius in Stephanus Byzantius, it
should appear, recording them for a nation of the Arabians, near to the Which
seems to be true, both because in the Liturg. Aethiop. in ^om. 6 8
bl^^thecae Ve^. pat. p. 59.
Ethiopian Liturgy, they term their own kingdom the kingdom of Sheba, and
also, because the KK. of Habassia, Zag. Zabo de Morib. Aeth^op. apud Dami^^.
deduce lineally their descent, from the Q. of Sheba that came to see Solomon:
which Sheba, is to the skillful, certainly known to be in Arabia: and either
the same, that we call Arabia foelix, or some part of it And certainly it is
observed by learned men, that Arabia foelix; in the eastern tongue, is named
(...), as Arabia deserta (...), and Arabia Petraea, (...), or (...).
Sabaeans: even in this case also, the occasion and original of circumcising
among the Abassines will be discerned well enough: namely, because it is
specially storied, to have been a very ancient ceremony among the Arabians:
among whom it might have beginning, by reason of the descent of many of the
Arabians, from Ismael, and from the other sons of Abraham, by Keturah,
planted in Arabia, of which Sheba is by name recorded for one. Genes. 25.3.
But yet, if the Abassines observe circumcision, not, as an ancient national
custom, Shindler. i^ D^ctionar. Pen^. ^^lot. in (...)
but in any sort for religion sake, then it may be excused in such manner, as
^.
one of their own Bishops has professed, namely, that it is done only in
remembrance, and love, and imitation of our Savior, because he was
circumcised, and not for any other opinion of holiness at all.

And secondly, touching their annual baptisings, in the feast of the Epiphanie,
which they (with many ancients of the Church) suppose to be the day of our
Saviors baptism, it is declared by the De Religion Aethiop. ^ong. ant. med.
Ethiopian bishop above mentioned, to be practiced among them, not as any
sacrament, or any conceate of sanctification to be obtained by it, but only as
a memorial of Christ's baptism, because as on that day he was baptized in
Jordan. Even as the Posseuin. de Reb. Moscou. page 6.
Moscouites also do the like on the same day, in rivers, and for the same
reason, which appears the more evidently to be so, because this yearly
baptising is no ancient ceremony of the Habassins, but a fashion of late
taken up among them, as Aluarez, that lived long in those parts, has related,
as being, namely the institution of Aluarez histor. Aethiop. cap. 95.
his grandfather, that then reigned in Habassia, being about 100 years ago.

Of the Armenians. CHAP. XXIIII.
THe Armenians, for traffic to which they are exceedingly addicted, are to
be found in multitudes, in most cities of great trade specially in those of
the Turkish Empire, obtaining more favor and privilege among the Turks and
other Mahumetans, Vid. Postel. lib. de re. Linguis Tit. de Lingua Armenica.
by a patent granted that nation under Mahumets own hand, then any other sect
of Christians. Insomuch that no nation seems more given to Merchandise, nor
is for that cause more dispersed abroad, then the Armenians, except the Jews.
But yet the native regions of the Armenians, and where they are still found in
the greatest multitude, and their religion is most supported, are Armenia the
greater (named since the Turks first possession of it Turcomania) beyond
Euphrates, and Armenia the less on this side Euphrates, and Cilicia, now
termed Carmania.

Now the Armenians touching their Ecclesiastical government, were aunciently
of the Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople, as being Notitia
pro^^nciar. Orient.
provinces of the dioces called Pontica, which together with the provinces of
the dioces Asiana, and of Thrace (three of the thirteen dioceses, into which
the whole Empire was divided) were by the council of Chalcedon, Council.
Chalcedo^. Can. 28.
assigned, or else confirmed, to the Patriarch of Constantinople, for his
jurisdiction. But at this day, and very long since, even before Photius his
time (as is evident by his circular Epistle) the Armenians are departed, Photij
episte ency^lica. ap^d Baron. Tom. 10. Annal. Anno. 863.
both from the government of that Patriarch, and from the commuon of the
Grecians (whom at this present, they have in more detestation then any other
sect of Christians) and that principally, for the very same occasion, for which
the Iacobites of Syria withdrew their obedience from the Patriarch of
Antiochia, namely the heresy of one only nature in Christ. And ever since
that departure, they acknowledge obedience, without any further or higher
dependence, to two Patriarchs of their own: whom they term Catholics.
Namely one of the greater Armenia, the families under whose jurisdiction
exceed the number of 150000 beside very many Monasteries. Leonard. Sidon
episc. ap. Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa. 1 c. 19, who at this present Mirae Noti^.
Episcop. Orb. page 36.

Boter. Relation. pa. 3. l. 2 c. de Dioscoriani.


keeps residence, in the monastery of Ecmeazin, by the city, etc. Leonard.
Si don. episc. ap. Tho. a Ies. loc. citato. by the city of Eruan in Persia,
being translated thither by occasion of the late wars betwixt the Persians
and the Turks: but his ancient seat was Sebastia, the Metropolis of Armenia
the greater: And the other Patriarch of Armenia the less, the families of
whose jurisdiction are esteemed about 20000. Leonard. Sidon. vbi. supra. who
aunciently kept at Council. Chalced Action. 1 in subscr^ption b.
Melitene, the Metropolis of that province, but now is resident in the city of
Sis, not far from Tarsus in Cilicia, the middle limit on Interstitium, of
those two Patriarchs Jurisdictions, being the river Euphrates.

Such at this present is the state of the Armenian Church, and the jurisdiction
of their Patriarchs. But it should seem, by that I find recorded, by Otho
Phrisingensis, Otho Phrising l. ^. c. 32.
upon the report of the Legates of Armenia, sent from the Catholic, to the
Bishop of Rome in his time, that the jurisdiction of the Catholic of Armenia,
was then far larger, as namely, that he had above a thousand Bishops under
his obedience: Except Otho perhaps mistook, as I verily believe he did,
obedience for communion: for as touching the communion, which the Armenians
maintained with other Iacobites, it extended indeed very far: But the
jurisdiction of Armenia, for ought I can find in any record of antiquity,
contained only four provinces, namely, the two Armeniaes before mentioned,
the greater and less, and the two provinces of Cilicia. In which small
circuit, that such a multitude of Bishop^ should be found, is utterly
incredible, especially because we find registers extant, both of the Bishops
of the two Armeniaes, in the Tom. 1. Iuris Oriental l. 2.
Novel of Leo-Sophus the Emperor, touching the precedence of Metropolitans:
and likewise of the bishops of Cilicia, in De Bell. sacro l. 14 c. 12.
Guilielmus Tyrius: and all of them put together, exceed not the number of
thirty. And although I find that Nouel. 31. cap. 1.
Justinian divided the two Armeniaes into four provinces (which yet to have
been after reduced 'againe into two, the Novel of Leo even now mentioned
assures us) yet were not for that cause, the number of Bishops increased any
whit the more.

Now, touching the properties of their religion.

1. They are charged with the opinion of one nature in Christ: Niceph. hist.
Ecclesiastic l. 18. c. 53.
yet not as Eutyches imagined it one, namely, by a permixtion and confusion of
the divine and humane natures, but yet by such a conjunction and coalition of
them, that they both together, make but one compounded nature in our Savior,
as the body and soul, but one compound nature in man. But nevertheless, it
seems by the confession of the Armenians, which we have extant touching the
Trinity, sent by the mandate of the Catholic of Armenia, Confess. Armenior.
Art. 26 27.28.29.30, etc.
to the Patriarch of Constantinople, not 50 years ago, that at this present,
they have utterly renounced that fantasy. Alfons. a Castro. l. 5. cont.
Haeres. Titul. de D^o. Haeresi. 13. Boem. de Morib. gent. l. 2. c. 10.


2. They believe the Holy Ghost proceeds only from the father.

3. They celebrate the sacrament of the Eucharist with unleavened bread (as the
Romans do.)

4. They deny the true body of Christ to be really in the sacrament of the
Eucharist under the Species of bread and wine. Nicepho^. loc. sup. citato.
Luturgia. Armen apud Cassandrum de Liturgijs
Guido sum. de heresib. They mingle not water with wine in the Eucharist: An
ancient opinion and property of theirs, for I find it Council. Constantinop.
3. Can. 32.
recorded of them (and condemned) in the sixth general council. Niceph. loc.
citat. Liturg. Armenior. vbi supra.
But they retain it notwithstanding still.

5. They receive infants presently after baptism to the communion of the
Eucharist, affirming that baptism cannot be conferred without the Eucharist.
Boem. de Morib gent. l 2. c. 10.
Guide* sum. de heresib.

6. They deny the virtue of conferring grace, to belong to the sacraments.
Guido loc. alleg. They reject purgatory, and pray not for the dead. Guido. in
Sum. de haeresib.

Alfons. a Castr. l. 12. co^t. Haeres. Tit. de Purg^torio. haeresi 1.

Boe^. loc. citato


Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa. 1. c 17.

7. They believe that the souls of holy men obtain not blessedness till the
universal judgment. Th. a Ies. l 7. pa. 1. c. 17. They admit married priests,
and as Burchardus has recorded. deser. terr. sanct. pa. 2. c. 2.. 9. admit
none to be secular priests, Bellon. Obs^ru. l. 3. c. 12. Postel. in Lingua
Tzeruiana.
except they be married. They rebaptise those that come to their communion from
the Latin Church. Guide. Sum. de heresib. but exclude their second marriage.

Boem. loc. citat.
8. They abstain from eating unclean beasts.

Nichol. Peregr. Orient. l. 4. c. 19.

Boter. Rel. pa. 3. l. 2. c. Dioscoriani.


9. They eat flesh on fridaies between Easter and Ascension day.

10. They fast lent most strictly, without eggs milkemeats, flesh, oil, wine,
etc. only with fruits herbs, Vitriac. histor. Orient. c. 7.9.
roots, and pulse.

11. They celebrate not Christmasse day when other Christians do ( Dec^mb.
25.) but fast on it: And in stead of it, Vitriac. loc. citato.
celebrate the feast of our Saviors baptism, namely, on the day of the
Epiphanie. Boter. loco. ^itato.


12. They solemnise the feast of the Annunciation, the sixth day of April. The
purification the 14 of February, etc.

Of the Maronites. CHAP. XXV.
THe Maronites who were so named, not of an heretic called Maron, as many
falsely write, Prateol. de sect. Heretic. in verb. Maronitae. But of a holy man
of that name, for we find mentioned in the book of Councels the Monastery of
St. Maron. Council. Constantinop. sub. Men. act. 5. the Monks only whereof at
first were termed Maronites: they are found in small numbers, in Aleppo,
Damascus, Tripolie of Syria, and in Cyprus: But their maine habitation, is in
the Mountain Libanus. Which although it contain in circuit about Posseuin.
Appar. Sacr. in Maronitae.
700 miles and is possessed only in a manner by the Maronites, who for that
privilege, namely to keep themselves free from the mixture of Mahumetans, pay
the Turk Namely, for every one above 12 years old 17 Sultanines by the year
(the Sultanine weighs a dram of gold, about 7s 6d of our money) and for
every space of ground 16. spannes square, one Sultanine yearly, as is
recorded by Posseuine.
large tribute: yet of all sects of Christians, they are the least, as being
esteemed not to pass in all Boter. Relat. pa. 3. l 2. c. de Maroniti.
Posseuin. loco citato.
12000 houses, (all in scattered villages) beside a few Monasteries, by reason
of the indisposition of Libanus in most places, for frequent habitation. For
beside the craggednesse or steepness of that Mountain, which makes many
parts of it in a manner inaccessible, the higher Ridges of it, (which by
Brocardus his relation are so eminent, Brocard. in D^s^r. Terr. s^nctae Tacit
historiar l. vltimo
that they may be discerned 40 leagues off) are also covered in a manner
continually with snow, which it retains, as Tacitus with Vit^iac. hist.
O^i^nt. c. 84. Postell. desc^ipt. Syr^ae. page 33.
others, has left recorded, notwithstanding the heat of that climate, even in
the nearest approach of the Sun. And is scarcely, as has been observed by
Postell, in one Summer of thirty to be found clear of it: for which very
cause and no other, that Mountain seems to have gotten the name of Lebanon.
For (...) in the ancient language of those parts (the Phaenician or Hebrew
tongue) signifies White, (...) Patal pom. (...) in Dicti (...). Album.
and (...) Whiteness: Even as, for the like whiteness of snow, Gerundensis
has remembered Canus (the highest part of the Pyrene hills) to have obtained
that name. And as Festus supposes the Alps, for the same cause, to have
gained theirs, that in the Sabine dialect being termed (says he) Alpum, which
the Romans in theirs named Album. For so touching the original of the name
Libanus, Isidor. Origin l 14. c 8.
had I much rather think, then be led by the fantasy of Isidorus and some
Stuk. in Co^. ad Arrian. ^e ^plum M^r. ^rythrae. p. 47. Adricom. Theatr terr.
sanct. in. Nephtalim. Number. 63.
others, namely, that Libanus, should purchase that name of frankincense which
the Grecians call (...) and the Jews (...). For, if it be not true, which yet
Theophrastus and Pliny write, that frankincense is gotten only in Arabia
foelix, (according with that of Virgil, Solis est Thurea virga Sabaeis) by
reason of which property of place, to burn incense is termed in Tertullian,
aliquid Arabiae incendere: if that I say be not true, for indeed, I find in
Dioscorides, record of frankincense gotten in India, and in Pedro Cieza of the
like in some part of America, yet is there no mention or remembrance in any
history of nature, or other, as I take it, that frankincense was ever gotten in
the Hill of Libanus.

The Patriarch of the Maronites (to come nearer to our pupose) who is noted to
be a Monk of St. Antonie, and to have under his Jurisdiction Theophrast. hist
Plantat. l. 9. c. 5. Plin. l. 12. c. 14 Virg. Georg. l. 2. Tertull. de coron.
(...) circa Med. Dioscorid de Medic. mate^ l. 1. c. 7.
8. or 9. Bishops, keeps residence for the most part in Libanus, in a
monastery of St. Anthony, and now and then in Tripolie: And is Posseuin.
Appar. sacr. (...) Maronitae.
one of them, that challenge the title of the Patriarch of Antiochia, keeping
ever the name of Peter as the Patriarch of the Iacobites, the other challenger
of the same dignity, does of Ignatius. But touching Religion, the Patriarch of
the Maronites professes obedience at this present, to the Bishop of Rome, yet
but lately, in Clement the 8. his time: And both he, and all the Boter. Re^*
pa. 3. l. 2. c. de Maroniti. Poss^uin. loc. citato.
Maronites, are become of the Roman religion (being the only Nation of the
East, except the Indians, lately brought also to the Roman Communion, that
acknowledges that obedience) and have Posseu. loc. citat. Boter. loc. citato.
Mirae: notitiae Episcop. Orbis page 34. Tho. a Ies. de Conu Gent. l. 3. c. 3.
a Seminary in Rome of Gregory the XIII his foundation, for the trayning up of
the youth of their nation in that religion. But before that alteration, these
were the characters of their Religion, 1. That the Holy Ghost proceeds only
from the Father. Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa. 2. c. 6. 2. That the souls of men were
all created together from the beginning. Id. loc. citato. 3. Not to baptize
male children together. Interrog. Patriarch. Maronit. ap. Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa.
2. c. 5. 3. That heretics returning to the Church are to be rebaptised. Th. a
Ies. l. 7. pa. 1. c. 6. 5. That the child is made unclean by the touch of the
mother till she be purified, which after a male child is 40 days, and 80
after a female, for which reason they baptize not their Infants before those
terms. Th. a Ies. loc. citat. 6. That they celebrated the sacrament of the
Eucharist in both kinds. Posseuin. Appar. sac. in Maronitae. Patriarch.
Maronit. Interrog. 3. ap. Tho. a Ies. l. 7. pa. 2. c. 5. 7. And in leauened
bread. Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa. c. 6. 8. Distributing to all the Communicants each
one a piece of the same bread (which they consecrate in great masses) together
with these words of the Gospel, he blessed and brake and gave to his
disciples, saying take eat etc. Mat. 26.26. Id. Patriarch. Interrog. 3. ap.
Th. a Ies. loc. citat. 9. To distribute the Sacrament of the Eucharist to
children before the use of reason, and first presently after baptism. Th. a
Ies. l. 7. p. 2. c. 5.. 9. and cap. 6. 10. Not to reserve the Sacrament of the
Eucharih. Patriarc. Maron. vbi supra. 11. Nor to carry it to any sick person
in danger of death. Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa. 2. c, 5. 12. To omit confirmation by
the Bishop. Patr. Maron, Int. 2. vbi supr. 13. To exclude the fourth
matrimony, in every person as utterly unlawful. Id. Ibid. Interrog. 5. 14.
That marriage is not inferior to single life. Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa. 2, c. 6.
15. Utterly to dissolve matrimony in case of adultery and marry another Patr.
Maronit. Inter. 5. vbi supra. 16. That the father may dissolve the matrimony
of his son of daughter if he mislike it. Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa. 2. c. 6. 17.
Not to ordain young men Priests or deacons except they were married.
Patriarch. Maronites Inter. 6. vbi supra. Posseuin. in Appar. sacr. in
Maronitae. But yet to restrain their second marriage. Th. a Ies. Ibid. 18. To
create children 5 or 6 years old subdeacons. Patriarch. Maronit. Inter. 5 vbi
supra. 19. That no man enters the kingdom of heaven before the general
Judgment. Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa. 2. c. 6. 20. Not to fast on the Lords day nor
on the Sabbath. Th. a Ies. loc. citat. 21. In the days of fasting not to
celebrate mass till the Evening. Patr. Maron. ap. Th. a Ies. l. 7. pa. 2. c.
5. 22. Not to eat of any thing strangled or of blood. Id. l. 7. pa. 2. c. 6.
23. To exclude women during their monthly issues both from the Eucharist, and
from the Church. Vitriac histor. O^ient. c. 78. Tyrius de Bello sacro. l. 22.
ca. 8.
Patriar. Maronit. Interr. 8. vbi supra. 34. Their maine Error was, the
heresy of the Monothelites, touching one only will and action in Christ.
Which error although they renounced about 400 years ago, and reconciled
themselves then, Saligniac. Itinor. Tom. 8. c. ^.
to the Roman Church, at what time those parts of Palestine and Syria, were in
the Christians hands, as Vitriac. and Tit locis ^am (...).
Iacobus a Vitriaco, and Guilielmus Tyrius, the one Bishop of Acon, and the
other of Tire, have recorded: yet shortly after, when those parts were by
Saladin, the King of Egypt and Syria, recovered from the Christians, those
Maronites relapsed, and forsook again the Roman communion, till the late
times of Pope Gregory the XIII. and Clement the VIII. with whom they again
renewed it.


And, this heresy of the Monothelites, springing out of that bitter root of
the Iacobites, touching one only nature in Christ, was the last of that long
and wicked train of heresies, which upon the contempt of the council of
Chalcedon, exceedingly wasted and ruined the East Church, for after that the
detestation of Nestorius heresy, touching two Persons in our Savior,
(condemned in the third general Council) had so immoderately distempered the
fantasies of Eutiches in Constantinople, and of the Patriarch of Alexandria,
Dioscorus with other their adherents, that they thought not themselves safe
enough from the heresy of two persons, till they were fallen into the other
and opposite extremity of one nature in Christ, the Divine and humane natures
in Christ (in their conceits) by permixtion and confusion of substances, and of
properties growing into one, upon their adunation: and withal, that the humane
nature of Christ, was not consubstantiall to ours, but of another kind, and
condition, which fantasies the fourth general council condemned. After I say
this heresy of Eutiches and Dioscorus, had grown to that head in Egypt and
Syria, that like a violent and furious stream, whose course would not be
stayed, it bare down before it all oppositions, and among the rest, that great
and reverend council of Chalcedon, that had condemned it, and was contemned by
it, it gave occasion for an infinite train of heresies to follow at the
breach, which it had made.

For first (to omit infinite extrauagant branches, Vid. Nicepl or Histor.
Eccles. l. 18 c 45. and ^^quent.

Leont. de Sectis. Action, 5. etc.


that sprang from it, and infinitely deformed the Church, renting with many
schisms the unity, and with as many heresies wounding the faith of it) It drew
after it, the heresy of the passiblenesse of the deity, because the deity of
Christ, was become (in their conceits) the same nature with the humanity, that
was passible. Secondly, (the absurdity of that being discerned) it occasioned
an other extremely opposite, namely of the Impassibility of the humanity of our
Savior, (but on the same ground) because namely, it was become one nature with
the deity, which now we know to be vnpassible. Thirdly, when the fondness of
both were discovered, It bred a new devise, touching one nature in our Savior
(as the wit of Heretics will better serve them, to devise a thousand shifts
to delude the truth, then their pride will suffer them once to yield and
acknowledge it) It bred I say a new devise, namely, to be one, not by
permixtion or confusion of substances, as Eutyches first taught, but only by
composition, the deity and humanity, by coalition becoming one nature in
Christ, as the body and soul grow into one nature in Man. And fourthly, when
this fantasy began also somewhat to abate, and relent in many: yet still a
fraction as it were or rather a consequent of it was retained (for indeed it
implies by necessary consequence the unity of nature) namely that there was
but one will, and one action of both natures in the person of our Savior. And
God knows what a train and succession of heresies might have followed these,
if that Lord, whom they had infinitely wronged by their wanton and wandering
conceats of him, had not, to stop the course and stream of their wickedness
and folly, brought on them, the Sarracens of Arabia, for even while the
Church, specially that of the Eastern parts, was in great perplexity and
travail, with the heresy of the Monethelites (which I last mentioned) the
Mahumetans of Arabia, like a mighty inundation brake forth, and overwhelmed
all, and them first, that first, and most had wronged the Son of God, by
fostering the forenamed heresies, and the infinite brood that sprung of them, I
mean Egypt and Syria, and to this day, both they, and the neighboring
nations that had been infected by them, remain in thraldom. But yet as in
the diseases and distempers of our bodies, contraries are usually healed by
contraries, so seems it to have fallen out in the distempers of these men's
religions, for as worldly prosperity and wantonness of wit (ordinary
companions) wherewith these nations in those times abounded, bred in them their
ordinary children, namely, prosperity of the world, pride, and wantonness of
wit, error, which couple in matter of faith and religion, is wont to produce
no better issue then heresy. So on the other side having now at length, their
hearts humbled, and their wits taimed by that poverty and affliction, wherein
the tyranny and oppression of the Arabians and Turks has long holden them,
it seems the Lord has taken pi^tie on them (as it is his property not to
despise humble and broken spirits, and to remember mercy in the midst of
judgment) and reduced them, or the most of them, to the right acknowledgement
of his son again. For certainly, that they and other Christians of the
East, have (at least in these later times) disclaimed and abandoned, those
heretical fantasies touching our Savior, wherein by their misleaders they
had been aunciently plunged (and which many Christians of these West parts,
still charge them with all) does manifestly appear, First of Biblioth. Vot.
Patr. Tom. 4 page 1049 and. 1^3.
the Iacobites, and Secondly of the Confess. Armen. de Trinitate Art.
26.27.28.29.30.
Nestorians, by their several confessions, translated out of the Syriaque
tongue by Masius, and extant in Bibliotheca Veterum patrum. Thirdly of the
Baron Tom 6. Annal. in fine.
Armenians, by their own confession also, translated by Pretorius. Fourthly,
of the De Relig and Morib. Aethiop. ap. Domian. a Goes.
Cophti, by the profession of their faith extant in Baronius. Fifthly of the
Posseuin. Appar. sac. in Nestoriani.
Habassines, by the relation of Zaga Zubo a Bishop of their own. Sixthly, of
the Posseu^n. lib. citat. in Maronitae.
Indians, by their reconcilement to the Church of Rome mentioned by Posseuine.
And Seventhly, of the Boter Rel. pa. 3. l. 2. c. Maroniti.
Maronites, by their like reconcilement, recorded by him and by others.

Of the several Languages wherein the Liturgies of Christians in several
parts of the World are celebrated. CHAP. XXVI.
ANd thus have I related, the several sects of Christians, that are abroad in
the world, with the places of their habitations, and the special characters
(that are recorded) of their religions. One point notwithstanding of their
difference, have I left purposely as yet untouched, both for the amplenesse of
the matter, and because I conceive you would have it declared severally.
Namely, touching the different languages, in which all these several sorts of
Christians, celebrate their Liturgies or divine service.

But first, to speak a word or two, of the public service of the Jews, and
of the Mahumetans, in their Synagogues, and Meskeds (seeing I entreated before
of those religions.) The Jews where they obtain liberty for their
Synagogues, celebrate theirs, in the ancient Hebrew tongue, Michou. l. 2. de
Sarmatia. c. 1. Crus. Turcog. l. 7. pa. 487. etc
as Michouius, with many others, has related, and as in manifest, by their
own editions of their public prayers, printed both at Venice, and in
Polonia, in that language.

But the Mahumetans have theirs in the Arabique tongue (the native language of
their prophet) as Georgeuitz, George^. De R^u^. (...) l 2. c. 1.

Richer. l. 2. de Mo^b and Instit. Turca^. C^^. Turcog l. 7 pa^. 487.


Richerius, and sundry others have recorded: So that not only in Arabia, and
Egypt, and Barbary, and Palestine, and Syria, and Mesopotamia (in which parts
the Arabique tongue is become the vulgar language) the Alchoran is read, and
their public devotions exercised, in Arabique: but also in Greece, and
Natolia, and other parts of the Turkish dominion, where the Greek, and
Turkish, and Slau^nique tongues are vulgar, as also in Persia, in Tartar^e, in
India, where they have other native, and peculiar languages, the Mahumetans
read the Alchoran Georgeuit^ de Riti^i. Turcar. l. 2. c. de Sacerdotibus.
(which they suppose were profaned if it were translated into vulgar tongues)
and perform their public devotions, in that language.

But Christians in celebrating of their divine Liturgies, differ touching the
language very much, Durand Rationat. ^iti^nor. l. 4.. 10.
Indeed I find it recorded in Durandus (but upon what warrant and authority
I cannot find) that til the time of Hadrian the Emperor (that is about 120
years after Christ) their Liturgies were all celebrated in the Hebrew tongue:
And that then, the Oriental Church began, first to celebrate them in Greek.
Indeed me thinks it is possible, that the Christians of the Gentiles might
in honor of the Apostles, retain the Apostles Liturgies, in the very tongue
wherein by the Apostles themselves, they had been first ordained, for it is
not to be doubted, but Vide Baronium. Tom. 1. Annal. Ad An chapter 4^.. 14.
many years passing (about ten) after our Saviors assention, before the
Apostles left Syria, and sundred themselves to preach the Gospel abroad in the
world among the gentile and foreign nations. It is not to be doubted I say,
but the Apostles, while they remained in Jury, ordained liturgies in the
Jewish tongue, for the use of those Jews, whom they had converted to
Christianity: which liturgies by the Christian disciples of the Jewish nation,
dispersed in many provinces of the gentiles, might together with Christian
religion, be carried abroad, and gladly entertained among the gentiles. This is
possible I say, but if it be also true (as I have not observed any thing in
antiquity that may certainly impeach the truth of it) yet that which is spoken
by Durandus of those Liturgies in the Hebrew tongue, must be understood (I
doubt not) of the Hebrew then vulgar and usual, that is to say the Syriaque
tongue: Not only, because in that language, we find them in these times,
celebrated by the Christians of the East: but also because I can conceive no
reason, either, why the Liturgies should be ordained by the Apostles in that
language which the Jews themselves (the learned excepted) understood not, if
it were done for the Jews: or else why the Gentiles, should translate them (or
use them so translated) out of the Hebrew into the Syriaque, seeing both were
to them alike, vulgarly unknown, and not understood. But howsoever it was in
that most ancient and primitive state of the Church, in and immediately
following the Apostles times, the difference certainly among Christians in
these present times, in that behalf is very great, some of them celebrating
their liturgies in their own native and vulgar, and some other in learned and
foreign tongues.

The Christians then (to speak first of the first sort) that celebrate them in
their own vulgar languages, are the Armenians, Habassines, Moscouttes with
Russians, Sclauonians, and Protestants.

For that the Armenians (howsoever otherwise in their ceremonies belonging to
divine service, they approach nearer as Bellon. Obseru. l. 3. ca 12. Vitriac.
Hilt. Or. c. 79.

Brocard. descript. terrae sanct.

Michou. de Sa^mat l. 2. c. 1 Breitenbach. Peregrin. c. de Armen.

Postel. de Ling^a Armenica. Bellon loco. ^i. tato. Nichol. Peregrin. Orient.
l. 4. c. 19. Villamont de Voyages. l. 2. c. 23.

Boter. Relat. pa. 3 l. 2. and Alij plures.


Bellonius and others report, to the rites of the Latin Church, then any other
sect of Christians) that they I say exercise their common divine service in the
Armenian tongue, Iacobus a Vitriaco, Brocardus, Michouius, Breitenbachtus, and
many others, some of their own experience, and others of certain relation,
have left recorded. And namely, as touching the translation of the holy
scripture into the Armenian tongue, which at this Present, is in solemn use
among them, the Armenians themselves as Sixth. Senens. l. 4 Biblioth. sanct in
^oannes Constantinopolitanus
Sixtus Senensis has recorded, attribute it, to no other author then to
Chrysostom: who also, out of the history of George Patriarch of Alexandria,
written of the life of Chrysostom, remembers it specially to have been
Chrysostomes work after his banishment from Constantinople, while he lived in
those parts of Armenia, to which as we read Sozomen. H^st. l. 8 c. 22.
Theodoret. l. 5. de Curand. Graecor. Affect. b. post. med.

Roccha. in Bibliotheca Vaticana. p. ^57.


Sozomen, he was by the Emperors decree confined, and there died. And
certainly, that the holy scriptures, were translated into the Armenian tongue,
before Theodorets time, who lived soon after Chrysostom, for he flourished
about the year 440, Theodoret himself (although he name not the Author of the
Translation) has left recorded: as I find also acknowledged by Angelus
Roccha, in his discourse of the Vatican Library, not only that Chrysostom is
said to have translated of the Scriptures into the Armenian tongue, but, that
he is also celebrated among the Monuments of the same Vatican, as the Id page
155. and M^^. Pansa de Biblioth. Vaticana, pa. 4 discors. 21. Aluarez. histor.
Aethiop. ca. 159.
Inuentor of the Armenian characters still in use.

And touching the Habassines, Aluarez a Portuguez that lived many years among
them has not only left recorded, that they read Scriptures in the Tigian
tongue, which is a dialect of the Habassin, (for Tigia he notes to be that
part of Habassia, which first received Christianity) into which language
Sabellicus Supplem. Histor. l. 8. records both the old and new testament to
have been translated out of the Chaldee. But Idem c. 11.
he, with many Postell. de Ling. Indica. Theu. Cos. l. 2. ca. 14.

Villamont. l. 2. ca. 24.

Biblioth. Vet. Pat. Tom. 6. page 55.

Michou. l. de Sarmat. 2 c 1. Sigum. l. de Reb. Moscou page 46.

Posseum. l. de Rebus Mose- page 4.

Theu. Co^. l. 19. ca. 12.


others, that they celebarte their Liturgy in their own language, though the
Chaldee be esteemed among them, as their learnd tongue, which also the Liturgy
it self (you may find it in the new Edition of Bibliotheca veterum Patrum) if
you mark the long answers of the People to the Priest, in their Prayers does
evidently import.

And no less certain is it also, of the Muscouites and Russians, that their
Liturgies are likewise ministered in their vulgar tongue (being a kind of
Slauonian) though sometimes intermingling Greek hymns as Guaguinus has
observed: Descript. Moscou. ca. 2. as is testified by Mathias Michou, by
Sigismund, by Posseuine, by Theuet, and sundry others.

And as evident is it of the Illyrians, whom we commonly call Slauonians Bapt.
Palate. de Ra^. scribend.

Roccha in Biblioth Vatican page 162


that they also exercise their public divine service in their own language:
which to have been allowed them by the Pope, at the suit of Cyrill their
Bishop, or as Auentin. l 4. Annal.
others say, of Methodius (but the difference is of no importance, for they
both lived in the same time, and were companions in preaching the Gospel to
barbarous nations) Aeneas Siluius and others have recorded. Aen. Silu in Hist.
Bohemica. c. 13. Auentin. loc. citat.

Rocch. loc. citato.


And, in particular of the Liburnians, (the more Westerly part of the
Slauouians) it is affirmed by Auentine: and of the Dalmatians, (the more
Easterly part of them) by Angelus Roccha, that they celebrate their liturgies
in their own language: Which, Roccha says the Dalmatians are most certainly
persuaded to have been of Hieromes devising. But yet in determining the
Antiquity of that custom, Roccha that refers it to Pope Paul the second is
greatly mistaken: Because we find it to have been much more anciently
granted them by Pope John the eighth that they might both read the Scriptures,
and celebrate mass, in their own tongue, as appears by the same Epist. 247.
Joan. Papae. 8. in Tom. 3. Council. par. 2. ap. Bin. page 990.

Roccha. lib. citato p. 168.


Popes Epistle extant, to Sfentopulcher. And even Roccha himself (forgetting
himself) confesses it in another place, to have been obtained of the Pope by
Cyrill, who was about 600 years ancienter then Paul the second. And certainly
(now I am speaking of Popes) of no other Judgment touching divine service in
vulgar tongues, seems Pope Innocent the third to have been (and perhaps it
was also the decree of the Council of Lateran) charging that in cities,
Council Lateran. c 9. and in Decret. l. 1. Tit. 31. ca. 14
where there as concourse of diverse nations, that differed in languages, and
ceremonies, divine service and the sacraments, should be celebrated according
to that difference.

But to speak a little in particular of the vulgar translation of the holy
Scripture used among the Dalmatians: It is not only affirmed by sundry writers
to be the work of Hierome, but Hierome himself in his Epistle to Sophronius,
seems to Hosius de Sacro Vernacul. legendo. Postell* de lingua Illyrica.
Eraim. De clarat 37. ad censur. theolog. Paris.
some learned men to intimate so much, But yet there is another translation
also of the Scriptures into the Slanonique tongue, later then that of Hieromes
as Sixth Senens. l 4 Biblioth. Sanct. in Hieronymus Stridonensis Scalig Diatrib.
de Ling^^s Europae. and alij plu^es.
Scaliger has observed, being written in the Seruian character (as the former
is in the Dalmatian) used in Rascia, Bosina, Bulgaria, Moldauia, Russia,
Moscouia, and other nations of the Slauonian language in the Eastern parts,
that celebrate their Liturgies after the Greek Ceremony, and profess
obedience to the Patriarch of Constantinople: Of which later translation Sixth.
Senens. loco citato. Hieron. in Epist ad Sophron. Tom. 3 Scalig. loc. iam
citato. Auentin. l. 4. Annal.

Pansa de Biblioth. Vatican par. 4. Discor. 23.


Methodius the companion of Cyrill in preaching of the Gospel to Gentile
Nations is certainly reported to have been the Author. Which Cyrill (if you
question what he was) was neither he of Alexandria, nor he of Jerusalem, as
Mutius Pansa has vainly imagined, but another, far later then either of
them, whom in the Slauonique tongue they call Chiurill, one that lived about the
year 860. namely, he that in the time of the Emperor Michael the third, and
Pope Nicholas the first together with Methodius, first brought the Mengrelians,
Circassians and Gazarans, and after that Martyrolog. Romans Martij. 9 Michou. de
Sarmatia. l. 1. c 7.
many of the Slauonians) to the faith of Christ, as Michouius has recorded.
Neither need we any other testimony, to refell the fantasy of Pansa touching
Cyrill of Jerusalem, then Pansa himself, as namely acacknowledging, that
Cyrill was the Inuenter of another sort of Illyrian characters then by Hierome
had been formerly devised (for of the Dalmatian characters, that are in use in
Dalmatia, Liburnia, Istria, Morauia, Postell de Ling. Dalmatica.

Roccha. Biblioth. Vatican. page* ^61. and Al^j plu^^mi.


Silesia, Bohemia, Polonia etc. Hierome is acknowledged to be the Author) It
could not be therefore Cyrill of Jerusalem, as being ancienter then Hierome,
and by him registered in his catalogue of Writers. And indeed (to make an end)
what reason or occasion might the Bishop of Jerusalem have to devise characters
for the Illyrians?

But to entreat a little more (on this occasion) of translations of the holy
Scripture, made by the ancient fathers into vulgar languages: Besides those
already mentioned, of Hierome and Chrysostom, by the one, into the Dalmatian,
and by the other into the Armenian tongue; It is also recorded by Socrates, and
Nicephorus, and sundry Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 27.

Niceph Hist. Eccles. l 11. c. 48.

Tripart. Histor. l. 8. c. 13. Paul. Diacon. Hist. Miscell. l. 12.

Sozomen. l. 2. c. 37.

Socrat l. 2. c. 32.

Vulcan. in praef. de Littur. and Lingua Getarum. Inscrip. Vet. page 146.


others of Vulphilas, bishop of the Goths one more ancient then either of the
former, for he flourished in the time of Constantius the Emperor, and was
successor to Theophilus, whose subscription we find in the first Nicene
Council (being the same man, to whom the Invention of the Gothique Alphabet is
likewise attributed by the same Authors) that he translated the holy Scripture
into the Gothique tongue. A copy of which translation is remembered by
Bonauentura Vulcanius, to be yet remaining in some Library of Germany: And it
may be, that the Gothique translation of the four Evangelists, mentioned by
Gruter in the book of ancient Inscriptions, to be of a thousand years
antiquity and remaining in the Abbey of Werdin, might be part of that
translation of Vulphilas: But yet that besides these translations into vulgar
languages, hitherto mentioned of Vulphilas, Chrysostom, and Hierome, the holy
scriptures were likewise aunciently translated into the languages of many
nations, is affirmed by Hierome: And in particular (although the translators
names be not recorded) into the Egyptian, Hieron. in praesat. in 4. Euangel.
Persian, Indian, Scythian, and Sarmatian tongues, nay into all the languages
of other nations, as Theodoret, Theodoret. l. 5. de Carand. Graecor Affe ^^ibus
post med.
that flourished in the time of the Ephesine and Chalcedon councels (almost
1200 years ago) has left testified: As also in the following times (yet
ancient) we read of the like translations of the Scriptures, to have been
made by V^sco. in Chron. Hisp^n ad An. 717.
John Archbishop of Civil into the Arabique, about An. 717, which then was the
vulgar speech of that part of Spain and some part of it, into the Saxon or
English by Beda, about the same time: Into the Slauonique by Io^n. Treuis. l.
5. c. 24.
Methodius about An. 860. etc. Into the Italian by Auentin. l. 4. Annal.
Iacobus de Voragine about An. 1290. etc.

Sixth. Senens. B^bl Sa^ct l. 4. in Iacobus Archiepiscopus Genuensis.
And now to entreat of those sects of Christians that celebrate their liturgies
in learned and foreign tongues: which the vulgar people do not understand: I
find only three languages, wherein they are all performed. Vitriac. Histor.
Orient. ^a. 77.

Barbos. in Vol. ^. de Viaggi. apud Ra^u^^. page 3^3. V^liam l 2. c. 1^ Boter
Rel. par 3. l. 2. c d. Nestoriani.


Namely, the Greek, the Latin, and the Chaldee, or Syriaque tongues.

And First, touching the Chaldee or Syriaque, in it are celebrated the
liturgies of the Nestorians, as Vitriacus, Ba^bosa, V^llamont, Boter^, and
others have recorded: for Genebrard that pronounces peremptorily the Hebrew
tongue, and not the Syriaque to be the usual language wherein all the
oriental nations minister their divine service, bewraies but too much,
Genebrard. Chronog. l. 3. ad. An. Chr. 3^.
both his boldness and his ignorance, as being not able, I am certainly
persuaded, to produce any history, or other lawful testimony, that records
the Liturgies of any Christians in all the East, to be performed in the Hebrew
tongue. But yet it may be observed, that where in sundry writers we find it
mentioned, that the N^storians exercise their divine offices in the Chaldee, we
are not to understand them of the pure and ancient, but of the degenerate or
Jewish Chaldee, which beside the Chaldee and Hebrew whereof it is principally
tempered and compounded, has much mixture also both of Greek and Arabique,
such as the Jews language was after our Savior and his Apostles time, that is
(in a word) the Syriaque, for the Jewish Chaldee (to declare this point a
little better) is of two sorts: One of those that returned not again after the
captivity to Jerusalem, but settled themselves to inhabit about Babylon, whose
language (although somewhat degenerating also from the right Chaldee) is termed
the Babilonian tongue, of which sort, the Jews dialect of Neardea in
Mesopotamia (the compilers of the Babilonian Talmud) was: The other of those
that returned from the captivity, whose language is properly termed the Syrian
or Jerusalem Chaldee, varying somewhat farther from the native Chaldee then the
former, by reason of the mixture of foreign words, Arabique, Greek, Roman,
and others, which in course of time it contracted: In which dialect, the Talmud
and Targum, both named of Jerusalem, and the books of the later Rabbines, are
written. And in this second sort of Chaldee, is the holy scripture by the East
Christians translated, and their Liturgies at this day celebrated.

Oser. de R^b. Emmanuel. l. 3 Posseuin. in Appar. sacr. in Diam^eriense
Concilium. Linschot. l. 1. c. 15.
Secondly of the Indians, that they in like sort perform their Liturgy (not in
the Hebrew, as is confidently affirmed by Genebrard, but) in the Chaldee or
Syriaque, is testified by Osorius, Posseuine, Linschot, etc. and confirmed by
their Liturgy, extant in Bibliotheca Veterum Patrum, which is there remembered
to be translated out of the Syriaque. Bibl. Vet. Patr. in Auctario. Tom. 2. in
fine.


And so do Thirdly the Iacobites: Namely, they of Mesopotamia, of Babylon, of
Palestine, of Syria, and of Cyprus, which are peculiarly known by that
appellation. Vitriac. Histor Orient. c. 76.
Of whom Vitriacus long since observed, that they read the divine scriptures,
in a language unknown to the Lay people: And that language by the new
Testament Vide Widmanstad. in paraefat. Testamenti. Syriaci.
brought from them by Moses Mardenus into Europe, to be printed (for the more
commodious dispersing of it abroad in their Churches) we now certainly know
to be the Syriaque tongue, even as it is also known and Post. de lingua.
Chaldaic. Boter. Rel. pa. 3. l. 2. c. de Gia cobiti.
recorded touching the rest of their divine service, that it is performed in
the same Syriaque language, which they term the Chaldee. And it is thought,
that the Liturgy commonly termed Anaphora Basi^ij, which, we have by Masius
translated out of the Syriaque into Latin (and is found in Bibliotheca Veterum
Patrum) is the Iacobites Liturgy: Biblioth. Vet. Pa^. Tom. 6. page 27.
which language although it be now unknown among them, (their clerks or
learned men excepted) yet that it was vulgarly understood, when that liturgy
was first ordained, the long answers of the people to the priest, in their
prayers which we find in it, may be demonstrations. But touching the old
testament, which they have also (as Arias writes he has heard from their own
relations, Arias. Montan. in Admonit. praefix. Biblijs Reg. de Versione
Syriaca. Postel. i^ Lingua Chaldaica
and Postell, that he has seen) usual in all those East parts in the
Syriaque tongue, it is specially observed by Arias Monatanus, to be translated,
not out of the Hebrew, but out of the Greek of Origens emendation.

And Fourthly, of the Cophti or Christians of Egypt, it is likewise Boter.
Relat. pa. 3. l. 3. c de Christiani dell Egitto.
observed, that they celebrate their liturgies in the same language: (reading
yet the Gospel after it is done in the Chaldee, in the Arabique tongue, which
is now, and long has been the vulgar language of Egypt.) And it may further
appear, beside the testimony of histories, by the Liturgy of Seuerus,
Patriarch of Alexandria, in use among them, translated out of Syriaque into
latin by Guido Fabritius.

And Fifthly, Posscu^n. in Appar. sacro in Maronitae. Postel. de ling.
Chaldaica. Villam. l. 2. c. 24.
the Maronites in their Liturgies, (which Posseuine observes to be the
Liturgies of Peter, of James, and of Sixtus) use the same Syriaque language
(the Arabique being also their vulgar) as beside Posseuine, Postell, also, and
Villamont, and others have recorded.

And so do Sixthly, and lastly (to make an end of this reckoning) the poor
Christians of the Isle of Zocotora (an Island after Barros his dimension of 60
miles in length and 27 in breadth) without the bay of Arabia, Barros. de Asia.
Decad. 2. l. 1. cap. 3.
for although I find it questioned touching the religion, whether they be
Iacobites or Nestorians; Iuan Barros affirming the first (and it may seem so
for their nerenesse to the dominions of Habassia) and Ananias proouing the
latter because they are uncircumcised, Anan. Fab. ic. del. Mondo. Trat. 3. p.
292.
which Iacobites are not, and profess obedience to the Patriarch of Mozal, who
is known to be Patriarch of the Nestorians: yet in this they both agree, that
their divine service (such as it is) is performed in the Chaldee tongue. Boter.
Relat. par. 3. l. 3. de Christiani di Socotena.
And although Botero relate it to be done in the Hebrew, yet he means (out
of doubt) not the ancient and pure Hebrew, but the latter or degenerate
language of the Hebrew, that is to say the Syriaque. As the other also that
affirm the public and solemn devotions either of these Zocotorini, or any
other Christians in all the East, or South parts of the world, to be red in the
Chaldee, require also the like interpretation: Namely to be understood, not of
the right, and Babilonian, but of the Jewish and corrupted Chaldee.

But now to speak of those Christians, that celebrate their Liturgies in the
Greek tongue: I observe them to be these.

1. The Graecians themselves: Namely all they whose vulgar speech the Greek
tongue is, inhabiting in Greece, and a great part of N^tolia, of Macedon, and
of Thrace, together with all the Islands of the Aegaean Sea, and the other
many scattered Islands, about the coasts of Greece. But yet they do it, not
in the present vulgar, but in the pure and ancient Greek tongue, whereof as I
before observed, the common people understand but little: using namely, on
festival days, the ancient Liturgy of Basil, and on common days that of
Chrysostom, as Jeremy a late Patriarch of Constantinople has recorded.
Ierem. Resp. 1. ad Germano^ cap. 13.
And namely, as touching the holy scriptures, using the Septuagints Greek
translation, and specially that of Lucians Emendation. At least it was so with
them in Hieromes time (and I find no mention at all recorded of any
alteration) who observes the Edition of the 70 Interpreters by Lucianus,
Hieron. in praef ad Lib. Paralipom.
to have been received in use from Constantinople as far as Antiochia: As
also that of Origens emendatio^, from Antiochia to Egypt and in Egypt, that
of Hesychius. But (howsoever it may be touching the edition usual among them)
yet certainly, that the Graecians have not the scriptures translated into the
vulgar Greek, the Theodos. Zygomal in epist. ad Crus. l. 7. Turcog^ ^cae. page
431.
Graecians themselves have directly recorded.

2. The Syrians, namely those, that for distinction of religion from the
Iacobites (who likewise inhabit Syria) are termed so, that is to say the
Melchites, for they (having the Arabique for their vulgar language) as they
agree in other points of their religion, and ceremony, and order of divine
service, with the Grecians, so do they as touching their Liturgy, in language
also, as is observed by Vitriac. Histor. Orient. c. 75. Ha^tho. l. de.
Tartaris* c. 14. B^eitenbach. Peregrin. c. de Surianis. Bau^ngart. Peregr. l.
2. c 9. Villamont. l. 2 c. 22. Boter. Rel. pa. 3. l ^. c. d^ Melchi^i.
Vitriacus, Haiths, Breitenbachius, and many others.

3. The Georgians, who having for their vulgar speech, a peculiar language of a
middle temper (which well agrees with the position of their Country) betwixt
Tartarian and Armenian, as Gesner and Postell and R^c^ha in their books of
languages have observed, exercise notwithstanding their liturgies in the Greek
tongue, as Vitriac. lib. citat. c. 80.
Iacobus a Vitriaco, Gesner. ^ithrid. in Lingua Georgian. Postel. de 12. Ling.
Tit. de Ling. Georg. Roccha. de Dialect i^ G^^orgiana, and in Grae3^a Vet.
Baumgart. loc (...). Villamont. l. ^. c. 23.
Gesner, Postel, Roccha, and diverse others have certainly recorded.

4. The Circassians: who yet in such sort celebrate their divine service in the
Greek, that their priests themselves by reason of their gross ignorance,
understand not what they read Inter^an. de^la vita de. 1. Zychi^ca. 1^ Bellon.
Obseruat. l. 1. c. 35.
as Intireano (that lived among them) has remembered.

5. And lastly, in the Greek tongue are celebrated, the Liturgies of all the
monasteries, that are of the Greek religion, wheresoever dispersed within the
Turkish dominions, in Afrique or Asia: As in mount Sinai, the Cities of Petra
and Eltor in Arabia: In Jerusalem, Alexandria, Damascus, and in sundry other
places, as Bellonius with others has left recorded.

And to come at last to the nation, that celebrate their Liturgies in the
Latin tongue: To speak of them, even this little will be enough: Namely, that
all the Christians, that are found of the Roman Communion, in America, and in
Africa, celebrate their liturgies in the Roman tongue. As all likewise in
Europe (except the Slauonians above mentioned.) And in Asia, except the two new
Roman purchases, of the Maroni^es in Syria, and of the Christians of Saint
Thomas in India, who retain still, the old accustomed language, which as I
observed before, is in the Liturgies of both those Nations, the Syriaque tongue.

FINIS.

