THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN BY M. DOCTOR. ALLEN: CONCERNING THE YIELDING
UP, OF THE CITY of Dauentrie, unto his Catholic Majesty, by SIR WILLIAM
STANLEY KNIGHT.

VVherin is shevved both how lavvful, honorable, and necessary that action
was; and also that al others, especially those of the English Nation, that
detayne any towns, or other places, in the low countries, from the King
Catholic, are bound, upon pain of damnation, to do the like.

Before Which is also prefixed a gentleman's letter, that gave occasion, of
this discourse.

Matthew. 22. Reddite ergo quae sunt, Caesaris, Caesari:

Render therefore the things that are Caesar's, to Caesar:

Imprinted at Antuarpe, by Ioachim Trognaesius, Anno 1587.

THE ANSWER OF M. DOCTOR ALLEN TO THE FORMER LETTER.
HONORABLE good Sir, Your letters came with good speed, and in season, having
at this present ready means to return answer, and yet time enough to
vvaighe well the matter of question you move unto me. Into the more particular
consideration vvherof, I vvil enter the rather at your request: though
otherwise by the duty of my priesthood, and profession, I count my self
bound to serve my christian countriemen, in all such things, as may any way
perteine to their salvation. For you must not thinck, that I am so restray ned
to stude^tes matters, though that be my special trade, and charge, that I have
no care of so many vvorthie men of your vocation, whom with heart, prayers,
and pen, I do most willingly serve knovving that state of life to be
necessary for the common wealth, godly, honorable, and especially appointed
by God, for defense of Justice, and Religion. Many souldiars great, Saints
and Martyrs.
Out of which order the Church of Christ celebrateth sun dry, for high
Saints: and whole legions have benne, for their constancy in faith, martyred
at once. Many in the holy Scriptures, for singular devotion toward Christ's
person, and special promptnes to receive the faith, by the Apostles preaching,
by name commended. And remembering in S. Lukes narration, Act. 10.
of the holy Captain Cornelius, and of one of his souldiars, whom the
Evangelist names: milite^ met uentem Dominu^, a soldier fearing God, it
easily brought me to conceive, that sundry of your band, in whose behalf
you propose the doubt, have the fear of God, before their eyes: which is a
peerlesse praise, in such as follow art militare: and that the whole company
is not far from the kingdom of God, that have such regard, of their
conscience, and good name.

To come then to your purpose, though I have already, by my letters to Sir
William, given mine opinion, I vvil yeat for better clearing the cause, set here
down, my mind more largely, and distinctly.

Re^dering up of towns, Wrongfully holden, to be necessaire.
Therefore first I say, that the re^dering up of such towns, and places of the
low countries as be in any English me^nes custody, is not only lavvful,
but necessary to be done, under pain of mortal sin, and damnation. The
cause is, for that every thing wrongfully obtained, and unjustly detayned
from the true ovvneres, whether they be, by fraud, or violence come by,
according to al divine, and humane laws, and by the very rule of nature,
ought to be restored to them, to whom they duly pertayne. Restitution of
things wrongfully detayned, necessary in all VVarres, just or unjust.
Which thing as it is evident in all other negotiation of man's life, vvherin
no man may lavvfully detayne other men's goods: so the old holy fathers, and
all the latter school Doctors agreably to the Scriptures, and the civil and
canon laws, determine restitution to be specially necessary, of al things
wrongfully obtained in vvarres: whether the vvarres be lavvful, or unlawful.
For vvarres being nothing else but an act of vindicatiue justice, must, as much
as is possible, be in all points, void of injury, and injustice.

Against which when any thing is committed, either by the Prince that
causes the war, or the souldiars that are executioners of his vvil, and
sentence, both the one and the other, are bound to make recompense, and
restitution according to the measure and manner, of the injuries done. And this
I say, even in lavvful vvarres, or such as to the common people may be, upon
their Princes credit, so deemed. Where, though they may offend the enemy in
life, goods, liberty, and otherwise as far and in such sort, as the law
of arms permits, and prescribes: yeat what so ever is done against
militare discipline, and justice, is sin, and punishable by Gods laws.

But where the war is wholy, In VVarres plainly unjust, recompense and
restitution is to be made of al damage: and of al things unjustly detayned.
and plainly unlawful, denounced, and vvaged without just cause, yea
evidently against right and reason, and so known to be to men of
understanding, and to the soldiars them selves: in that case the Prince that
published the war does principally, and most damnably offend: then every
one that serves in those vvarres, does sin mortally: and al and every one
bound to satisfaction, and restitution, for what soever anoyance is done, by
the said unlawful arms, to the Prince, and people, to whom the injury is
done. Neither does the Souereignes authority, and commandment excuse the
souldiars, or subjects, who can not in conscience, nor may not, be executors
by their service, of the Princes known iniquity. Ovving ever obedience to
God more then to any man: though where the injustice of the vvarres were not
so assuredly known to the subjects, they might upon their Princes vvarrant,
and commandment serve in the same.

The English vvarres proved to be unjust both by land and by sea.
But now that the vvarres of the low countries, on the English part be most
unjust, not only such as be in conscience Catholic (for other causes which
afterward I vvil rehearse) do most certainly see: but even those also which
are not well instructed in Religion, endued only with good nature, reason, and
civil honesty, must heedes confess. Whereby it vvil be plain, that neither
the one sort of conscience, nor the other of moral justice, can lavvfully
serve in the said vvarres. Lib. Etym. 28. c. 1. Causa 23. Quest. ^.
The war is just, says Cicero in his books de. De Republica: as Isiodorus
cites it, which is denounced for recompense, or revenge of injuries, and
anoyance, or for defense against enemies.

Socij, of any Prince, or commonwealth, that for their defense arms may be
taken.

4. The kings Majesty has done to the Queen,

It is not the pretense of the Queen's counsel, or realms public allowing, or
permitting these things, that can excuse them before God, or man, either in
conscience, or honor. For injustice done by public pretended authority, is
more shameful, then that, which is done by private offenders. S. Augustine
affirming, that whole Kingdoms, when they agree upon open iniquity, are
nothing else, but a great larondge, that is, a brotherhoode of thieves,
co^curring and conspiring in common robbery, Li. 4. Ciuit. Ca. 4.
Quid sunt regna (says he) remota iustitia, nisi magna latrocinia?

I remember, two of the best learned Divines in Louaine, being demanded, of
the lavvfulnes, The judgment of the Divines of Louaine concerning the like
vvarres.
of the Duke of Alinsones late like actions, in those countries, and of the
obligation of that oath, which he caused the people to make, against their Lord
and Master, to him, ansvvered: and put forth their answer in print, that
war to be wholy unlawful, and al oaths, and promises made to him, to be
of them selves unjust and not to bind any man either in honor, or conscience.

And yeat that Prince, might perchance seem to have some better pretense, upon
I can not tell what old interest, that France chalengeth in Flaunders, and
other those Provinces, which once were united, and joined with France: and
of some hope he had, and gave to many, to reduce those countries to liberty,
at least of Catholic conscience again. But this English action, has no
appearance of justice, or aequitie in the world. And therefore to any
gentleman, or soldier, that stands upon his honor (as that state of men, of
al others, have most reason to do) it must needs be a great disgrace, to
serve in such public robberies, either by sea, or land. Which I say to al
noble Capitaines, or souldiars, of what Religion soever they be, who may
easily perceive, by conference of our old English honorable denounced vvarres
with these of our days. None other having benne vvaged by our country, these
thirty years almost, then in the cloak of amity, to surprise the towns,
and countries of their freindes, and confederates: and for the defense, or
encouragement of detestable rebels, against their lavvful anointed Kings.

They help the Scottish rebels.
As soon as the Scotts rebelled, against their Queen, the English joined their
forces, to the utter ruin, and destruction of both her, and her Dominion. They
rebel against their Kings in France: our English helps, and arms were
straight ready, to succor them, The French rebels.
and to seize upon the strong places, of that land, in their own, or the
rebels behalf. They rise in the low countries, and in other parts of the
vvourlde, The Flemish rebels.
against the iustest power that can be: and immediately (as though our country
were ordained, to be the buckler of al rebellion, and injustice, and an enemy
of lavvful Dominion, and Superiority) the Queen thincketh it honorable or
needful, to protect the said rebels, and to assail with the wicked
traitors, and seditious persons, the oldest, faithfullest, and greatest
confoederate, that ever our realm had.

When therefore our English vvarres, that in other ages, were renoumed for
justice, fortitude, and foelicitie, are become to be infamous, and unfortunate
through the vvourlde, as made for the patronage of rebellious, and seditious
persons, and maintenance only of injustice, and iniquity: Who can not of very
moral reason, and honesty perceive, his good name, and honor to be stained,
by cooperation in such infamous actions? and his soul to be in danger of
aeternal perdition, by follovving, and executing, other men's most unlawful,
and barbarous desigmentes, to the disturbance of the quiet, and weal, of al
christian nations. rovvnd about us? or thincketh it not a most glorious
resolution, to revolt to that side, with which al true honor, and justice,
and al conditions of lavvful vvarres do stand? Of such I speak of our
country men, in whom is yeat lieft some remorse of conscience, or respect of
justice, necessary for humane society: though by this euel times, and error
of education, at home they be not well instructed yeat in christian Religion,
and virtue. For of others (as I fear some such be, in the Atheism, Atheistes
of England un capable of admonition.
that our country is fallen into) that have put of al sense of civil justice,
honor, and honesty, together with the fear of God, and his judgments in
the next life, I can say nothing. In this sort some such may be, not only
among private poor souldiars, but of the counselers of our country, that
without respect, of either christian discipline, or old heathen observation
in this case, which was ever most sacred, think Regna esse occupa^tium,
kingdoms to be rightly theirs that can catch them: and al their own, they
can either by Machiuilia^ shifts, or violent arms obtain: that regard not
the old honor, rule, and discipline of Chivalry: that fear not the count
they have to make, for the blood of innocents, for sackages, spoil, rapine,
destructions, depopulatio^s, and subversion of whole kingdoms: that think it
cause of war good enough to hinder their neighbors greatness, and to
disturb other men's quietness, to procure their own peace, and safety. If
either, (I say) our country, once of notable name, in martial justice, or any
of our souldiars, be come to this extremity, to deal with such, either by
humane, or Divine laws, were, To be mad with reason.
Cum ratione insanire. As the Poet said.

And these have only to make their prayer, in the morning daily, as we have
heard, of a certain holy thief, in the bordes: Good Lord send me, to hurt
many this day, and none to hurt me.

But now to come to those, This that follows specially to be noted of
Catholike^,
that in the camp be Catholics, as I perceive by you, Sir, and otherwise,
that very many be in their hearts fully resolved, our forefathers faith to be
only true, and that innumerable, at home in our country, do daily more and
more perceive, that these nevve Sects were but to make broyle, and garboyle
in the vvourlde, that in the universal shuffle of things, poor lost companions
might have their parts, yea and other men's parts too. To such therefore as
be, by Gods special gift, Catholikly bent, it shall be an easier matter, to make
clear this point. For as they be more capable of reason, and more obseruant of
civil justice, and moral virtue: so they have their consciences better
informed, by the rules of Christian Religion, for government of their actions,
in all parts of life. Such may easily perceive not only for the causes
aforesaid, this war, on thenglish side, to be unjust, and that the service
in the same, is sinful, dishonorable, and obnoxious to restitution: but
principally, for that it is vvaged, for defense of Haeresie, and Haeretikes,
and for the euersion of the Catholic faith: that is to say, directly against
God, and his holy Church.

The holy Prophet of God, that reprehe^ded King Iosaphat, for giving succourse
(of amity only, and not of euel meaning in Religion) to the wicked King
Achab, sayng: Impio praebes auxilium, 2. Taralip. 19. Aug. lib. 2. contra
Epist. Parmem.
and ijs qui oderunt Dominum amicitia iungeris, idcirco ira^ Dei merebaris.
Thou geuest aid to the wicked and art co^foederate with such as hate our Lord,
therefore thou deseruedst Gods ire: What would he have said, or what may we
deem of our Princes co^foederacies, only and alvvayes, with Christ his
enemies? as with the Ghevves, Ghevves, Hugonots, and Caluinistes, in
Flaunders, France, and Scotland, with most ample succourses continually
yielded to every of them, for destruction of christian Religion? In which not
only unlawful, but sacrilegious vvarres, al men of conscience must consider,
that al Coronells, Capitaines, and souldiars, that in this case serve the
Prince, and Haeretikes, are partakers of their iniquity, cooperators with
them in all their sin, executors of the Haeretical Princes sentence, against
their own Catholic, and innocent brethren: fautors, and defenders of
Haeretikes: and so by the censure of holy Church, The ease of Catholics that
serve Haeretikes.
incur Excommunication: a most pitiful, and dangerous state, for a christian
man to live or dye in.

They must mark, what an infinite misery it is, for a noble, and courageous
heart (as lightly those men of best service be) that with their svvoorde, and
arms, the wicked only should be protected, and the innocent destroyed,
Churches despoyled, Gods Priests and servants murdered, the blessed
Sacraments profaned, yea even the dread sovereign holies, of Christ's own
body and blood. What death should not a true Catholic knight suffer, rather
then for to see, such horrible wickedness committed? Or to be in such base
servitude of Haeresie, and her dishonorable defenders, as with their own
hands, to be ministers of such sacrilegious impiety, and which is yeat more
pitiful, that one Catholic man should be brought, to destroy an other, that
in fine every one may be the instrument, of his own destruction? In their
civil gouuernment at home, they cause the Catholic judge, to give sentence of
death, against the Priests, whose innoce^cie they know, The policy, and
practice of Haeretikes to make one Catholic, destroy another.
and whose Religion in heart, they believe to be true. They make one Catholic
neighbor, to accuse an other, and one noble man to condemn an other. In their
vvarres, they serve themselves of Catholics: and by English Catholics, they
destroy Catholics abroad: that foreign Catholics being overthrown, they
may more easily, overthrow their own at home. Alas for my dear brethren:
alas for our desolate country: which no noble heart can now serve, either in
Politic, or Martial matters, but upon such detestable co^ditio^s, of assured
da^natio^, and in fine to their own utter ruin also in this life.

Of al men in the world, A soldier (...) had most need to be careful of his
co^sciece.
the soldier should most specially attend to his conscience: and stand upon
good and sure grounds, for the justice of the quarrel, he has in hand, being
hovverly more subject to death, and danger then any other kind of men: and
being assured, that if he dye, in any known evil cause, and namely in this
fight against God, and defense of Haeretikes, he is doubtless to be damned for
ever. As contrarievvise, to dye in lavvful vvarres, for defense of justice, is
euerful of hope. And for defense of true Religion, Souldiars dying in defense
of true Religion are martyrs.
and Gods honor, in most cases plain martyrdom. Let no christian conscience
therefore, excuse, or flatter it self, in this case, upon the Princes
commandment or the Superiors authority, or upon the danger of disobeyng the
Queen's laws: no mortal creature having lavvful power to command, nor any
subject bound, or permitted to obey, in matter directly against God. In which
case, a man must say to his Prince, with S. Augustine: Tu minaris carcere^, S.
Aug. ser. 6. de verbis Domini.
Deus Gehennam. Thou threatnest prison, God threatens Hell. And as it is
indecent, for any Christian for fear of man, to offend God: so it is most
disagreable to the manly courage, and constancy of a christian Catholic
soldier, for fear of death, or danger what soever to enter in to so
damnable, and dishonorable a service, or to fight, or die in a cause contrary
to his own conscience. An other inconuenie^ce in serving of Haeretikes.
Besides all this to serve in an haeretical cause, and under haeretical
capitaines, catholics are enforced, to hear continual blasphemies of al
Saints, and Sacraments, and to be present at the wicked Sermons, and profane
service, of the Haeretikes. Which is no less damnable, then it was in old
time, for such as served the heathen Emperoures, to commit Idolatry, by
Sacrificing to Idols. For refusing of which abomination, and in particular
for disobeying the Emperor Maximinus his commandment therein, the famous
Coronel S. Mauritius, S. Maurice with his legion of sould^ars martyred. Eusebi
lib. 8. cap. 3. and 4.
with the legion of Thebs, sustained most glorious martyrdom. As diverse
others did under Julian the Apostata, and the like. And many noble souldiars,
for that they could not exercise their Christian vsages, partly were driven to
abandon their profession, in displeasure of their Princes, and partly were
licensed to depart: as may appear by a Decree, Can. 12.
in the holy council of Nice. Where it is forbidden to christian souldiars so
lice^ced, to return to those profane vvarres again. For that is the meaning,
when the Fathers upon great spiritual pain commanded, that none should
resumere cingulum militare, that is, put on the girdle militare again, that
for such a cause, had leift it once.

And surely if there were nothing else but this, that the Catholic soldier
being hovvrely in peril of death, can have no Sacrament, nor Sacrame^tal for
his sins, nor any comfort of conscience, nor succor for his soul in the
world, it must needs be the most miserable condition that can be thought of.
Now to be reliued of this deadly calamity, and distress of conscience,
after a man is once by error, or misfortune entered into the same, there is no
way, but to forsake that unjust, and irreligious cause, and to retire to that
part, where a man may serve with justice, honor, great reward in this
life, and sure hope of salvation. And no doubt, but most happy be those
Gentlemen, that have this occasion, and commodity offered them by God, to make
amends for their former error, as well by serving of the Church, which before
they impugned, as by rendering up the places, which they (though not of
malice, yeat) by other men's unjust appointement, did from the true Lords, and
owners detayne.

Yea I say more to you (Gentlemen) seeing you desire to know my meaning fully,
in this point, Another cause vvh^^ the vvarres of the Queen be not lavvful.

Bulla P^j quinti. an. 1569.


that as al acts of justice within the realm, done by the Queen's authority,
ever since she was, by public sentence of the Church, and Sea Apostolic,
declared an Haeretike, and an enemy of Gods Church, and for the same, by name
excommunicated, and deposed from al regal dignity: as (I say) ever sithence
an. 157^.
the publication thereof, al is void, by the law of God, and man: so
likewise no war can be lavvfully denounced, or vvaged by her, though
otherwise in it self, it were most just. An excommunicate person cannot
lavvfully denounce vvarres.
Because that is the first condition, that is required in just war, that it
be by one denounced, that has lawful, and supreme power to do the same: as
no excommunicate person has: especially if he be vvithal deposed, from his
Regal dignity, by Christ his own vicare, which is the supreme power in
earth. And al subjects are not only absolved, Subject. 1 ought not to on^y an
Excommunicate Prince.

Causa 15. quest. 6.


and discharged of their service, oath, homage, and obedience: but specially
forbid to serve, or obey any such canonically condemned person. Nos (says
Gregory the seventh) Sanctorum Praedecessorum nostrorum Statuta tenentes, eos
qui excommunicatis, fidelitate aut Sacramento, constricti sunt, Apostolica
authoritate a sacramento absoluimus, and ne eis fidelitatem obseruent, omnibus
modis prohibemus. that is: we according to our Praedecessors Decrees, do
assoyle, and discharge al them, that by obligation of oath, or fidelity, are
bound to persons excommunicate: and that they do not obey such, we do
expressly forbid. And for their discharge especially, that serve in such
vvarres, there is an express Canon of Vrbanus the second: Vbi supra.
Iuratos milites Hugoni Comiti, ne ipsi, quandiu excommunicatus est, seruiant,
prohibeto: qui si sacramentum pratenderint, moneantur, oportere Deo magis
seruire quam hominibus. Fidelitatem enim qua^ Christiano principi iurarunt, Deo
eiusque Sanctis aduersanti, and eorum praecepta calcanti, nulla cohibentur
authoritate, persoluere Which is thus in our tongue: Give order, that the
sworn souldiars of County Hughe, serve him not so long as he stadeth
excommunicate: And if they praete^d their former oath, made unto him, admonish
them, that God is to be served, before men. For, that oath, which they made to
him then, when he was a Christian Prince, is not now to be kept toward him,
being an enemy to God, and his Saints, and a breaker, and co^temner, of
their commandments These fevve, as I might do much more, I allege, that
you may see, the sense of the Catholic Church, which to you, that be the
children of the same, vvil be a full vvarrant, for all your actions, and a guide
for all Gentlemen, and persons, of rightly informed consciences, how to behave
them selves, when not only the wars are for Religion, but when any
excommunicate, or canonically condemned Prince, is one party. Whom no man by
law can serve, nor give aid unto, but he falls into Excommunication. And
therefore when S. Augustine vvriteth, that sometimes it falls out, Lib. 12.
con. Faust. cap. 74. and 75.
that a just man, may serve a wicked, and sacrilegious King in the vvarres,
for obedience to his superior, so that nothing be commanded him plainly
against Gods praeceptes: especial exception is made, Causa. 23. quest. 1.
in Kings excommunicated. Who differ in this case, in respect of service, and
obedience of their subjects, and are in a vvoorse Praedicament, then any
either heathen, or unjust Prince, or Pote^tate who so ever: yea then Iuliane
the Apostata him self: whom to serve in just vvarres, and causes, Christian
souldiars were not by the Church, then prohibited: Causa. 11. quest. 3. ca.
Iulianus.
but only were as well by the law of God, as the Church forbidden to serve
him, in any war or work, against Christ, and Christians, or when he
went about to destroy the true Religion. But where, for defection from the
faith, or other enormities not tolerable, the sentence of Excommunication, and
Depositio^ is also adjoined, there can neither be lavvful vvarres, nor any
duty of service in the same allowable. How heinous a crime it is for ae
Prince to fall from the Church of God.
So great a crime it is in a Prince, that is exalted by God, to administer
justice, to defend Christ's Church, and the faithful people thereof, and takes a
solemn corporal oath, at his coronatio^, by his word and might, to observe,
and maintain, the laws and priuilegies of holy Church, and al praerogatiues,
granted by his praedecessours, to the same, and to honor the Bisshoppes, and
Clergy of his realm: afterward neglecting his oath, promise, and vocation, to
bend al his power, to destroy Gods Religion, Church, and Priests, and become
an enemy to al humane society. This then being the miserable condition of
such Princes, as be cut of by the Churches Censures, from the felovvshippe of
the faithful: you may see what a dishonorable thing it is, for men of honor,
or honesty, to strive by arms, for the upholding of them, vvho^ God by his
just judgments, and the Churches sentence does pull down. And therewith
perceive, that those that break with God, can not claim any bo^de of oath, or
fidelity of them, that were their subjects. And least of al, of christian
Knights, and Gentlemen of arms: The duty of a christian Knight.
the principal institution, and profession, of al such noble orders being, for
defense of the true Catholic, and Apostolic faith, and to be sworn
adversaries, and persecutors of Gods enemies: the Cross and Cognissaunce they
wear protesting the same. Liberius Epist. 1. ad Athanasiu^.
As contrarievvise, no Haeretike can be a lavvful soldier, but by the imperial
and canon laws, is to be degarded, of militare dignity, and arms, and to be
spoiled of his militare girdle, Haeresie makes a man infamous, and incapable
of al degree, and dignity.
as they then spoke. For Haeresie makes a man, by all christian laws,
infamous, and voideth him of al degrees, and titles of honor, among which
militare order is, and of old time was so great, that every man of arms,
was capable of the Imperial souereigntie. Therefore as in yielding up, the
places unjustly possessed, you did an act of restitution, and justice: so
(Gentlemen) in forsaking the vvarres of the other side, for so many respects,
as I have said, dishonorable, unlawful, and damnable, you have done
doubtless agreably to your christian knighthood, and an act much renowned in all these parts, of the best and vvisest, of al degrees.

And the same that you have done, al other of honor, conscience, and Religion,
of our country, are bound to do: as well in this war, as in all other,
which either at home, or abroad, is vvaged for, or against Religion. 1. R^^.
16. and sequent.
After King Saul was by God, and the Prophets sentence, as it were,
excommunicated, and deposed, it was no fault for David, or others, either of
the Priests, or people, to revolt from him: nor for the vvorthie Captain
Abner, to revolt from Saules son, that claimed the Kingdom, by the pretended
right of his father: nor for any other Capitaines, or souldiars of Saules side,
now deposed, to render up al they had in their governments, to King David,
and his posteriposteritie. It was no crime, but great commendation for Ioiada
the high Priest, 4. Reg. 11. ^. Reg. 1^. and 4. Reg ^
to revolt from the usurping Queen Athalia: nor for others to do the same,
against wicked King Achab, and cursed Iesabel, nor to see, permit, and prove
them, for their impiety condignly punished: whereunto the very Priests, and
Prophets of God, did by counsel, and encourageme^t, cooperate. In which case,
we may see, for our instruction, not only towns unjustly detayned, to be
restored, to the true Lords, but an impious Kings own countries also, and
cities lavvfully by revolt of the people, yielded up to other men's hands. 2.
Paralip. 21.4. Reg. 8.
As the Scriptures do record of the countries and cities of Edom, and Lobna:
Which revolted from King Ioram, and from the Dominion of Judah, for ever,
yielding this cause thereof: Dereliquer at enim Deum patrum suoru^. For (says
the holy story) he had forsaken the God of his forefathers. To forsake them,
that forsake God, is most lavvful, honorable, and necessaire. As contrarievvise
to serve and defend them, whom God by the sentence of his high Priest, and
Tribunal in earth, has pulled down, and vvil have punished, is to fight
against God, and to resist his ordinance.

Examples of our own country.

King John forsaken.


And I pray you, Gentlemen, (to give you domestical examples,) what disgrace,
or shame was it, for all the chief Lords of our country, to revolt from King
John, in his days? and absolutely to deny him aid, and assistence, even in
his lavvful vvarres, until he returned again to the obedience of the Sea
Apostolic, and were absolved from the Censures of the same, which he had
justly incurred? Or for the English Nobility, and specially for the renowned
Stanley, one of this Sir William his house, Richard the third lavvfully
forsaken.
and name, to revolt from King Richard the Tyrant, and to yield him self, and
his charge, to Henry the seventh? what dishonor was it, for the Nobility
of England, Jane the vsuper forsaken.
in our memories, to forsake Jane the pretended Queen: and Northumberland, the
father of him, whom now you have forsaken, and to yield the Tower committed
to their custody, and them selves, to the lavvful, and most Religious Queen
Marie? Notvvithstanding what unjust bands of oath, or promise soever they had
made, of fear and pusilanimitie, to the said usurper, and Haeretical Queen
before? In all these, and the like, there is neither sin, nor shame, nor
scandal committed. For that to revolt, is of it self, lavvful or unlawful,
honorable or otherwise, according to the justice, or injustice of the cause,
or difference of the person, from or to vvho^, the revolt is made. Wherein,
when the right from the vvrong is evident, and in the Capitaines, or souldiars
conscience, and in all godly men's sight clear, and undoubted, there needs no
more discussing of the matter.

To conclude briefly. In these vvarres, How Catholics should inform their
con^^^rn^^s for the justice of the vvarres.
and al others, that may at any time fall for Religion, against Haeretikes, or
other Infidels, every Catholic man, is bound in conscience, to inform him
self, for the justice of the cause. The which when it is doubtful, or
touches Religion (as is said) he ought to employ his person, and forces, by
direction of such, as are virtuous, and intelligent in such cases: but
specially by the general Pastor of our souls, A necessari^ and a sure rule.
being Christ's vicare in earth. Whose sovereign authority, and vvisdome,
derived from Christ him self, may best instruct, and vvarrant a christian
soldier, how far, when, and where, either at home, or abroad, in civil,
or foraine vvarres, made against the enemies, or Rebels of Gods Church, he
may, and must break with his temporal sovereign, and obey God and his
spiritual Superior.

Again (Gentlemen) by this your retiring your selves, from the service of
Gods, Other commodities of retiring to the Kings service.
and the churches enemies, you have not only provided well, for your
consciences, honor. and salvation: but also for the increase of your
knowledge, and experience in art militare, and of the exact order, and
discipline to be observed in the same, being now to serve, under so virtuous,
valerous, fortimate, famous, The noble Duke of Parma.
and victorious a General, as has had few peers, in these latter ages. And in
company of so many valiant, and expert Capitaines, and souldiars, of diverse
Nations, as no where in Europe, better can be found. Which your selves (my
masters) may more easily consider, by comparing your late General, my Lord of
Lecester, his virtues, and famous factes (scilicet) unto the glorious
exploytes, and victories, atchiued by the Duke of Parma his Highness. Or the
disorder of the English irreligious, and licentious companies, to the religious
discipline, of the Catholic camp. Between which, I doubt not, but you find
a marvelous difference, and shall do daily, more and more, to your infinite
contentment. Would to God, by your honorable example, A necessary
consideration.
al others our deceived countriemen, would begince to thinck earnestly, how
to discharge them selves of that dangerous, and infamous service of Haeretikes,
and Rebels, and render them selves, into this most just, and godly course,
that you are happily entered into. Which they should the rather speedely resolve
upon, for that they can not be so ignorant, of the times lately past, or the
present days, but they must needs have marked, how God him self, fights
for the just causes, of his Catholic Majesty, and generally for all Catholic
Armies, against Haeretikes, God gives the victory ever to Catholics.
and Rebels. Wise men have noted, that though God for our sins has
suffered, and still does permit Haeretikes, to keep great broiles, in all parts
(almost) of the world, for a time: yeat he ever has put them, in fine, to
confusion: giving the victory, lightly in all battles, and encounters, to the
Catholics. And that oftentimes very miraculously, defeating (as in the vvarres
of the Machabees, and else where in old time) great numbers, with a very
fevve, and for one Catholic, a thousand Haeretikes slain: and many glorious
victories obtained without any bloodshed.

For Luther, and Zvvinglius his time, I refer you, to the records of
Germany, and Svvizerland, which set down the ouerthrovves of Haeretikes in
the filde. The fightes in France, where the Catholics, ever have had also
the victory, be in all our memories marvelous. But of al others those of
Flauders are most memorable. Where, Diverse unbloody victories, given to the
King Catholic, in these vvarres.
besides the conflictes at Grunning, Mock, Mounts, Rosandal, Zeriksea,
Northorne, Amerone, Antvvarpe, Luart, Gemblovve, and the like, in every of
which (the Lord God of Hosts mercifully fighting for his own cause, and the
Catholic Kings right) very few Catholics, without any loss of men, in
manner, slevve and defeated many thousands, of well appointed souldiars: God
has destroyed all the Haeretikes partakers miraculously.
the same most just God of revenge, has notoriously put to rebuke and
confusion, al such foreign Princes, and people, as came to aid his enemies.
And sometimes, by his just judgment, has brought them to ruin, even by those
same Haeretikes, and Rebels, that called for them, and for whose protection,
they came into that country. As we have seen both in the case of the Almaine,
and French succourses. And the like luck seems to approach unto our English
forces: except our Lord (which I heartily pray for) call them from that unjust,
and infamous service of Haeretikes. Who having the perpetual curse of Christ,
and his holy Church, lying heauely upon them, can no more escape speedy
destruction, then others, who vnluckely have followed that side, have done
before them. Which I speak of charity, love, and compassion of my dear
countriemen: being assured, that if they perish in body (as it is to be
feared, they shall do in that service) they shall lose their souls also
everlastingly: and shall aeternally curse those, A necessary admonit^on to ou^
cou^triemen.
that led them out of their country, to so certain perdition. Let not the
memory, of the old English notorious battailles, and victories, which in old
time were co^parable to what provinces, or peoples were most famous: nor the
esteem, either true, or partial, of their present streingth, and courage in
England, make them obstinate, in so dangerous and doubtful state of things.
Let them not flatter them selves, nor be abused by others: it goes not wholy,
nor principally, nor oftentimes at al, by the streingth, or might of man's
arm, if they were as they pretend: but God strikes the stroke, and gives
the victory, according to his Divine disposition, to the vvorthie, and to
such, as serve him, put their trust in him, and confess with the Prophet:
Psalm 43.
That. Nec in gladio suo possederu^t terra^: and brachiu^ eoru^ no^ saluauit
eos: sed dexteratua, and brachiu^ tuu^. Neither in their own svvorde have they
possessed the land: and their own arm has not saved them: but thy right
hand, (o God) and thy arm.

1. Reg. 25.
When our Princes did Praeliari praelia Domini, Fight the sightes of our Lord
(As holy vvritte says of David, By what means our Princes became of old so
victorious.
being in arms against King Saul then deprived) and their subjects, and
souldiars served, and feared God, reverenced his Priests, had their
confessors with them in camp, daily heard Mass devoutly, adored the Blessed
Sacrament, called on Christ, and his holy Angels, and Saints, and the
special Patrones of their persons, or country, for their defense, lived in
martial discipline, order, and obedience, Luc. ^.
religiously (according to S. John Baptistes rule, given to men of that
condition) abstayning from rape, and violence, toward the innocent,
co^bating only for their faith, or their countries right: the^ both amongst the
Infidelles, and Heathen, and also among their Christian neighbors, their
fightes were famous, their conquestes glorious, and the English arms
redoubted in all places.

But now having forsaken God, and God forsaken them: when they take no
quarrel in hand, but for the dishonorable defense of Rebels, Pirates, and
Infidels: when their Princes are become, Socij furu^, Isaia. 1. Ezech. 22.
and quasi lupi rapientes praedam* Companions of thieves, and ravenous woolues:
and public enemies of al true Kings, and lavvful Dominion: keeping fidelity
neither with God, nor man: though they were as strong and valiant, as ever
they were, and of provvder conceit, of their own courage, and cunning, then
at this day, they pretend: yeat God vvil confunde them, and such a fear vvil
be put into their hearts, that they shall fly, when no man persecuteth them,
and a thousand shall runae away, before the face of one Catholic, that
fights for Gods Church. These things (my dear countrieme^) you have either
seen with your own eyes, or by assured faithful testimony of others, have
heard to have fallen, in all these vvarres of Flaunders, and shall daily prove
it, by your own experience, to be most true that no humane streingth, or
desperation, can match God: and that it never fell well with him, that opposes
him self to Christ, and his holy Church. To which Church, the Prophet
plainly says: Isaia. 60.
Gens et regnum, quod tibi non seruierit, peribit. The Nation and Kingdom,
that serves not thee, shall perish.

Now in such evident, and immine^t danger of destruction and death, as well
of body as soul, to al such as follow these new English quarrels, it were
bootlesse to put you in mind, No aduau^cement by English vvarres with the
Haeretikes: but intolerable miseries.
of the impossibility of advancement, by those vvarres, what so ever your
success be: your selves having daily experience, of the intolerable
distresles, both there and at home, and how shamfully they which were the
authors of such vvarres, and now are the chief leaders of the same, have
abused al sorts of our countriemen: enforcing many a Gentleman, and
substantial person, to serve of their own charges, and to spoil them selves
at home, in hope of their enriching abroad. Who now finding al things
contrary, to promise, and expectation, are so entangled, that they neither
dare go^ home, for fear of hanging, nor can well endure these miseries abroad,
for fear of dying shamfully, and miserably in foreign countries. Nothing
being leift for their relief, indeed, in this perplexity, but only to do that
(if they have grace) which you have both vvisely, godly, and honorably done:
praeseruing your souls for life, and glory everlasting, and your persons, for
the service of our Church, and country, in better times to come. In the mean
while to occupy the fortitude and forces, Epist. 207.
of your body, and mind (which are Gods special gifts, as S. Augustine says)
in the service of the Almighty: and of the greatast, and iustest Monarch in
the world, under a General so peerles, who can, and vvil, according to the
worthiness of your courage, condition, and qualities, advaunce you, and bestow
you in such places of service, where you may increase in honor, and
knowledge, and so be in time, when it shall please God to have mercy of our
desolare country, not only restorers of old militare virtue, and discipline in
the same: but be notable helpers by the valerous arm of your Christian
Knighthoode, to reduce our people, to the obedience of Christ's Church: and
deliver our Catholic freindes, and brethren from the damnable, and intolerable
yoke of Haeresie, and her most impure leaders.

It is now some years ago, since a Gentlman, and Captain, of my name,
wished, and (to say the truth) conferred earnestly with me about it, that as
we had certain Seminaries, and Colleges for praeseruation, or restitution of
the Clergy, when the time should come, to serve God, in our country: A
Nourcerie (...).
so that there were some compainies of English souldiars also, to be trained
up in Catholic, and old godly militare discipline, for the help of our said
country, in that kind likewise. Which thing being honorably begune, by diverse
Noblemen and Gentlemen before: so I trust, God has brought to pass in you
now, that it shall be finished, to the universal comfort of us al, and the
great good, and hope of our Nation. For redressing the evils vvherof, it is as
lavvful, godly, What merit it is to fight for the faith.
and glorious for you to fight, as for us Priests to suffer, and to die.
Either the one way, or the other, for defense of our fathers faith, is alvvais
in the sight of God, a most precious death, and martyrdom. And great comfort
(truly) it is to me, and hope to our poor country, that in this our
desolation, our merciful Lord has leift us seed in both sorts: And that I may
truly say to you, the words of S. Augustine, Epist. 207.
to Cou^tie Boniface: Alij pro vobis orando pugnant, co^tra inuisibiles
inimicos: vos pro eis pugnatis, co^tra visibiles Barbaros. God (says he)
gives his gifts diversely: Others by prayers fight for you, against your
invisible enemies: and you sight for them, against visible Haeretikes, or (as
he speaks) against the Barbarous. The Priest and soldier should concur.
So goodly a thing it is, for the Priest and soldier to concur, in the
service of God, and their country, together.

But I forget my self, and am already past the measure of a letter. Therefore
I vvil here make an end: and for the rest refer you to the good Priests, to
whom I have given order in all things. And you shall find them such, as for
zeal, discretion, learning, and virtue, shall be agreeable to your desire, and
expectation. Whose holy labors, and al your honorable endeavors, I beseke
Almighty God to bless. Comme^ding unto you for a farewell, this goodly
sentence of the foresaid holy Doctor S. Augustine, vvorthie to be written in
golden letters, Vbi supia.
on every noble souldiars breast: Hoc primum cogita, quando armaris ad pu^nam,
quia virtus tua etiam corporalis, donum Dei est: sic enim cogitabis, de dono
Dei non facere contra Deum. that is: When soever thou art armed, and in
readiness for battle, let this be thy first cogitation, that thy very
corporal streingth it self, is the gift of God: whereby thou shall still be put
in mind, never to use the gift of God, against God him self, that gave it
thee. Fare you vve^ again. And to command me in these matters, that pertain
to my profession, make no courtesy. For I am wholy yours, and al theirs, that
serve the Catholic cause, and our country.

At Rome the 23. of April, 1587. Your friend and servant in Christ: William
Allen.

Vidit and approbauit Siluester Pardo, S. Theol. Licenciatus and Cathedr.
Ecclesiae Antuerp. Can. librorumque Censor.


