A POST WITH a mad Packet of Letters.

LONDON

Printed for John Smethicke, and are to be sold at his Shop in S. Dunstons
Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1602.

To the Reader.
GEntle if you be, be you so gentle Reader, you shall understand, that I know
not when, there came a Post I know not whence, was going I know not whither,
and carried I know not what: But in his way I know not how, it was his hap
with lack of heed, to let fall a Packet of Idle Papers; the superscription
whereof, being only to him that finds it, being my fortune to light on it,
seeing no greater style in the direction, fell to opening of the enclosure, in
which I found diverse Letters written, to whom, or from whom, I could not
learn. Now for the Contents of the Circumstances, when you have red them,
judge of them: and as you like them, regard them. And for my self, if I hear
you like well of them, when I meet next with the Post, it may be I will cast
about with him for more of them: till then, fearing to be too tedious in this
Letter, lest you like the worse of that which follows: I rest as I have
reason.

Your loving friend, Nicho. Breton.

The Contents of this Book.
A Letter of comfortable advise to a friend, and his answer. A Letter of
advise to a young Cour^er, and his answer. A mournful Letter to a brother, and
his answer. A Letter of a Jealous husband to his wife, and her cunning
answer. A Letter of kind Complements to a friend, and his answer. A Letter of
love to a Gentle woman and her answer. A Letter of scorn to a coy Dame, and
her answer. A Letter to a foul Dowde, and her answer. A Letter for the
preferring of a servant, and the answer. A Letter of counsel to a friend, and
his answer. A Letter of comfort to a sister in sorrow, and her answer. A
Letter of counsel from a kind Father. A kind answer of a loving son. A
Merchants Letter to his Factor, and his answer. A Letter of challenge, and the
answer. A merry Letter, or newe^ of complaints. The answer of the Laughe. A
Letter to a friend for news, and his answer. A dissuading from marriage, and
the answer. A kind Letter of a Creditor for money. The debtors answer. A
Letter of News, and the answer.
A Post with a mad Packet Of Letters.
A Letter of comfortable advise to a Friend.
HOnes^ Alexander, I hear thou art of late tallen into an extreme melancholy,
by reason of the sudden departure of Pannella out of this life: for thy sake
I am sorry she has left her passage on this earth, though being too goo^ ^or
this world, she be surely gone to a better; now, if thy mourning could recover
her from death, I could willingly bear part of thy passion, but when it does
her no good, and thy self much hurt, let not a wil^ull humor lead thee into
a woeful Consumption. Thou know she is senceless^ in the grave, and will thou therefore be witless in the world? Say thy love is extreme, and let me
believe it, will thou therefore deprive nature of reason? God forbid it: well,
thou know I lent thee, and in my love let me adu^se thee, not to go from
thy self, with an imagination of what was, to loses it which is: because she
is in heaven, will thou be in hell? or if she be h^lfe an Angel, will thou be
more then h^lfe a devil? ^^ spend thy spirit in a better humor: let not the
rem^mbrance of her perfection drive thee into unperfections: nor make love
hateful to other, by seeing the unhappiness in thy self. O^ let not sancte
show folly in thee, howsoever virtue deserved honor in her: Leave thy solitary
humor, and come and live with me, we will d^^nse some good meane^ for the
remove of this melancholy: In the meantime make not too much of it, least it
prove to a madness: Love thy self, and belee^^ thy friend, and what is in me
to too thee good, command as thin^ own: glad I would be to see thee, as he
who defy entierly lous thee: and so desirous to hear from thee, to the
Almighty I leau^ thee. Farewell.

Thine as his owns. D. F.

His Answer.
Kind Francke, I have received thy friendly Letter, and note thy careful
love: but pardon me, if I do not answer thee to thy liking: Alas, how can he
truly judge of life, that never kindly was in love? or know how soundly to help
a sorrow, that never inwardly felt it? reading makes a scholar by rule, and
observation I know does much in the perfecting of Art, but experience is that
which touches knowledge to the quick; My mistress beauty was no Moon
shine, whose virtue gave light to the hearts eye, nor her wisdom, an ordinary
wit, which put reason to his perfect understanding: and for her Graces, are
they not written among the virtuous? Thou sai^st well, she was too heavenly a
creature to make her habitatio^ on this earth, and is it not then a kind of
hell, to be without her in the world? Imaginations are no dreams, where
substances are the objects of the senses, while the eye of memory, is never
weary of seeing. Oh honest Francke, think thou have not lived, that have not
loved, nor can live in this world to have such a love to die in: It is a dull
spirit that is fed with oblivion, and a dead sense, that has no feeling of
love: think therefore what was, is with me: and my self as nothing, without
the enjoying of that something, which was to me as all in all. Is not the
presence of an Angel, able to ravish the sight of a man? And is not the light
of Beauty the life of love? Leave then to burden me with imperfections in my
sorrow for her want, whose presence was my paradise, and whose absence, my
world^ hell: thou do misconstrue my good, in languishing for her lack, and
know not my hurt, in thinking of any other comfort: ^o Francke, let it
suffice, though I love thee, I cannot forget her: and though I live with thee,
yet will I die for her: have patience then with my passion, till time better
temper my affection, in which most diuoted to thee of any man living, til I let
thee, which shall be as shortly as I well can, I rest.

Thine as thou know. D. E.

A Letter of advise to a young Courtier.
My good Cosen, I hear you are of late grown a great Courtier, I wish you
much grace, and the continuing of your best comfort: but for that your years
have not had time to see much, and your kindness may hap to be abused, let me
entreat you a little now and then to look to that which I tell you: Keep your
purse warily, and your credit charily, your reputation valiantly, and your
honor carefully: for your friends, as you find them, use them: for your
enemies, fear them not, but look to them: for your love, let it be secret in
the bestowing, and discreet in the placing: for, if fancy be a wanton, wit
will be a fool: Scorn not Ladies, for they are worthy to be loved: but make
not love to many, left thou be beloved of none: if thou have a favor, be not
proud of thy fortune, but think it discretion, to conceal a contentment: go
neat, but not gaie, left it argue lightness, and take heed of lavish expense,
left it beggar thy state: play little, and loose not much, use exercise, but
make no toil of a pleasure: Read much, but dull not thy brain, and confer
but with the wise, so shall thou get understanding. Pride is a kind of
coyness, which is a little too womannish, and common familiarity, is too
near the Clown for a Courtier: but carry thy self even, that thou may fall
on neither side: so will the wise commend thee, and the better sort affect thee:
but let me not be tedious, left it may perhaps offend thee: and therefore as I
live, let it suffice I love thee, And so wishing thee as much good, as thou
can wish to be wished, in prayer for thy health, and hope of thy happiness, to
my uttermost power, I rest, in affectionate good will.

Thine ever assured: H. L.

His Answer.
Sweet Cosen, I think you have either some Court in the Country, or else you
are much studied in the Courtier, that you can set down such rules, as are no
less worthy the reading, then observing: believe me, they shall be my best
leizures studies, and in my daily courses my counselors, my solicitors in
love, and my Judges in honor, my guiders in greatest hopes, and my admonitions
in greatest dangers: for your pains in them, I thank you, and for your
kindness, I love you: your care of me, I see by them, and will not unkindly
forget them. I must confess, I find Courtiers close people, and Ladies
strange creatures, and love so idle an humor, that I am afraid to loose time
in it: but the better by your advise I hope to carry a hand over it. For
apparel, I will keep my stint, and care for no fond fashion: and for exercise,
nature is so given to ease, that good qualities are almost cut of use: and for
virtue, poor Lady, she is scarce able to live with her pension: but for study,
I have little time, so much company withdraws me^a^d for a book, next the
Bible, your Letter shall be my Library. And thus smiling at such G^lls, as
think no grace, but in a gay coat, nor wit, but in a stale Jest, noting many a
beggar like a king, and many a Lord like a poor gentleman, seeing the truth of
Solomon, in his conclusion of all earthly comforts that all under yt Sun is
vanity: meaning not to be a servant to a base humor, nor to reach higher the^
I may hold (...) thankful kindness for thy careful Letter, and faithful
affection to thy worthy self, wishing thee so near me, that I might never be
from thee, I rest.

Thine what mine own. N. B.

A mournful Letter to a brother.
GOod brother, the misery of my home life, the crosnesse of my cruel fortune,
and the unkindness of my unnatural kin, have made me so weary of this world,
that I long for nothing but my latest hour, and yet loath to despair of Gods
mercies, willing, to take any good course for my commodity, I have of late bin
persuaded by some of experience in their travails into those parts, that my
travail into the low Countries would be much to my commodity, as well for my
language as my skill in such traffic, as I would make use of in those places:
but my state being so down the wind, that I know not how to get up the weather,
having no stock to lay out, to give me hope to bring in, I will even set up my
rest upon my resolution o^sc^une, and thrust my self into some place of
service, where I will either win the horse, or loose the sad^ell as If J d^,
mercy is my comfort, if I live, desert is my hope: but to the h^lping forth of
this my forlorn spirit, good brother put too your hand, assuring your self,
that I will not live to be ungrateful: for as my heart loves you, my soul
shall pray for you, and when I have time to see you, I will not be from you. And
thus agreeued to charge you, never more meaning to trouble you: beseeching God
to enable me to requite you, in the true love of a natural brother: I rest.

Yours as mine own. N. B.

His Answer.
Dear brother, as I grieve at your crosses, so would I that I could as well
procure your comforts. But my state much inferior to my will, makes me unable to
satisfy your expectation: and yet will I hurt my self, rather then you should
perish: for you shall receive by this bearer, what I am able, and more, as I
shall be better able. But touching your courses for the low Countries, I fear
your traffiqu^ will be but little gainful, the wars so eat up the wealth of
the country: and for your intent touching arms, I fear your forwardnes is too
great for your experience. Yet do I so far allow of your good mind herein, as
I should less grieve to hear of your honorable death abroad, the^ see your
disco^tented life at home: and therefore for winning the horse, or loosing the
saddle, leave that to Gods blessing, who will bestow honor as it shall please
his divine providence: but good brother, have patience with thy crosses, attend
mercy for thy comforts, and have a care of home, howsoever thou farest abroad:
I know thy mind is great, but take heed of pride lest it be a bar to all thy
fortune, and overthrow of all thine honor: I see thou art weary of ye world,
make the^ thy way toward heaven, that God, who has tried thee with calamities,
may bless thee with eternal comforts. In hope whereof, willing in all I can
to help thee, praying heartily for thee, with my unfeigned hearts love unto
thee, to the Lord of heaven I leave thee.

Thy loving brother, D. S.

A Letter of a Jealous husband to his wife.
WIfe, in as much kindness as I can, I advise you to lean such courses, as
are neither to your credit, nor my contentment: you know, much company, causes
many occasions of Idle speeches, and young men are not in these days, given to
speak the best of their kind friends: trifles and toies, were better refused,
the^ accepted, and time i^lely spent, brings but beggary, or a worse blot: of
all the birds in the field, I love not a Cu^koe in my house: truly I do not
dissemble with you, your light behavior does much dislike me, and how glad I
would be to have it reformed, you shall know when I s^e it: shall I make you
fine, to please an other, and displease my self? shall I leave you my house,
to make an hospitality of ill fellowship? ^it me not so with the fool, how
ever you feed your self with a foul humor: shake off such acquaintance, as
gain you nothing but discredit, and make much of him that must as well winter
you as summer you: Look to your house, have a care over your children, set
your servants to work, and have an eye to the maine chance, leave tatling
gossips, Idle hus wiu^s, vain headed fellows and needless charge, so will God
bless you, and the world will thrive with you, your neighbors speak well of
you, and I shall truly love you. And thus, hoping that you will by this my
secret admenition, have a care of your good carriage, I rest in hope of your
well doing.

Your loving husband* T. F.

Her cunning Answer.
HUsband, with as much patience as I can, I have red over your unwise Letter,
wherein Jealousy keeps such a stir, that love does but laugh at such
Iolenesse: much company drives away idle thoughts, and for fools it is good to
be afraid of had I wist: Ill thoughts beget ill speeches, and an old dog
bites sorer then a young whelpe: for beggary, let it fall upon the slothful, I
know how to work for my ^uing: and for blots, speak to scribblers, for I have
no skill in writing. Now for the Bird, to answer you with the Beast: I think a
Calfe in a Closet, is as ill as a Cuckoe in a Cage: If I were sullaine, you
would sure suspect my humor, and do you mislike my merry behavior? well, your
conceit may be deformed, in being so wrongfully informed, to have me so
suddeinly reformed. My finenesse, is your countenance, and my conversation,
your credit: and therefore do you shake off your lowzie humors, I will make
choice of better company: your house will stand fast, if it fall not, and your
children be quieter then their Father, your servants earne their wages, and the
maine chance, is nicked w^ll enough: Women must talk when they meet, and men
not be scorned, though not entertained: and he that keeps a house, must
seek to defraie the charge. And so hoping that you will leave your Iealouzie,
and think of some ma^ter of more worth, as careful of my carriage, as you of
your credit, meaning to ^o as well as I can without your teaching, and as well,
as if you were at home. I rest.

Your too much loving wife. I, F.

A Letter of kind Complements to a Friend.
WHere I love much, I speak little, for affection has small pleasure in
ceremonies, your kindness I have found, my desert I dare not speak of, least
it more offend my self to think on, then you to look on, but since you have
made me happy in your acquaintance, let me not too long lack your company,
for though I live among many good neighb^urs* yet do I much want the comfort of
so good a ^riend, by wh^m I should not only gain the use of Time, but fin^^
the pr^fi^ of my desire: which joining issue with your humors, cannot ^ut so
concur with your contentment, that if there be a paradise on the earth, I
hope to find it in the fair passages of our loves, which grounded on virtue,
and growing in kindness, cannot choose but be blessedly fruitful. In brief,
til I see you, I will mourn, and if not the sooner, I shall languish: for, my
wishing and want cannot be satisfied with absence: hasten therefore your
coming, and make your own welcome: for what I have or (...), enter in the
^owle of your possession, where in the freehold of my love, I assure the
substance of my life. And so leaving compliments, to t^ngue spirits, in the
truth of an honest heart: I rest.

Yours as you do and shall ever know me. N. B.

His Answer.
S^^, I have received your kind Letter, and I find you ver^e fine at your
corner, you will speak, and say nothing: be eloquent in plainness, but you
must not speak in the clouds, to them that are acquainted with the Moon: and
say what you will, I must believe of my self what I list: for indeed, I know
mine own unworthiness, of your commendation, in which, I will rather bear
with your affection, then be conceited with your opinion. Yet, not to be either
disdainful, or ungrateful, be not so far deceived in my disposition, that
wherein my presence may pleasure you, I will answer you with ^ine absence, nor
long delaie your expectation: for excuse, is but cold kindness, and too much
haste is not fit: therefore as soon as I conveniently can, I assure you, you
shall seem, and in full measure with your affection find me, to the vtterm^st
of my power, rather in action then prot^station, during life: in fair weather
or foul.

Yours (...) mine own. W. R.

A Letter of Love to a Gentlewoman.
Fair Mistr^ss^, to Court you with eloquence, were as ill as to grieve you
with gross^ humors: let it therefore please you, rather to believe what I
write, th^n to note how I speak, for my heart being fired in your eyes, has
vowed my service to your beauty: in which, finding reasons admiration, can
think but of nature in her perfection: in which, being ravished about it self,
cra^eth of your favor to be instructed by your kindness: I mean no further
then in obedience to your commandment: for if I be any thing my self, it
shall be nothing more then yours: and less then nothing, if not yours in all.
I could commend you above yt skies, compare you with the Sun^e, or set you
among the Stars, figure you with the Phoenix, and imagine you a Goddess: but
I will leave such weak praising fictions, and think you only your self:
whose virtuous beauty, and whose honorable discretion, in the care of a little
kindness, is able to command the love of y^ wife, and the labors of the honest,
with the best of their endeavors in the happiness of your employment, to seek
the height of their fortune: think not therefore I flatter you in hope of
f^uour, but honor you in y^ desert of worthiness: in which if you will
vouchsafe to entertain the service of my affection, what you shall find in my
love, I will leave to your kindness to consider. In the care of which comfort,
craving pardon to my presumption, I rest humbly and wholly,

Yours directed to be commanded. E. W.

Her Answer.
SIr, I have heard scholars say, that it is Art to co^ceale Art, and that
under a face of simplicity, is hidden much subtlety: of which, how silly
Women need to be afraid, I will leave to wise men to consider. And though I
cannot in fine nor fit terms, answer the humor of your writing, yet
after a plain and homely fashion, I will entreat you to accept of my writing:
Perfection and corruption, cannot meet^ together in one subject, and therefore
my imagined ^^a^tie, bring but a shadow of deceit, believe not your eyes, til
they have a better speculation: and for the inward parts of commendations, I am
persuaded, that wit is not worth any thing, that is drawn into admiration of
nothing: only this, not unkindly to requit your good thoughts of little worth,
leaving fi^i^ns ^o idle fancies, let me entreat you not to mistake your
figures, and to honor a better substance then my unworthy self. And yet, so
far to assure your desert of my contentment, that wherein I may conveniently
counter^aile the care of your kindness, excuse my indiscretion, if I fail of
my desire, in which, wishing you more happiness, then to be commanded by my
unworthiness, I rest as I may.

Your loving poor friend. M. W.

A Letter of scorn to a coy Dame.
Mistress Fubbes, if you were but a little fair, I see you would be mightily
proud, and had you but the wit of a Goose, you would surely out hiss the
Gander: but, being with as bad qualities as can be wished, as rich as a new
shorn sheep, I hope, fortune is not so mad, as to bless you further then the
beggar: It is not your holy day face put on, after the ill-favored fashion, can
make your half Nose, but ougly in a true sight: and but that you are
exceedingly beholding to the Tailor, you might be set up for the Sign of the
Sea Crabbe. Now, for your parentage, to help out the hope of all the rest,
when the Tinkers son, and the Cobblers daughter, met under a hedge at the
milking of a Bull, within forties weeks after, what fell out you know. Now, not
too plainly to lay open the ^owle members of a filthy carkass^, but, as
patiently as I can to keep Decorum, in your description, let me tell you, that
all this, and much more, being true in your disgraces, I cannot choose but
ma^^aile, that you mourn not to death in imagination: to think, that a
monster in nature, can have any grace in reason, but, let it be as it is: I
have ^ut lost a little breath in talking to a deaffe ear, for I mean ^o take
no more travel to the subject of so ill an object: and therefore meaning to
make my farewell and beginning with you, both at one instant, leaving you to
loathe your self, as one, whom no creature can well be in love withal: sorry
that I ever saw you, and never more entending to trouble you. In recompense of
your course entertainment, I rest in all unkindness: this present and always.

Yours as much as may be. T. E.

Her Answer.
Master Swash, it is not your hustie rustie, can make me afraid of your big
looks: for I saw the pla^e of Ancient Pistol, where a craking coward was
well cudgeled for his knavery: your railing is so near the Rascal, that I am
almost ashamed to bestow so good a name as the Rogue upon you* but for
modesties sake, I will a little forbear you, and only tell you, that a hanging
look^, and a hollow heart, a cunning wit, and a corrupted conscience, make you
so ^^t a mate for the devil, that there is no Christian will desire your
company: now for your state, it is much upon fortune, which brings many of your
fellows to a deadly fall, when the pain of their heads is only healed with a
halter: and for your lineage, when the Bearewards Ape, and the hangmans Monky
met together on a hay mow, what a whelp cam^ of such of such a litter, let the
world judge, I say nothing: now for your stumpe feet, and your lame hand,
suting kindly with your wry neck, who would not make of their eyes, that could
endure the sight of such a picture? now, your wealth being but in a few words,
which you have almost all spent in idle humors, hoping that the Tortus will not
quarrel with the Crabbe, and that when you have slept upon your Al^, you will
get a medicine for your madness, till the Woodcocke do tell you how the
Dawcocke has caught you, leaning further to think on you, more then utterly
to ^oathe you, glad that your entertainment was so much to your coffeehouse:
In full measure with your malice, I rest.

Yours as you see. A. W.

A Letter to a foul Dowd^e.
Mistress, I hear that you think your self fair, but you are much
deceived, for the Curriers Dyle, is but a cours^ kind of painting: and for
wit, how far you are from understanding, the wise can tell you: now, for
qualities, where you learned them I know not, but if you could leave them,
^wer^ well: I wonder not a little, what madness has possessed your brains,
that you can make so much of your self: are your eyes your own: or are they
so sealed they cannot see? get you to your prayers, and leave making of love,
for age and an evil fau^ur, ha^ need to be helped with a good purs^: I hear
you study Music, indeed, when an Owl sings, the Nightingale will hold her
peace: but for shame learn not to dance, for a barrel can but tumble: but if
you would use a medicine for your teethe, you might be the better to speak
with in a morning: what ailes you to buy a ^anne, except it be to hide your
face? and til your hande^ be whole, you should wear but dogs leather for your
gloves: In truth you abuse your self, that you keep not your chamber, for none
sees you but laughes at you, or at least loatheth to look upon you: be
therefore content to do as I wish you, speak with none but by Attorney, leave
the Painter to better Pictures, and rather grieve at nature for framing of you,
then think of any thing that may help you: your goods bestow on me for my
counsel, and make suit to Death for your comfort. And thus hoping that being
weary of your self, you will hasten to your grave, I end.

Yours as you see. H. I.

Her Answer.
SIr you may think your self wise, but you do not show it, for railing
words, are the worst testimonies of a good wit: for good qualities I think you
know them not, nor can go from the evil: but for madness, I think it sorteth
best with your humor. For the help whereof, it were good that you were let
blood in the brain: but for ill sight, who is so blind as bold ba^^rd, that
will not see his own folly? my prayers I will not forget to God, to bless me
from such foul spirits on the earth, and for love, more then Charity, I hold
you the furthest off in my thought: now knowing your poverty, I wonder you
will speak of a purse, and for an ill-favored face, go to Parish garden to
your good brother, indeed your Croidon sanguine, is a most pure complexion: but
for your Tobacco it is a good purge for your rewine: for my Fan it keeps me
sometime from the fight of such a vizard, as your good face: and for my hands I
keep my nails on my fingers, though you cannot keep your hair on your head:
now for laughing at fools, you are pr^uided for a Corcombe, and for loathing
an ill countenance, let the hangman draw your picture: be therefore contented
to be thus answered, speak wisely, or hold your peace, and be not busy with
your betters, least you know the nature of had I wist: so, hoping that you will
be so weary of the world, that you will hang your self for a medicine, to
heal your wits of a melancholy, I will bequeath you a halter upon free cost,
at your pleasure: and so I rest.

Your friend for such a matter. E. P.

A Letter for the preferring of a servant.
SIr, knowing your necessary use of a good servant, and remembering your late
speech with me touching such a matter, I thought good to commend unto you in that
behalf the bearer hereof W. T. a man whose honest secrecy, and careful
diligence, upon a reasonable trial, will soon make proof of his ^ufficiencie:
his parentage is not base, nor his disposition vile, but in all parts requisite
in one of his place, such a one, as I am persuaded will fit your turn: if
therefore at my request, you will entertain him. I doubt not, but you will
thank me for him: for I was glad to get him for you, and hope to hear he will
much content you: and thus loath to trouble you with longer circumstances,
leaving his service to your good regard, and my love, to your like commandment
in affectionate good will, I rest.

Yours ever assured. N. B.

The Answer.
SIr, I have received both your Letter, and the bearer, both which I will make
much of for your sake: for in the one I will often see you, and in the other
remember you: your commendatio^ of him, argues your knowledge, a sufficient
warrant for his worth, which I will as kindly, as thankfully think on: his
countenance I like well, and his speech better, and for the performance of my
expectation, am the better persuaded of his discretion: when I see you, you
shall know how I like him, in the mean time, he shall find that I will love
him: for all things necessary for his present use, I find him sufficiently
furnished: but if I find his want, it shall be soon supplied. So thanking you
for sending him, and wishing you had come with him, remaining your kind debtor
^il a good occasion of requital, with my hearty commendations, I commit you to
the Almighty.

Your very loving friend. R. T.

A Letter of counsel to a friend.
MY best approved, and worthiest beloved Philo, I hear by some of late come
from Venice, that seem to be somewhat inward in thy acquaintance, that thou
art of late, fa^nt into an amorous humor, especially with a subject of too much
unworthiness: a news, that (knowing thy spirit) I could hardly believe, but
upon solemn affirmation, I was sorry to bear: for, beauty, without wealth,
is but a beggarly charu^e, and honor without virtue, is but a little for a
Title: has she a glib tongues it is pity she has no better wit: is she
witti^, it is a sorrow, it is n^ better best^wed: for the craft of one woman,
is the confusion of many a man: does she say she loves thee? believe her not:
nay, does she love ^hee? regard it not: for it is a Jewel of so little worth,
as will give but (...) in the buying: I feared the plague had taken hold of thy
lod^in^: but thou art peppered with a world of infection: thy study (...) with
^oleness^, thy brain with dizinesse, and thy spirit with madness: O^ leave
these follies, think love but a dream, and beauty a shadow, and folly a
witch, and repentance a misery: wake out of thy sleep, and call thy wits
together, be not sotted with an humor, nor slave to thy self will, leave
courting of a Curtizan, and keep thy breath for a better blast: save thy purse
for a better purpose, and spend thy time in more profit: let not the wise laugh
at thee, and the honest lament thee: for my self, how I grieve for thee, I
would I could tell thee: but let thus much suffice thee: believe nothing that
she says, care for nothing that she does, nor give her any thing that she
wants: see her, but to purge melancholy, talk with her, but to sharpen wit,
give her, but to be rid of her company, and use her but according to her
condition, so shall thou have a hand over those humors, that would have a head,
over thy heart: and be master of thy senses, by the virtue of thy spirit,
otherwise, Will having gotten the bit in his teethe, will run away with the
bridle: and Reason, being cast off, may never sit well again in the saddle:
but why do I use these persuasions for the remove of thy passions? If thou be
soundly in, thou will hardly get out: but if thou be but over shoes, thou may
be saved from drowning: well, whatsoever I hear, I hope the best, but to a^^^d
the worst, I have presumed out of my love, to send thee this fruit o^ my
affection. In which, if my care may do thee comfort, I ^h^l^ think it a great
part of my happiness: howsoever it (...), I co^^it the consideration to thy
kindness. And so till I ^eare from thee, which I daily long for: I rest.

Thine as his own. N. R.

His answer.
Gentle Millo, I have received thy most kind and carefu^^ Letter, a messenger
of the most honest love, who has told me no less then I wholly believe: that
love in idleness, is the very entrance to madness: but yet, though I will
think on thy counsel, give me leave a little, to go on along with conceit:
whereof let me tell thee my opinion. Beauty without wealth is little worth:
but being a riches in itself, how can it be poorly valued* and honor, being
but the state of virtue, how can you pluck a little out of her ^tytle* the
tongue is the instrument of wit, and wit the approuer of discretion: where it
Reason b^ grauelled, nature may be admyred: now for words they hau^ their
substance, and love is not to be abused: for it is a Jewel well known, that
is worthy his price: Intrations are cuerie where, and Jealousy a most cruel
plague, but rid thy self of that disease, and fear not my health in the
other: conceit is a kind of dizinesse, which worse formented then with
idleness, is troubled with too strong a madness: but he that is unwise had
need to be reformed: and he that laughes at an imperfection, may fall himself
upon the fool: now for a mad dream, or an imagined witch, a conceited sleep,
or an entreated waking, I must confess they are pr^tie humors, and will
think of their errors: now for lotting and slavery, and for courting in
^nauerie, be persuaded, that time will employ my purse to better purpose: then
grieu^ not for me, but only love me, and let that suffice me: and for thine
advice in seeing, talking, and giving, fear not the had^wist of my folly: for
he that is master of himself, shall not need to his mistress: and therefore
he that cannot ride, let him leave the saddle: for Reason has a power over
(...), where (...) is but a servant to Nature: in the certainty of which
course, intending so to lay my hand on my heart, that I will fear no ho^nes on
my head, with many thanks for thy kind perswastons, hoping thou will take no
exceptions at my constructions, entreating thee to bel^ue of me no more then
thou need, and to love me as thou do, in the faith of that affection,
that holds th^^ bear to my love, I rest: during life.

Thine obliged and diuoted. W.B.

A Letter of comfort to a sister in sorrow.
Dear sister, I heard lately of your husbands departure for the Indies, when
with no little sorrow I considered your heavy case: in which, finding his
wants to be grievous, and your friends cold in comfort, I could not choose,
without unkindnesse, but remember these few lines of my love unto you: I know
your state is weak, how fair so ever you make your weather; but the more is
your patience worthy honor, that can so nobly conceal your discontentments;
for my self, I would I were able to do you good, but what I have, or can
procure, shall not fail to do you pleasure: but if your mind be too great to
stoop, to be beholding, what I am able to do, take a duty in my brothers
love: good sister therefore be of good cheer, and put your care upon me, I
will so you often, and love you ever: for a creature of your worthiness is
seldom found in your sere: that for her husbands love will adventure the state
of her living: your children are not many, but such as are shall be mine, and
you to me as myself: take therefore as little thought, and as much comfort as
you can, no doubt but God that tries his servants, will bless them: hope then
of my brothers happy return, and fill he come, command me, shortly God
willing you shall see me, in the mean time let me entreat you kindly to
accept this little token of my greater love, which is but an assurance of a
beginning of my affections never ending, in which predicament of true
friendship, I rest ever assured.

Your very loving sister, E.W.

Her answer.
Sweet sister, I have received your kind Letter and loving token, for both
which, I am your thankful debtor; but to^ching which husband, though his
wants were grieuo^s, yet to want him, is my greatest sorrewe, for in the stay
of his love was the state of my living: I am sorry that you know my weakness,
and with it but in strength to ^unswere your kindness: but good sister, though
I am willing to conceal my crosses, to be beholding to so honorable a spirit,
I count i^ not the least of my happiness, Therefore, though I have diu^ted my
self to solitariness in his absence, your company shall be to me as light in
darkness and no^ing the nature of your kindness, will ever be beholding to
your love: come then to me when you will, and command me what you will, for I
will be as go and you will: my children are my worlds joys, and my hearts
Jewels in whose faces I will behold their father, in whose love I will spend my
life: so in a merry go sorry, grieuing for his ab^ence, and wishing your
presence, praying for his happy return, your health, and mine own patience,
that in too much passion of affection, I fall not upon indiscretion, with most
hearty thankful love, I commend my life to your commandment.

Yours affectionately bound. E.G.

A Letter of love to a fair Mistress.
Far Mistress, to trouble you with a long circumstance, ^ might perhaps
fear you with the loss of time, and to make an end ere I begin, might argue
little care in my conceit; but to avoid both suspicions, let me a little
entreat with your patience, to peruse in a few words, the sum of a long
tale, in which, the truth of love, to the latest hour of death, protests the
joy of ^i^ life, but in the fruit of your favor, of which the thought of his
unworthiness, toth too much show his unhappiness. Time makes me too brief,
but in your wisdom is my hope of understanding, that in my trial you may
trust me, and by desert esteem me: in which, if I deceive your expectation, let
me die in the misery of your disdain. Thus not to flatter you with a fair
^^le in the state of your worthy commendation, beseeching to be commanded by
the kind care of your discretion, in the hands of avowed seriuce, I humbly
rest.

Yours always assured, R.O.

The Answer.
SIr, as I would be loath so be thought proud, I would as v^willingly be found
idle: either to believe too well of my self, or, not to have a respect of
other: Truth is sildome marked with smoothe words, and love is not bredde, but
upon great contentment: your lyking may be greater then my desert, and so alter
upon a better consideration: but mistake not your happiness, in my favors
unworthiness, where the best of my commandment, may be the least of your
contentment. Your consideration of time may excuse my shortness of writing,
where in a word you may understand, that in deed I intend: that Truth in
honorable in love, and virtue the fairest joy in affection: in which, it I not
misconstrue your conce^^, I will answer the care of your kindness: in which,
according to the due of desert, you shall find the effects of your desire. And
so for this time I rest.

Your poor friend. A.T.

A Letter of counsel from a kind Father.
MY dear son, you must not from your father look for a flattering love, no^
take it unkindly, that I suspect your ^ll courses: for I have passed the
dangereus tune y^ you now are in, and have hardly go^e through the briers: and
therefore in a jealous fear, from an inward care, I cannot ^h^se but give you
w^rning of what may pre^^dice your good. Beauty is a bewitching obied, and
^anto^nes is the ruin of wit: prodigality quickly makes a poor man, and he is
only rich that lives contented. But my good son, above all things serve God,
and keep a clean conscience, pass not the limits of allegiance, nor build
Castles in the air, take h^^d of extremities, for they are out of the course
of discretion, and the fruit of Ignorance, yields but the sorrow of
repentance: young men may be witty, but ^^ldome wise: and sometime, though ^rt
be a great perfecter of Experience, yet observation, is better then conceited
^unning. ^rpence is necessary upon occasion, and hope, is not amiss^ upon
desert: but Reason sometime is more regarded, then rewarded, where ^ill is too
powerful to be resisted. I hear that you are much given to Alch^mistry, it is
a study of great charge to many, and profits ^ewe: yet I forbid you no good
labor, so that you loose not by the bargain: ^^e therefore a care in the
employment of your time, and wherein my helps may further your good, seek no
other friend for your comfort. For though I would not wish you to disda^ne any
kindness, yet would I have you as little as you may to be beholding to any man:
for the prodigal are commonly talkatiue, and the couctous negative: and what a
grief it is to want, ^ pray God you never know. Any quality in a
mediocritie, ^ g^^dly allow you, but let not your love be carried away with ang
i^le imagination. I have sent you a hundredth Crowns, w^^ may you use them, and
when you need any more, send to me for them: for your affection touching
marriage, I would it were bestowed as I could with it: howeuer it be, it shall
be much amiss, it I mi^k^ke ^. I have sent you likewise a Horse, now and than
to manage in a morning, but I pray you forbear to use him as a ^ackney to ride
up and down the streets in idle humors. Converse with no fools, for you
shall loose time with them: and take heed of knaves, for there is much to be
feared in them. Long not after news, least you be gu^d with a ^east: and take
heed of drunkenness, for it is a healthy humor. Make much of thy money, and
abuse not thy friend: be careful of thy self, and forget not thy Father,
whose earthly joy is but in the hope of thy happiness, and whose deadly
sorrow would be to so thee (...) amiss. What shall I say more to thee ^ thou
know I love thee, and only in my love am I thus careful over thee. Accept
then my admonitions, and ponder upon the constructions, they may hap to (...)
thee good, but harm they can do thee none: ^se them therefore for thy best
avail. After the Term, the bacation will call thee into the Country, where
knowing thy Fathers house, thou may make thine own welcome. ^ill when, and
always, I will pray for thee, that God will so bless thee, that I may have
joy in thee.

Your loving Father, H. W.

A kind Answer of a loving son.
My dear Father, as I will not flatter myself with your love, so can I not but
joy in your kindness: whose careful counsel within the compass of so few
words, I will lock up in my heart, as the best jewel of my life: for to serve
God, is the duty of a Christian, and no longer let me line, then in the care
of that comfort. A clean conscience I find like a clean pair of sheets,
where the soul after labors may take a safe place of rest: to pass the limits
of allegiance, merits the loss of life, and he is borne ^^ happy that is
unnatural to his country: and a^ery castles, are but mad men's imaginations: I
know extremes are not durable, nor often prefitable: and repentance, a payment,
that pincheth the ^art of understanding.

I find the instruction of the aged to be the best direction of the youthful,
and observation with Experience to make the perf^ction of Art: the necessity
of Experience cannot be a^yed, but the hope of desert may be deceived: for,
while will stands for judgment, there is no holding of argument: touching
Al^hamistry, I hear much, but believe little: and for the charge, I will not
waste your Land, to make a new metal: but if by my industry I can do good,
I will take the benefit of Time: for qualities, I thank your large allowance,
the best means with labor to attain them, for Teachers, are worthy their
rewards: to be beholding I love not, and hate to be ungrateful: But as I
follow not the prodigal, I have little pleasure in the courtous: and for idle
imaginations, I can use them as fictions: for your Crowns, I humbly thank
you, and hope to bestow them to your (...). Your ^orse will do me much
pleasure, and cause me to see you the sooner. For gallopping the streets, it is
like children upon ^obby horses, but gi^^ie heads have such humors, that God
knows what will become of them: for marriage, though the course be honorable,
yet could I be content to forbear it, though in the ^^re^ion of my affection,
I will be much ruled by your discretion: Fools c^nnot understand me, and
knaves will but trouble me: but from the company of (...) conditions, the Lord
of heaven deliver me: good news come never too soon, nor badde too late, and
therefore as they are, I will est^^me them: For drunkenness never doubt me,
for it is most l^athsom^ to my nature: and for my money, though it being
servant, I will hold it as my good friend: for my friend he shall be my self;
but my father my hearts love, and my life's comfort: in whose careful
admonitions, how kind I f^^de the ininstructions, the obedience of my duty,
shall make known to your contentment: the vacation is near, and I will not be
long from you: where finding you well, shall be my best welcome: so thinking my
self bless in the heavens, to have so good a Father on the earth, beseeching
God to make me joyful in your eyes, by the graces of his mercies, in prayer
for your long health, with your hearts ever happiness; In all humble thanks,
I take my leave.

Your obedient son, T.W.

A Merchants Letter to his Factor.
As I have reposed trust in your care, I look for your performance of my
credit: your ability in managing such matters as I have committed to your
charge, I make no doubt of: and therefore hoping in your discretion to hear of
my expected contentment, I will look by your next Letters to hear of the
sum of my desire: in the meanetime, let me tell you, that I have sent you
over four score broad clothes, and thirty Car^ies, with such other
commodities as I think fit for your use in those parts, I pray you make your
best market, and take heed of your Creditors: for I hear there are men reputed
of great wealth, in suspicion to play banquerup^s, have therefore a care of
your business, your travels shall not be unconsidered: your French Wines I
hear this year are very small, and your Gascoigne Wines very dear, Prunes
cheap, but you know your markets, and so I hope you will have care in
disbursing your money, for it is hardly come by, and as this world goes, ^ooth
much in great matters: if there boe any News of woeth, acquaint me with them,
and in any wise, do not trouble me with untruthes: your Cou^en tells me that
you are in good regard with the Governor for certain clothes that you lately
bestowed on him, he told me the cause, and therein I commend your
discretion: for sometime it is better to give then to save, when it turns to
advantage. In sum, let this suffice you without further circumstance, you
have my love, and my purse, I pray have a care of them both: so till I hear
from you, I rest.

Your loving Master* W.H.

His answer.
S^^, I beseech you mistrust not your trust, nor have any fear^ of my care,
for, having both your love and your purse, how can the one let me forget the
other: ^o sir, be you assure^ howsoever banquers play banquerou^, sure pawnes
will dece^ue no credit: and touching such affairs as I have in charge, doubt
not your expectation of my dispatch: your clothes ^ have received, and like
them very well, year Car^ies are very good, I would you had sent more of them,
for they are much in request, and well sol^e. I have by good hap met with a
hundre^ Tun of Gascoigne Wines, upon a good market, as you may know by my
note. Prunes are good, and good cheap, and therefore I have sent you the
greater store of them, on the ^a^tes you shall find my mark, with two letters
of your name. I have sent you likewise, a Tun of Cuchiniles, which I bought
by a great cha^nce, the price you shall find^ in my note with the rest. By the
next Post you shall hear what I need, in the mean time having no
intelligence of worth, ^oth to trouble you with ^^^tle^, glad to perform^ that
(...) that your kindness has bound me too, wishing to live no longer, then
to discharge the office of an honest care, praying for your long health, and
everlasting happiness: I humbly take my lean.

Your faithful servant* C.B.

A Letter of challenge.
My wrongs are so many, as may no longer be dige^ted, and your excuses so idle,
as I will beneforth despise them: for your words are but wind, and therefore I
am weary of them: and therefore if you be not of so cold a complexion that
you bare not maintain your reputation, meet me to morrow early in the morning
in some ^elds a mile out of Town, and bring with you such Arms as you do
ordinarily carry, assign your place, and hour, and fa^e not your
appointment, that God the Judge of (...), may determine of our wrongs, and the
point of the sword may put a period to our discourses, Thus, having blown over
an idle paper, with a few last words of my intent, answer^ me as I expect, or
^eare of me as it will fall out. ^n haste.

Your enemy to the death. T.P.

The answer.
What you have written to me, I return upon your self, as loath to loose time
in answer of such idleness: if you burst go alone, I would go with you, but
let it suffice you, that I know ^^u, and therefore mean not to trust you, but
bring a friend with you, and I am ready for you: come to my lodging as early
as you will, and though I would be loath to break a sleep for you, yet I will
take a little pain to answer you: and for the field, we will cast lo^^es for
the place, where God, and a good conscience, will quick^y determine the
quarrel: but I fear the point of the sword will make a comma to your ^unning:
which if it do, you shall find wh^t will follow, And so leaving further
w^rds, wishing you to be as good as your word, I end.

Yours as you mine. H.W.

A merri^ Letter or News of complaints.
HOnest George, mine old schoolefellow, and kind friend, glad to hear of thy
home quiet, how ever I fare w^^^^y far travel: whereas thou writest unto me,
for such News as this place ^eelds, let me tell thee, that there are so many,
and so few of them true, that I dare almost write none; only this, upon my
knowledge, I dare deliver th^^: that of late in this City, there are a number
of complaints, every hour in the day, but all to little purpose. The Soldier
complains either of peace, or pe^^rie: the Lawier either of lack of Clients,
or cold f^es: the Merchant of small traffic, or ill fortune* the Trades man
of lack of Chapmen: the laborers of lack of work: the poor^ men of lack of
charity, and the rich men of lack of money: the th^efe of lack of booties:
and the hangman, that his trees are bare: in brief^, if I should tell th^e of
all the complaints that I hear of, as well among the Feminine, as Masculi^e
gender, how so^e old women cry out of young vnth^ifts, and some young wenches
complain ^f old misers: How some complain of their customers, and some other
of their neighbors, it were such a world of idle sto^^e, as would but trouble
thee in the reading: but since their complaints are all to little purpose, for
that S^uldiers are but for e^tremities, though honorable in their erploy^^,
and Lawiers are some tr^ublesome, except upon agreement of controue^s^es,
though Judges are worthy honor in execution of iu^^ice: and Merchants may
bear with fort^ne, when their Coffers are full of coin, though in respect of
their traffic, they are the maintenance of the Commonwealth: and Trades men
may sell cheap, when their best wares are all uttered, though it is
necessary, that they be set on work for the maintenance of the state: and
laborers may rest, when their Harvest is in, though it be needful to set them
to work for the avoiding of idleness: beggars may hold their peac^, when they
have filled the patches of their profession, though it is not amiss to relieve
them for the exercise of charity: now the rich men may shrugge their
shoulders, when they have no use for their bags, though sometim^ it be
requ^^^t rather to be sparing, then prodigal: and for the Th^efe, let him ^^gh
till the hangman do help^ him: and for the hangman let him mourn, for he i^
sure the devil lie^ in wait^ for him; and therefore let the old^ me^ill munch,
and the young titte mourn, I cannot help them, but as I h^are of their
complaints, I have written thee the contents, which being scarc^ worth the
reading, I l^aue to thy worst using. And so sorry that I have no matter of
worth, wherewith better to fit thin^ humor, in as much kindness as I can, I
commend my love to thy com^^^ndement: and so I (...).

Thine ever (...) his (...). W. P.

The answer of the l^ugh.
MY good wagge, I see travel has not so altered thine humor, but thou will
ever be thy self with thy ^^ien^s: for thy kind Letter I thank thee, and as
kindly as I can, will requi^e thee: as you are there full of sorrow, we are
here full of mirth: for in every place there is nothing so common as laughing:
one laughs at an other: the wise man laughes at the ^^^le, to see the nature of
his imperf^ctions: and the fool laughes at the wise man, because nature lets
him know none of his sorrows: the rich man laughes at the poor, to see the
manner of his life: and the poor man laughe^ at the rich, to s^e the misery of
his care: the fair laughes at the soul, to see how they are despised, and the
foul laugh at the fair to see how they are troubled: the honest laugh at the
knau^, to see how he shifts with the world: and the knave laughes at the
honest, to see how his simplicity is abused; for particulars, how any one
laughes at the other, either the old at the youthful, or they at the aged, I
dare say nothing: but w^rt thou hare, and had I not the more cause of sorrow,
we would laugh a little together to loo^^ at the laugher of this world: but
they say, he may laugh y^ wim^es, at least till he loose again: but the
natures of their laughing are diverse and very strange, for some laugh so loud
that they are noted foolish: some laugh so wide, that they shame their mouths
with lack of teeth: and some laugh so cunningly, that they ^^^ther it up in a
smile: but let them laugh till they be weary, it is a good world when men are
merry. Which hoping thou art, or praying thou may be, that when we kindly
me^t, we may commune better of these conceits, wishing thee all contentment,
and my self the pappinesse of thy good company, till I see thee and ever, I
rest: one and the same.

Thine as thou know. R. W.

A Letter to a friend for News.
Cousen, I know you that live abroad in the world, cannot but hear of news
every day, which we here in the Country would be glad now and than to ^ee
acquainted with: your labor will not be much in writing, and for your
kindness, it shall not be unrequited: we hear much murmuring of many things,
but little truth of any thing: but from you that know, I would be glad to
learn. There i^ a speech among some idle Astronomers, that the man in the
Moon has fal^e in love with a Star, and walking through the clouds, was
almost ^rowned in the water: and that the Tomblers of y^ forest have spoiled a
number of black Conneys, so that Rabbots are so dear, that a poor man may be
glad of a piece of mutton. It is said here with us in these parts, that you of
the City are much troubled with a new disease, truly we have reasonable good
health, but that there are such plagues in diverse houses, what with shrewd
wives, and evil husbands, stubborn chil^ren, and wicked servants, that many
honest men cannot live in quiet with their neighbors. Though the Spring be not
very forward, yet there is great increase of many things, especially of
children* which how they may answer the ^awe, I will not greatly stan^ upon.
Thus having no matter of moment wherewith at this time to trouble you,
entreating you that I may ^^ortly hear from you, I ^est, in much affection.

Assuredly yours. R. T.

His Answer.
MY good Cosen, to answer your kind Letter, if there were any thing here
worth the writing, I would not have been so long silent, but such are the
occurrents in these places, as are either not worth the noting, or better
unspoken the^ written: for love in youth is ^o full of idleness^, and malice in
age so malicious, that virtue is so hid up in corners, that there is little or
nothing spoken of her account. For the man of the Moon, I leave him to wait
on the Sun, but if he have a mind to any Star, I leave him to follow his
owlight: for his watery element, since it is all in clouds, let it hang in the
Air, I will not meddle with his loving Astronomy. For Connies, I am no
Warrener, and therefore let them that have the keeping of the grounds, look
to their game: I have small sport in such idleness: but for a piece of mutton,
a young lamb is worth five old Connies, and he that is not glad of such a
feast, let him fast for his dinner. For our new disease, it is with many men in
the head, ^ women in the tongue, servants grow great libertines, and children
are sick of the parents: and for neighbors, there is so much love in the
streets, that there is almost none in the houses: and therefore besides other
ordinary diseases, we want no plagues to make us look into our sins. But
God amend all, for one s^arc^ mend an other: and therefore entreating you to
have patience with me till the next week; when you shall hear of the best
News that come to my hands, I rest: in bounden good will.

Yours as mine own. N. R.

A dissuading from marriage.
Sweet Cosen, I am sorry to hear, that being so well at ease, you will coosin
your self of your quiet: and for want of a worlds hell, you will put your self
into a purgatory with a wife: but if it may be that I speak in time: hear
what I s^y, (...) she be fair, it may b^eed jealousy: if foul^, dis^ike, and
change: if rich, take h^^d of prid^: if poor, mis^rie: if young, bew^re the
w^nt^^: if ^l^, take heed of the ^eldame: if wise, sh^^ will gouern^ thee: i^
foolish, she will fret thee: how dear soever she love thee, she will sometime
or other, either cross or fl^tter thee: and therefore, if thou will be ruled by
a friend, let neither old nor young, fair nor ^eu'^ trouble thee: believe me,
as I have read, these are ye properties of most wives: to weaken strrin^th, to
trouble wit, to e^ptie purses, and to breed humors: but if I be deceived in my
reading, or mine Author in his writing, either in altering your course, or
proving your comfort, tell me your mind when we meet. Till when, wishing you
continuance of that quiet, wherein you now live, or the true contentment of the
best love: leaving to your discretion, the mannaging of your affection, I
commit you to the Almighty.

Thine ever ^s his own. T. W.

The answer.
GOod Cou^^n, I find your kindness above your knowledge, in mistaking paradise
for purgato^ie: for, a wife is y^ wealth of the mind, and the welfare of the
heart: where the best judgment of Reason finds Discretions contentment. May
b^ is a ^oubt: but what is, must be regarded, in which ^ence I an^ pleased:
where youth with beauty, and wit with ^ert^^, have power to command, where
kindness^ must obey. Poverty I fear not, and wealth I seek not: but it
suffices ^e to seek no other fortune ^o: the sum of my worlds happiness:
where the avoiding of evil, and the hope of good, makes me know more comfort
then you are able to conceive, till you enter into that course, where in the
^oy of love is the second blessedness of this life. What shall I say, but that
I know not what to say, to express the perfection of this pleasure, that puts
down all idle imaginations: from which, hoping to see thee removed, when I
next see thee. Till then and ^uer I rest.

Thine as thou know. B. D.

A kind Letter of a Creditor for money.
SI^, I pray you take it not unkindly, that I write thus earnestly unto you,
for more necessity, then will has v^ged me unto it: my many is not much, and
you well able to discharge it, the day of payment is past, and I have great
occasion to use it, my losses by sea, and ill Creditors by land, make me strain
curtesse with my friends, for their good help in an extremity, yet d^^ I
desire nothing but my due: but as I was ready to lend, I would be glad to
receive, with that fullness of good will, that may continue our kindness. I
write not this, as doubting your discretion, but t^ entreat your patience, if
your purse be not in tune: for were I as I have been, and hope to be, I had
rather bear ^oo long, then as^^ too soon, especially of so good a friend, as
I have always found of your self. Consider therefore of my case, and in your
kindness answer me: Time is precious, and therefore least by disapointment, I be
disfurnished, and so perhaps discredited, I pray you speed^ your answer:
which, howsoever, shall be welcome: and therefore, ^arnestly entreating you, to
help me now, that I may the better ^uil your kindness hereafter, with many
thanks for your great favors, which cannot be forgotten to be deserved: I
take my leave further at this time to trouble you, but will rest in what I
shall be able ever to pleasure you, to make you know how much I love you.

Your loving friend at command. T. R.

The debtors Answer.
SIr, your request is so reasonable, and your kindness so much, that for a
greater matter then your demand, if my purse were not in tune, I would strain
my credit very far for you: ^eare then with my a little forgetfu^^es of my
day, and think it ^o trouble to my patience, to be put in mind of my credit:
your sea losses I am sor^^ for, and wish your recovery by land. Debtors that
will not pa^e, make Cred^^ors they cannot lend: but for my self, to make you
know, how much interest you have in my affection, let me tell you, that though
by some inexpected expenses, I am short of my hoped reckoning, yet upon the
receipt of your Letter, I have been th^s careful for you: your money I have
sent you, and as much more for so long time, I will lend you, which you shall
rec^i^e of this bearer: and in my Letter, the day of payment, which if it may
pleasure you so much as I wish you, I am glad I had it for you: how^oeuer it
fall out, use it to your own discretion: and so far be always assured of my
love, that my word and deed shall be all one in your comfort. And so leaving
ceren^on^ous complements, in unfeigned good will, I rest; Always to my
uttermost power.

Yours as mine own. D. W.

A Letter of News.
TO perform my promise in my last Letter, my kind, and best Cousen, you shall
understand, of such occurrents, as I hear go current for truth: I hear there
are certain old people, that speak much of Prophecies, where they set it
down^ for a certain rule, that this year, and many to come, he that wants
money in his purse, and a friend in the Court, may walk into the Country, and
pick strawes for his comfort: for the law is very dangerous for begging,
and Charity is so cold, that the poor must starve, rather then the rich will
want. Old men shall never be young again in this world, and beauty in a young
woman, will not let her know her self. Honesty without wit, will die on the
fool, and craft without credit, will labor to little purpose. In sum, there
will be a great plague among the poor with lack of money, among fools for
lack of wit, and knaves, for lack of honesty: but it may be, Nature may
alter her course in many things, and Prophecies may fall out in contrarieties.
Howsoever it be, welcome that comes on Gods name: and so, hoping thou love no
legerdemaine, nor will ^e led away with blind Prophecies, writing this only for
exercise of a merry humor, I rest.

Thine what mine. P. R.

The Answer.
SUch idle Prophets as you meet with, have such kind of matter as you write
of: but let the world wagge as it list, there is not a truer wagge in the
world then thy self: and were it not, that I fear my Letter would come to
light, I would answer you in your kind. But to be short, let me tell you, that
laws are good to take order with such outlawes, as after prodigality, put
themselves upon Charity. And yet to cross your rule of little experience, old
men may have young humors, fair wenches, put wise men to their wits, and
honesty, may thrive with a mean trade, when a crafty knave may loose by his
c^^^ing broking. As for the plague, I fear me it is never from you: for if
neighbors agree, yet their wives may fall out: and while the poor fret, and
the rich frown, there is little hope of health, where the world is so out of
quiet. And therefore hoping that you have wit enough, to beware the knave and
the fool, and to make your choice of best company: wishing your continuance of
your good humor, with thanks for your waggish Letter, I rest, in our old
league.

Yours as mine (...). R. W.

A Letter of persuading to marriage.
Dear Cousen, I ^oo not a little wonder at your solitary life, and more at
your little care to match your self in marriage with some virgin worthy your
love: will you leave the world without memory of your name, your inheritance to
no issue of your own honor, and run a course of too little comfort^
Me^thinketh, that your knowledge of the diversity of ^ariet^^s should settle
your content upon some especial virtue: what if some women be aged, some are
youthful, and some fr^war^, other may be kind: and some wanton, there are
better stayed: and some sullains, some are loving: and is there n^n^ can fit
your humor? God forbid: the law of Nature, the law of Reason, the law of God
does will it, that love breed increase by a virtuous coniun^tion, which cannot
be performed, without the honor of this course. Bastards will be witnesses of
their parents wickedness, when natural children are the joy of their Fathers:
and ^ a true loving wife, is worth a thousand wild walkers: her care in the
house, her kindness at the Table, and her comfort in the bed, are pleasures
better conceived then expressed: fall the^ ab^^rd with such a Bird, as you may
hold for your Phoenix, and think thy mind at best liberty when it is ^ree
from the bands of folly. In ^ne, let me entreat thee to make thy house a home,
thy wi^e thy worlds love, and thy children thine earths joy: which as I hope
^hou will be glad to have, I shall be glad to see. For good speed whereof, in
hearty prayer I rest.

Thy loving Co^^en, R. W.

His Answer.
MY kind Cousen, I see you are better read then experienced: for Batchellers
wives, and Maidens chi^^ren, are pretty things to play withal: but he that
knows many dangers, will take heed of all. A wife is an everlasting substance,
which if it be not of the better nature, is a perilous thing to meddle
^ithall: for if it catch hold of the hands, it may put the heart to a fore
pain: and the Phoenix is such a figure, as if I must find he in a woman, I
fear me I must seek a great way for her. For the laws that you speak of, I
yield to truth, but love is so nice an humor, that he ^l^ome settles in a
place: for Bastards, I love not the breed: and better children will do well
when they come: For bed and board, and those tricks, let them joy in them that
have them, when I f^nd time I will think on them: in the mean time, more at
quiet in my lodging with a friend, then perhaps I may be at home with a wife,
not forswearing marriage, nor peasting to purgatory, in stead of a mistaken
paradise: wishing thy prayers for my better happiness, then loves idleness,
and if I do marry to be kindly matched: I rest.

Thine a^ mine own. D. L.

A Letter of unkindness upon a denial of a Courtesy.
IF my deserts had not exceeded my desire, I would have hate^ the nature of my
humor, which loves nothing less then to be too much beholding: my request was
not much, and the grant but easy: howsoever for ill fashion, the excuse ^ay be
cunningly framed: but though I conceive unkindness in this course, I can
rather grieve then be angry: for I will mistrust my wit, til I see too much of
my sorrow: and love my friend, though I be plain with his patience: be content
therefore rather to let me tell you of my discontent, then to cover a
dissimulation, and to wish your better regard of my affection, then to give me
just cause to touch the care of your discretion, which in denying a triflle,
may loose a greater benefit: but not to go too far in impatience, let me
thus grow to an end: Friendship once grounded is not easily removed: and
therefore being assured of my love, bear with my dislike: and wherein I may
better pleasure you, doubt not the ill requi^all of unkindness, for I can chide
and not be angry, and better love you, then tell you so. And so entreating your
reasonable answer for my satisfaction, I rest: all displeasure set apart.

Your loving friend. N. S.

His answer.
YOur humorous kind of writing, puts me to study for an Answer: for your
anger without cause, may move caul^ of anger: you know you might command what
I am, and will you have more? Conce^t may be deceived, and so kind^^sse abused,
and suspicion of impatience has the least part of dis^r^^on. Excuses are idle
among fr^^nds, and therefore words shall be deferred till our meeting: when
s^^ing your own f^ul^, you will not think amiss of your friend, grieve not
then without cause, nor be carried away with conceit: and as you know my
nature, command my love, which is far from the thought to make a friend
beholding: be not discontent with a den^all, till you have better reason of
displeasure, but measure me with your ^^lfe, and you shall find small cause of
difference: if there be any, let kindness dispute it, reason confess ^t, an^
patience b^^re it, so shall friends be themselves, and you and I shall not fall
out. So hoping that you will sat^^fie your self with this answer^, ti^ we m^^t
to talk further of the matter, I conclude with your kindness, and rest ever.

Yours, as you kn^w, T.W.

A Letter to an unthankful person.
I Have heard that a Prince sometime ordeining a punishment for all offenses,
le^t Ingratitude to the gods to plague, as p^^^ man^ power to punish ^^ough:
the Tale may well be true, con^^dering the vileness of such a nature, as I
think the ^^ke lives not in the shape of man. Could thou not only forget,
but abuse my kindness, and so make a monster of a wicked shadow: I could not
have believed it, had I not too we^l proue^ it: but I wish you would leave the
humor, least it make a lo^thsome nature: and though I will not revenge a wrong
upon a (...) to much baseness, yet will I learn to know the condition of so
much vileness, and as well warn my friends from an enemy, as further abuse
mine own wit with so mistaking of a friend, In brief therefore, let me tell
you, as I know you, I regard you, and as I found you I leave you, as one fit,
if there lacked a Card, to put in the stock for a wicked help. And so sorry to
have lost so much time to write to you, I wish all the world that knows you,
to hate you.

Your enemy from the heart. D. M.

His answer.
HOw straungely men will write, that impatience does put out of order? a good
turn is lost, when it is cast in the receivers teethe: and abuse misconceiued,
can hardly be well excused: consider better of what is done, then wrong the
meaning of a good mind, and you shall find without excuse, no true cause of
displeasure: If the information of malice have moved choler without judgment,
poor men must endure the misery of evil fortune: against my self I will
confess nothing, but refer time to decide all doubts, when Truth shall put
the differences betwixt a shadow and a better substance. So leaving ill humors
to like minds, and good thoughts to better natures, hoping to find you your
self, which will be far enough from that you write: In spite of the devil I
commit you to God: and so rest.

Your friend whether you will or no^. D. R.

A Letter to laugh at, after the old fashion of (...):to a Maid.
AFter my hartic commendations, trusting in God that you are in good health as
I was a^ the writing ^^r^o^, with my Father and my Mother, my bro^hers and
sisters, and all my good friends, thanks be to God. The cause of my writing to
you at this time is, that E^len, I do hear since my ^^^^ing from Wakefield,
when you know, what ta^ke ^re bad together at the sign^ of the ble^ Cuc^oe, and
how you did gi^e me your hand, and swear that you would not forsake me for all
the wo^^de, and how you made me buy a Ki^ng and a ^art, that cost me right^^^e
pene^, which I left with you, and you gave me a Napkin to wear^ ^n my ^^t, I
thank you, which I will wear to my dying day^^nd I (...) if it be true as I
hear, that you have alt^red your mind, and are made sore to my neighbor
Hob^ins younger son, truly Ellen you do not wel^ in so doing, and God will
p^a^^e you for it, and I hope I shall live and if I never have you: for there
are mo^e maids the^ Maulkin* and I count my self worth the whis^ing. And
therefore praying you to write me your answer by th^s bearer my friend,
touching the truth of all, how the matter ^t^nd^ with you, I com^^^ you to God.
From Ca^lo^ gr^^ne.

Your true Lo^er. R. P.

Her Answer.
T^uly Roger, I did not look for such a Letter from your hands, I would you
should know, I scorn it: Have I gotten my Father and Mothers ill will for you,
to be so used at your hands* I p^rceiue ^ you be so Jealous already, you would
be somewhat an other day, I am glad I find you, that you can believe any thing
of me: but it is no matter, I care not: send me my Napkin, and you shall have
your King and your Heart, for I can have enough and I never see you more: for
there are more Batchelers then Roger, and my penny is as good silver as yours:
and therefore seeing you are so lusty, even put up your pipes, for I will have
no more to do with you: And so ^nsaying all that ever has been said betwixt
us, make your choice where you list, I know where to be loved: and so I end.
From Wakefield.

M. R.

FINIS.

