ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS


THE REASONS WHICH DOCTOVR HILL HAS BROVGHT, FOR THE upholding of Papistry,
which is falselie termed the Catholic Religion: Unmasked, and showed to be
very weak, and upon examination most insufficient for that purpose: By GEORGE
ABBOT Doctor of Divinity and Deane of the Cathedral Church in Winchester.

The first Part.

Joh. 9. 4. The night comes when no man can work.

Jer. 51. 6. Flee out of the mids of Babylon, and deliver every man his
soul: be not destroyed in her iniquity.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOSEPH BARNES, and are to be sold in Paul's Church-yarde
at the sign of the Crown by Simon VVaterson. 1604.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Thomas Baron of Buckhurst Knight of the Honorable Order
of the Garter, L. High Treasurer of England, one of the LL of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, and Chancellor of the University of Oxford,
my very especial good Lord.
RIGHT Honorable, it is not unknown unto your Lordship that in the days of
our late most blessed Sovereign of famous memory, some unnatural English,
who as Fugitives had departed their Country, did maliciously and slanderously
write against our stare Ecclesiastical and Civil, and oftentimes against those
who governed both the one and the other. And albeit the pretense whereof they
did make show to the world, was only the restoring of the Roman Religion, yet
men of deeper judgment could not be ignorant, that they had a purpose to
prepare their credulous Scholars for a day of alteration otherwise; and in the
mean while to make them discontented with the present times, which they ceased
not to lade with all calumniations, and wicked imputations whatsoever. Amongst
this number was and is a certain audacious person, who terms himself
Doctor Hill: and being a man of no more then a competent learning, but yet of
a very bold spirit, has traced the steps of other his fellows which went
before him. For he principally makes show to yield Reasons, why Popery should
be the true faith of Christ, and for that purpose heapeth up a many of weak
and worne-out Arguments: but toward the middle of his book falls into other
points, as if this Kingdom our Country, were a sink of wickedness beyond
all the nations of the earth, and therefore detestable to God and good men. In
respect of which insufferable defamations, it was held most fit that this
Treatise should receive an Answer: but especially for the points of
Papistrie broched and urged therein, which may beguile the hearts of the simple,
or such who are not indifferently affected. Having therefore at the entreaty of
others who wish the flourishing of true godliness, traveiled some-vvhat in
this Argument, for the better settling of such as will take pains to read or
hear, it now remains that I should reco^mend the protection thereof, to your
Honorable Lordship, to who^ of right and duty it appertains. For as
heere-tofore, so always I must acknowledge, that whatsoever my poor labors
can effect, is due unto your Lordship as to a special maintainer of true
Religion, a lover of our Country, a Protector of our University, an vp-holder
of learning, and unto me a most Honorable Patron.

Almighty God evermore bless and increase your Honor, to the good of his
Church, to the service of the Kings most gracious Majesty, and to the great
benefit of this Commonwealth. From University College in Oxford. Ianuar. 4.
1604.

Your Lordships Chaplein much bounden

GEORGE ABBOT.

To D. Hill, as a brief answer to his two letters prefixed before his book.
AS he is not to be commended for skill at his weapon, who frames unto
himself a man of straw, and then at his pleasure does prick or strike him: so
you are not in too high a degree to be thought well of, for your knowledge in
Divinity, who in the entrance of your petty work, do forge unto your self an
Epistle put out in the name of other, whereunto you may say, or not say, what
best fitteth your own humor. You, who can be Fitz-Williams in steed of Hill,
are capeable of such a quality; and in composing of your former letter you
cannot much dissemble it; when you pretend, your friends, the two Citizens
that write unto you, to be first so learned, as out of Bud. ex Cicer.
Budaeus, or Tully to call you Opinator vehemens, and secondly so zealous as to
seek to reclaim you from your course: and yet you bring them in, making no
mention of Christian persuasion drawn from Divinity, or the word of God; but
only multiplying upon you worldly reasons of Country and Parents, and friends,
and preferment, and other such like matters. Such of our people as are grounded
in Religion, can readily yield some account 1. Pet. 3. 15
of the hope that is in them: but such as withal do make show of learning, may
be presumed in a matter of this nature would intersert somewhat, which might
savor of spiritual contemplation, especially their letter being sent to one
of that mind, whereof throughout this treatise you show your self to be. But
this devise of your own seemed unto you the most cleanly shifte, that by such
a Fighting with a shadow.
(...) you might have some color to divulge your rotten Reasons; yet taking
heed too, that you urge not your self over-hard, least you might be deemed
more unwise, then some of your Popish (...) ^selues a voluntary penance, will
not lash themselves sorer then agrees with their own fancy.

In your Answer to this imaginary Letter, you would have your Reader conceive
in you a most firm resolution to persevere in Papistry, since no Parents are
so dear unto you as the father of all fathers. Which judgment of yours were to
be prized at a high rate, if it were certain and vn-questionable, that you did
walk aright. For there is nothing in the world like the pleasing of that e^e,
which Psa 121. 4. Chrys^m 23 (...) G^n.
neither slumbereth nor sleeps: and as S. Hierome could say, ^pist. 8. Tom. 9.
It is better to blush before sinners upon earth, then before the holy Angels
in heaven. But if you mistake your walk, and run in the way of falsehood, in
steed of the path of truth; and so deprive your self first of the company of
your earthly Parents, and then of the comfortable presence of that father which
fitteth in heaven; you resolve amiss, and the issues of your race are the
issues of death, so that the fruit of your persistance, or pertinacy rather, is
no less then truly miserable. Mat. 15. 2.
When the Pharisees stood stiffly for the Tradition of the Elders, and S. Act
22. 4.
Paul was so vehement for his old opinions, that he persecuted the way of
Christ unto the death: When S. August de m^us Eccl Cath 1. 18.
Austen for nine years space could not be reclaimed from Manicheisme, they
thought they had done well, and verily believed, that those their courses were
acceptable to the Almighty: and yet indeed they were most displeasing in his
sight, most exorbitant from the rule of his commandments. God judges not by
the imaginations and conceits of men: but according to those prescriptions
which he has laid down in his word, so is his determination. And whether
your opinions do agree with that his sacred Scripture, we shall sift in time
and place.

In one Periode you tell your friends, that they love you amore concupiscenti^,
rather then amore amicitia, seeking their own good thereby: yet you add in
the very next sentence, that whatsoever they write or say, you know it
proceeds from love and affection, and from true am^, but yet savouring
merely of flesh and blood. Here we would gladly know, how true amity
should be in any, and not amor amicitia. You had need explane this Paradoxe.

If you were borne and baptized in Popery, it may seem that your birth was in
Q. Mary's days: but how you should receive confirmation in the same errors,
unless it were after your flying beyond the seas, we cannot tell. It is one
thing to be generated, another to be regenerated; one thing to have a birth,
another a new birth. And as touching your Baptism, you should remember that
you were baptized into the faith of Christ, not into the belief of the Bishop
of Rome; who for his own part shall stand or fall to God, but shall not so
answer as to clear the souls of other. Epiphanius in Ancorato.
Origin shall not stand by us in the day of judgment; neither shall any other
so assist us, as by his protection to savegard us. Neither is it sufficient to
say, that after this or this sort I was baptized, and therefore I will continue
in the same; in as much as the Jew may say so far, touching his Circumcision
in Iudaisme, and the Mahumetane concerning his Circumcision in Mahumetisme: yea
the Arrians were baptized in Arrianisme, and other Heretics received that
Sacrament after the obliquities of their Heresies. It is ill to begin amiss:
but it is worse to persevere in the by-waies of uncertain error. Tullie could
recount it for a fault, that Academicar. Qu^st. 4.
men in the weakest time of their age, either listening to some friend, or being
inveigled by one oration of some body which they have first heard, they judge
of things which they know not, and look unto whatsoever discipline they
be carried as with a tempest. unto it they do cleave as to a rock, and never
examine whether it be right or wrong. Yet such as these, in their elder
years might have said for themselves; In this have we been conversant even
from our youth: therein have we had our education; and therefore now we
are not to vary from it: This determination had not been good in Philosophy,
neither is the like to it commendable in Divinity.

Your magnisike bravado of embracing that which is so ancient and universal,
is but a blaze to dazzle the eyes of your credulous disciples. If in defense of
your superstition, you be able to shevve ought of more antiquity, then the
word of God is, we will soon yield unto you: but verily in comparison
hereof, all for which you strive is but plain novelty. Neither does the wide
spreading of error, alter the nature of it into truth, or give any privilege
for the warrant of the same: for then should the service and obedience of
Satan be of higher worth then the verity of Christ, in as much as the fear
of God has ever been contained within more narrow listes, then the devotions
and ceremonies performed to the Devil. Truth is not to be esteemed by the
multitude of the followers, but by the reality of it self. But in the process
of this work, there will be occasion more then once to speak of this
argument. That joy of yours, that you follow not any new opinions, as of
Puritanisme, Brownisme, Martinisme, or of the family of love, is but slenderly
supported: for among men of understanding, it is no better to hold a long
continued untruth, then a late-sprung-vp falsehood. The one is to defend an
inveterate error, and the other to mainetaine a later mis-conceite. And
probably against the former it may be objected, that as A^ist Top 3. l. (...).
Bonum quo antiquius, eo melius: so on the contrary side, Malum quo antiquius
eo peius. In those matters which deflect from the rule of right, the heavier
sentence does ever light, according to the measure or quantity of of the
variation from the rule, not according to the age or youth of the opinion. That
is but a circumstance: the other is the maine consideration.

Great carfulness you pretend to satisfy your friends, that it is not on
any heady or braine-sicke fantasticalitie, that you are so addicted to the
Romish profession: But while you join thereunto, that you have no purpose to
persuade other to your superstition, as being dangerous because prohibited by
the laws of the land wherein we live, we dare not entertain that on
your Popish credit. For we are not so simple but to see, that this Mat. ^3 15.
compassing of sea and land, this laboring to disgrace our Religion and the
professors of it, this forging and faining so many untruths, this magnifying
of the Papacy and the members thereof, and the publishing of al these, and that
in the vulgar tongue, is to no other end but to make proselytes if it may be,
to enlarge the kingdom of Antichrist, to extend the territories of the Pope,
to stay and intricate the passage of the strong, to entangle the weak, to
perverte the simple, to abuse those who are light of belief, to feed the
humor of the male-contented, and to minister more poison to those who are
already intoxicated with the cup of Apoc. 17. (...)
fornication, reached out by the whore of Babylon. And in respect of this your
project, we marveile not at all at your braving and facing, that you are able
to afford us infinite more Reasons, why your profession is true Religion. We
are now well acquainted with such bragges as these are, and our youngest
Divines who look into your works, which come from beyond the seas, do
despise it and contemn it in you al; that when you have spent many years in
compiling your pamphlets or greater books, yet it must be said to be done in a
few weeks or months, or as Campians Reasons were, Conclusio december Rationum.
munusculum contextam operis in itinere subcisivis. And when you have raked
together all that you can say, yea and stolen it also from the works one of
another, yet you could make large volumes more, and fill the world with the
ever-flowing streams of your continual running rivers. Of this we shall
need no better instance the^ your self; whose huge boasts will be displayed,
to be but base and poor shifts; and your Quartron will be manifested to be,
for a great part thereof, but borrowed stuff, and that of such mean
quality, as that hardly it may go in the number of the buttons and lace,
whereof you talk: that is to say, for Pedlerie and paultry ware it may be
reputed, and not as ought of any precious accounte or reckoning. You had need
therefore entreat your friends (as you do) to take all well, which if they
do upon this your request, and so yield you your defire, it is much more of
their kindness and courtesy, then of your deserving.

The protestation, which you make of loyal and duetiful affection toward our
and your Sovereign, is in show somewhat, if in truth your heart and actions
do directly and indirectlye corresponde thereunto. But it may be demurred
upon, whither those who are in highest authority, and by long experience and
manifold intelligence have understood their course who are brought up in the
Seminaries, will give credit to your words. You do not so dance in a net,
as that you can see every body, and no body can see you. There is much and very
much prejudice against you, such as will not in have, upon the naked word of a
person suspect, be satisfied for. We know this your Maxim, that faith given,
or promise made to an Hereuke may be broken. We know, that with you the Pope is
Christ's Vicar, and his voice is to be obeyed as an immediate Oracle of God. We
undoubtedly understand that diverse of the Roman Bishops have done their
worst to deprive her late sacred Majesty of her crown and dignity. We find
that many of your Predecessors and Schoole-maisters, have in printed books much
reviled and railed against the Lords Anointed, and some do yet persist. We
are assured that the companies of your fellow students, are mainetained by the
late professed enemies of our Religion, Prince, and Country. We have it
confessed by men of their own sort, that many of the English beyond the seas
are at the sole devotion of the Spanyard. It cannot be denied that the Rectours
and chief men of, or near your Seminaries, as Allen, Bristow, Stapleton,
Parsons, and other, have either by their actions, or their writings, or both,
declared themselves known traitors against our dead Sovereign and the State,
as also that diverse of the leaders did with their best indevours help forward
the invasion, Anno 1588, and some of the meaner sort came in the fleet. And as
certain it is, that sundry both Irish and English Priests and Jesuits have
been principal instigatours of the Irish tumults. At home, albeit of late
there has appeared some difference between such as are united to the
Archpriest, and the rest which oppugn him, yet in this our Q. Elizabeth did
certainly find that they al agreed, that to their vitermost they did knit The
proclamation. Nov. 5. 1602
as many as they could fast to the Pope, diminishing the number of those who
were assured to her Highness, and increasing his account, who heretofore had
as a temporal Prince his banner displaide in the field, and still to her death
continued his warlike Stratagems against her Majesty. And from this root of
being reconciled to the Roman Bishop, it arises, that many of your followers
are male-contented with the present state, and insinuate so far as they dare,
that they wish another government. Al these scruples make against you; besides
the frequent conspiracies by some against the life of our late gracious Queen,
and by others, the justification of such Rebels as have lift up their sword
against her. And well it were, if together with her death, the wicked malice of
that false generation had dyed: but it is otherwise, as by the attempts of that
Quodlibeting Watson and other his accomplices, is evident to all men. They have
by printed books, made infinite protestations of allegiance and loyalty, the
least spark whereof does now see me never to have resided within their
breasts: which well demonstrateth what credit may be given to active stirring
Papists. Now for your part if you approve these things, your heart is not
sound: and if you dislike them, you renounce many Theoremes, and much also of
the practice of Popery: and then you may be a witness to your self, that as
many of your forerunners and fellows have swarved in these actions and
positions, so they and you also may go astray in your other points of
Papistrie, which you at this time do not more eagerly defend, or confidently
mainetaine, then your predecessors and copartners have done the rest before
named. But until this do enter into your heart, and you by evident
demonstration do show us some better fruit, you must give us leave with a
watchful eye to observe you, and to hold you no more loayll, then we have
good assurance thereof. An enemy can humble himself, and make fair
vveather, till he can gain opportunitye to effect his longe-vvished and
principal desires.

Upon this I pray you to ruminate in your chamber at Phalempyne or Palempyne,
whence you date your letters; which we will not imagine to be Pampelyne or
Pampelune in Navarre, nor otherwise beat our brains to know what this
means, since an Examination has detected, that Master Fitz. UUilliams, that
is to say, you Doctor Hill, brought your book your self to be Printed, not
at Antwerpe, as the first page falsely signifies, but in England, and there
where either black or white Lords or Ladies bear either game or name avva^e.
God send you so much grace as to see and consider your own courses, to
recall your untruths, to repent for your slanders, and to make satisfaction
to those simple and superstitious people, whom by this following libell you
have abused.

AN ANSWER TO THE FIRST REASON.
THOMAS HILL. If the Prophecies of the Holy Bible be true (as they be most
true) then must the Religion of the Protestants needs be false.


GEORGE ABBOT. THat some do still continue to plead for their unholy father of
Rome, and do their best endeavors to underprop and uphold the ruins of his
decaying Babylon, ought not to seem strange to any Christian man, who has but
a competent knowledge of things spiritual. For while there is a church
militant, there shall also be a Church malignant, laboring to oppress and keep
down the other; and so long as Antichrist stands, he shall have his
admirers, yea and Apoc. 13. 15.
adorers too, of the image of the beast. And toward the end of the world it is
foretold, that there shall be swarms of Cap. 9. 3.
locusts, who in likelihood will not so ill love the bottomless pit, from which
they do ascend, but that their purpose will be to return thither again, and
draw with them such store of company, as they may be able to work upon.
Neither may it seem wonderful, that among the devoted servants of the Pope,
some of our nation being ^ed over the seas, should play their parts and prizes,
since it is their open profession to stand on his side, and fight under his
banner: And something they must return for their hungry pensions and needy
mainetenaunce which they receive from his Holiness and the King Catholic;
besides the containing of their favorites here in their former courses, by
refreshing their wits with novelties; and the solacing of their own
discontentments, which do the less gaul and gripe their vnquie^ hearts,
while their heads are busied with inventing, and their hands with writing
that, which whether it be true or false, tending to edification or destruction,
they little care or consider.

2 But of the two, it is more to be marveiled at, that after so long and
plentiful a flowing forth of the water of life, there should yet be any of
our countri-men and women remaining at home, who will taste of puddle water, yea
be as greedy to drink thereof, as the masters of the broken cisternes can
be ready to propose it unto them. That come there forth any pamphlet, of what
small worth soever, yet some or other will either for their ignorance admire
it, or for their vnsetlednes entertain it, or for their perversenes embrace
it, as if it were some divine Oracle descended from above. But this is the
instabilitie of their judgment, who are once Gal. 3. 1.
bewitched like the foolish Galathians, that although Christ has been so
lively testified unto them, as if he had been crucified before their eyes,
yet if new teachers come one after another, they will earnestly attend, and
listen unto the^. The world is not so altered, but that in their passage to
Number. 11. 4.
Canaan, some Israelites will loath that Ma^na, which is Ps. 78. 25.
the bread of Angels, and long to be again in Egypt. If there were never
philosopher so absurd to invent any fond opinion, but there were some
auditors as absurd to maintain and follow the same, who can conceive but
that until the destruction of that whore, the famous strumpet (with the Apoc.
17. 2
cup of whose fornication many of the Kings, and much of the people of the
earth have bin dronken) should still have some inamored on her. As there ever
will be deceivers, so there shall be some which will be deceived. Satan cannot
give over his Job. 2. 2.
compassing the earth: his skoutes and messengers will entend his service.
Some children of Idolaters to the worlds end, shall unto the Exo. 20. 5.
third and fourth generation participate of their parents curse, God
withdrawing his grace from them, and not opening their eyes: the peevish will
decline, stumbling at some rock of offense: weak women to show themselves to
be Eves daughters, will rather Genesis 3. 1.
choose to harken unto the serpent then to God almighty: and young ones for want
of judgment and discretion, will credulously listen to a Sirens Song. Thus it
has bin, and thus it will be. Not withstanding, the Magistrate by his charge,
and the Minister by his duty, and indeed every Christian in his place, is both
for pieties and charities sake to endeavor, to pluck as many as he can Iud. 23.
out of the fire, as Saint Jude speaks.

3 Yet this being granted, that such leaders and such followers there be and
will be, it may nevertheless be much marveiled at, that the wisdom of
Popery is so blinded, and the ability of English fugitives is grown to so low
an ebb in the Seminaries, that to make good their party they have no better
means to use, but such base ones, as in this book or libel are presented to
the world. Especially since this treatise is pretended to come from a Doctor
of Divinity, and one taking degree in one of those Universities, which by
themselves be See Reason 15. and Bristow Motive 31.
reported to be so famous, as that almost he who may but smell the smoke of
them, or breath but a while on the air there, shall be inspired with knowledge,
and have more learning Metaphysically infused into him, the^ among us is to be
attained to in many years. And can a man of the highest degree in school
there, for the maintenance of his cause, bring no better then such worn and
broken stuff, as here is co^gested and heaped together? Yet worship betide
him, who not long before the birth of this tract, put out the Certain
Articles, or forcible Reasons. 1600.
Pamphlet, that, the Protestants have no faith nor religion: that the learned
Protestants are Insidels: that the Protestants are bound in conscience to
avoid all good works: that the Protestants teach, that God is worse the^ the
Devil, and such other worthy conclusions, to which D. Barlow. D. Buckley.
two learned men have made reply. For although he had but little honesty, in
propounding such prodigious and portentuous monsters, yet he had more wit;
since that carried some ^u^ble with it, albeit in such fort, as that those who
respected it, were more afraid then hurt. That which coming unawares, seemed
to the improvident at the first to be some clap of thunder, was at the last
discerned not to be so much as the striking up of a drum: It was no otherwise
but a few stones shaken together in an empty barrel. Yet the wile of the man
is to be commended, that he could set some good words on it, as the Montibank^
does use, who after open protestation that he has something to sell of admirable
virtue, of incomparable value, of inestimable benefit, which the Graunde
Seigneour of the Turks, the Great Duke of Muscovy, the Emperor of Germany will
accept of, and desire, yea earnestly call for, which to have at their need,
Lords and Ladies will think themselves most happy: does at the length and
after all this flourish, produce some lippe-salve, or other such toy, as
mooveth laughter in some, and serious indignation in other, who have not been
acquainted with the Mountibankes custom.

4 But this gallant with whom I have to deal, and who speaks as hereafter
you shall hear, imagining that all the men in England are as blind as he would
have them to be, has sent us a fresh garment made of other men's old clothes,
which the most of understanding have seen and known, to be both worn bare
and torn like the Ruins of Time. And he has little altered the very
fashion of it, saving peradventure to set the right sleeve where the left
formerly was, and something now before, which erst stood behind. Indeed some
pieces he has shrunk, and drawn the^ in narrower, to make them seem the
thicker: and some other few (for in sooth they are but few) he has enlarged
with a skirt or hem of new cloth: and yet willing to buy as little stuff as
possibly he might, in some places he has sewed two or three rags together,
so to make a pretty piece. The truth is, that now almost An. 1574.
thirty years since, a cou^try-man of ours, whom D. Fulke not unfitly called
Bl^ring Bristow, did with much boldness and little learning put forth a
book, which he called his Motives unto the Catholic says. Which as then for
satisfying of the simple, and repressing of the craking insolency of the
adversary, it was answered by a worthy man D. Fulkes Retentives.
who now resleth with the Lord; yet since that time, (howsoever by some
Romanists, Banke-rupts of better matter, it has ever now and then slightly
been talked of) almost generally it has lien contemned of all, scant worthy
the naming or serious recounting. Yet of late because Master Parsons was busy
about State-causes, or the supporting of his weak and languishing Archpriest,
and they have not many other which may keep the mint going, in the year 1599.
some body thought good to revise their old t^inkets, and for lack of richer
stuff, out were put these Motives again, printed at Antwerpe, as in the first
Page is prefixed. And albeit this were a Crambe, whereof most stomakes, which
received it, had surfeted before; yet this honest friend D. Hill, thought he
would not leave it so, but the very next year 1600.
after, and from the same forged place, and printed with the same letters, for
any difference that may be seen between them, sends this script unto us,
as if it were some new excellent book, whereas indeed much of the form and
manner, and almost all the matter, for the ground thereof, is taken out of
Bristow.

5 Yet of his old Rectour Mr. Parsons, he borrows some fevve Memorandums,
and here and there a touch from Campian, and a finger he has in Staphilus
translated by Stapleton, on al which he bestows ever now and then a little
viperous aspersion of his own; if among so much taken upon trust, we may judge
that to be his own, which perhaps might be found to belong to some other, if
we had use of all their books and dictates which they retain among them. Had
it not bin better for one of that learning which this title does entend, to
have translated a piece of Bellarmine, or Gregory de Ualencia out of Latin
into English? If the work had bin but mean, yet this had bin gained by the
bargain, that every English Papist and Protestant almost, had not bin
acquainted with the matter before hand. But to take an old English book, and
to make a new English book of it, is but to take an old garment, and to turn
it and new dress it, where when all is done, because it is not only turned
but rotten stuff also, it deserves no better then to be turned out of door,
that it may find no place in the conscience of any Christian man or woman.
Where by the way it may be observed, that reasons for Popery grow fewer and
fewer; for Mr. Bristow being of likely hood desirous to have made them up
fifty, did stretch his wit so far, as that, tales quales, he brought the
to eight and forty. But D. Hill has reduced his number to five and twenty: And
though he would have his friends believe, In his second letter
that he can add many more, yet the Reader shall find that in these he has
involved almost all the remainder of Mr. Bristowes matter, as in the process
hereof shall be declared. And if hereafter he bring more, by Gods assistance
he shall have the^ examined. In the mean while I will be dealing with these,
who^ after the French fashion he utters by the Quartron; and calling them A
Quartron of Reasons, does intimate unto us, that being wayed in the balance of
the Sanctuary they are as much worth as a quarterne of raysings. Let us see now
what proof is made of his first stout proposition.


T. HILL. BEfore the coming of the Messiat, there was not any People, or
Nation which did serve the true and living God, but only the Jews, al other
whatsoever being overwhelmed in a Sea of blindness, and worcester s^ipping false Gods,
which indeed were Devils, and thereupon the Master Devil Lucifer was
termed Princeps huius mu^di, that is, Prince Joan. 12.
of this world, for that he was (...) and worshipped in all Lands and
Kingdoms, Iewry, and that in part only, excepted: which miserable state and
condition God of his infinite mercy greatly pitying, promised in time to send
a Savior, which should redeem all Nations and People, free them from that
pitiful servitude and blindness, and bring them to the knowledge of true and
right Religion, by suffering death, and consequently by planting a Church, to
the which all Nations should repair. Thus he did foretell by diver se and
sundry Prophets, as by Esaias, who said the Church should be as a mountain, to
the which All nations should slow. And many people shall go and say; Come
and let us ascend to the Cap. 2.
mountain of our Lord: and after, Idols shall utterly be bruised, and to be
brief, all this Chapter, yea all the rest in a manner fore-shevv the same
matter, declaring most plainly the conversion of all Nations to the Church of
the Messiah, and ^vv Kings and Queens should come, Cap. 49. and 60. Dan 2 and
7. Psalm 47. Mich. 4. Luc. 1. Psalm. 71.
and (...) homage unto it, and that it should ever continue without
interruption: and that it should be most ample and large, the Prophet David
most manifestly fore-telleth, saying, that it should extend from Sea to Sea,
and from the river to the ends of the world, and how the Aethiopians should
fall down Before the Messiah, with the Kings of Tharsis, Arabia and Saba, and
to be short, all Kings and People should acknowledge this Church, as
innumerable Prophecies of the old Testament do plainly foreshew. Heerevpon
it was that good men thirsted and longed so greatly for the coming of the
Messiah, knovving that by him all people which sat in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, should be lightened, delivered, and set in the right way to
Heaven. And so our Savior b^selfe being now in the way to Jerusalem to suffer,
said, Now the Prince of this world shall be cast out: and, If I shall be
exalted from the Ioh. 12.
earth, I will draw all to my self, meaning by his Passion to dravv all people
from Heathenish Idolatry to serve him.


G. ABBOT. 6 I will not dispute with you, whether the master Devil (whom the
Jews termed Luc. 11. 15.
Beelzebub) be called Lucifer or no, and whence that opinion had both his
beginning and progress: neither will I handle any other thing of like nature,
which properly belongs not to that which is in difference between you and
me: But I will condescend unto you, that some Job, or Iethro or some few such
excepted, the Church for the ordinary compass of it, was after the entrance
into Canaan, within the bounds of Israel, that is, the twelve Tribes at the
first, and afterward in Iewry, accounting that to comprehend the men of Judah
and Benjamin, with the Levites. And on these terms it stood till the coming
of our most blessed Savior, concerning whose appearance Esaias did foretell,
that to Cap. 2. 2.
the mountain of the house of the Lord etc. all nations should flow, And many
people should go and say, Come and let us go up to the mountain of the
Lord. But that which you cite of Idols, Verse. 18.
And the Idols will he utterly destroy, howsoever it may be applied unto
Christ, yet if you look again, it may well be disputed to belong in that
Chapter to another time and matter; and then you in referring the whole, to the
revealing of the Messiah, may very well be deceived. I will not stand with
you, but that Esaias and Daniel, and David and the other sacred writers, do give
ample testimony of a copious confluence every way to the Church. As also it
must be yielded that men longed for the coming of the fore-appointed Savior,
since he it was alone who should bring joy unto mankind. Only by the way I do
tell you, that in delivering the words of Esaias, you are bold with the text,
when you put it, Our Lord, whereas no such word, as Our, is there to be found.
But that is your custom to hale in that word throughout the whole new
Testament, it neither being in the Greek nor in the vulgar Latin. Only the
(...) Rhemists do enjoin In 1. Tim. 6. 20.
it to their obedient children, that they must not say, The Lord, but Our Lord,
as we say, Our Lady, for his mother, not the Lady, and this they make to be a
mark of difference between themselves so speaking, and us saying after the
Scripture, The Lord. And accordingly our English people do practice it, if
they savor of Popery^ so much that in all my life I have scant heard any in
common speech always saying, Our Lord, but that party has more or less been
tainted that way.

7 Furthermore when you name Heathenish Idolatry, do you give it that
Epitheton, as meaning that Christ would put an end to the horrible
superstitions of the Ethnicks, but that there should still be Idolatry in your
Synagogue, which by no means you will forgo? Or is it rather your mind, that
all Idolatry is heathenish, and that there can be none in the days of the
new Testament? Indeed so Mr. Bristow your good master, would make us
believe, saying, Motiv. 32.
So must we every where understand Idols in the old Testament, that they
were figures of Heresies in this time of the nevve Testament, no other Idols
being now but Heresies. Ponitur Idolum quan^ do novum dogma constituitur etc.
An Idol is sell up, when a new Position (or Heresy) is erected, says Saint
Hierome, the most learned and expert In Ier. 32.
interpreter of the Scriptures. Saint Paul also himself giving his voice
thereunto, where by Baal, the Idol that God did speak of to Elias, Romans 11.
be teaches us to understand the erroneous wicked doctrine against Christ, 3.
Reg 19.
of his incredulous Countrie-men the Jews of his time. This is good Logic
Mr. Bristow, and for the sweetness of the conclusion, fit to be studied in your
Popish Universities. An Idol is set up when a new doctrine is erected, (which
is a figurative understanding) and Baal may in some application signisie an
erroneous doctrine, Ergo there be now no other Idols but Heresies, neither
have bin under the Gospel. By this reckoning you do well in your Catechismes
to leave out the second commandment, as not at al belonging to the new
Testament. But why did Saint John, after Christ's death and ascension too,
bid, 1. Ioh 5. 21 (...).
Babes keep your selves from Idols. And is it not said else where speaking
of times, after the opening of the Apoc. 8. 1.
seventh seal, and when the sixth Cap 9. 13.
Angel had sounded his trumpet, that is to say, toward the end of the world,
that men Cap 9. 20. (...).
repented not of the deeds of their hands, that they should not worship
Devils, and Idols of gold and silver, and brass and stone, and of wood, which
neither can see, neither hear, neither go, which being taken with all the
circumstances, is a most manifest convictio^, that in the later days there
should be material Idols. To which may be added the Idols destroyed by
Constantine, three hundred years after Christ, and the intolerable Idolatry
which in this last age has been discovered to be committed, in the East
Indies, America and many parts of Africa, by diverse Ethnicks and Infidels,
which did and do inhabit there. Therefore you cannot so run away and escape,
but that eve^ now also Idolaters you may be. This I note to show how your
Popery does hang upon gimols.


T. HILL. NOw if the Religion of the Papists (as these new men term them) be
false and arronious, then is it against the Messiah, and consequently it is a
Religion of the Devils own invention, and he the master and inspirer
thereof, and so by it he is served and worshipped: and then must it needs
follow that the Prophets were false, yea Christ himself said not truly, in
telling his Disciples, that the Prince of this world, that is, the Devil,
should then be cast out, and that he would draw all to himself, for that since
his passion the Devil bath had a more large and ample dominion then he had
before.


G. ABBOT. 8 Very bluntly and boisterously is your second Proposition here
connected to your former: where we will not be straightlaced toward you, but
readily yield you the term of Papists. For if Christians be such as depend
upon Christ, you may well be called Papists, as resting your summn^ bonu^ upon
the Popes pleasure and determination. Neither shall you need much to press
us, to grant that your Religion, or rather Superstition is false and erroneous,
yea against the Messiah, and as far forth as the abuses of it stretch, of the
Devils own invention. For Saint Paul does teach us, that it is 1. Tim. 4.
(...). 2. 3.
doctrine of Devils, to speak false in hypocrisy, to forbid to marry, to
abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with giving of
thanks; the first whereof, most of you ple^tifully perform, the second you
inhibit to some men at all times, the third to all men at some times, and that
not for state-governme^t, but for Religion sake. But the sequel of your
inference, does prove to be a most discinct and dissolute thing: for how will
it then follow that the Prophets were false, and Christ said not truly?
Marry, in telling his Disciples that the Prince of the world, that is, the
Devil should then be cast out, and that he would draw all to himself. Which
do you so expound, as that all Nations of the world should immediately after
his death, resurrection, and ascension be converted to the faith, and should
always so continue? which your former words may well seem to import, by your
inculcating of Al Fol. 2.
Nations, and having afterward subioyned unto it, ever continue without
interruption, and, Fol. 3.
all Kings and people should acknowledge this Church, and again, all people
which sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, should be lightened,
delivered, and set in the right way to Heaven. If you take it thus, you are
pitifully out: for our Savior has foretold that into the Math. 7. 13
wide gate and broad way, that leads to destruction, many there be which
enter; but the straight gate and narrow way that leads unto life, few there
be that find. And it was reveiled unto John, that with the whore of Babylon
the Apoc. 17. 2.
Kings of the earth committed fornication, and the inhabitours of the earth are
drunken with the wine of her fornication. And experience has confirmed, that
not only the Saracene doctrine has for almost these thousand years possessed
the show and face of many great countries; but time out of mind, very
Gentilisme and Heathenisme have reigned in the East and West Indies, in the
Islands near adjoining, in diverse parts of Africa, in Lappia, and many other
countries, the name of Jesus our Redeemer (for ought that of certainty can be
found) till of late years being scant ever heard of among them. Or do you
rather understand those speeches of all Nations coming unto him, and of all
being drawn unto Christ, to carry this sense, that the Gentiles now, as well
as formerly the Jews, should be admitted, and moreover that the word should
be spread to the East and to the West, and to the North and to the Southe,
so that before the day of judgment, God should have some faithful in every
quarter; and sometimes when his Church did flourish many thousands in diverse
places, and always some servants some-where? In this meaning if you take it,
we willingly join with you, the rather induced thereunto by the nature of the
word, All, in the Scriptures, and by the manner of the fulfilling of those
Prophecies in the Church, in such a sort as with reason cannot be gaine-saide.
For as All in holy writ does evermore at least signify many, so it does not
continually importe a generality without any sort of exception. When it is
said that to John the Baptist Math. 3. 5.
went out Jerusalem and all Iewry, and all the region round about Jordan, it
is not meant that no individual person did stay at home, but many of all
sorts, rich and poor, young and old, men and women, such a company as if
almost all the country had come in, were partakers of his Baptism. So Tit 2.
11. (...).
the grace of God has appeared, which brings salvation to all men, says
Saint Paul to Titus. Like to which is that to Timothy, 1. Tim. 2. 4.
God our Savior, who will that all men shall be saved; where All intends
many, or diverse of diverse sorts, not universally every one. He will have all
to be saved, says Gregory, In 1. Reg. 14.
because out of every sort of men he chooses those whom he draws to the
joy of everlasting salvation. And Aquinas himself among other interpretations
of that later place, has this, Part 1. q. 19. a. 6.
It may be understood that the distribution must be made pro generibus
singulorum, and not, pro singulis generum, according to this sense: God will
have of every state of men to be saved: males and females, Jews and Gentiles,
small and great, but not all of every several state. And who will say that in
every particular country of Asia, or the continent toward the South pole, or
many other quarters of the world, the Church of Christ has always apparently
bin? The Romanists of al other must not say so; if they will have the
congregation of Gods faithful to exte^d it self no further the^ their doctrine
and the Popes vsurpatio^ does go. For they cannot prove that ever those
regions heard of the name of the Roman Bishop until this last age, if now
they do, or have lately done. This the^ we grant unto you: that Christ Jesus
has evermore a Church, and that variously dispersed under the cope of heaven,
not bou^ded within narrow precincts, as that of the Jews was. The goodly
titles also which in the word are give^ unto it, are ever true in respect of
the purity of religion, but especially for the fundamental points which finally
concern salvation. And they are also as true for the visible glory of the
church in time of peace and the free course of the Gospel: but are not
perpetually and without interruption, to be understood for the patent extent of
the same, and that gloriously and appara^tly to be in any one country of the
world, as the defenders of the Roman Hierarchy would challenge to themselves.


T. HILL. FOR before the coming of the Messiah, the people of the Jews, and
many others also in other Lands, which were of the Jewish Religion, were in
some sort far from the bondage of the Devil; but since his coming both
Jews and Gentiles and almost all Nations, Tribes and Kingdoms have bin ever
in Lucifers thraldom until this our age, in which Luther came to expel
Lucifer, and to rid all the world out of his captivity. And so the passion of
our Redeemer availed little or nothing at all, for the space of these fifteen
hundred years; and for a thousand years together he was so far from
drawing all unto him as he said he would do, that he drew not so much as one
person that any man can name. And in Ioh. 12.
our Country there of England, it is most manifest that all were Papists
without exception from the first Christening thereof, until this age of King
Henry the eight.


G. ABBOT. 9 YOU labor to prove, that if you be not the Church, the Devils
dominion since Christ's time has bin larger then ever it was before. And your
reason is, that before the coming of Christ, the Jews and other of the Jewish
profession in other lands were in some sort free from the bondage of the Devil:
(which is true in all those who by the eyes of faith did foresee the birth,
life and death of the Messiah, and did believe on him, reputing him their
Redeemer, as (...) Job did call him) but since his manifestation, say you,
Jews and Gentiles and almost all Nations, Tribes and Kingdoms (...) Job. 19.
25.
have bin ever in Lucifers thraldom until this our age, in which Luther came
to expel Lucifer etc. I wonder that you can suffer the name of Luther to pass
so quietly without some egregious contumely: but keeping it for him you only
stay it a while, and anon he shall have it. But being here in the height of
that argument, which above all other pleases your side, and the very
rehearsing whereof (as you would make your doting followers believe) does
make us all Campian Ration. 3.
look pale; you amplify your former proposition, that if this be yielded
unto, Christ's passion availed little or nothing at all for fifteen hundred
years; but for a thousand years he was so far from drawing all unto him,
that he drew not so much as one person that any man can name. This is spoken
like a man of some metal indeed: and by this shall your disciples know how to
trust you hereafter. But as if yet you had deserved but one end of a
sharpingstone, and meant to have the rest with you before that you depart, you
tell us that in our own country, there of England, (which whether you speak
with some contept or no, your self can best discover) it is most manifest that
all were Papists without exception, from the first Christening thereof, until
this age of King Henry the eight. You are a blessed companion, and a man may
believe much upon your word. Doubtless you persuade your self that all, who
should read your book, would be mad, or drunk, or senseless, or else you
must think that they would admit and admire you for a singular liar. Besides
that of Antiquity, the vvritings and testimony of your own men, will convince
you in this to have neither wit nor shame. We make it good against you, that
the thousands and ten thousands of the servants of God in the Primitive Church
knew at the first nothing; and afterward but little of your blasphemous
Popery, and that not in the mainest points: And albeit in process of time,
superstition (as it was 2. These. 2. 3. 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. Pet. 2. 1.
foretold) did by little and little creep in, yet in all ages God had his
Church of such as did not spotte their souls with your horrible contammations:
And we maintain it, that in our own land there were testimonies most
luculent, of such as detested the Antichristian pride, and other loose
behavior of the Roman Clergy, both in doctrine and manners, and served the
Lord after the prescript of his own word, as now we do endevor to do. If you
know not this Mr. Doctor, you have read but little, and so in some sort we
question your scholarship: or else you have read it, and so we question your
conscience. But we will hope the best, that it is your ignorance: although
these present propositions and many other in your book, do give us great
occasion to suspect your honest conscience. Your own men will be ashamed, that
you talk in this fashion, as anon you shall perceive. But I follow you a while.


T. HILL. AND so the Protestants affirm of other Countries, and boldly say,
Luther in postil Ger. 1537 part. 2. fol. 141.
that until this age, the Gospel lay in the dust, and was hidden under the
bench, and Christ was unknown. Which to say (as the Protestants must needs
say, and blush not to say indeed) is mere madness and flat infidelity, and a
plain denying of Christ, and no small establishment of Mahomets Religion. For
the Protestants and Mahumetanes agree in this, that the Church which Christ
founded, fell some five or six hundred years after his ascension, into most
horrible errors, and then (say the Turks) the Angel Gabriel was sent from
God to Mahomet, to teach him how he should reform the said Church,
because it would not stand with the wisdom and goodness of Almight^ God to
suffer his Church to vanish away through errors and superstitions, without
sending in time to reform it. And in this, out of doubt, the Turks have
far greater reason then the Protestants have, which Protestants by their
doctrine make Christ the most simple and most improvident Lavve-giver that ever
was in the world. For neither Plato, Solon, Lycurgus nor any other Lavv-maker
whosoever, was so simple and improvident as to fashion and plant a
Commonwealth, which before it were well settled should vanish away and come to
nothing, having no sufficient means to prevent errors, and such abuses as
would ever throvve their Laws, and destroy their Cm^on wealths. And therefore
if Christ be God, and the holy Bible true, the Religion of the Papists must
needs be that Religion which he ordained, and left to all generations, and
consequently the only true and right Religion.


G. ABBOT. 10 SInce by your last foregoing words, it has appeared to be
your profession, in your own person to speak largely, it is most probable
that to the uttermost you will rack and pervert the speeches of other. There
is neither Luther nor any other Protestant so absurd, as to say according to
that which you would intimate here, that there was no Church till of late, and
that the Gospel was absolutely hidden, or Christ simply unknown until their
days. For we well understand, and teach co^trary-wise, that in the Primitive
Church plentifully, and afterward always more or less, in some parts of the
world or other, there were the Elect of God, who groaning to behold the common
errors of their age, did strive to believe and live after the rule of the
Scriptures. But the speech of Luther and of us in that behalf is comparative:
that in comparison of that which it should be: or that which had bin not long
after the Apostles: or in respect of that which the Lord has of late reveiled:
or of that which by the faithful might have bin wished, the Gospel had not for
some later ages, so free a course, and Christ was not so ordinarlly and
vnpollutedly taught; but the Bible lay much neglected, and was cast aside in
comparison of other books. And while we acknowledge this, we need not to
blush, neither is it madness in us, but Act. 26. 25
the words of truth and sobernes, as Saint Paul said in a like unjust
accusation: nor yet infidelity, or denying of Christ, or the establishing of
Mahomets Religion. Here you heap up many words, but are not able to prove
the least part of your own Propositions: we must therefore give you leave to
say much, and conclude nothing. Your unjust imputatio^ that not only in this,
but in diverse other matters, we join with the Turks, you borrow of Doctor
Gefford, who no less slanderously then crakingly, prete^deth to do great
things in his Calvino-Turcismus. (The maliciousnes whereof is already displayed,
and the crime returned by a learned D. Sutliv. in Turco. Papismo.
man upon the Papists themselves.) It is to be hoped that the Author thereof
will either in time repent him and turn to grace, or receive the reward of his
blasphemous speeches against Christ's Religion, and his venomous revilings
against his natural Prince and country. In the mean while he may look to the
clearing of his credit, from the accusations of father Parsons, Parsons
manifestation cap. 1. and 7.
who describes him to be very ill qualified, and no better the^ a fire-bra^d
in kindling dissension eve^ among the English fugitives of the Roman College.
But for our parts, know you, o the whole rabble of the Romish generation, that
we from the bottom of our hearts detest Turcisme and Mahumetisme, and know
that Mahomet was a false Prophet, and never had Angel, (unless it were one of
darkness) sent unto him. And as touching the Church of Rome, we are not ignorant
that before the days of Mahomet, it did by little and little decline, but in
the time of Phocas the Emperor and Boniface Vide Plat. in Bonif. 3.
the third, then Pope, (which was near to the days of Mahomet) the malignity
of it did grow much greater. And since that season, the mystery of iniquity
has wrought forward and forward, and it is almost grown to the ruin of it
self. But in all this time the Congregation of Gods servants was never extinct,
not the Church brought to such pass, as that Mahomet one of the great enemies
of Christianity should need to reform it. His reformation was deformation,
and to his power he would like the Psa 80. 13.
Boar of the Forest, have rooted up Christ's vineyard. If then you will
understand what it is which we do teach, the Turks have not so much as in
show, any the like reason for their most vain assertion, as we have for our
position; since our doctrine in this case is laid upon a sure foundation, which
with all your invectiues you shall no more be able to impeach, the^ you can
hurt the Moon with stones thrown against her. Neither do we make Christ a
simple and improvident lawgiver, but wise, and wisdom it self in all his
actions, since he determined before hand what he would have done, and that not
after your imaginations, but after the depth and purpose of his own counsel;
and accordingly in time he performed it. For he had ever those who were his
Congregation, and Commonwealth, observing his statutes; and this regiment was
better settled then that of Solon or Lycurgus was, the precincts of whose
government were bou^ded within the territories of the Spartane and Athenien
Jurisdiction, and in the compass of some hundreds of years came to their
period and end. But this of our Savior is restrained within no limits of time,
(but is perpetual,) nor circuit of place, otherwise then as it seems good to
his infinite wisdom, to restrain or to enlarge it. Now whereas you join here
with Solon and Lycurgus the lawgiver Plato, I pity your oversight. For that
Commonwealth which Plato imaginarily erected, did indeed vanish away and come
to nothing, before it was settled. For all men of learning can tell you, that
there never was any such matter in rerum natura, but in his books De Platon.
Dialog. de Rep.
Republica he propounded speculatiuely, what was to be striven and contended
for, if we could attain to perfection. But if I should ask you in what City,
or within the compass of what Country it was established, you cannot answer
me: unless after much study you should remember your self, and reply that it
was in Sir Thomas Moors Vtopia, and famous Citizens there, were Aristotle's
Felix, and Tullyes Orator, and Castilios Courtier; and Xenophons Cyrus albeit
he could not be a Monarch there, yet carried the mainest sway. Well, I pardon
you this fault: notwithstanding requesting you to put it among your negligences
and ignorances; and telling you withal, that our boys and ordinary scholars,
in those Rat. 15.
Universities which you seem to vi^sie, can inform you, that Plato was a
Lawmakers, and a Commonwealth establisher, but by imagination. And so nothing
here said does hinder, but that Christ may be God, as indeed he is Romans 9. 5.
God over all, blessed for ever, and the holy Bible true, as verily it is the
sacred rule of truth; and yet the Religion of the Papists is not that Religion
which Christ ordained, or left to all generations, but a mere profanation of
his Word and Sacraments, a horrible abomination, the service of Antichrist,
idolatry and superstition. And so I let you breath a while^dismissing you
notwithstanding with this close, that although in this Chapter you took some
more pains then you meant to do hereafter, because this is the front of your
book, yet the ground of this your foremost Tracte is taken from the Motiv. 37.
and 45.
seven and thirtith, and five and fortith Motive of Bristow; you, to color the
matter, placing the end almost of his book in the beginning of yours. But
here-after you will show your self more plainly, as from Chapter to Chapter I
shall remember you.

11 ANd here the Christian Reader will pardon me, if partly to show the
ignorance and indiscreete folly of this fresh gamesler, and partly to stop
the mouths of other our clamorous adversaries, but especially to satisfy the
weak, I do add something more in the former argument, although by diverse of
our men much heretofore has been suide to that purpose, both in English and
Latin. We do therefore teach, that as from the beginning long before the
incarnation of Christ, God ever had his Church, yet sometimes more visible and
glorious, and sometimes more contracted and obscured; so since the appearance
of our Savior, at all times infallibly and without exception, there have been
chosen children of God, who have retained his faith, and calling upon his name
have studied to express their knowledge in their life, by retiring themselves
both from the loose conversation of Libertines, and the profanations of
Idolatrous persons. Neither ever was there any of our profession, which did
teach or write the contrary. But whereas the Synagogue of Rome lay it down for
a fundamental rule, that this Church has been and must be in all ages, a
visible and conspicuous congregation at the least, consisting of an apparent
Hierarchy, so that at all times a man may point it out, and may repair thither
as to a matter eminent, yea and in a sort pompous too, or to say as Stapleton
speaks when he does most extenuate it, In Antid. Matthew 24.
It is evermore visible in respect of her governors and sheepe-heards, but
most of all for the Pope or chief Pastor thereof; to which Pope, De Roma. no
Pontif. 4. 4.
Bellarmine assigns, that he cannot err in judgment, and to the people and
Clergy of Rome (where this sensible Church must principally be) that they
cannot err with a personal error, so that all altogether err; we therein
do dissent from them, and maintain that although when the godly are most
driven to extremities, by heresies or persecutions, they be visible each to
other, and acquainted with some other brethren who are in like case with
themselves, yet they are not so apparent to other men, as that at all times
they know where to find assemblies, and congregations of them. But that the
Bishop of Rome and his Pontifical Clergy, should have the face of the Church
tied, and inseparably joined unto them, we can in no sort yield, but do
disclaim it as a flattering tale, suggested to that Bishop by such parasites
as are about him, and from time to time do depend upon him.

12 And that it may be seen what reason we have of this our assertion, we
first show, that the estate of the faithful was frequently so, before the
coming of Christ. For when it lay as hid in some few persons, within the
single families of the old Patriarchs, before and after the flowd, what great
boast could there be made of it? Nay when the Commonwealth of the Jews was
much settled, into what straights was it brought, when David complained, Psalm.
12. 1.
Help Lord for there is not a godly man lest: for the faithful are failed
from among the children of men; this being spoken, as it is most probable, in
the days of Saul, after the death of Samuel, and the 1. Sam. 22. 18.
slaughter of the Priests. How was it even in Judah and Jerusalem, when Esaias
cried out, that the Isai. 1. 5. 6.
whole head is sick, and the whole heart is heavy? from the soale of the foot
unto the head there is nothing whole therein; the estate of the Church being
then most miserable, and all depraved, not only in manners, but in religion,
Idolatry being plentiful as is manifest by the words in the same vision,
verse. 29.
for they shall be confounded for the Oaks, which ye have desired, and ye
shall be ashamed of the gardens which ye have chosen, which intends the
trees and pleasant places where they used their superstitions. Call to mind
the days of leremy, when he said, Ier. 5. 1.
Run to and fro by the streets of Jerusalem, and behold now and know and
inquire in the open places thereof, if ye can find a man, or if there be any
that executes judgment, and seeks the truth, and I will spare it: And those
of Ezechiel testifying in this sort, I Ezech 22. 30.
sought for a man among them that should make up the hedge, and stand in the
gappe before me for the land, that I should not destroy it: but I found none.
These things were said of Judah and Jerusalem, where alone at that time was
that Church which was, the Israelites for their grievous sins being long
before carried away into captivity. You may add to this, if you will, the
complaint of Micah, Micah. 7. 1
We is me, for I am as the Somer gatherings, and as the grapes of the vintage:
there is no cluster to (...) my soul desired the first ripe fruits. The good
man is perished out of the earth, and there is none righteous among men: they
all lie in wait for blond: every man ^teth his brother with a net. If the
Priests and people had not almost generally gone astray, and the whole face of
the visible Church had not seemed to be defaced, would these Prophets thus have
particularized, that one godly man was not left, that one was not to be found
who had not declined from truth?

13 We doubt not but in those times the Lord had many faithful ones in secret,
as he had seven thousand in Israel when 1. King. 19. 18. Rom 11 4.
Elias lived, of whom neither the enemies of the truth, nor scant that Prophet
did take any notice. The Ezech. 9. 4 Apoc. 7 3.
mark in the foreheade is sometime known to few, but only to him who
imprinted it there; yet this is a good hold for the Elect, 2. Tim. 2. 19.
The Lordknovveth who are his. But upon what might those, who were Gods secret
chosen, out wardly build, when diverse times the Princes and people had
corrupted their ways, and the Temple it self was polluted and made a sink of
Idolatry? For we find that things stood upon those terms in the days of
Manasse, when in the house of the Lord, even that house whereof the Lord had
said, 2. Reg. 21. 4. 5.
In Jerusalem will I put my name, he built profane altars: and in the two
courts of the house of the Lord he built altars for all the host of Heaven.
Judge where in those days was the glory of the visible church, or where it was
a pretty while before that, when the Priest 2. Reg. 16 11.
Vriah was as ready to set up in the temple an altar after the fashion of that
which was in Damascus, as the King Ahaz was ready to co^ma^d it. And then the
Prince and Priests co^spiring, there was sca^t any kind of gross Idolatry,
which was not ple^tifully committed. Ahaz himself making Verse. 3.
his son to go through the fire after the abominations of the Heathen. And
least it should be thought that the people at least, did amend somewhat which
was amiss, in the very next Chapter it is witnessed in general, 2 Reg. 17. 19.
Yet Judah kept not the commandments of the Lord their God, but walked
according to the fashion of Israel which they used. And by most probability,
this outrage under Isa. 1. 1.
Ahaz was the tune, against which Esaias so inveighed in the vision before
remembered. These things are so plain, that the greatest pillars of the Papacy
cannot deny the^; and therefore they are forced to another shift, as the
Rhemists when they say, In Romans 11. 4.
that there is a great difference between the Christian Church and the Jews,
ours resting upon better promises then the^s; which is a very poor eva^ion, in
as much as every Divine may know, that there be as large and many promises,
that the Church of the Jews should last until Christ's appearance in the
flesh, as there be that the Congregation of Gods Saints, shall continue among
the Gentiles until the day of Judgment. And saving only for the time of the
Babylonish captivity, there was one set external place of Gods emine^t
service, that is, the Temple at Jerusalem, supported with such words, Psalm. 132.
This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell, etc. and, 2. Chr. 33. 4.
In Jerusalem shall my ^me be for ever; she like whereof throughout all the
continuance of the new Testament, is not warrantable out of the word, for any
one place whatsoever. No it cannot so much as superficially be maintained out
of the Scripture that Rome it self has any such promise: but rather out of
the Revelatio^ of St. John there are many substa^tial matters which make to the
contrary.

14. But because by the strong shot of truth, they be beaten from the bulwark
of the Jewish Synagogue, and fly to the next hold of the later Testament, let
us follow the^ thither. When our Savior Christ was borne, and for the most
part afterward till he was baptized, where shall we co^ceive, was the visible
Church? The Scribes and Pharisees possessed all the show, and they were no
better the^ Mat. 23. 24
blind guides of the blind. The 2. Match 4. 8. 24. c. 11. 3. Joseph. de bell. Iud
4. 5 and lib. 5. 9.
Priesthood was long before and after bought and sold; and in Christ's own
time, it is evide^t out of the Scrip ture, that the highest spiritual dignity
going by Ioh. 11. 51.
years, Annas and Caiphas and other unworthy me^ of that rabble did enjoy it.
Upon the birth of Jesus, they were not glad who should most have rejoiced in
it, but al Jerusalem was Math. 2. 3.
troubled at it. And how they persisted afterward till Christ did manifest
himself fully, may be guessed by diverse circumstances, which the Eva^gelists
do mention after his birth. But when he came first into the world, of whom do
we find speech made, but of some shep-heards in the field, of Simeon an old
man, of Anna a most aged woman; both ready to go into their graves, of Joseph
and Mary, Zacharias and Elizabeth and very few other? And of these some might
be soon dead, other lived out of the way, at Beth-lehem or Nazareth or in
Egypt, and the shepherds were in the fields about their trade; but where
there was the appara^cy of a visible congregation, ca^ hardly be imagined. When
our Savior had selected out his Apostles, they then were termed by the name of
a Flock, but yet by their master they were called but a Luc. 12. 32.
little flock, where the Rhemists do confess, that Rhemens. ibi.
in the beginning it was little indeed. At the death of Christ, when his body
hanged on the Cross for our sakes, and his disciples were Math. 26. 56.
all fled, no man daring to show himself, Ioh. 19. 25. Nic. Cleman. de matter*
Council.
Mary and John and a few women were all the faithful that now appeared upon
earth. And afterward while the Apostles and their followers walked very
privately, or were assembled in a Act. 1. 13.
chamber, the Priests, and Scribes and Pharisees were they who ^uffled it in
the streets, and bore the sway in the Temple: so that if a weak body had
enquired for the church, he might rather have bin directed to the^, who had the
law and the altars and al sacred things in their custody, then to any other.
When Act. 8. 1.
Steeve^ had been stoned, and for fear of the persecution, which was at
Jerusalem, the disciples were all scattered besides the Apostles, it may well
be presumed that for a time, they which remained in the city, where Steeve^
had lost his life, did not walk very openly. Truth it is that after these
things the Church was better settled, and the truth was more spread: but yet
never was there any such privilege bestowed upon it, but that in the days of
persecution, or some grievous Apostasy, the faithful might be brought to a
small visibility.

15 Our Saviors words intend so much, when alluding to the time of his second
appeara^ce, to judge the quick and the dead, he asks, Luk 18. 8.
Nevertheless, when the son of man comes, shall he find faith on the
earth? as meaning that very little should then be to be found, in comparison of
the flowds and Ocean of iniquity, which every where should abound. But God to
the end that he might not have us ignorant, but warned before hand, into what
straights the Church should be brought, informs us by Saint Paul, that the
Lord shall not come, except there first be an 2. These. 2. 3 (...).
Apostasy, or revolt, or falling away, wherein Antichrist with great pride and
disdain should show himself. This is solemnly spoken of by the Apostle, and
by all both old and new entreating of it, is observed to signify some matter of
great note, that is to say, some maine declining from somewhat. Many of our
Papists fearing to touch this soar which can in no case turn them to good,
would have this interpreted to note nothing else, but the slipping of diverse
regions and countries, from their subjection to the Roman Empire. But Gregory
Martin and the other Rhemists, being overcome with the evidence of truth, are
here a little more honest then ordinary, and speak to other purpose. Indeed
they cannot tell how it will be taken at other Papists hands, that contrary to
the custom of their fellows, in a matter of such moment, they should give way
unto us, and therefore they do use these words in way of excuse, be Rhemens.
in 2. These. 2 3.
it spoken under the correction of Gods church, and al learned Catholics. But
to the point, concerning the Apostasy they deliver this; It is very like that
this great defection and revolt, shall not be only from the Roman Empire, but
specially from the Roman church, and withal, from most points of Christian
Religion. In the margent it is, and from most articles of the Catholic faith.
Here they would have us take the Romish belief, for the Christian Religion and
Catholic faith: but that deserves a long pause. We rather observe out of
them, that this revolt is in matter of faith, and not only from the Empire;
then which gloss nothing can be truer. Well then, if there must be so
egregious an Apostasy, it will follow, that Antichrist so dominering, as by the
Apostle he is described, will not be negligent so to repress the public
service of God, that it shall not carry any lively head or countenance, where
he has to do. So that certainly our Rhemists yielding to this exposition,
do in substance confess so much, as that the apparencie of Gods congregation,
in the time of the great defection, must be mightily eclipsed. Now the Lord,
to the end that he might establish his faithful, and arm them to expect this
paucity of believers, and inconspicuousnes of his Church, and yet not be
discouraged for that which should be past, present, or to come; and again that
there might be no doubt in a matter of this moment, lets us farther know,
that the Apoc. 12. 6
woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God. It is
not doubted of between the Romanists and us, but that this woman does
represe^t the church, concerning whom being in the wilderness, it does
manifestly follow, that for the time of her abode there, which the Almighty
had decreed, she should not be discerned; that is, by her enemies, who did and
would chase her: not withstanding it be not to be doubted, but she knew where
her self was. If the Romanist therefore and persecuting Adversary, did not
ever see the professors of the Gospel, it was no wonder, the woman was to
remain in the wilderness apart and hid from them. The evidence of which matter
is such, that as Master In praefat. super Apocalypse.
Fox observes, for fear of diverse things in the Revelation of S. John
(whereof this may worthily be one) scant any Popish writer for many years
together, durst adventure to comment any thing upon the Apocalypse, until our
Rhemists being desirous to shame the Pope and themselves, with all who are
wise, adventured to set pen to paper. Having then a purpose to set forth,
and corrupt the New Testament, partly by their Translation, but most of all by
their Annotations, they may not choose but say somewhat of the Revelation,
although they profess that it is as In argument. Apocalypse. and in Apoc. 1. 1.
sparingly as may be, and as briefly; which is not for that the volume of the
Rhemish Testament grows great, as they would color it, but for fear least
they should too much lay open their own weakness, which while that book is
in the Bible, will never be concealed. Howsoever therefore through their
volume, in many maine matters they be very silent, where they should most
speak; as of the question of imputed righteousness, where the Rom 4. vi de
Ration. 14.
Apostle does most handle it, (a ^ore argument of their own conscience
distrusting their cause, and even sinking under the weight of that Chapter) yet
here God overruling the^ to say a truth, as he did Ioh. 11. 50
Cayphas, they interpret the woman to be the In Apoc. 12. 6.
Church, flying from the great persecution which shall be in the time of
Antichrist. Indeed to keep peace with their Lord and Master the Pope, they
will not have this flight to be, but in the very ending of the world, and so
they would fetch it with a back racket, that the woman should continue so in
secret, but three years and an half, which (to keep all upright) they
assign to be the time of Antichrists reign, and then the judgment must come;
which is a most fond evasion, seeing by that means men living at the
appearance of Antichrist, should be able precisely to tell, when the last day
should be, to wit, three years and a half after Antichrists entering. But of
Mark. 13. 32.
that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven,
neither the Son himself, save the Father only. It can never be made good,
that the Apoc. 11. 2 3. c. 12. 6. c. 13. 5. Dan 7 25.
time, times, and half a time, the two and forty months, and the thousand two
hundred and sixty days, are so literally to be taken, as that they should
contain exactly three ordinary years and a half. Your Roman Bishop in his
declination, has already been in the world much longer, and he is the
greatest Antichrist that ever yet was manifested among men, and on whom many
things in the Scripture signified touching Antichrist, do directly and
vnavoidably light.

16 Well, this revolt taking place, and the woman the Church being in the
wilderness, it is not to be doubted, but here and there be diverse which serve
God aright, the very Mat. 16. 18
gates of hell not being able to prevail against them. And as these in
general, whersoever dispersod, do make up the universal militant Church, so
where any few of them, eve^ in the smallest number, are assembled together,
they may be said to be a particular Congregation or Church. Exhortatio ad
castitatem
Where three are, says Tertullian, there is a Church although they be lay
persons. It is likely that he alludeth to that saying of our Savior, Mat 18.
20.
Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them. He is with them as with members of his Church, to guide them
and hear them, to bless the^ and preserve the^. And that such little
assemblies are not unworthy the name of the Church, is plain by St. Paul's words
to ^hilemo^, where he se^deth greeting not only to Philemo^, and Appiat and
Archippus, but to Philem (...). (...).
the Church in Philemons house, for so the Rhemists themselves translate it. In
dangerous and Apostatating times, such petty aslemblies do make up the general,
and they belong unto the same mystical body, although they not only be not
known to their persecutors, but many of the^ have no acquaintance with other.
T^ have the same head, the same faith, the same charity, the sam^ spirit, De
Baptism, contra Donatist 6. 4 Idem Spiritus sanctus ca dimittit* (i. peccata)
qui datus est omnibus Sanct^s etc.
The same holy Ghost is given to all Saints, joined one to the other in love,
whether they know each other corporally, or do not know the^, says Saint
Auste^* The want the^ of acquaintance each with other may keep the godly
a^u^der, as well as the rage of their persecutours, both which are to be sound
in the case of Elias. But directly to follow farther this argument of the
Eclipse of the Churches glory, may it not be thought to be brought to a low
ebb, when it is said of the second beast* that Apo. 13. 16.
he causes al, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, that he
should give the^ a mark in their right hand or in their foreheads, and that
no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast;
or the number of his name. And what else is signified when so many Cap. 17. 2.
15.
are mentioned to have co^merce with the whore of Babylon, yea all Cap 18. 3.
Nations are reported to have drunken of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication? The ancient Fathers were not ignorant, that such times there might
be, when they so often co^pa^ed the Church to the Moon, as Saint Ambrose;
Epistol. lib. 5. 31.
The Moon it self, whereby in the Oracles of the Prophets the countenance of
the Church is figured, when at the first rising again she is renewed into the
ages of the month, she is hidden by the darkness of the night, and by little
and little fi^ing her horns, or right ever against the Sun ending the^, does
shine with the light of clear brightness. Saint Austen in one In Psa. 10.
place does for diverse respects liken the Church unto the Moon, and
expounds the Moon to signify it. In another Sermon 134. de Te^pore.
place he says the Sun is Christ, the Moon the Church. Which as on the one
side it does intimate unto us, that the Moon has no light but from the Sun,
and the Church no light or bewty but from God: so on the other side it does
most lively put us in mind, that as the Moon continues not at the same stay,
but increases and decreaseth, waxes and waneth, is eclipsed by the
interposition of the earth between her self and the Sun, and sometimes in the
change cannot be seen, although it is never to be doubted but there is a
Moon; so the Church of Christ while this troublesome world does last, is now
glorious, then shadowed, in one age in bewty, in another age kept under, under
some Princes in peace, under others in persecution, yea sometimes so pressed
with the extremity of the mali^us, as that she is glad to remain retired into
secret places, and not (...) appear openly to the maligna^t, albeit she never
is nor ca^ be extinguished, but has a continual being. Unto which it may be
added, that since faith does much consist Heb. 11. 1.
of things which are not seen, and we believe the holy Catholic Church, as an
Article of our faith, it may follow, that it need not ever be eminently
visible, and apparently sensible unto us.

17 For the better exemplificatio^ of this verity, it may be remembered what
havocke was made by the heathen Roman Emperors, and their Deputies, against
the flock of Christ, in the ten first persecutions. That in the Roman dominion
there was scant any to be heard of who professed Christianity, but he was
soon cut of by the sword, or otherwise. Did they in those times suffer any
patent visibility of true profeslours, or when they once knew where they were,
did they not forthwith labor to extirpate the^? But in the days of
Co^sta^tius, when the Arria^ Heresy had once gotten the head, where in the
world did there appear any se^sible congregation maintaining the Orthodoxe
belief? Hieromes testimony of those days was, Adversus Luci^rianos.
The whole world did sigh, and wondered that it self was Arrian. The words are
but few, but they are to the purpose. So said Gregorius Presbiter, writing the
life of Gregory Nazianzen, The sect of the Arria^s had almost possessed all the
coasts of the world, the power, and impiety of the Emperor ministering boldness
unto it. The words of Consta^tius himself in Theodor. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. 16.
Theodoret, do give testimony unto this; neither does Liberius the Roman Bishop
say ought to the contrary. The speeches of the Arrian Emperor, against him and
Athanasius are these. The whole world does think that this is well. The whole
world has give^ sentence of his impiety. Thou alone do embrace the
frie^dship of that wicked man. And a little before that: Does so great a part of
the world reside in thee Liberius, that thou alone do dare to come in aid to
that wicked man, and disturb the peace of the universal world? Whereunto
Liberius did not take exception, saying that the visible Church stood for him
and Athanasius, but rather gives another reason, to make good his being alone.
Be it, that I am alone. Notwithstanding, for that, the cause of the faith is
not the worse. For a great while agone, there were three only found, who would
resist the Kings commandment. Here the Church for any external show was low
brought: for if any body held it up, it was Athanasius, who the^ played least
in sight and durst not appear. For this Liberius who did for a time second
him, did afterward shrink. He went at first into banishment in defense of the
truth, but after that, he was so solicited and laid at by Hieron. in Catalog.
script. Eccles.
Fortunatianus, that he rele^ted and co^descended to subscribe to the Arrian
heresy, as Hierome witnesses, who lived in that age, and was long co^versant
in Rome, and therefore could better report what was the issue of Liberius his
co^sta^cy, the^ some other who do relate it otherwise. What can be said for
him, De Pontifice Romano 4. 9.
Bellarmine has; but yet enforced by the evident testimony of Athanasius,
Hilary, and Hierome, he confesses so much as I have here set down: but cover
it he would, that he only consented to the external act of subscribing, but
remained in heart Orthodoxe. Why should it then be a marveil^, if in process of
time, Antichrist growing to greater strength, the Church should be in covert?
It is no more then often times fell out under the Jewish Synagogue, and has
bin exemplified to have been since among the Christians, and was so evidently
foretold before. In so much that by the example of the Apoc. 12. 6.
woman, it cannot be the true Church, unless it should be hid in the
wilderness: Which while our Popish teachers deny to agree to their Romish
Church, but profess that it has ever bin in sight, they themselves do by a
co^seque^t proclaim, that they are not the pure and undefiled flying woman,
but another painted harlot and stru^pet. The true Church is for a time out of
sight in the wilderness: but so, say they, was their Church never, and
therefore, will they nill they, their Church is not the true Church.

18 And here to the end that the slau^derous calu^niatio^ of our Adversaries,
may the more be manifested to all those, who will not wilfully close their
eyes against truth, I will a little show the vanity, and yet maliciousne^ of
their objection, when they say, that there was Campian Ration. 10. Q^nti Evang
pro fessores.
never any of our faith before the days of Luther, who in the year 1517.
began for hi^ part to display the kingdom of Antichrist. Where I pray the
Reader to consider, that the most part of those who^ I shall ^e, are Popish
writers, and no way partially. flected toward us. We say the^, that M. Luther
was not the first brocher of those points, which he taught against Papistry,
but as he did originally deduce the^ from the Scriptures, and out of the works
of the ancient Fathers, so he did derive the^ also hereditarily from other, who
immediately before him had taught the same doctrine, and left it both in books
and the hearts of me^ reco^me^ded unto him. As principal parties herein, I name
John Hus and Hierome of Prage, and al such as were their scholars, in or about
Bohemia: who before Luthers time oppugned the belief of the Church of Rome*
and their profession was not extinguished until his dates, howsoever it before
had bin mainly assaulted: If we could learn this no where else, yet Frau^cis
Guicciardine, an Italia^ and Flore^tine Historiographer would inform us of it,
who Histor. l. 13.
writing of the year 1520, says plainly that Luther did set abroad the
Heresies (as he terms the^) of the Bohemia^s, and he names there Hus and
Hierome, as former divulgers of the same. And Petrus In vita Wenceslai.
Messiah a Spanyard, therein agrees with him, who me^tioning the opinions of
Hus and the Bohemians, says, they were the seed of those errors, which were
afterward in Germany; alluding to the doctrine of Luther. There is no man whose
testimony in this behalf may be of more worth, the^ Johannes Cochleus: first
because he wrote a large story Historia Chochle^ de Hassit^s.
of purpose concerning the Hassites, and therefore by his long search, reading,
and writing, in that argument, may be presumed to know as much as any.
Secondly because it may be well imagined, that he would feign nothing to
do Luther good, in as much as he also wrot^ a Histor, de actis and script. M.
Lutheri
volume purposely against that worthy serva^t of God, inte^ding to rippe up his
whole life, from year to year, and to censure all his works. Yet this enemy
of his, in the story of the Hussites, does ple^tifully satisfy us about the
matter now in question. One Lib. (...).
where he tells us, that Hus did slay souls for an hundred years together,
neither yet does he cease to slay them by the second death. Within an hundred
years after him came M. Luther, according as the said John Hus did Io. Foxus
in Histor. Ecclesiastic.
prophecy not long before his death. And when it is added, that yet he does
not cease to slaye, it is manifest that his doctrine remained till the days of
Cochlues. In another Cochl. lib. 2.
place he relates, that Luther did stir up seditions in Germany, by the
books of the Hussites. Afterward he calls those, who were in Germany in his
time, Ibidem.
new^ Hussites. And again, Hus did so rent the unity of the Church, that
unto this day there remains a pitiful division in Bohemia. He proceeds in
the same matter Lib. 3.
elsewhere, saying, that the people of Germany are now by Luther partakers of
the heresies of Hus and Hierome. One sort of the followers of this John Hus,
did call themselves Thaborites, and these were they, who most dissented of all
other from the doctrine of Rome. Of these he speaks thus: Lib. 8.
Unto this day remains the sect of the Thaborites, in many places of
Bohemia and Moravia, under the ^ame of Picards and Waldensis. Lastly the same
Cochleus in the year 1534. does vvish, that Lib. 12.
he may see the remainders or leavings of the Hussites to return to the
Church, and the Germans to cast out all nevve sects. What can be more
evident, then that the doctrine of John Hus was sensibly and apparently
continued somewhere, even till the days of Martin Luther? Unto which may be
added, that whereas Luther began to show himself but in the year 1517. that
very year was Centur. 16. lib. 1. 20.
ended the Counsel of Laterane, held at Rome, and finished by Pope Leo the
tenth. And there consultation was had of reforming the manners of the Church,
and of recalling the Bohemians to the unity of the Church of Rome.

19 And as these testimonies do co^vince, that the Christian confession of Hus
was not extinguished at the coming of M. Luther, so may there be good reason
assigned why it did so long continue, in as much as it was embraced by many,
and earnestly maintaned eve^ unto the death. When Hus began first to preach,
the people which used ha^dy Cochl. lib. 1.
crafts, did with great desire hear his sermons, and did read the
Scriptures, being turned by him into their mother tongue; so that they could
dispute with the Priests: which the very women were able to do; yea and one
woman did make a book. Not long after, three of the Ibidem.
scholars of this preacher, did affirm that the Pope Johan. ^3.
the^ living was Antichrist, who had proclaimed a Croisado against a Christian
King; that was Ladislaus King of Naples, then infesting the lands of the Church
of Rome. These three persons were martyred for this speech, and took their
death patiently. In small process of time this doctrine so multiplied, that as
Onuphrius has, In tabula Council. ante Platinae Histor.
the Council of Constance was called principally for two things; the one was
against the Hussites, the other to take away the sehisme between the Popes.
These of likelihood grew great, that now a general Counsel was called against
the^. Neither did the people only agree in faith with John Hus, but the Nobles
of Bohemia stood appara^tly for him, in so much that they sent two Io. Fox. in
Council. Constant. Historia.
several and solemn supplicatio^s to the Counsel at Co^sta^ce in his behalf.
And when these their requests were neglected, and John Hus and Hierome of Prage
(contrary to the Emperors safe conduct given to the former of the^) were
burnt, the Nobles Cochl l. 4.
of Bohemia did mightily murmr against the fathers of the Counsel, insomuch
that Sigismund the Emperor to give them satisfaction on his behalf, did write
unto the^, excusing himself touching the death of these two me^, and laying the
fault upon the Counsel. But this gave not co^tentme^t to the Bohemia^s, now
robbed of their principal pastor, but being moved at the perfidiousnes of
those at Co^stance, they assembled themselves together to the number of Ibidem.
thirty thousand, and in the fields, upon three hundred tables erected for that
purpose, they received the Eucharist in both kinds. Afterward they rushing into
the Churches and Monasteries, did break down the Images there. It was not long
after, but that under Johannes Zisca, a noble and victorious warrior, these
Hussites grew to be of soldiers Lib. 5. and Petr Messiah in Sigismundo.
forty thousa^ds in one army, who got into their hands the castle of Prage the
chief city of Bohemia. The^ not long after did Pope Martin the 5. publish a
Croisado against these who^ he called Heretics, promising remission of their
sins to such as could destroy them. Notwithstanding, these hated persons did
still prosper, getting many victories under Procopius and other Captains, but
especially under Zisca, who was of that dexterity and felicity in his wars,
as that Cochleus almost amassed at his strange success, says, that Lib. 5.
sca^t any history of the Greeks or Hebrews or Latins, does me^tio^ such a
General as Zisca was. He built a new city as a refuge for his me^, and called
it. Thabor, whereof diverse embracing the doctrine of Hus were afterward called
Thaborites. A Lib. 6
second time time did Pope Martin proclaim a Croisado against the^, granting
remission of sins to al, who did either fight or co^tribute money against the^.
Upon which there were at one time forty Ibidem.
thousand German horsemen gathered to destroy the^: but such was the terror
of their name, that upon the approaching to the^, the horsemen of their own
accord turned their backs and fled. The Popish Auctor says that there was in
this some secret judgment of God, but he thinks the cause of their ill
success was, that they had Bishops and Priests to their leaders and Cap
taines. By this time came on the Counsel of Basil, which as In tabula ante
Platinam.
Onuphrius says was held against the Hussites. This shows that they were
many; which may also appear, in that the Fathers at Basil, did by an
indulge^ce grant to the Bohemia^s this dispe^sutio^, that contrary to the Act
of the Sess. 13.
Counsel of Co^sta^ce, they might receive the Eucharist both in bread and wine.
Genebrard, who was ever a true servant to the Pope, Genebrard lib. 4
Chronograph.
confesses so much: but adds withal, that the cup was permitted unto
the^, because that always before had been their custom so to communicates
yet says he, al was on that condition, that they should not find fault with
the contrary use, nor sever themselves from the Catholic Church in other
rites and doctrines. Cochleus Lib. 7.
names no such condition. Nay, to show that simply and directly it was yielded
unto them, he reports that the Legates of the Council of Basile, did thus
expound that which was concluded in the Bohemians behalf, Lib. 8.
The Council does permit the Eucharist under both kinds, not tolerating it
only as a thing evil, as to the Jews was permitted a bill of divorce, but so,
that by the auctority of Christ and his Church it is lawful, and profitable to
the worthy receivers. Where, is it likely, that unless the Bohemians now
after Husses death had bin a strong party, the Antichristian rabble would have
yielded to their importunity, so directly against the Canon of the next
precedent Council? Indeed the Ibidem.
Emperor Sigismund did afterward take a course to lessen their number, when he
sent many of them into Hungary against the Turks, that there they might either
conquering win to him victories, or being conquered themselves so be
destroyed and perish. He who list to see more concerning the multitude of
these Professors, let him but look on Hist. Boh^* ca 35. and cap 50. Epist.
130.
diverse places in the works of Aeneas Sylvius, who was afterward Pope by the
name of Pius 2. and he shall find him reporting of his own knowledge (as
travailing himself into Bohemia) that they were many, and very earnest also in
their Religion.

20 If here it should be replied, that these perhaps were base people and of
the vulgar, who thus followed John Hus; but men of learning and knowledge, or
persons of authority they had none to join with them; the course of the story
will easily clear the same, and show that they had both learned Pastors, and
great Magistrates, who believed as they believed, and stood wholly with the^. Of
what literature H^ himself was, is evident by his works yet remaining, and by
his personal withstanding the whole Counsel of Constance. And what learning,
what eloquence, what memory, all admirable, were in Hierome of Prage, as also
with what singular patience he took his death, is most significantly delivered
in an Ad Leonardum (...).
Epistle of Poggius, who as an eie-witnes beheld him, and seemed to be much
affected with the singular parts of the man. Which noble testimony of that
worthy Poggius is acknowledged by Lib 3.
Cochleus. While these two lived, there were diverse Lib 2.
priests, and Lib. 1.
preachers, which agreed in their Doctrine, and in their Sermons reproved the
Popish Clergy for their Simony, keeping of Concub^, avarice, riot, and
secular-like pride. But after the death of those two famous servants of God,
their Lib. 4.
followers got to them a Bishop, who was Suffragane to the Archbishop of
Prage, and by him they put into holy Orders as many Clerks as they would.
Which the Archbishop took so il, that he suspended his Suffragane. But it was
not long before that Lib. 5.
Co^radus the Archbishop himself, became a Hussite also, as the Author
calls him. Under this Conradus as president of the assembly, these Hussites
held a Counsel at Prage in the year 1421. and there they compiled a Confession
of their faith, This Cause did the said Archbishop, and many Barons of Bohemia
afterward stiffly mainetaine, and complained against the Emperor Sigismu^d, for
offering wrong to those of their Religion. Ibidem.
Alexander also the Duke of Lituania did give these Hushtes aid, which moved
Pope Martin the 5, to write unto him in this sort, Know that thou could not
give thy faith to heretics which are the ^ors of the holy faith, and that thou
do sin deadly of thou shall keep it, because there cannot be any fellowship
of a believer with an insidel. Thus did the virtuous Pope write. In Lib. 8.
process of time there grew a parley, between Sigismund the Emperor and the
Bohemians. There among the Compacts this was one, that the Bishops should
promote to holy Orders the Bohemians, even Hussites, which were of the
Universitie of Prage. And they might well deserve to be reputed University me^;
for Cochleus himself witnesses, that the Priests of the Thaborits were
skilled in arg^g, and exercised in the holy Scripture. Lib. 10.
Rokizana one of the^ did undertake to dispute, with Capistranus a great and
learned Papist. By that time that the year 1453. was come, Aeneas Sylvius does
complain that the kingdom of Bohemia was wholly Lib. 11.
governed by heretics. Now all the Nobility, all the Co^minalty is subject to
an heretic. That was one George or Gyrziko, Governor of the kingdom of
Bohemia under king Lad^slaus. But when Lad^slaus was dead, this Lib. 12.
George himself was by the Nobles and the People chosen King of that country.
And continuing the ancient profession of his Religion, about the year 1458,
those of Uratislavia and Silesia do refuse to obey him as being an heretic.
Notwithstanding Pope Pius the 2. then intending wars against tho Turk, did
by all means persuade the^, that they should yield obedience to him. This
George, says the Author, was borne and brought up in the heresy of the
Hussites. Now when Pope Pius did interpose himself, as a mediator between
this King and his Subjects, George did require of the Pope, that he might keep
the Compacts agreed upon at Basil, in behalf of the Bohemians. And when
Ibidem.
Pius vvoulde not yield thereunto, the king calls together the Estates of
his kingdom, and protests that he would live and die in those Compacts, and
so did also the Nobles which were Hussits. This was done at Prage in the year
1462. This resolutenesse of his, caused that Pope to tolerate many things in
him, but Paul. 2. who succeeded in that See of Rome, did excommunicate that
king, and set up a Croisado against him. Also he gave to Matthias the king of
Hungary, the title of king of Bohemia. Apud Platin.
Onuphrius in the life of Paulus 2, says that the Pope did excommunicate him,
and deprive him of his kingdom. Indeed for seven years this George and
Mathias did war for it, and Mathias got from him Moravia and Silesia, and a
good part of the kingdom of Bohemia. Vratislavia also and some other Provinces
and cities, did put themselves in subjection of Mathias. Yet did not George
deal hardly with the Papists which were at Prage, but in his greatest
extremity, did use both the advice and aid of many Nobles of the Popish
belief. At length after the continuance of war for seven years, Cochl. lib.
12.
Mathias concludes a peace with king George, both against the will of the Pope
and the Emperor. And then this king was content, to ask of the Pope an
absolution from the excommunication, some Princes being mediators for him in
that respect. But before the Agents could return from Rome, the king died in
the year of our Lord, 1471. By this story it is manifest, that both noble and
learned of high account, were of that Christian belief, which John Hus taught,
and were contented to adventure all things which they had in the world, for
the maintenance of the same.

21 Perhaps here it may be asked; but how shall we know that John Hus and his
followers, did embrace that Religion which is now professed in England? We
find in Aeneas Sylvius some opinions of theirs, which peradventure will scant
be reputed current among all English Protestants. He rehearses these four of
theirs, Histor. Bohem. ca. 50.
That they would receive the Sacrament in both kinds; that Civil dominion is
inhibited to Clergy men: that preaching of the words was to be permitted to
all men: that public crimes are in no sort to be tolerated. I answer, truth
it is that he there mentions only those, and whither he relates them truly
or no, it may be doubted, as anon I shall show, by laying open the custom of
the enemies of the Gospel, in mis-reporting their doctrine. But elsewhere he
delivers other opinions of theirs, as Epist. 130.
against the Supremacy of the Pope, against Purgatory, against Invocation of
Saints, and such like matters. If we return to Cochleus who was best
acquainted with their matters, we shall find much more. As thus, Cochl. Hist.
lib. 1.
Hus translated all the books of Canonical Scripture into the Bohemian
tongue, and the people did most diligently read them. They would have the holy
Scripture, to be the only judge in matters of Controversy. They held that al
Bishops and Priests, are the successors of the Apostles. That not the Pope but
Christ is the head of the Church, neither are the Cardinals the body, but all
that believe in Christ. That the Pope is not a member of the Church, but of the
Devil and his Synagoge. That one Pope was a woman. Yea Hus did preach, that
the Pope is an abomination, and Antichrist. Also Lib. 2.
he called the General Council at Co^stance, the Synagoge of Satan. Another
of his Articles was, Lib. 3.
The Pope is the beast in the Apocalypse. His scholars after his death, broke
down the Lib. 4.
Images in Churches and Monasteries. Yea Zisca did cast down all the Lib. 5.
Churches, which were dedicated to the Virgin Mary, or to any Saint, as if it
were lawful to build a Church, only to almighty God. In his time the
Professors began to be distinguished into two companies. The one of them did
not so much dissent from the Pope, as the other. Those which in fewer matters
differed from the Bishop of Rome, retained still the name of Hussites; they
which disagreed in more, were called Thaborites, of Thabor the City which
Zisca built for them. And these were the greater number and the stronger. There
is in Cochleus, a Professio fidei antiquae, etc.
Confession of faith by one Johannes de Pr^bram a Bohemian, who was but a
Hussite and not well affected to the Thaborites, because he accounted them as a
kind of Precisians or Puritanes, in comparison of himself. Yet this more
mild man does wish and beg of God, to see a reformation of the Church, that
there might be redressed, Artic. 57.
Simonyes through all the world most detestable, most wicked setting to sale
of all Sacraments, most insatiable avarice, most impudent fornications, most
putrified uncleannesses, rottennesses most abominable, Co^ubines-keeping most
polluted, manners most dissolute, most corrupt gestures and behaviors,
harlotry every where too too much multiplied in the Clergy, wherewith alas the
whole earth lies corruptly filthy. Also the Lucifer-like pride of the
Clergy, which is exalted above God, their dainety and daily banquets, their
abundant riches and rich abundance, their disquietnesse most litigions, being
the chief root of the quarrels of the world, their curiosity most vai^, their
most unseemly pomp of apparel, their conversation most secular-like, their
most open transgression of all the commandments of God, their most remiss
care of souls, their most negligent regard of the word of God. This he says
for himself: but concerning the Thaborites who indeed came nearer to the
purity of the Gospel, he witnesses of them, that they held, Articul. 5^.
That material bread does re^ine in the Sacrame^t^ that the Saints now
triumphant are not to be called upon: that there is no Purgatory: that no
suffrages, or prayers, are to be made for the dead^: Also they allow not of the
holy da^es almost of all the Saints, nor of the Eves or Uig^s that go^ before
them; Nor the consecrations of visible things, as salt, oil, holy water,
belles and such like. They have a s^bismaticall celebration of their Masses,
that is, a several sort of Church Service, and refuse the most celebrsou^
service of the Church, and the r^es and administrations of almost all the
Sacraments. Let our Papists now speak whether they and we do not agree in the
same doctrine altogether. For I doubt not but they, who had received so much
grace from God, as to see all these things, were also partakers of farther
knowledge in the mysteries of Salvation.

22 While I have spoken thus largely concerning these good Christians in
Bohemia, let not any man imagine that Christ's faithful flock was restrained
within the compass of that country, so that godly men were else nowhere to
be found. For certain it is that between the time of John Hus, who was burnt
in the year 1415. and the first standing up of Martin An. 1517.
Luther, were very many other, who in that darkness did see what belonged to
the light of the Gospel. Among these may be reckoned, as very memorable, the
Walde^ses, who about the year 1508. do make Responsio ad Doctore^ Augustinu^.
an answer in de^ce of themselves, and therein as they testify that they the^
had Priests of their own, so they speak against Purgatory, and most op^ly
against Tra^substa^tiatio^. The same, touching Tra^substa^tiatio^, they do in a
Waldensium Confessio in fasciculo ^erum expetend. and ^ugiend.
Confession of theirs, where also they impugn Adoration of the Eucharist.
There also they name the Prelates vnsav^ry salt, and avouch that the execrable
naughtines which was in the^, by the instinct of the Devil, did drive the^ away
from the Sea of Rome. For the Papists in their Sermon^ did call one another
schismatikes. heretics, sacrilegious, false Prophets, ravening wolves, the
beast and whore in the Revelation. Of Sleidan. Lib. 16.
these there were many in one part of France, who time out of mind had
refused to bear the yoke of the Pope, and therefore in the days of Frauncis
the first, king of France, by a bloody decree of that king, but by the
execution of one Minerius a most cruel person, Merin^ol and Cabriers with some
other villages about them, were sacked and destroyed, men, women and children
being slain. Yea diverse of them being stripped stark naked first, and then
murdered, and forty poor women being burned in a barn. I may add unto
these, many worthy men here and there dispersed, where-of all cried out
against the Church of Rome, and desired a Reformation, and many of them
apprehended, and delivered to other the true meane^ of Justification, which is
the nearest point of Salvation. The Lucas O^iand. l. (...). c. 8.
Author of the sixteenth Centurie names about the year one thousand five
hundred and somewhat after, (but yet before Luther) Baptista M^ntuanus; and
Franciscus P^cus, Earl of Mira^dula, both which much inveighed against the
Clergy, and their whole practice. Also one Doctor K^serspergius, another
called Johannes H^lten, a third named Doctor Andreas Proles, and Sava^orola,
all groaning under the burden of those times. The Oration of Oration ad Leonem.
10
Picus in the Council of Laterane is extant: where besides his most bitter
taxing of the filthy behavior of the Clergy, he uses these words. Piety is
almost su^ke into superstition. How Mantu^ does every where pay the Romanists,
may appear to those who read his works. But one place of him I will Calamit^
cum. 3.
name.

-- Petrique domus polluta fluente
Marcescit luxu, (nulla hic arcana revelo
Non ignota loquor, liceat vulgata refer:
Sic vrbes populique ferunt, ea fama per omnem
Iam vetus Europam) mores exirpat honestos:
Sanctus ager scurris, venerabilis ara cyaedis
Servit, honorandae Divum Ganymedibus ades.
Quid muramur opes, recidivaque surgere tectat
Thuris odorat^ globulos and cinnama vendit
Mollis Arabs, Tyrij vestes: venalia nobis
Temple, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, corona,
Ignis, thura, preces, coelum est venale, Deusque.
Some of them, I English thus.

Priests land now Iesters vile does serve: The Aultars bawds maintain.
Of holy Churches of the Gods, lewd Ganymeds make their gain,
Why do we woder that their wealth, and houses fallen do (...)
Sweet franckincense and cinnamon are the only merchandise
Of the Arabian; and but clothes the Tyrians use to sell:
But with us Churches, Aultars, Priests, yield money very well.
Things hallowed, crowns, fire, franckincense, the prayers which we make,
Yea heaven, yea God, are saleable, if we may money take.
The opinions of Savanarola against Popery are many, and for them (howsoever it
be otherwise ^uicciard. Lib. 3.
colored) he was burnt. In the matter of free Justification he is In psa. 51.
clear. And the same is written also of Catalog. test verit. lib. 19.
Trit^ius another learned man, who lived at that time. How in England Christ
had in all these times professors of the truth, I shall have occasion to show
anon, when I come to speak of John Wiclef.

23 In the mean while I shall not do amiss, to mention some other, who were
between the days of John Hus and Martin Luther. A special oppugner of the
Papacy was that learned Laurentius Valla, a Patritius of Rome, and Canon of
Saint John of Laterane there. He wrote a treatise of purpose against the Contra
(...) donatione^.
forged Donation of Constantine. He pronounces of his own experience that the
Pope himself does make war against peaceable people, and sows discord
between Cities and Princes. The Pope does both thirst after other men's
riches, and swalloweth up his own. He makes gain of not only the
Commonwealth, but the state Ecclesiastical and the holy Ghost. The later
Popes do seem to labor this, that look how much the ancient Popes were
wise and holy, so much they will be wicked and foolish. He lived about the
year 1420. and for the freeness of his speech and pen, was by the Pope
driven into exile. About the same time lived Archdeacon Nicolaus de (...), who
rebuked De Annatis non sol* vendis.
many things in the Ecclesiastical state, and spoke excellently in the matter
of General Councels, and their circumstances, as Ration. 9.
hereafter may be declared. Petrus de Aliaco Cardinal of Cambray, gave a tract
to the Council of Constance, touching the De Reformatione Eccl^.
reformation of the Church. There does he reprove many notable abuses of the
Romanists, and gives advice how to redress the^. Cap. 3.
There should not be multiplied, says he, such variety of Images and pictures
in the Churches. There should not be so many holy days. There should not so
many new Saints be Canonized. Apocryphal writings should not be read in the
Churches on holy days. Cap. 4.
Such ^umerositie and variety of Religious persons is not expedient. There are
so many orders of begging Friars, that their state is burdensome to men,
hurtful to hospitals and to the poor. Few do now study 'Divinity for the
abuse of the Church of Rome, which has despised Divines. All now turn to the
Law and to Arts of gain. He says, that it was then a proverb, The Church
is come to that estate, that it is not worthy to be ruled but by Reprobats. He
has very much more, and in the end concludes, that Cap. 6.
As there were seven thousand, who had not bowed to Baal, so it is to he
hoped, that there be some which desire the reformation of the Church. Imagine
whither this Cardinal, if he had found some company to have joined with him,
would not have said much more. About that time lived Leonardus Aretinus, whose
little book In hypocritas libellus.
Against Hypocrites, is worth the reading. So is the Oration ad cleium
Coloniensem.
Oration of Antonius Cornelius Lynnichanus, laying open the lewd lubricity of
Priests in his days. So does he detect many abuses and errors, who wrote the
Dece^ gravamina Ger maniae.
Ten Grievances of Germany: but those who compiled the hundred Grievances of
the German Nation, do discover many more. Finally he who list to see
farther, that God even in those dead days, had diverse servants, who by more
then a glimce did see the truth, and desired yet more plentifully to be
instructed in Religion, let him read the Lib. 19.
Catalogus testium veritatis lately set out, and there he shall find diverse
whom I have not named.

24 By this time I trust it is manifest, how false a slander that of the
Papists is, that before the days of Martin Luther there was never any man of
our Religion. Till the time of the Council of Constance, this case is cleared.
And beyond that, it is as easy to show, that John Hus and Hierome of Prage,
had their immediate antecessours in witnessing the faith of Christ. For they
were instructed and much helped, by the books of John VViclef an English man,
and therefore says Platina, as In Ioh. 24.
sectatours of Wiclef, they were condemned in the Council of Constance. Aeneas
Sylvius shows the means how those Bohemians came to know the doctrine of
Wiclef; he says thus: Histo Bohem ca. 35.
He who first raised up the opinions of the Hussites, had them from Oxford,
carrying thence into Bohemia Wiclefs books De Realibus Vniversalibus. Cochleus
who by his good will would be taken for a vehement defender of Popery, gives
yet a larger testimony. For he says Histor. de Hussitis, li. 1.
that as a Bohemian brought first into Bohemia Wiclef* book De Realibus
Vniversalibus, so there was afterward one P^ter Pain a scholar of Wiclefs, who
after the death of his Master, came also into Bohemia, and brought with him
Wiclefs books, which were in quantity as great at Saint Austens works.
Ibidem.
Many of these books did Hus afterward translate into their mother tongue. In
plain terms after this, the Author delivers it, that Lib. 2.
the Hussites and Thaborites were branches of Wiclef. And in the same book,
Hus did commit spiritual fornication with many strangers, with the Wiclefists,
the Dulcinists, etc. And in the next he avoucheth, that Lib. 3.
Hus and Hierome took their heresies from Wiclef. And once again he terms
the Protestant Germans Lib. 6.
new Wiclefists. What an opinion of this man John Hus had, may be fully seen
by that wish of his, wherein he prayed Lib. 2.
that he might there be, where the soul of Wiclef was. Now what VViclef did
teach, may be easily gathered, if by nothing else, yet by the deadly hatred
which the Romanists did carry toward him. The Session. 8.
Council of Constance did define him to be an Heretic, long after his death,
and commanded that his bones should be taken up and burnt. Also Cochl. li. 1.
Pope John the 23. in a General Council at Rome, did before that time condemn
him for an heretic, which the Hussites did but laugh at. But no man had a
harder conceit of him then Cochleus, who sticks not to affirm that Lib. 2.
he thinks the torments of Wiclef are greater in hell, then those of Judas or
Nero. If God Almighty had no better opinion of him, the man were in an ill
case. But the best is, this cholerike Critic is not the Judge of all the
world. He was angry be^^ke in behalf of Transubstantiation, concerning which
he cites this Article of Wiclef, There was never a greater heresy, then that
which puts the Accident without a Subject in the Eucharist. But he might
have named more points, wherein that holy man did differ from the Church of
Rome. The Session. 8.
Council of Constance picketh out five and forty Articles of his Positions,
which the learned Reader may find there. Yet doubtless many of them are fasly
reported, which is a matter common with enemies of the truth, to perver^, and
mis-construe, that so they may more freely defame. There was one Respo. ad ^8
artic. Wiclef. In ^ase rer ex* petend.
(...) Wideford, who took on him to answer eighteen Articles, said to be
Wiclefs, whence a man may gather some of his doctrine. But that al things there
laid against him were not true, may well be observed out of the same Answer,
declaring that he had many things concerning Wiclef, but only by In fine
Articul. 10.
fame and report; And Virgil. Aeneid 4.
that is not the most certain Relater. What positio^s indeed he held, may be
seen in Mr. Fox reporting his life and actions; as also in the Lib. 18.
Catalogus Testium veritatis. And those who be not learned, may esteem of
them, by the doctrine of John Hus before rehearsed, who by the testimony of the
Papists themselves, as I have showed, maintained the opinions of Wiclef.

25 Now that this worthy champio^, and preacher of the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
went not alone, but had many English men and women, who in his life time, and
after his death, believed as he believed, and professed as he professed, is in
the next place to be showed. Among the chief of his fautours were John of
Gaunt, (as Apolog. Hie^arch. ca 1.
Parsons the Jesuit confesses) and Lord Henry Percy, the one of them Duke of
Lancaster, the other Marshall of England. Master Fox cites out of a Ex
Regist G. Courtney.
Register of the Arch-bishoppe of Canterbury, a Mandate mentioning that the
Conclusions of Wiclef, were preached in diverse and sundry places of the
Arch-bishoppes Province, generally, commonly, and publicly. The same also is
manifested by a letter of that Arch-bishoppe to the Bishop of London; and in a
Monition directed to Ad Cancellar. Ox.
Oxford, where it is said that certain Conclusions heretical and erroneous,
were generally and commonly preached and published, in diverse places of the
Province of Canterbury. There be extant also Ad (...) Cant. and Cancel. Oxon.
letters of King Richard the second, directly signifying so much. But there
is nothing which may more amply testify the spreading of his doctrine, then
an Act of Parliamente in the beginning almost of that young Kings days,
where it is related, that there were Anno 5. Rich 2. ca. 5
diverse preaching dayelie, not only in Churches and Church-yardes, but also
in markets, f^res, and other open places, where a great congregation of people
is, ^verse sermons containing Heresies and ^etorious errors. This puts me
in mind of a written book which once In manu Mr. Gu^el. Wirley.
I saw, being a Chronicle compiled by a Monk of Leicester Abbay, who writing
of the time of the said K. reports at large, that the people in faires and
markets, and riding by the way, and almost every where, would talk of the
Scripture, and reprove the customs of that time, as also the Priests, to the
exceeding great trouble and offense of the Clergy. This they might the rather
do out of the word of God, because the Scriptures were then translated into
English, as may be seen by diverse copies written and remaining to this day,
supposed to be so turned by UUiclf. And it is very probable, that in
Leicestershire there were many of those, of whom the Mon^e Leicestrensis
spoke, since at Lu^erworth a town in that Coun^e, John UUicl^f was beneficed.
But the greatest part of this learned man's abode, was at the first in the
University of Oxford, where he was both a Doctor and Reader of Divinity, and
therefore is to be conceived, to have many learned men partaking with him in
his opinions. In fine. R. Edward 3.
Master Fox says (out of the Chronicle of Saint Albane^) that he had a
benefice in Oxford, of which he was deprived by Simon (...) Archbishop of
Canterbury. It may be this was nothing else but the Maister-ship, or Chief
Governors place in Ba^oll College, which I am persuaded that he had, since
there are yet two ancient writings in the Treasury of that In Archivis
Colleg. Ba^ol.
College, (which I have seen) who were made in the name of John Vviclif
Master of that house, and that in the days of King Richard the second. But
while he lived, he had so many favorers in that University, as that Vide
Io. Fox in vita Wiclif.
Master Robert (...) Uice-chancellour, and the two Proctors took part with
him, As also Nicolas Herford, Philip (...) and John Ash^on, preachers and
Bachelors of Divinity, and grew into great question for his cause, where
R^ington, in the end being Doctor, did slip from him. Yea so far was his
doctrine there spread, that Pope Annot. R. Richard^. (...).
Grego^ie the eleventh in the year 1^78. did direct his Bull to the
University of Oxford, against the doctrine and Articles of that learned man,
even Rome it self ringing of his opinions in that University. Neither did his
followers dye, when he himself died, but long Sub Rege Henry.
after that, Pope Gregory the 12. did direct down another Bull to Oxford,
against VViclif, in which he uses the same words, which his Predecessor
had, that is to say, that VViclif did follovv^ the doctrine of Marsilius of
Pa^a, and of John of Gand^ne of unworthy memory, which speech is vvorth the
marking to shevve, that this man also had his Predecessors. Lib. secund. in
literis Reg. Henry. 4.
The copy of this later Bull is to be seen in the book which that worthy
lover of Antiquities Master Hare gave to our University. Where also is to
be seen, in the Constitutions of a Provincial Council celebrated at Oxford,
a sharp Inquisition decreed by Thomas Arondell Archbishop of Canterbury
against all even the heads of Colleges and Halles, and others suspected of
Lo^ardy and VViclevisme. They might well suppose that the students of that
place were entertainers of such doctrine, since about that An. 1406. Octobr.
(...).
very time, a testimonial In operibus John Hus.
was given in their Congregation house, under seal, in favor of John
VViclif, where these words are, among other, GOD forbid that our Prelates
should have condemned a man of such honesty for an Heretic etc. And yet in the
Council of Constance he was condemned for such a one, forty years after
that he was dead and buried. But all vvoulde not serve, to extirpate his
books or memory out of our University, but even in the days of An. 1476.
King Edward the fourth there were nevve letters directed to the Governors
of that place, by the King himself, to make search for his books and to burn
them. I have in my custody a fair ancient Record of that University, which
by means of a good friend I have gained back to this place, And therein is a
solemn letter, directed from the Convocation of Doctors and Masters to the
King, testifying that according to their Sovereigns commandment, they had
with accurate diligence, searched out the books and tractes of VViclif
himself and of Reginald Pecocke, and had burnt them. So much ado was it, and
that in so long a space, to suppress the head whereunto VViclif^ doctrine
was grown, in the famous University of Oxford.

26 How elsewhere in this kingdom, his Positions were spredde, may be
easily collected out of Geffrey Chaucer, who dying about the year 1400. may
rightly be supposed to have lived while John UUictef lived. This Chaucer who
wanted neither write nor learning, did at In the Plow-mans tale.
large paint out the pride, lascivious, vicious and intolerable behavior of
the Pope, Cardinals, and Clergy, even applying the name of Antichrist diverse
times unto the Roman Bishop, and saying that there were many in those days
of the speakers mind, yea finding fault with their faith, as well as with
their manners. The whole tale is well worthy the reading: but I will cite
only a few verses.

Peter The Apostle.
was never so great a ^oole
To leave his kaye Which Pa^sts say he has of heaven gate.
with such a As the Pope.
lorell,
Or take such cursed such a tool
He was advised nothing well:
I trow they have the kaye of hell,
The^ master is of that place Marshall;
For there they dressen him to dwell
And with false Lucifer there to fall.
They been as proud as Lucifarre,
As angry and as envious;
From good faith they been full far,
In covetise they been curious:
To catch cat ta^le as covetous
As bound, that for hunger well yall;
Ungodly and ungracious
And needely such falshed shall foul fall.
This and a hundred times as much, he expresses in a simple Plowmans person,
as evidently inferring, that the husbandman and meanest country body of that
time, by the reading or hearing of the word of God, could tell what was right
and religious, and what otherwise, yea and complain of the blindness, and
impierie of the Romanistes in that Age. But if we would be advertised, what
even laye-men in those times could do let us look into the Declarations of
Walter Brute, who wa^ in question for his opinions, before the Bishop of
Hereford in the year 1393. and gave up a little book, containing those things
which he maintained. The true Ex Registro Episcopi Hereford.
copy of that treatise is yet extant, and deserves to be read. There we may
find these and the like positions; That bread remains in the Sacrament
after Consecration: that the Pope is Antichrist: that nothing is to be believed
but what may be confirmed out of the Scriptures: that the Pope is the Idol of
desolation sitting in the Temple of God: that Antichrist is not to come of the
Tribe of Dan: neither only to reign three years (...) a half: that the
City, Apoc. 17. is Rome: that our Justification is freely by faith alone: that
the doctrine of the Pope differs from that of Christ that miracles are no
assurance of truth that men are not rashly to be reputed Saints: that the
Pope has not power beyond other Bishops: neither is the head of the Church:
that Papists mistake the keys of binding and loosing: that Infantes dyeing
before Baptism are not therefore damned: that Auricular confession is not
prescribed in the Scripture: that the Canon Law is ill grounded: that the Pope
deceives men in his Pardons: that Absolution is to be sought at the hands of
God only: that the Priests use vain prayers in the Mass: that Exorcismes and
holy water are unlawful: that Priests do sin who bargain to sing for the
souls of men departed: that Religious men and women are the devourers of
widows houses: that selling of Orders and Dirges is naught: that the Pope is
the beast with the two horns like the Lamb, while he chalengeth the
double svvorde: that he seeks to be worshipped as God: that Dux Cleri does
make up the number 666: that worshipping of Images is Idolatry: that
temporal goods may be taken from the Clergy offending. There was a great
Papist one William Wideford whom before I mentioned, who gives testimony to
this Treatile of Brute, whom he calls Waltherus Britta in Latin: and
vvriting against Contra 18 articul. Wiolif.
VViclif, makes In articulo 11. and 12.
twice mention of a book of his own, sent to the Bishop of Hereford
(D^num Ersordense^ he calls him) in confutation of the book of Walter
Britte.

27 While I wr^e these things, I cannot but think upon the audacious
absurdnesse of my ignorant Doctor, who blusheth not to utter, that is is
Ration. 1.
most manifest, that all in England were Papists without exception, from the
first Christening thereof, until this age of King Henry the eight. He is
doubtless an honest man, and worthy to be trusted on his word. It is not only
manifest, but most manifest, not that the greatest part, but all, yea and be^
shall not be scanted, all w^ut ^ption were ^apistes etc. Were John Wiclif^ bones
burnt because he was a Papist? and were the Bul^ of the Pope against him for
that cause? and were the Archbishop Arondel^ Cost^ against his followers so
severe, because they were Papists. The man is h^ to be pitied for his
simplicity. A man may know by the laws, Proclamatio^s, letters and proceedings
by the State against some as against Heretics, As also by the Records of
Bishops yet extant, and by the manifold executions and burnings afterward, that
even in that deep time of ignorance, England did give most noble testimony of
Christ's truth against Popery, eve^ so far as to the fiery trial. If the
Christian Reader peruse the Ecclesiastical History of Mr. Fox, he shall find
how (...) An. 1400. sub K. Henry. 4.
before the Co^, William Sa^ a Priest was burnt, and after him John Ba^y, and
that because they were Wiclevists o^ L^ (as they the ^ed them) and not because
they were Papists. There are the reasons also and asseveratio^s of P^y and
Thorpe against Popery, with diverse other matters. And is it ^ot to be thought
that the Heretics increased, when a ^ynode (...) Sub Reg. Henric. 5.
was assembled in S^. P^ Church at London, into the which ^me (...)
Inquisito^, who in a former Synod were appointed, to (...) and (...) the vv^gs
of VV^, wherein they found* 24^. Conclusions, an which they supposed to be
I^ (...) in the (...) ^eere of K. Henry the (...) d^ (...) ward the L. (...)
was ^ge (...), as (...) had been a ^de of Trai^, but he was then (...) ^ed
H^. So was o^ (...) for his (...) consumed to (...). Not long^ (...)(...),
beside^ (...) (...) Sub (...)
Religion, (...) and VV^ two (...) and (...) of (...)followed afterward^
Neither ^d ^he (...) and of King (...) the (...) escape (...) of sundry
(...)CHRIST^ (...) sake (...) for (...) profession of the ^hy the particular
stories of whom, may b^ ^ounde in the Author about (...) The Clergy of these
times did bear much sway with their Princes, and left no means v^ught, no
stone vn^ned, to keep up the dignity and pre-eminence of their Romish
Hierarchy, and the superstitions Idolatry which then was in use. Now ^in
the reigns of all these Princes, so many were slaughtered for the testimony
of a good conscience, how many weak brethren were there, who did not make
open profession of their faith, and how many did there lie hid, diverse of
them in probability having confederates, and some of them being Priests, and
therefore not unlikely to have learning, both to confirm themselves in the
truth, and such other as heard them. Thus have I both in England and
else-vvhere brought up the doctrine of the Gospel, until the time of John
VViclef, who flourished in the year, 1371.

28 Here it may please the Reader to remember, that the judgment (before
cited) of ^vo Gregor. 11. and Gregor. 12.
Popes was that VViclef taught the doctrine of Marsilius of Padua, and of John
of (...). Of the later of these, there yet appears no monument written: But
he joined in Catalog. test. verle. lib. 18.
opinion with the former. But as for Marsilius Patavinus, our Adversties
cannot but acknovvledge him to be a very learned man, after the measure of
the age wherein he lived, which was in the year 1324. He vvrote a
Defensor pacis.
book against the usurped power of the Bishope of Rome: which argument he
entered into, in behalf of the Emperor Lewis of Bav^e, who was mightily
laid at by three Popes successively. There the Author avovveth as right and
just, the supreme authority of the Emperor, displaying the iniquity of the
Popes usurpation over Christian Princes and General Councels. The book is
vvoorth the reading, to see whether all in times past, did allow of the Popes
doctrine and proceedinges or not. His opinions are these* That the Pope is not
superior to other Bishops, and much l^ the Emperor and civil Magistra^.
That thing as are to be decided by the ^ure. The (...) men of the lai^ (...)
in Councels. That the Clergy and Pope himself are to be subject to
Magistrates. That the Church is the (...) company of the faithful. That
CHRIST is, (...) of the Church, and appointed (...) to be (...) Ui^: That
Priests may be ^ryed. That Saint Peter was (...) at Rome. That the Popish
Synagoge (...) a d^ of thieves. That the doctrine of the P^ not to be
follovved, because it leads to everlasting destruct^. In the time of this
Marsilius, lived that noble Poet Danie, who vvrote also a book against the
Pope, Petrus Messiah in Ludovico.
C^ the Monarchy of the Emperor* but for taking part with Jews of Bav^ere,
he was condemned for an heretic, and his book ^hereticall. Then also vvrote
Catal. test. verit. lib. 18.
Occam directly to the same purpose: but for his labor therein, and his large
reproof of the Pap^cie in other points, he was excommunicated by the roman
Bishop, which he so much contemned, that he not unwillingly dyed under that
sentence. About that time were here and there dispersed sundry godly men, who
saw more then the common sort touching Religion. As Ibid. ex Hen. de Erford.
Hay^ a Minorite, who frequently said in his Sermons, that the Church of Rome
vvat the where of Babylon, and that the Pope and Cardinals were mere A^:
which propositions were held somevvhat before also, by Ibidem.
Ger^ and Dulcinus, two learned men. This Du^ may be thought to have had many
followers, since Hist. Hussit. lib. 2.
Cochleus could say, that John Hus committed spiritual fornication with the
W^sts, and with the Dul^nists. The same opinions concerning the Pope and Rome,
did that rare man* Epist. 20. and in Poesi Italica.
Franciscus Petrarche seem fully to embrace, as may appear to any who will
read his works, howsoever Cardinal In Appe^d. ad lib. de Romano Poutif. c.
20
Ballarmine labor to make the world believe otherwise, being desirous to
have us thinke^, that Petrarch spoke not against the Pope, but some abuses in
the Court of Rome. And to make it plain that it was not a slight conceit,
or only in a few, that the Pope was (...), and Rome was Babylon, Apocal.
17. God stirred up yet more in that age, who proclaimed the same in (...). As
Genebr. Chronogr. l. 4. An 13^7
(...) B^ or ^sis, who was a Mino^, and for teaching so, was dug up after
that he was deed, and his body by the sentence of Pope Clement the si^ was
burnt. A fevv years after him did Catal. te^ verit. lib. 18
(...) ^es de R^ssa, a Monk, teach the same doctrine, which as every man may
guess does (...) the Papacy in every respect. Academ. (...). Christ. Clas. 15.
Johannes G^ came not so fat: but saw in his age many horrible abuses of the
Church of Rome, and in his writings spoke liberally of it. And it did bite
deep, when De auferibilitate Papae ab Ecclesia.
he disputed that the Pope might be taken safely away from the Church, and
yet ^o danger follow of it. But let us now go a little higher.

29. I mentioned before how Cochleus says, that John Hus did take his doctrine
from the Wiclevists and the Dulcinists. Hear, I pray you, what he says. Hist.
lib. 2.
H^ did commit spiritual fornication with many aliens, with the Wiclevists,
the Dulcinists, with the Leonists, the Wal^ses, the Al^ingenses, and other of
that sort, enemies of the Church of Rome. These Leonists or poor men of
Lions, and Waldensis, and Albingenses were the same men, but diversely upon
diverse occasions termed by the Roman Synagoge which hated them. Their
opinions then did Hus mainetaine. Aeneas Sylvius does also directly witness
the same, affirming that the Hist Bohem. ca. 35.
Hussites did embrace the opinions of the Waldensis. There you may see, that
their doctrine was against the Primacy of the Pope, Purgatory and such like
matters. Chron. lib. 4.
Genebrarde, who says that these Waldensis began Anno 1170, or as some
other will 1218. rehearses out of Sylvius these opinions of theirs, that
prayers for the dead and Purgatorie-fire are an invention of the Priests
covetousness, that holy Images are to be defaced, that Confirmation and
extreme Unction are no Sacraments, that auricular Confession is a trifling
thing. He who list, may see a great many more of their Catal. test. verit.
li. (...).
positions, agreeing with the doctrine which we teach, which may well also
be gathered from the Jesuits themselves. For that is the cause that In
prefat. general. Co^trovers.
Bellarmine ioineth these together as heretics, the Ber^garians, the
Petrobrusiant, the Waldensis, the Albingenses, the UUiclevistes, the Hussites,
the Lutherans, etc. And Lib. 1. c. 19.
Jews Richeome, another of that Society, in his defense of the Mass against
the Lord Plessis, says that the Ministers for the confirming of their
figurative sense in This is my body, have none for their Doctors, for their
Ancients, for their Fathers, but Berengarius, ^uinglius, Calvin, (...),
VViclef, the Albingenses, the UUaldenses. These Waldenses then and Albingenses
are ours, by the confession of our Adversaries. And of these, long agone there
were no small company. For as Du Hist. li. 12.
Haillan in the life of Philip the 3. King of France speaks, being driven
from Lions in France, they withdrew themselves into Lombardy, where they so
multiplied, that their doctrine began to spread through Italy, and came as
far as Sicely. As the same Author Lib. 9.
writes, Philippus Augustus came to his kingdom, Anno 1180. which is now
more then four hundred years since. And in his time it was, that the
Albingenses did so increase in France, that the Pope and Princes adjoining
were afraid of their number. He who reads the story of them shall see, that
they are reported to have held many gross, wicked and absurd opinions mingled
with their true doctrine. But Du. Haillan the best and most judicious
Chronicler of France, and no partial witness in our behalf (since his
profession touching religion was such, that he was employed to write that
story, by K. Henry the third) had not so little wit, but that he perceived
those imputations to be laid on them in odium, and of purpose to procure their
defamation. See how wisely he speaks truth and his conscience, and yet so
coucheth it, that his felows might not justly be offended at his words. Lib. 10.
Although says he, these Albingenses had evil opinions, yet so it is that
these did not stir up the (...) of the Pope and of great Princes against them
so much, as their liberty of speech did, wherewith they used to blame the
vices (...) dissoluteness of the said Princes and of the Clergy, yea to tax
the vices and actions of the Popes. This was the principal point which brought
them into universal hatred, and which charged them with more evil opinions
then they had. Now first that they were not men infamous, either for their vile
opinions or filthy conversation, and secondly that they were not only base and
poor people, it is evident by this, that so many noble and worthy men took
part with them, yea to the adventuring of their lives, in their company and
for then behalf, as the Ibidem.
Counties or Earls of Toulouse, of Cominges, of Bigerre, of Car^, yea the King
of Arragon. And when Raimund this Earl of Toulouse was for his belief
excommunicated by the Pope, and a Croisado was proclaimed against him, and the
Albingenses, as if they had been Saracens or Infidels, not only the Counties
of Foix and Cominges came with all their strength to assist Raimund, but
Alphonsus the king of Arragon came in his own person to his succor, as being
his kins-man and his friend. And when all these were met together, the report
is says Du Haillan, that the army of these heretics, did consist of about
one hundred thousand fighting men. These things being thus discovered by men of
your own part, be ashamed you Papists and blush, to spread among your simple
and credulous followers, that never men did as we do, nor believed as we
believe, before Luthers time, and al Christendom formerly liked of the
Papistical doctrine and proceedings. But because you shall yet hear one
testimony farther, touching these Albingenses and Waldenses, how honest and
truly religious they were, I will cite what one Reinerius, a man who did hate
them and was as it is supposed, an Inquisit or against them, did report
concerning them, now three hundred years agone, or there about. Thus then
among much other matter he says of them, Catal test. verit. lib. 15.
There were many sects of heretics long agone, among all which sects that are
or were, there is not one more pernicious to the Church of God, then that of
the Poor men of Lions, for three causes. First because it is of longer
continuance. Some say that it has endured from the time of Sylvester. Other
say, that from the time of the Apostles. The second is because it is more
general. For there is almost no land in which this sect does not creep. The
third, that whereas all other by the imm^ity of their Blasphemies against God,
do make men abhorte them, this of the Lyonists having a great show of
godliness, because they do live justly before men, and do believe all things
well of God, and all the Articles which are contained in the Creed; only the
Church of Rome they do blaspheame and hate: which the multitude is easy to
believe, and as Sampsoni Foxes had their faces several ways, but their tails
tied one to the other, so heretics are diverse in sects among themselves, but
in the impugning of the Church they are united. There can hardly be found a
more honorable testimony, out of the mouth or pen of a bitter and bloody
adversary, as he was who wrote this, and much more, concerning those good
servountes of God.

30 We shall not need to ascend any higher, since he gives witness of the
antiquity of their profession long before his ^lme. Which otherwise to make
plain is as easy, as to deliver that which hitherto I have spoken. And it is
not to be conceived that Petrus VVald^ (of whom the Waldensis took their
name at Lions) had his doctrine from no body, but that of himself he attained
to his own knowledge, since he was not deeply learned. Matthew. Part in Gul.
Conquestore.
Berengarius indeed was only called in question for denying of
Transubstantiation in the Sacrament, but it may well be thought, that in some
thing else he dissented from the Church of Rome. And albeit by his own
weakness and the importunity of the Clergy, he yielded once or twice to
recant, and abjure the true doctrine which he held, yet he had many
Co^tinuat. histor. de gestis Anglorum, lib. 3. 27.
scholars, who by his example would not be driven from the right Belief,
which they had apprehended. These scholars were in Malmisbur. lib 3.
France in great numbers, and in diverse other Lands. And Genebrard cannot
conceal it, but that about the Chronogr lib. 4.
year of our LORD 1088. Basilius the Monk did set on foot again the error
of Berengarius. And might not the doctrine of both these be sucked from
Bertram, who wrote so learnedly and so directly, out of the Scriptures and
Fathers, against the Reall-presence and Transubstantiation, that the Index In
Bertramo.
Expurgatorius cannot tell what to make of him; but the Bishop of Resp. ad
Dan. Tilen. fol. 258.
Eureux under the name of Henry Connestable, terms him the great
forerunner of all the Sacramentaries; and La saint Mess declar. lib. 2. 4
Rich^e the Jesuit disclaimeth him plainly as a Sacramentarie Heretic. Then,
Calvin and Zuinglius were not the first who gaine-saide Transubstantiation.
Before our ascending thus high, we might tell you of Saint Bernard, whom
although it is likely at the first dashe you will chalendge as your own, yet
when you have well advised on him, you may let him go again. For albeit he
had his errors, which he sucked from the age wherein he lived, and we
may not in all things subscribe to his judgment, but say of him as commonly
it is spoken, Bernardi^ non vidit omnia: yet we find in him s^rem partem, a
liberal profession of many good and sound points agreeable to the Gospel.
He for a fashion acknowledges maine matters to be in the Pope, and gives him
De considerat. ad Eugen. lib. 2. 8.
greater titles then any Papist can justify, but it is by such infinuation to
win him the more attention from Eugenius, and then having procured liberty,
or rather taken it to himself, he schooleth and lessoneth the Pope, plainly
showing, that he liked not of their ordinary courses, neither did he repute
him to have that pre-eminence or prerogative, which his Parasites did allow
him. But touching the matter Sermon. 61. in Canti^.
of merit by good works, for Epist. 190.
Justification by faith alone in Christ; for De gratia and libero arbitrio.
Free Will, for Sermon. 3. de 7. misericordijs.
Certain assurance of salvation in the death and by the strength of our
Savior, and for Sermon. in Council. Rhemens.
dislikeing then the vile life of the Clergy, how cle^re, how pregnant, how
copious is he? These things we teach together with him: and notwithstanding
his other slippes, we doubt not but his soul does rest with the Lord, God
pardoning unto him his errors and ignorances, which he, being carried with
the stream of that time, did never discuss, but took them as they were
delivered to him, without scanning or examining. And to this good hope we are
firmly induced, by that saying of Saint Paul. 1. Cor 3. 11.
Other foundation can no man lay then that which i^aide, which is Jesus
Christ, And if any man build on this foundation, gold, silver, precious
stones, timber, hay or stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest, for
the day shall declare it, because it shall be reveiled by the fire, and the
fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. If any man's work,
that he has builte upon, abide, he shall receive wages. If any man's work
burn, he shall lose, but he shall be safe himself. He held the
foundation of Justification by only faith in Christ, and that our best deeds
are but De gratia and liber. arbitr.
via regni, non cause regnand^, the way to the kingdom, not the cause of
reigning* and for that cause we doubt not but his soul is safe, though his hay
and stubble of praying unto Saints, and other such stuff, as cannot endure the
fire of the holy Ghosts trial, do burn and consume. And this is our judgment
touching many other, both before and after the time of Saint Bernard, that
holding Christ^e foundation aright, and groaning under the heavy, but then of
humane Traditions* Satisfactions and other Popish trash they by a general
repentance from their errors and l^pses known and unknown, and by an assured
faith in their Savior, did find favor with the Lord. Such as these were,
we hold to be Gods good servants to be of the number of the Elect, and
propter sa^rem and (...), for their founder and better part, to be of that
Church whereof we are: to be members of that body, whereof by the grace
of Christ we are a portion.

31 And in this respect our settled and resolved judgment is, that when it is
asked, where our Church in former ages was, we may besides that which formerly
has been answered, truly say, that it was in England, in France, in Spain,
in Italy, yea in Rome it self. Spiritus vbi vult spirat. The holy Ghost
breaths Ioh. 3. 8.
where it pleases. For who cannot conceive by the writings of many in former
ages, or by such touches as other do give concerning them, that diverse who
lived nearest the whore of Babylon, did most detest her abomination, and
finding that the weakness and impurity of her doctrine, could not truly
satisfy the hungry and thirsty soul, did according to that knowledge which
Christ out of his word reveiled to the^, seek some means which was not
ordinarily professed in that time. And if it be asked who they were, and how
could they lie hid from the world, it may truly be answered, that their case
was like the case of them in the days of 1. Reg. 19. 18.
Elias, who were not known to that State, which would have persecuted them. Now
why should not we think, but as God had his secret and invisible company at
that time, in that most idolatrous country, so in the time of the deepest
darkness, he had those who saw light this Christian children among Antichrists
brood: such as embraced true religion, among the superstitious? So that Italy
and Rome, and these Western parts, had some of God^ Saints in all ages, who
like seafish, most fresh in the faltest water, and being removed in their
affections, though not in their persons, did with (...) Lot vex their
righteous souls in the 2 Pet (...). 8.
midst of a spiritual Sodom, and kept themselves (...) unspotted ^am. 1. 27.
of the world. And yet it is not to be taken, that we co^rctate the Church
within those Provinces only which looked toward the Sea of Rome, but know that
God had thousands of his elect elsewhere. Osor. li. 3. de gest. Emanuel.
Christians have been in (...) India, even by perpetual dilcent from the
days of the Apostles: and so in Africa among the (...) Abyssines, in (...) and
huge-companies, besides Li. 9. Dam. (...) Goes de morib. Aethiop.
such as have continued (...), Asia the lesser, Egypt, but especially in the
Greek Church, which was never so much as in show extinguished, and from whom
the Russians and Muscovites had their faith. Our Popish lads would gladly shut
al these out of Christ's fold, because they acknowledged not the Bishop of Rome,
for their universal Pastor: but we should do wrong to Almighty God, to pin
his judgment upon the Popes sleeue, and to offer to pull from him so many ample
Churches, whereas charity and common sense might put us in mind, that he
might there have thousands throughout all ages. Look to these places ye
Papists, and imagine that if there had been none but these, yet the words of
the Scripture, which in generality speak of a spowse had been true, and
Christ had there had his body on earth, and the Church had not been utterly
extinguished, if neither we nor the Synagoge of Rome had been extant.

32 But in as much as it cannot be denied, but that the Prophecies concerning
Antichrist do most touch the Western world, Apoc. 17. 18.
Rome being by the holy Ghost evidently designed, to be the seat of the whore
of Babylon, as also because our Romish standard-bearers, are more willing to
talk of those parts, then of any other, I will once again return to the
Countreies near adioining. Then in some parts or other of Christendom, how
many men were there in all ages, who lo^thed both the Sea of Rome, and the whole
courses of it, as the Israelites did loath the Egyptian bondage? Matthew Paris
alone gives us many notable experiments that way, as relating the Acts of the
In Hen. 3.
Emperor Frederike, who put out diverse declarations in detestation of the
Pope; and adding else* where farther of his own, that Ibidem.
Pope Gregory did absolve from the oath of fealty, all who were bound unto the
Emperor, persuading them that they should be faithful in unfaithfulness,
obed^nt in disobed^ence. But so much deserved the Roman Churches lowdnesse
which is to be ex^ed of all men, that the Popes authority did merit^ to be
harkened unto by few or none. He reports also of a certain Ibidem.
Carthusian Monk a^ Cambridge, who cried out against the Pope, and said that
he was an heretic, and that the Churches were profaned. And of Robert
Grosthead Bishop of Lancolne, who was a man both holy and learned in his time.
This Lincolniensis, while he lived, had many Combats with the Bishop of
Rome, and openly resisted his barbarous tyranny in dominering so far in
England, as to inioyne Provision of the best Benefices, to be taken up for
Italian boys; which for a Lincolniens. epistol.
Prebend in his Church at Lincoln he would not yield unto, and for that
cause was by the Pope excommunicated. But when he was Matthew Paris in Hen. 3
dying, he most bitterly inveighed against the Roman Bishop, and the
Ecclesiastical Persons, as being the most w^ked men that did live. In the same
Ibidem.
Author you may also find the conceit, which the most Reverende Arch-b^shop
of York Sewaldus had of them and their proceedings. What should I mention
Hoveden. part secu^da.
loachim, who said that in his time Antichrist was already borne, and was in
the City of Rome. Or that Bishop of Platina in Paschal. 2.
Florence, who lived about the year 1100. and did use to say, that Antichrist
was then in the world, which moved Pope Paschalis so much, as that he thought
fit to enquire of him in a Council, and did there castigate him for it.
Notable in this kind are the contentions of Philippus Pulcher the King of
France, and his whole Clergy, against Pap. Mas^on in Bonifac. 8.
Boniface the eighth. I might add to these Petrus de Brus, and many other
learned men, who laid the axe to the very root of Popery, and some in set
Treatises oppugned one of their documents, and some assaulted other, but that
the writer of the Catalogus Testium veritatis, as it is lately enlarged, and In
Histor. Ecclesiast.
Master Fox, and Master In Catal. script. Brit. Laur. Hu^^r. ^uitism. part. 1.
Bale, and diverse 1 other, have largely handled this; to the reading of whose
books I do referte them, who in particular desire to be more advertised in
this behalf. Now if these things do appear much by their own witness, and
by the confession of Papists themselves, as also by such few Records, as by
Gods providence so disposing, do yet remain; how many illustrious arguments
might there have been of the confession of our faith, if the Clergy and
Magistracy of those dark times, had not burned and suppressed all things which
made against the, as I showed before touching the books of John VViclef, and
Reginald Pecocke in Oxford. The Clergy in those days did almost rule all, and
they had the custody of all libraries, to ransacke at their pleasure, or to put
in and pull out, and they had power to search poor men's houses, and to destroy
what was thought fit by them to be destroyed. But God, who would not have his
truth utterly burned, or buried in ashes, suffered a rema^nt to remain, yea
and that in England; albeit Polydore Virgil with an Italian trick of his own,
did there consume and destroy many worthy and ancient monuments.

33 By this time I may well suppose, that some vehement Papist, having read
over this long Chapter, is even ready to swell with his belly full of
exceptions against these things here said. And first he will begin and say,
that we rake to gither as the Ancesters and forerunners of our faith, such as
were notorious Heretics, as Wiclef or Hus or the Waldenses, men condemned by
Popes or general Councels. And Heretics, as Ration 10
Campian tells us, are the dregs and the bellows and the f^well of hell.
These as our Papists commonly say, are already firebrarnds of hell, and frying
there in the flames. It is no rare matter with the Synagogue of Rome, to
pronounce such sentences as these are. Our Rhemists by their Consistorial or
Imperial decree, have defined, that Calvine and Verone are not only Heretics
but In Romans 11 33.
Reprobats, for writing so as they have done, touching the Article of
Predestination. Yea they call M. Beza a Reprobate also, although he were not
only then alive, but yet is so; howsoever the Jesuits some An. 1598. vide
Epist. Bez^ ad Stuckium.
few years since, did by a most ridiculous Pamphlet or other news spread it
in France and Italy, that he was dead, and dying had recanted his Religion,
and was turned to the Romish faith, which also Geneva did by his example. It is
no news with Jesuits to lie, and therefore Master Beza must bear with them:
and so had he need to do with the Rhemistes also, who got hastyly into Gods
chair, and there concluded him to be a Reprobate. But indeed those good
Christians before named, of whom many lost their lives for the maintenance of
Gods truth, were heretics in such a manner, as Christ was said to be Mat. 26.
65
a blasphemer, who indeed was both called so, and condemned to be such a
one, by a Council of the High-Priestes, Scribes, and Rulers of the Synagoge.
We do not believe that all those are Heretics, whom you Papists will so
call, or accounte: for you give us that name, which maugre your malice, you
shall never be able to prove against us. They are truly Orthodoxe and right
Catholics, who teach nothing but that, whereof they have evident vvarrant out
of the word of GOD. And this we have, as has been often showed by men of
our side, and in that question we are ready at all times to iumpe with you for
any part or all the doctrine which we profess. With Saint Paul therefore
we say, that Act. 24 14.
after the way that you call Heresy s^ vvorshippe we the GOD of our
Fathers. The same which you maliciously and presumptuously term Schism and
Heresy, is that whereupon (under our blessed Savior) we rest our souls,
and by the confession thereof we hope to be saved, in the day of the general
judgment. Do not you therefore take that for granted, which is so highly
questioned between us and you, but rather if you can, prove our profession to
be heretical. By GODS grace we shall not shrink at any of your biggest
objections.

34 Yea but say you farther, the vvriters which make mention of these your
predecessors, do brande them with the holding of some most gross and
damnable doctrine, which you your selves will not avouch. My answer is, that
we our selves do easily believe so much. For did malice I pray you ever say
well? The Act. 16. 20. cap. 17 7. 2. Cor. 12. 16
Apostles were at more times, and in more places then one, charged with many
accusations, which yet in truth were but calu^niations. The old Christians in
the Primitive Church, were slandered to use incestuous company each with other
like Oedipus, and to eat up man's flesh as at the banquet of Thyestes: yea their
own Eu^b. Eccl. Hist. lib. 4. 7. (...). 5. 1.
servantes for fear were induced to lay such matters to their charge. (...).
(...). 20. Theodor. Eccl. Hist I 1. 30.
Athanasius was accused to have cut of ones hand, and a harlot to his face
would have calumniated him, to have committed fornication with her. This
practice was never more liberally frequented, then by the enemies of the
Gospel, in the late days of Popery. You may remember what I cited before out
of Du Hailla^, concerning matters f^lsly objected to the Albinge^ses. There is
extant an In fasci^ul. ^um exp^nd.
Excusatory Oration of the Waldensis, wherein they say, that for that their
faith, which they were ready to justify, they were condemned, judged,
captivated and afflicted. And afterward, that they were called Heretics. But
in their Confess. Waldensiu.
Confession they have it directly, Of these criminations whereof we are
blamed oftentimes, we are nothing at all guilty. The Pope and his Chapleins
were fell and furious against them, because they did bite so near, and
therefore to disgrace them, both in present and to posterity, they held it
fit that by speech, preaching and writing, it should be divulgated, that they
taught monstrous blasphemies, that by that means the credulous people might be
preiudicate, and so not only frighted from harkening to them, but be much the
readier to join in the prosecutio^ of the^ to prison and to death. But what
they indeed held, is declared before. When Cochl. Histor. Hussit. lib. 2.
John Hus was at the Council of Constance, he did openly call God to
witness, that he did neither preach nor teach those things which his
adversaries did object against him, neither that they ever did come into his
mind. Neither is it to be marveiled, that they did lade his scholars with
the like false accusations, when their malice was such toward them, as that
they burnt many Lib. 8.
thousands of them in barnes, which was done by the treachery of one
Mainardus. In other places the Romanists have still held the same course of
slaundering, which caused the Protestants to profess, in the Diet at Augusta,
Sleidan. Commentar. lib. 8.
that diverse opinions were falselie reported up and down, which
vvrongfullie were fathered upon them. And that th^se were not only estranged
from the holy Scriptures, but that they were abhorrent even from common
sense. And is it not probable that long since, when much darkness did cover
the face of the earth, and few had grace to perceive their doings, and fewer
had authority to question their doctrine, the Pope-holie Clergy which hated
the true Gospellers with all their hearts, would pay them with vile and
odious reports; when in this age, wherein God has afforded more plentiful
means, to discover their falsehood, they do dare not only in their sermons, or
in their secreter whisperings, but in their Printed books to proclaim abroad
concerning us, most false and ungodly calumniations and imputations, as that we
do teach all loosenes of life, and Weston vbique.
Libertinisme by this our new Gospel, that we Campian Ration. 8.
maintain, that al sins are aequal, that we hold it as a Maxim, that God is
the Author of sin, and whatsoever else it pleases M. Campian and his
fellows, to invent and devise touching us, wheeras we utterly disclaim these
and the like Positions, as execrable and ungodly. Yea that Mounti-banke whom
once before I mentioned, has not blushed to assevere, that we so teach, as
that by our doctrine, Certain Articles or forcible Reasons. At Anwerp, 1600.
the Protestants are bound in conscience never to ask God forgiveness of
their sins. And that they are bound in conscience to avoid all good worke^.
As also that we make God the only cause of sin; And hold that God is vverse
then the Devil. So shameless was this fellow grown, that he neither knows
not cares what he says. And yet many a poor Papist, abused and gulled by the
Devil^ deceiving instruments, does swalow such goageons, and runs away with
these things, being as verily persuaded of them, as that the Gospel is true.
Such a hand the Seminary Priests have over their disciples, that they may not
read our books to see whether these objections be true or no, neither may
they hear ought to the contrary. Now if they thus use us who can speak for
ourselves, will any ma^marveile, that those who professed the verity two or
three hundred of years since, do t^st of the malignant aspersion of those
times.

35 The Romanists not withstanding all this which has been said, do not yet
so leave us, but once more farther add, that none of all those which hitherto
have bin named, or can be named, but in some known, confessed, and undoubted
opinions, did vary from you, and therefore they and you may not be said to
have been al of one Church. Our Masters of Rhemes do think that this lies
hardly upon us, and therefore thus vauntingly they urge, that they In Romans ^1. 4.
will not put the Protestants to prove, that there were seven thousand of
their Sect, when th^r new Elias Luther began, but let them prove that there
were seven or any one, either the^ or in all ages before him, that was in all
points of his belief. What the old Fathers taught, we shall have time
enough in diverse Chapters heere-after to show; where by the assistance of
GOD, we shall discuss many single points of faith: but for other of later
time, it is most easy to manifest, that all those whom before I have named,
did generally for all maine matters teach the same which we now do teach.
There is no Papist who can truly and without calumniating them, or sayning
things upon them, demonstrate that in causes which touch the substance of
faith, or the foundation of Christian Religion, they did dissent from us. He
who will try this, let him look on the Declaration In Mr. Foxes Eccles Histor.
of Walther Brute, which I before mentioned, and let him read it set down by
himself, and not reported by other. And what did that learned layman deliver
there, which was not the belief of Wiclif, and the rest of the English
professing the Gospel in those times? But if there be in some petty matters,
yea questions of some reasonable moment, difference in opinion between them
and us, shall we not therefore be of the same Church with them, or they with
us? Yes verily: for otherwise many of the ancient Fathers, should not be of
the Communion of Saints, or Catholic Congregation with those who came after
them, and amended their errors. For was not Divin. Iustir l. 7. 14
Lactantius spotted with the Millenarie infection, and Augustine. Epistol. 48.
Cyprian with the matter of Rebaptizing? Had not Austen an Epistol. 106. and
107.
opinion of the necessity of the Eucharist, to be administered to children, and
that Infants being dead without Epist. 28.
Baptism, were not only deprived of the fruition of heavenly joys, but were
damned to the pit of hell, and to everlasting torments? And what man
religiously affected will suspect, but that although Saint Cyprian, and the
other Affricane Bishops aslembled in a Council. Carthag. in Cypria^. oper.
Council, did, concerning the new baptizing of those who were already baptized
by Heretics, determine clean contrary to Cornelius, and the rest of the
Italian Bishops, yet they should not be of the same faith in general, and of
the same holy Church, whereof Cornelius was? Saint Austen can thus write
concerning Cyprian: De Baptism contra Donatist. lib. 1.
Whereas that holy man Cyprian, (thinking otherwise of Baptism, then the
matter was, which was afterward handled, and with most diligent consideration
established) did remain in the Catholic unity; both by the plentifulnesse of
his charity a recompense was made, and by the sickle of his suffering there
was a purging. Lib. (...).
In another place he says: The authority of Cyprian does not terrifi^ mee^
but the humility of Cyprian does refresh me. He means that if that worthy
man had lived, to have seen more light in that argument, or to behold, what
the succeeding time had reveiled, and concluded in that behalf, he would in
great humility and meekness of heart have conformed himself and yielded
unto it. Which may justly serve for a true defense of the Waldenses, John
Wiclif, John Hus, or any other servant of God, who might seem in matters of
small moment to vary from us.

36 And thus I trust that by this time it appears, to every one who will not
wilfully close his eyes, and stop his ears against an app^rant truth, that
God has at all times had his children houlding the verity of Christian
Religion, and not approving of the filthy Superstitions, and sacrilegious
Idolatries of the abominable Antichrist of Rome. So that it is a most fond
collection, that either the Popish Convocation, or Confusion, are the right and
undoubted spouse of Jesus Christ; or else that for a thousand years together
there was no Church in the world. They doat much upon themselves, and on the
opinion of their bewty, who in such intolerable deformities, do predicate and
magnify their Synagogue, as the unspotted wife, and mystical body of our most
blessed Savior. Truth it is, that intending to blind the ignorant, and to
abuse the simple, they labored by all external pomp and show, to give to
their hypocrisy and outward formality, a settled opinion of piety and
sanctity; and for that cause there was no corner of the brain of man, or
rather of men in many ages succeeding together, unsought, to procure glory to
that which was in it self very vnglorious. Their care therefore was to convert
the eyes of all persons on their external hew, which was marveilously adorned
and garnished to the sense, with their (...) Crosses set up or carried before
some Prelates, with the triple Crown Praefat. Catalog. Testium veritatis.
of their Popes, the redd hattes of their Cardinals, the precious attire of
some in their Churches, their prodigious apparel abroad, the diverse-cou^oured
coules of their Monks, such singing and chau^ting with Organs, such ringing of
Belles, such trimming of Images, and many more such sensible matters, as that
neither the Jews nor the Gentiles had the like. And among all this, if true
Religion in diverse were present, it is not to be marveiled at if she were
scant seen, or if no notice were taken of her, for her poor and untrimmed or
ungarnished hew, for her naked simplicity and unpainted integrity. It was the
commendation given to Sol^ beloved, by whom the Church is represented, that
the Ps. 45. 13.
Kings daughter is all glorious within: her bevvti^ consisting of purity in
faith, verity in doctrine, severenesse in behavior, innocence, patience, and
such like spiritual complementes. And these are as much contemned in others by
the Antichristian rabble, as they are neglected in themselves; whereas their
external pomp on the contrary side is as much despised by the LORD, as it is
magnified in their fleshly and carnal imaginations. And thus I end this
matter, hoping that if any Reader think that I have been to long in this
Chapter, he will remember the weight of that which has been handled, and a
recompense shall be made in some other Reasons following, where I am not
enforced to the large handling of the question then occurrent.


THE SECOND REASON. The name of Catholics.
T. HILL. NO man can justly deny, but that they who have ever holden the name
of Catholics, and have bin known thereby, were undoubtedly of true Religion,
for that they had ever on their side, the Scriptures, Miracles, Fathers,
Councels and Martyrs, and for that every one which was against them was ever
accounted and reputed for an Heretic. And the same Catholik^ were ever taken
as the trunk, or as the body of the tree, and all others bearing the name of
Christians, as branches or boughs cut of the same tree. Now all the world
knows, that whoseever in any age was a member of the Roman Church, and
under the obedience of the high Bishop thereof, he was ever taken for a
Catholic and so termed, although in these our days it has pleased the
Protestants to call such by the name of Papists, which indeed is all one with
the name Catholics; for that it signifies such as follow and embrace the
doctrine of that Church which has for her head under Christ the Pope. And it
is not amiss, as Chrysostom says, to be named of them who govern the
Homil. 33. in Acta.
Church in Christ's steed, so that they take not their name of any particular
man as Heretics d^e.


G. ABBOT. BY this little which is already passed, every man may conceive, that
Master Doctor Hill is desirous to write a book; (for I dare not say, make
one, for fear of slaundering him) and resolving that the ground of all his
^ong should be taken from Master Bristowes Motives, he could not well for
very shame begin as Bristow began, least at the very entrance into this
his renouned labor, he should be deprehended, to take up the most part of his
ware on trust. Using therefore in the front some little simple cunning to go
farther of, he with some change borrowed the matter of his first Chapter Brist.
37 and 45. Motive.
out of the 37. and 45. Motive of the other: but not willing to trouble
himself any more in that painful sort to seek far of, his fingers
present^ ^itched to be doing with somewhat nearer hand; and therefore for the
slender substance of his second Reason, he goes fairly and readily to the
C^. 1. and. 3.
first and third Chapter of his good Master Bristow, and scambling somewhat
of his own in, from those two he patcheth up all the ^est. He hoped that the
former being not so much disguised as trans-placed should have covered all
which followed: and if that at the first had been clenly carried, all which
comes after, would have been the safer under the protect^on thereof. There
is or has been some what in the world, which thinks all well if the head
of it self be hid, although the whole body do lie out to be seen. If you
know not what that is, (...) imagine it to be Caligula the Emperor, who
albeit in great thunder and lightning, as Sueton in Caligula 51
Suetonius reports, he would wholly run under his bed for fear, yet if it
were but a little clappe or flash, he would wink with his eyes, and hide his
head alone, and then he thought all his body out of peril: But for this
borrower upon Interest, his body lies open to us searching for it: and the
head, although both winking and hooded, has not been hid. And now take us
with you, I pray you.

2 Every wise one can deny and that most justly, that such as have desired to
ingrosse the name of Catholics, appropriating it to themselves, and yet have
taken no farther care, but titularly to be are it, as (...) r^, as M^ns (...)
no^ (...), cannot rightly make challendge to retain and possess the Orthodoxe
faith; but that the Divine Scriptures, true and approved Miracles, authen^icall
Fathers, O^cumenicall Councels, and Christ's Martyrs may be as su^e from such
counterfeites, as light is from darkness; and men shall not be Heretics,
but God^ good servants, who upon sufficient ground do stand against them. The
true Church is indeed^ the Lords Vine, the tree of his delight, a more
precious plant then any was in Paradise, but those who bear Apoc. 3* 1.
a (...) to live and yet are dead, as it was said to the Angel of the Church
of Sardis, are to be accounted no better, then dead boughs or rotten
branches, until they see their own error and there-vpon repent. And all the
world knovveth (that we may use your phrase, which you borrow of Master
Appendix to the quodlibets in the margent.
Parsons, or of the F^ench (...) le mon^) that howsoever in times past, while
Rome kept the Apostolic faith, a man v^ted to the same profession might be
called a Catholic, not because simplye and absolutely he applied himself to
the men of Rome, but by reason that ^ointelye and together with them, he
accepted the Belief of the Universal Church; yet nov^ one conforming himself
to the practice of that City, to the Decrees of the Popes, to the Canons of
the Tridentine Council, does me^ to be termed a Cacolike, an Heretic, an
enemy to the Church, an adversary of CHRIST, a vassal of Antichrist. But vve^
are contented to give them a milder appellation, of Romanistes and Papists, or
in L^in Pontifi^ij, because they fetch their Dictates and Oracles from Rome,
and more respect the voice of their Pope, then the voice of Almighty God; they
not sparing to thrust that miserable man into Christ's place, and to make him
not so much a ministerial, a^ (...) monstrous head of their vn-Catholike
Congregation. And since the name of Papists does so please the, that in the
former Chapter they ^ssume it, and in this Chapter they (...) it, giving reason
why they should have it, as being all one with their pretended Catholics,
we will not envy it them, but with good liberty they may take it. Neither
shall they need to trouble themselves so far, as to cite Saint Chrysostom
for the ratifying of it. His words are these* Homil. 33 in Acta.
But if we will also have the (...) of any man, it is not as from the beginners
of heresies, but as from those who are rulers ^ver us, and do govern^ the
Church. The reason of which speech in that reverend Father, I cannot hastily
guess at, since we find not, that in or before his time, the Christians were
called by the name of any of the Rulers over the Church, not Petrians no^
Paulians, nor any such name. Only his own adversaries termed the^, who did
stick close unto him, So^omen lib. 8. 21.
I^ita, his proper name being Ioannes, and the appellation of (...) being
afterward given unto him, as a Cog^ for his eloquence. In which respect it is
probable, that for the defense of himself, and those which followed him in the
truth, he did use the words before cited.


T. HILL. But yet the Catholics are not called Papists, but only of a few
Lutherans in Germany, and of some other their adherentes in other countrey^
^ere about: for in Greece, Asia, Afrike, and in the In^s, as i^ Italy, Spain,
Sicily and in other countries of Europe, the (...) of Papists i^ v^terly
unknown. The name therefore of Papists is (...) used but only of a few, and
never heard of before Luther (...), for that he could not call them after the
proper name of any one man, because there was nev^r any such in the Church,
which ^ther brought up any new doctrine, or changed the Religion of his
Predecessors.


G. ABBOT. IF you would, you might quickly know, that names are given for
distinction sake, and when those persons to whom the names belong, are to be
distinguished from a general sort, they have names more general: but when
from a special comprehended in their own general, they are to have
appellations more special. In Greece if a man had been disposed to put a
difference between one that was learned, and the vulgar unlearned people, it
had been a good note of distinction to say, he is a Philosopher. But when the
question grew between several Sects and their opinions, then for more
particular difference, it was not enough to say that Diogenes was a
Philosopher, but he was a Cynick: such a one was an Epicurean, another a
Peripa^eticke, this an Academike, that a Platonicke. In some sense it is enough
to say, that in the year 1588, her Majesty of England had against the Spaniard
a camp of so many thousand English, resolute me^, religious, and well
appointed: but when there is question of particulars in that camp, then the
Oxford-sheere men had those Captains, the Wilt-shire men these, and their
colors were several. So if in India or Asia, the opposition must be between
the Infidels or Mahumetans on the one side, and the servants of Christ, of what
sort soever they be, on the other side, it is enough to say in general, thus
or thus do the Christians: But if there be occasion to particularize any thing,
then the Christians in Spain, or those in Germany are thus and thus affected.
When speech is of the doctrine of Mahomet opposed to Christianity, the name
Mahumetane will comprehend the Persian and his subjects, the Turk and his
vassals, the kings of Argier, Tunis and Marocco, and all that are under them.
But when we talk of the difference in Mahomets profession, between the Turk
and the Persian, which has on either party cost much blood, we say the
Persian thus holds: the Turk believes thus. Wheresoever in Christendom
there is disagreeme^t in Religion, some holding for the Pope and some other
against him, there the name Papist is frequent: and this is not only in
Germany, but God be praised for it, in Norway, and Sweden, and Denmark, in
Polonia, in France, England, Scotland, the Low Countries, and whersoever else
the Gospel is known either openly or secretly. Yea in Italy, Spain and
Sicily not only the name of Papists, but the whole doctrine of Popery would
quickly come in question, were it not for your bloody Inquisition, or cruel
massacring otherwise, of such as bend not that way. And yet they be not able to
extirpate Gods truth. As for the Greeks they love you not, neither like of
your Religion; and Asia, Africa and the Indies know very little of our
differences in Profession, unless it be by the Christians themselves, and
that only here and there, as at Aleppo peradventure or some other Mart
town; except you will name a few creekes or corners of Africa, and the East
Indies, where the Portingales have incroched, or those parts of the West
Indies, where the Spaniards have devoured up, almost all the old inhabitants,
and planted themselves: and to ask of these Portingales and Spaniards whether
they be ought but Catholics, is not to ask a man's fellow, but to ask a man's
self, whether he be a thief or no? But surely the Infidels, or Turks, or
Greeks do neither call you nor know you by that name. And if Luther were the
first who gave you that title of Papiste, which pleases you so much, you are
behoulding to him for fitting you so right: not that you might not lustly have
bin so called before. But he having occasion to display your impiety to the
full, and God inableing him with learning and knowledge, as also with spirit
and wit for that purpose, he gave you a name most suitable to your nature,
which is the truest use of appellations and names. It very well agrees with
you: for if Christians be those who harken unto Christ, and are directed by
him, you may well be Papists, who depend on the only voice and direction of
the Pope.


T. HILL. WHereas (...), Heretics have ^ver take their names of some one who
began that Havesy, as the Nestorians of Nestorius, the Pelagius of Pelagius,
Lutherans of Luther, Calvinists of Calvin, etc. And although Luther termed
them Papists, yet knevve he so well in his conscience, that they ever had
been and ought to be called Catholics, as that he caused his followers to
change their Creed in saying: I believe the Christian Church, and not I
believe the Gatholike (...). Mo. 1.
Church: for fear least they should be thought to confess that they beleaved
in the Church of Rome, which ever was called Catholic. And is seems that the
Protestants know in their ^vvne consciences the name of Heretics to be so
proper to themselves, as that in their translations of the Bible, where the
name Heretic occurreth, they put in place of is, a man that is the author of
Sects, assuring themselves that the Reader finding the word Heretic or
Heresy, would presently judge it to be meant of them.


G. ABBOT. 4. THat Luther and Calvin were Heretics, you Pseudo-Catholikes may
say, but you shall never be able to prove it. They taught Gods truth, and if
ever any would have showed them out of the Scripture, that they had erred, such
was their mind, they would have reformed it. As for the name of Lutherans and
Calvinists, to be desired or embraced by us, we utterly disclaim it; not that
we are ashamed to be of the same faith which these worthy servants of God did
teach, touching the foundation of Religion; but because we take our name from
the Son of God, of whom we are called Act. 11. 26.
Christians. This is the name wherein all of us do rejoice, at all times and
in all places, without any exception or circumstance of dependence: but the
appellation of Lutherans, and Calvinists, or Zuinglians, or any such like, you
in your hatred toward us do set upon us. And by your rule of Chrysostom
before mentioned, they might without impiety be received of us in some sense,
since Zuinglius and Luther and Calvine, had a great stroke in the government
of those particular Churches where they-lived, and were much honored of the
Congregations which were near unto them. As for the Nestorians, we at
knowledge that they had their title of the Hererike Nestorius, and the
Pelagians of Pelagius, yea if you will also, the Marcionites of Marcion, the
Arrians of Arius, according to that of Chrysostom: Homil 33. in Acta.
Are we cut from the Church? have we Captain. Heretics? have we our
name from men? have we any leader, as Marcion is to one, and Manicheus to
another, and Arius to a third, and to a fourth another beginner of Heresy? But
whereas you give down a general rule, that Heretics have ever taken their
names of some one who began that Heresy, we pity you much and fairly
demiu^de of you, from what one did the August. de Haeres ad Quod vultd.
Euchitae, the Quartidecimiani, the Patri^passiani, yea the Anabaptists take
their name? you should have said that a great many had their appellation from
the auctor of their sect, but not all. And therefore put this also among your
ignorances.

5 That Luther should be afraid of the word Catholic, so without reason
usurped by you, or arrogated to your selves, is a conceit very childish. He who
dreaded not to encounter your Popes triple Crown, to bait his Bulls, to batter
his Purgatory, to lay siege to Babylon it self, was never so white-liverd, as
to fear the Moon shining in the water. Therefore when you shall cite v^ some
authentical warrant, that he changed I believe the Catholic Church, into I
believe the Christian Church, we will give credit unto you. But when you bring
us Master Bristow in the first of his Motives, and he gives us no testimony of
his speech, neither quoteth any place for it, we think that we may safely
return it to the shop, in which it was first forged. Notwithstanding we
observe the manner of your proceeding, you Papists taking up things by
tradition, or one from another, without ground, to deface any man of rare note
among us. You in your margent quote Bristow, and there upon I turning to the
place in him, find the same accusation, but no place or tract specified, only
Luther is put in the margent and nothing else. Your late fabler upon Quinti
Evangelij. cap. 1.
Nullus and N^, serves us in this sort, saving that he ascribes that to us
all, which his fellows limit only to Luther. Being to speak of the Article in
the Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, he
sub-ioyneth thereupon, This Article all the Pretestants in general, as far as
in them is, do oppugn. First because they have thrust out of the Creed, the
word (Catholic,) and in steed thereof have put the word (Christian,) as is
Catholics were no Christians. This did Luther in the Creed in Dutch, because
the word Catholic is a sta^ in the (...) of the Protestants. It is worth the
marking, that first he charge us all with it, secondly the instaunce is
given in Luther alone, and thirdly no proof is made of that, no not so much as
out of Giffords Calvino-Turcismus, out of which being as slanderous a work as
his own, this excellent Author does most commonly take his confirmations.
Thus if one Papist will be so wicked, as to devise something which was never
spoken, or to pervert that to ill purpose which was well spoken, his fellows
will presently applaude it as a truth, and publish it one after another, as if
it were as certain as the Gospel. Now for this of Luther, if there had been
any such matter, which but in probability could have been fastened upon him,
would that sweet fellow Cochleus who pursues him step by step, have forgotten
it? Or would he not as well have remembered him for the Creed, as he did for the
Paternoster, although that also was but the seeking of a knot in a rush. For
it is a complaint made by An. 1522. in actis Lutheri.
Cochleus against Luther, that in his translation of the New Testament, he did
not keep the set words of the Lords prayer formerly used, but for Pater
noster quies in coelis, he put it, Noster pater in coelo, and for,
Sanctificetur nomen tuum, he translated it as if it were, tuum nomen sit
sanctum, and yet you must understand that it was into Dutch that he turned it,
and not into Latin, where in all likelyhoode it was as a great fault to put
Noster before Pater, as it is in English to say Our Father, and not rather
Father ours, or Father of us. Do you not want matter of weight to object, when
you spend your times in such frivolous exceptions? And even of this sort is
the next stout reason which follows. For as Luther was afraid of the word
Catholic, so are we of Heretic, that is to say, never a whit: for we know
that there be Heretics, as Arrians, Anabaptists and many more: and that the
Romanists are as great in Heresy as any, in as much as they vary from truth in
many, and those capital and very dangerous points. But if you had not trusted
your master Bristow, from whom you have Motiv. 2.
stolen this, but looked your self into our books, you should have seen that
Master Beza had translated that (...) of Saint Paul to Tit. 3. 10.
Titus, hareticu^ hominem; and so Tremelius out of the Syriake, A viro
haretico. And the ordinary English has it, even as the Rhemists put it,
without varying a title in the whole verse, A man that is an heretic after the
first and second admonition avoid, and another English, Reject him that is an
heretic after once or twice admonition. And I think it be not to be found,
but where (...) is in the Greek, we put it Act. 24. 14. 1. Cor. 11. 19. Gal.
5. 20. 2. Pet. 2. 1.
heresy. And if at any time there has been put for an heretic, an author of
sects, it has been to no other purpose, but to express the nature of the
word, and to make it plain to the people, what is meant by an heretic, that
is an inventor or a follower of some strange sector opinion in Religion, to
which peculiar use, the Ecclesiastical writers have applied (...) and (...)
from a more general understanding amongst all the old Grecians. Here it may
be noted once again, that you Papists make no conscience, in charging us with
any thing whatsoever, that makes for your purpose. For if it be in our books
as clear as the Sun to the contrary, yet your people must not look into our
writings, so to disprove your falshoode: that is inhibited unto them. Whereby
it appears, that you not only do your best, to send your ghostly children to
hell; but the glory of it is, they must go thither blindfolded. At this b^ck
you now have them.


T. HILL. AS for their own name, whereby they term themselves Protestants,
(which name they take from certain Lutherans in Germany, who first named
themselves so, differing and dis-agreeing altogether from the Protestants in
doctrine) it is new, and never heard of before in the world, and of the same
quality and condition, that the name, Zwinglians, is of. And therefore I
conclude with the saying of Saint Hierome. If any where thou hear them, which
are said to be of Christ, to be Advers. Lucif. Chryso. in Act Hom. 33. and
Just. in Tryph.
termed not of our Lord Jesus Christ, but of some other, as Marcionites,
Valentinians, Hil-brethren, or Field-brethren, be thou sure, that they are not
the Church of Christ, but the Synagogue of Antichrist.


G. ABBOT. I told you before, that absolutely we challendge no name but
Christians, which is full out as ancient as the time of the Act. 11 26.
Apostles; but Zwinglians you in your malice term us, as also Protestants
with a contempt. Yet this latter appellation was not begun by you, but arose
upon an accident at Spires in Germany. There in a An. 1529.
Diet the Duke Electour of Saxony, the Marquis of Brandeburge, the Lantgraue
and some other Princes, and Cities of the Empire, did make solemnly in
writing a Sleidan. Hist lib. 6.
Protestation against a ^ecree or Edict, made in prejudice of the reformed
Religion* whereupon for distinction sake, in common speech the name of
Protestants, which is the Prosters, was given unto the^. By your former rule
this cannot be an evil name, since it is not taken from any man, or from the
author of a sect, but it arose from an action, there first thought necessary to
be done with those circumstances: Whence it may be no marveile, if that title
arising from that action, were never heard of in that meaning before. And since
that time, those who are ready to use the like Protestation upon the like
cause, or do approve of that their wise and Christian course there, do not
refuse to be called as they were, in some sense, not simply; for some respects,
not absolutely; but most of all for difference sake from you, against who^ the
Protestation is to be made. Yea and custom having so prevailed, we do in
writing and speaking promiscuously use the word Protestants, as we do
Religiosi, or Reformata Religionis homines, or Eva^gelici, not boasting in
these titles, as you do to be called Papists, but only admitting of the^ for
customs sake, and to make a distinction between us and you, both tearming our
selves Christians. Now that we altogether disagree in doctrine from the
Protestants in Germany, is not so much ignorance in you to avouch, as malice.
For you know and se^sibly feel it, that we right-wel agree with the^ and they
with us, in displaying of Antichrist, his Indulge^ces, his Pilgrimages, his
Orders of Religions, in oppugning the Tridentine Council which is the
new-erected Capitol of Popery, in that excellent Article of Justification by
faith only, and in brief in all matters of moment, saving the point of
Consubstantiation in the Eucharist, which yet also thousands in Germany do
deny, and whereof I shall have occasion to speak farther Ration. (...).
afterward. But the hatred which you do equally bear, un to the^ and unto us
for the same respects, does show that we join in serving the same Christ, and
discovering the same Antichrist. Your co^clusio^ the^ which you draw out of S.
Hierome, makes nothing against us; nether does ought that you intimate out of
In. Martyr or Chrysostom. They speak of heretics who take both their name and
doctrine from men alone, and nothing at all from God: whereas first we are
Patients and not Agentes, when the name of any man is set upon us, and this is
not by our selves delighted in. And secondlye our doctrine is not from any
creature, but only from Jesus Christ and his word, to whom we cleave and
stick as to a rock, and regard none who brings any thing contrary
thereunto. And so for this boute I leave D. Hill; putting him notwithstanding
in mind, that he is so studious a sectatour, and so faithful a scholar of M
Bristow, that without varying a letter he cites the place of Hierome, word for
word as his master does, when Montenses and Campitas, might for his credit
sake, and to have had a little variety, been as well translated Hill-men, or
Field-persons, as after that sort that he does put them. But there Hierome, as
it is most probable, alludeth to the Montanists, whom with a kind of ierke he
calls not Montanists, but Montenses, and for their loose life rather
Campitas, as being fitter to tumble in the fields, then to show themselves on
the mountains, which also is collected by a learned Marius Victor. in Annotat.
super Hieronim.
man upon that place.

7 HOwsoever some other simple flourishes are here made by M. Doctor, yet the
substance of his second Reason is this; that the Romanists are called the
Catholics, therefore they are the true Church; which Argument is no better then
a very vain and ridiculous thing. For who does not know that evil persons have
good names, as (...) Adoni-z^dek the king of Jerusalem, (...) Ios. 10. 1.
who was an Idolater and a Tyra^t, had a name signifying the Lord of justice,
or the justice of the Lord, and one who was a grievous persecutour of the
Christians, was termed (...) Theotec^, the child of God. (...) Eusebius. Eccl
Histor. 9. 9.
And as it fell out, that Jerusalem which once was Isai. 1. 21.
the faithful city, afterward became an harlot: so it comes too often to
pass, that such as whose Auncesters have had a good name; and that not
vndeservedly, do themselves decline from the virtue of their predecessors, and
yet will strive for the name still. Beth-el in (...). Reg. 12. 32.
Ieroboams time was unwilling to part with the name of Beth-el, the house of
God; but it rather deserved to be called Beth-aven, the house of vanity. The
Priests and Levites, as may be gathered by the consequence of the text in
Malachy, and by the Lords answer there, did bear themselves bold, that they
were Gods Priests, and other there were none; they were of the seed of Levi,
which Tribe the Lord had separated to be his chosen inheritance, they were the
only Levites: but hear what God said to it; (...) But (...) are gone out of
the (...) Malach. (...). 8.
way: ye have caused many to fall by the law: ye have broken the covenant of
Levi, says the Lord of hosts. He reputed that but a painted sheath with a
wooden weapon in it. How did the Ioh. 8. 39.
Jews boast that they were Abraham's seed, Israelites, sons of Judah, the
^nant of the posterity of the Patriarchs? but Christ tells them, If ye were
Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham. Our Savior in the
Revelatio^ does meet with such merchants, who being in truth of the Synagogue
Apoc. 3. 9.
of Satan, did call themselves Jews and were not, but did lie. And among the
Christians there have bin men desirous of names, which were not fit for the^,
or else the Apostle would not have said, 1. Cor. 5. 11,
If any that is called a brother, be a fornicatour, or covetous, or an
Idolater, or a railer, or a dru^kard, or an extortioner, with such a one eat
not. The name of a brother in Christianity is much: as presupposing to have God
a father to him, who is indeed the father of all the faithful: and yet there
be brethren in name, who are far enough from God and goodness. Hist Eccl. 3.
18.
Evil names, as we find in Theodoret, being set on good men do nothing obscure
them; The Christians were not hurt, when Julian in a scorn to our Savior
Jesus, always termed them Galileans: and if Socrates, says Theodoret, had
been called Critias, or Pythagoras Phalaris, or fair Nireus foul Thersites,
it had nothing impaired their true reputation. So it is in applying good titles
to bad persons: they are not for the same in any more estimation, with such as
be of understanding. When thieves by a common phrase are termed good-fellows,
and light huswives are called honest women, neither the one nor the other are
the honester for that nominatio^. Those who are ordinarily called by the name
of Jesuits, do little that may savor of the spi rit of Jesus; unless to seduce
youth, to inveigle and beguile the wealthy, to play al tricks of Machiavel, to
conspire the death of Princes, to plot how to set kingdoms in co^bustio^, and
cu^ningly to sow secret discord and sedition, be the imitatio^ of our blessed
Redeemer; which no man but one inspired by the Devil may acknowledge. What man
of learning is ignorant, that the Saracens are descended from Hagar, and from
her son Ismael, and therefore should be called properly Hagarens or
Ismalites, as the Psalm. 83. 6. 1. Chr. (...). (...).
Scripture does warrant. And yet as it was observed by Sozomen, more the^ a
thousand years agone, to the end that they may avoid the imputatio^ of
bastardy by Ismael, and of baseness by Hagar, who was but a bondwoman, they
take Sozom. Eccl. Hist. 6. 38.
to the^ the name of Saracens, as if they were derived from Sara the right wife
of Abraham. Neither can there ought be said, why the Romanists should be the
true Church, because they are called Catholics, but the same may be said for
these Mahumeta^s, why they should be the sons of the free woman, and not of the
bond. For the name is most ancient, and they are every where known by it, and
if Sarace^s be but spoken, ech-one that has ever heard of the^, understands
that they and they alone, are mea^t by it, and in Asia and Europe and Africa,
yea in America also, this by custom runs curra^t without co^troleme^t, and
yet we know that it is neither so nor so. I might add more examples, as of
those who are commonly, not only in England but in other parts of Europe,
called Aegyptiaus, and yet neither they nor their forefathers ever came near
to Egypt.

8: Our Seminary men therefore do seed their followers', but with draffe and
husks in steed of corn, when they lay before them such meat as this is: and
they who live by such diet are not fed but corrupted and poisoned by it. Let
matters be well wayed, and there is nothing farther from Catholicisme the^
Popery is. For shall wetake the word as it signifies? The (...), is
Universally or generally, Augustine. lib. 3. contra ^aude^t.
and (...) does import universal, and so the Catholic Church in our Creed, or
elsewhere, does signify the Church universally diffused. That of the Romanists
may not truly be reported to be so. For as the Congregations in Asia, and those
under Prester-Iohn do no way admit thereof, so those of Greece with many
thousands in Europe, do not co^sort with it, and yet are Christians too,
howsoever the Pope does repudiate the^ as Schismatiks, because they will not
kiss his feet. How the Universal should in this case be so limited, as to
exte^d no farther then one Particular, our Logic cannot find. Contra haeres.
c. 3.
Vince^ti^ Lir^s does define that to be Catholic, which is believed every
where, at all times, and of all. The Papists cannot truly avere that this
agrees to their Profession. Or shall we take Catholic in that sense as our
Jesuits seem to take it, when they (as the secular Sparing Discoveri^ of
English Jesuits.
Priests report of them) would appropriate the faith Catholic to the temporal
government of the king Catholic, as if it were a principle that al of tha^
Belief, must for their bodies be under his Regiment, as for their souls
under the Roman Bishop; yet they will not be in the right; since many of our
English Recusants make the world believe, that they have no great mind to
bear a Spanish yoke, howsoever some other secretly Hispaniolized, and little
less then dis-Englished, or traitorified by the Jesuits, do earnestly but most
foolishly and unadvisedly thrist after it. But a great number also in France
and Italy, and other Popish parts of Christendom, would for themselves forbid
those banes. Or must we expound Catholic for Orthodoxe and true, in which
meaning that of Saint Austen may be; The Christian faith De moribus Eccles.
Cathol. lib. 1. 18.
is not any where but in the Catholic discipline or instruction; and unto
which sense, use and ordinary custom has now brought the word? Even so they
are most far from it. For while they strive about the name, they have lost
the thing: they keep the shel, but have parted with the kernel: while they lay
hold on the Candle-sticke, some other is run away with the light. Their case
is like that of the kings soldiers of Socrat. l. 7. 20.
Persia, who keeping the name of (...), or Immortales, were well proved to be
otherwise, when by the Roman armies they were distressed, slain, and showed to
be mortal. Let the^ lay aside these verbal and titulary gloses, and make plain
out of the Scripture, that they maintain the same faith, which Christ and his
Apostles taught, and then they do somewhat. But they are fallen from it, yea
from the sound profession, which was in the days of the Fathers and Doctors of
the Primitive Church, and therefore that which was true of their times, is not
communicable now to Popery. No not that of Saint Austen, whereupon they have a
maine desire to faste^, The De vera Religione. cap 7.
Christian Religion is to be held by us, and the communion of that Church which
is Catholic, and is named Catholic not only of her own friends, but also of
all her enemies. For will or nil the very Heretics, and favorers of schisms,
when they speak not with their own but with strangers, they call the Catholic
church nothing else but the Catholic church. For they cannot be understood,
unless they distinguish her by that name, whereby she is called of all the
world. This was spoken of the whole number of Christians in the world, which
embraced the right faith, not of the Roman Church only. And those who now
are devoted unto Rome, do as much differ from the purity and integrity of
their old predecessors, as Babylon does differ from Sion. Then in oppositio^
to Heretics, which were but in corners and few places, the faith which either
Rome or any right Christian city held, might be called Catholic; but now
that which the Pope maintains, may it self be reckoned no better then
Heretical perfidiousnes, which the farther it is spread, the worse it is with
Gods flock.

9 To set them therefore straight, by bringing the^ from such vizards and
painted shows to the matter, it is not any name whereunto men are directed,
for finding out the truth, but Ioh. 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, says Christ, for in them you think to have eternal
life, and they are they which testify of me. And as they testify of Christ,
so do they also of his Spouse, as we find in diverse of the ancient Fathers.
Cyprian says, De Lapsis.
He is not joined to the Church, who is separated from the Gospel. He who
bears the name of Origene on the Canticles; Homil. 3.
A good purpose, and the believing of right opinions, does make a soul to be in
the house of the Church. But St. Chrysostom or the Auctor of the Imperfect
work upon St. Matthew, does yet speak more plainly: Homil. 49.
He who will know what is (or which is) the true Church of Christ, whence
should he know it but only by the Scriptures? The Lord therefore knowing that in
the last days there would be so great confusion of things, does therefore
command, that the Christians which are in Christianity, being willing to
receive the firmenes of a true faith, should fly to no other thing but to the
Scriptures. Otherwise if they look to other things, they shall be scandalized
and perish, not understanding which is the true Church. By which our Romanists
may see, that it is not a naked name, nor any other matter of all that
uncertain rabble, which the writer of this Pamphlet hereafter subioyneth,
that can be our direction, which is the Church, or where is the truth, but
only the holy Scriptures. And as Chrysostom has, Homil. 33. in Act.
If any agree to the^, he is a Christian: if any fight against them he is
far from this rule. The word of the Lord is the sure foundation, and he who
builds on any thing besides this, sets his house but upon the Mat. 7. 26.
sand, and while he thinks that he stands for the Faith, and for the
Church, he is enemy to both; as those were to whom Leo sometimes Bishop of
Rome wrote thus. Leo Epist. 83 ad Episcopos Palestinos.
you think that you deal for the faith, and you go against the faith. You
are armed in the name of the Church, and you fight aganist the Church. Let him
who will farther be satisfied in this point, read what a learned man has
written upon this Argument, that Ioh. Rainold. These. 5.
The Church of Rome is neither the Catholics Church, nor a sound member of the
Catholic Church; and if he be not obdurate, he shall never need to doubt
farther in that behalf. In praefat. De triplici hominis officio.
UUeston a most vainglorious, but shalowe fellow, at Doway, has vaunted that
if he had leisure, he would beat that servant of God to dust. I fear he will
never have leisure to grapple with him, unless it be here and there to skulke
out at some hole or corner, and run back again, I mean here and there
snatch a saying of his falsely alleged, and unconscionably perverted, as
already he has done. But if he be the man that he pretends to be, and I
may request any thing of him, let him first begin directly to answer the
Thesis before named, and we shall by his carriage therein, judge what is his
true strength. I would have Weston fall about this work, for it is of too
high a pitch for my good Doctor Hill.


THE THIRD REASON. Unity and Consent.
T. HILL. THe Catholic Roman Religion, being received by so many Nations in
Africa, Asia, and Europa, and in this last age in both the Indies, has,
notwithstanding such variety of wits, such diversity of ma^ners, such
multitude of tongues and la^guages, such distance of places, such numbers of
matters to be believed, yet ever kept Unity and Concord in such peaceable and
consona^t manner, as never any one in Engla^dor Ireland, which are the
uttermost part of the VVest-world dissented or disagreed in any point of
doctrine concerning faith from him which lived in the utmost parts of the
East. But whosoever they be or in what place or Region soever they remain in all the world, if they be Catholics or Papists, (if you will call the^ so) they
all have one Faith, one Belief, one Service, one number of Sacraments, one
Obedience, one Judgment in all, with other like points of Union and Unity,
which makes a geuer all Uniformity also in the peace of men's minds, and to
be brief, they have all one heart and one soul. Act. 4



G. ABBOT. 1 WHen that Italian Didapper, who entitled himself, Praesat in
explicatio. triginta sigillorum.
Philotheus lordanus Brunus Nola^us, magis elaborata Theologia Doctor, etc.
with a name longer then his body, had in the train of Alasco the Polish Duke,
seen our University in the year 1583. his heart was on fire, to make himself
by some worthy exploite, to become famous in that celebrious place, Not long
after returning again, when he had more boldly then wisely, got up into the
highest place of our best and most renowned school, stripping up his sleeves
like some Iugler, and telling us much of chentrum and chirculus and
chircumforenchia (after the pronunciation of his Country language) he
undertook among very many other matters to set on foot the opinion of
Copernicus, that the earth did go round, and the heavens did stand still;
whereas in truth it was his own head which rather did run round, and his
brains did not stand still. When he had read his first Lecture, a grave man,
and both then and now of good place in that University, seemed to himself,
some where to have read those things which the Doctor propounded; but silencing
his conceit till he heard him the second time, remembered himself then, and
repayring to his study, found both the former and later Lecture, taken almost
verbatim out of the works of De vita coelitus co^paranda.
Marsilius Fic^us. Wherewith when he had acquainted that rare and excellent
Ornament of our land, the Reverend Bishop of Durham that now is, but then Deane
of Christs-Church, it was at the first thought fit, to notify to the
Illustrious Reader, so much as they had discovered. But afterward he who gave
the first light, did most wisely entreat, that once more they might make trial
of him, and if he persevered to abuse himself, and that Auditory the third
time, they should then do their pleasure. After which, Iordanus continuing to
be ide^ Iordanus, they caused some to make known unto him their former
patience, and the pains which he had taken with them, and so with great
honesty of the little ma^s part, there was an end of that matter. If I had been
at Palempine with you Doctor Hill in your chamber, when you were writing this
worthy work, I should have dealt so charitably with you, as after the first and
second reason to tell you, that some one or other of the Heretics in England,
would soon disery, where you had borrowed your stuff: but when I had
perceived, that you had been bold with Motiv. 27.
M. Bristow for this third Reason also, I would have entreated you to have done
somewhat of your self, or to let all alone, least some body should tell you,
that by D. Fulke the most part of your book was answered before it was made.
But since I was then absent from you, and now it is too late to stop you at the
third stone, you must be content to bear your own praise; and I satisfy my
self, that as soon as I can co^veniently, I acquaint you with it. And hereafter
it may be that we shall receive from you, Terent in Prolog. Eunuchi.
Nullu^ est ^a^ dictu^, quod non dictu^ sit prius, or some other Apology for
such borrowing.

2. That your Antichristian poison has infected too many in Europe, and some
other places, we cannot but acknowledge, and exceedingly grieve at it also;
were it not that God had fore told, that there should be such an 2. These. 2, 3
Apoc. 17. 2.
Apostasy, and Princes and Nations should be intoxicated by the Whore: but
that the exte^t of your infectio^, is not so large in Asia and Africa as you
praedicate here, I shall have occasion to show you, in my answer to your fifth
Reason. You pretend that, notwithstanding such variety of wits, manners,
languages, places and matters to be believed, (you should have put the sixth
also, as Bristow. Motiv. 27.
your Mr. does, such difference of opinions amongst learned me^, which you did
leave out, least you should insinuate to any, but a very favorable Reader, a
co^tradictio^ to your own position) such unity has been kept, as that in
faith and doctrine, he who lives in the most Western countries of the old
inhabited world, has not disse^ted from him, that resideth in those of the
East. where by the way you fail a little in your Geography, as well as in your
Divinity: for it is much doubted of Ireland, but certainly known, that England
is not so far to the West as Gallitia, or Portingale: but in Africa, the parts
about Marocco do without controversy exceed them all Put this therefore in
your negligences. But all Papists in the world have one faith, one belief,
one Service, one number of Sacraments, one Obedience, one Judgment in all, and
the peace of their minds is such through their uniformity that they have all
one heart and one soul. What their sympathy of affection in other matters
besides Religion is, if we could not learn by Guicciard lib. 9.
Pope Julius the second, in person making war against Mira^dula, and the
French, then also lying in the field when all was covered with snow: or by
Natal. Comes Hist. l. 9
King Philip the second of Spain, most eagerly watring by his General the
Duke of Alva, against Pope Paulus the fourth himself: or by the Conestag. lib.
7. Histo.
Spaniards prosecutio^ against Don Antonio and his Portingales: or by the much
love, which Henry the third King of France with the Duke of Espernon, did
bear to the Guize and the Leaguers, and they to them; or by the long continued
The estate of English fugitives.
factions between our disco^tented English Fugitives beyond the seas; yet our
Romanists at home would lately teach us; where the Jesuits and the Arch. Priest
with his adherents on the one side, and diverse of the Seculars on the other
side, have exercised such contentions, and almost deadly fewde each against
other, that all England and a great part of Europe has rung of the same; yea
the Pope himself and his Cardinals are no strangers thereunto. And by your
leave, the rest of the Papists being either at liberty, or restrained,
throughout this kingdom, have not been all of one heart, one obedience, one
judgment about these businesses; but there has been not only dislike, but
intestine hatred also in some of them, against the blabbing Priests, and the
party opposite to the Jesuits.

3 And do all Papists agree in matters of doctrine, of faith, and of belief,
when the Quodlib. fol. 21. in margin. A dialogue between a secular Priest and
a lay gentleman fol. 97.
Jesuits are charged to give toleration to come to the Protestants Churches,
and the Seculars do withstand it? When the Jesuits uphold the Bull of Pope Pius
the 5. and the Seculars do question it? When the Jesuits mainetaine, that the
Excommunication Consistorially given against her late Majesty, is a right and
Papal sentence: but the Seminarians and their abetters, avouch it to be a
matter of fact, and not of faith, and therefore the Pope may there in err. And
is there one belief when you cannot doctrinally agree, whither the Pope or the
General Council be the greater? When not long since Pigh. Eccles. Hier. lib.
1. 2.
Papists did mainetaine, that the authority of the Church was above the
Scriptures, but the Bellar. de Council. lib. 2. 12.
Jesuits now deny it; and the In Gal. 2. 2.
Rhemistes as moderatours cannot well tell what to make of it, but in some
senses rather bend to the prerogative of the Church? And as you have reformed
many other things in Popery, so is your service the same? When your Breviaries
or Porteises are so much altered since the time of the Council of Trent, and
so many shameful things put out, which if they were impious or idolatrous,
your people before those days were in a pretty pickle. As Georgius and
Timotheus being more nasute then their predecessors, did purge their Socr.
Eccles Hist. 7. 6.
Arrianisme, and cleared it of many the blasphemies of Arius, retaining such as
were more plausible: so Pius the 5. cleansed the Breviary of many absurdities,
and held only those things which he supposed were more defensible. Bellar de
verbo Dei. lib. 2. 11.
In your new Missals also many texts are altered, from that which was in the
old. Your Lege^daries in former times were read in the midst of your
Congregations, and accepted for good truth: yet now you reject your ancient
books, insomuch that Motiv. 5.
Bristow himself disclaimeth uncertain or false Miracles, which they read,
says he, in I know not what Legenda Aurea: so contemptuously he speaks of
it: and now that only must go for current, which De Viti^ Sanctoru^.
Surius and Lippoman have revised and allowed. Nay has the Church of Rome ever
had one belief, when the foundations of their faith, in which, will they nill
they, their soul and salvation must be acknowledged to consist, are and have
been so and such among them, that no man can well tell, what to make or
determine of them; I mean the Scripture which is unto them as a dead law, and
the Pope which is as the living Magistrate. For first touching the Scriptures,
we know that with them the Latin Vulgar Edition is only authentical, and so
the Session. 4.
Council of Trent has defined it; whereas the Originals of the Hebrew and
Greek, which are the first and clearest fountains, are but basely esteemed by
many of them, insomuch that they Prolog ad Lector. ante li. 1. Esdr.
who put out the Complutensian Bible, say that they have set the Latin there,
between the Greek and Hebrew, as Christ was upon the Cross between the two
thieves. Now what can any man make of this their Latin Copy, when besides the
difference of it from the Originals, (against which we most except) it is in it
self so often altered, and chopped and changed? for besides the Castigations
and Corrections of the Lovanists and Coleinists, and I cannot tell how many,
the Pope Sixtus 5. did cause it to be revewed, and (...) professing that he
had amended very much of it, he made it to be new printed* and (...) praefixa
Biblijs Sixti quinti.
prefixed a Bull before it, testifying that he in his own person had gone
through the whole Copy, and judged of it, yea amended the faults escaped in
the Printers Press, with his own hand, and therefore did give charge by that
his Constitution, which was evermore to stand in force, that it should never
afterward be altered, or any other Copy of the Vulgar Edition be used. And if
an^e did attempt contrary to his Decree, then he should inc^rre the
displeasure of Almighty GOD, and of the Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul.
This was published but in the year 1589. and within three years after, Anno
1592. comes Pope Clement the 8. and under a color that his Predecessor
Sixtus had intended torevise his Bible once again, but that he dyed before
he could effect it, he puts out another, in many hundreds of textes
differing from the former, so that the diversities compared together, do make
a (...) pretty book; and there is little more variety (...) Bellum Papale
Thom^ James.
for material points, between the translation used in the Church of England,
and the Rhemish Testament, then is between these two. And since the next Pope
who succeeds, will think scorn but to have as much authority as his
Anteceslour, it may be chopped not only once more but many times: so that the
Romish Church may be said, to be so far of from Unity in Verity, that of
certainty they have not the Scriptures, vvhereon their faith must be builte,
but they in former times, and these in this present age have various grounds
to rest themselves upon. Secondly as now it is with the Scriptures, so it has
been heretofore with the Popes, when they have had 23. several Schisms,
Antipapes being erected the one against the other, and those broils sometimes
continuing, for scores of years together without interruption; so that all
Christendom by partaking with them, has been in an uproar, and thousands
by that means have been murdered. Now if it be such an Article of faith;
that the Church must be believed, yea believed in, and this Church is the
Roman Church; and is ministerially inspired by the head, and the head is not
only like bifidus (...), a hill with two tops, but triplex Gerion, or
tric^ps (...) vvitl^ three parts, as it was a little Vide C^cil. Constantions.
before the Council of Constance, three Popes usurping at one time, and every
one of these do eurse to the deepest bottom of the lowest hell all that
stand against them; nay all who are not with them; and in their
Consistories, if they be Popes, they cannot err. Will any man, who has his
vvittes about him think, that here is one Faith, and one (...) in the Romish
Cocke-pit? And especially when these Popes, shall against the Antipapes
proclaim Croisadoes, that men are to mark themselves with the sign of the
Cross, and fight against their adversaries, as against Turks, Saracens and
Infidels, the known enemies of the Christian profession. Hear this ye
Papists and blush, when you mention your Unity.


T. HILL. BUT on the other side if you look into the d^ings of Protestants,
you shall see such dissensions, such divisions, such schis^s, such contra^tie
of opinions, as the like was never among the Arrians, among the Eutychians,
among the Donatists, among the Nestorians, among the Valentinians, (...) yet
am^ngest the most ^arring Heretics that ever were. So as you may plainly
behold in Luther his seed the self same thing that the Poets feign of (...)
his sowing; you may see Ovid. M^tam. lib. 3. Iudic. 7.
the Madianites and Amalekites in (...) against the people of God; builders of
the tower of Babell, accusers of ch^st Susanna: for they are not only
different, and divided from the general body of Catholics in Christendom,
with whom they were v^ited (...), but amongst themselves they have implacable
wars.


G. ABBOT. 4. IN your whole book you raunge from the truth: but here not the
least of all. There are some few points in differenc^ between the
Professors of the Gospel, but you heartily could wish that there were more;
eve^ as an ancient Roman, the more to satisfy the ambition and bloody
covetousnes of his Countrymen, did thus pray, Let Tack. de morib. Germano^.
there remain and continue in those Nations, if not the love of us, yet the
hatred of themselves, speaking of the old Germans and other bordering
Nations. But God be praised, there is not such disagreement, and multiplicity
of sects, as was among the old Arrians, who variously contended with the
professors of their own Heresy. That the Eutychians, Donatists, Nestorians
and Valentinians, did very much i^rre among themselves we do not read, unless
you mean each sect against other, which fitteth not your purpose: since even
your selves do think it no disgrace, to disagree with all in the world, whom
you account Heretics, and especially the Protestants. Neither are they the
seed of Luther, who as you say agree like Cadmus his men, or the Amalekites and
Madianites, or the builders of Babell, or the slanderers of Susanna, but they
are known Heretics who are spru^g up since that time, as Servetus, the
Anabaptists, and other of like sort, being the seed of the Mat. 13 25 28.
(...) man, who when men were a sleep came and sowed tares. And albeit some of
these might go out from us, yet 1. Ioh. 2. 19
they were not of us, as you might know by Luthers writing even at the first
against these Sleidan. lib. 10.
Anabaptists, (professing that the same Devil who set them on work, was but a
gross and foolish Devil) and Instit. li. 1. 13.
Calvin's against Servetus, and others against other. Yeam^ny men of worth of
our part, have not only by preaching disclaimed them, but by written books
have confuted them; with much more zeal and diligence then any of your side.
And where the reformed Churches are, the Christian magistrates being taught out
of the word, and called upon by their Pastors, have censured with severe
punishment, yea sometimes so far as Centur. 16 lib. 2. ca. 34. and 22.
to death, such as have broke out to the maintaining of any very impious and
blasphemous doctrine. With these it is that they have implacable hatred; and
yet not with their persons, but with their opinions; for they love August de
civit. Dei. li. 14. 6.
that which God made in them, but hate that which the Devil has infused or
inserted. But the Professors of the Gospel do not in maine points vary one
from another, nor yet from the Orthodoxe Church, although they co^ioine not
with the servants of Antichrist, who being Pseudo-Catholikes do arrogate to
themselves the name of Catholics. And from these that they are come forth,
they are right glad; least remaining in Babylon, and Apoc 18. (...)
partaking of her sins, they should receive also of her plagues. It was no
dishonor or hurt unto Lot, that he Genesis 19. 12
came out of Sodom, when God did call him, but it was his safety and
happiness: for if he had remained with them, he had perished together with
them.

5. The matter wherewithal you may justly charge them, is that opinion of
Luther, and some of his scholars, concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
Where, as he d^ffereth from your monstrous conceit of Transubstantiation, so
bending too far another way, he imagines that not only bread remains after
consecration (which is very true) but the body of Christ also co^substantiated
with the bread. And for the maintenance of this, first grows hereunto, that
in the bread, with the bread, and under the bread, or some way of those, is the
realty of Christ's person; and secondly that by the almighty power of God, he is
every where invisibly; upon which ground the vpholders of that doctrine, are by
some termed Ubiquitaries, and are concerning that point rightly refuted by
Bellar. de Christo. li. 3 cap. 11.
Bellarmine. This was in Luther ^rror, and lapsu^ human^, which the Lord
suffered in him, as he has permitted the like both for opinion, and slips of
life too, in diverse of his Saints, that thereby we might learn that men be
men, and that this world, is Bernard. de modo been vive^di. cap. 10.
via, non patria, the way and not our country, a place of defect and not of
true perfection, the habitation of men and not of Angels. This consideration
does holsomely humble us, and makes us more earnestly to pray, that we may
have a right understanding in all things, and that we may be guided by the
Spirit into all truth expedient for us. By this also we are taught not to
doat too much upon men, but only to follow them so far as they do 1. Cor. 11.
(...).
follow Christ. And it is no shame at all, but rather a commendation to our
Churches, that whereas he himself, whom we honor as an admirable servaunt of
God, does swerve from the path, be it little or be it more, we rather follow
the way, then him. But some have written that Luther before he dyed,
relinquished that his own opinion, saying that he had gone too far^ in the
matter of the Sacrament, as the Acta Colloquij Mul^unens.
Ministers of Heidelberge do affirm in a Dutch book; as Chron. lib. 4.
Genebrarde himself relates unto us. Indeed it had been to be wished, that
al who came after him had been of his mind, (if that were his mind) and had
sought peace, as Philip Melancthon did* but all the scholars of Luther would
not subscribe thereunto, but some have divulgated books against them, who^ in
their heat they have called Zwinglians, Calvinists, and Sacramentaries, and so
having stirred up the flames of contention, have given occasions of joy to the
enemies of them both, who will soon with an Joy at the hurt of other.
(...) take comfort in their evil. That is the fruit of Christian men's
contention, as long since Gregory Nazianzen could say of a difference between
some Bishops, about whom the people at Constantinople were divided, Ora^. 10.
My Tragedy is nothing else to our enemies but a Comedy. Therefore it is not
a little, which we have taken from the Churches, and added to the stage. I do
wish that the Lutherans and their con-combatants had remembered this, as for
some other reasons, so to stop the mouth of the common adversary. But being
as it is, we do not doubt but they both are Gods servants if they live
according to the Christian rules of their profession, since they both do
rightly hold the 1. Cor. 3. 11
foundation, that is to say, Faith in Jesus Christ, and Justification by his
blood only. We read of one called Sozom. Eccl. Histor. lib. 1. 14.
Eutychianus, who wen^ astray being in opinion a Novatian; yet he was much
esteemed by the good Emperor Constantine, and there were very pregnant
testimonies that he was the child of God. Euse. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. 33.
Ireneus held the error of the Chiliasts, And Iustine Dialog. c^ Tryph. lud.
Martyr embraced the same conceit; and yet who dare seclude them from the
fellowship of the faithful? So we doubt not, but the maintainers of the
doctrine both of Zwinglius and of Luther, are as well jointly members of the
Catholic Church, and Communion of Saints, as Council. Carthag. in Cyprian.
Cyprian was on the one side with his African Bishops, and Cornelius was on the
other side with his Bishops of Europe, albeit these had much contention each
with other, and dyed in difference of opinion, concerning rebaptising the^ who
were baptized by Heretics. So that (the Lords name be praised) howsoever we
could wish, that neither formerly nor now, there were any such examples, yet
this contention is not the first, and it is but one, and (...), as y^ the
Pamph^ would have^. We will (...).


T. HILL I I would you did but see what I have seen in these Countr^, as (...)
the (...) ^ds, (...) and di^ of Luther his of-spring^ a^ of the Muntzerans,
Anabaptists, Adam^, Steblerians, sabbataries, Clan^ (...) Gart^der,
Manifestarians, D^monians, Common holders, ^pers, Howling Anabaptists, Davidge
or gi^, Memno^, Polygamists, Signifiers, Figurers, Valewers, Pledgers,
Presentaries, ^tamorphists, Iud^sts, Neutersacramentaries, Image-breakers,
Zealons Lutheranes, Soft Lutheranes, or Interimi^, New Arrians, Trinitaries,
Hell-maisters, Hell-tormentors, Antid^monians, Amidorfians, Antadiaphorists,
Antosiand^lans, Anti-Swanck ^dians, Anti-Calvinists, H^d-impositors, (...),
S^s, Invisibilists, S^turians, Adiaphorists, (...), (...), Luther^-Calvinists,
(...) Pen^, (...), (...), (...), ^drians, Sta^, Antistan^, New-Man^chees,
St^bergers and of such lik^ (...) which (...) their (...) out of the dregs of
Luthers doctrine, (...) ^e (...) Protestants all.


G. ABBOT. 6 IN what country you have heretofore lived, it is hard for we to
tell. In England you were when you published this (...) and had (...)
elsewhere with you, when you penned this work, (if else where you did p^
(...)) he should sc^ have (...) two or three persons in (...), of those sects
which (...) you ^cite. But him ^th he (...) what you ^we, he (...) have
^lying before you, a ^de book of the (...) Apo^ St^, which was thirty
years since Apology of Fride^. ^taphyl.
(...) into Eng^, by our Countryman Stapleton. This Sraphy^ you follow in
these untrue reports of yours and from his book English^, you shamefully ^ke
all these (...), word for word. While I read them, as also the (...) and
Cities which else-vvhere you (...) Ration. (...).
I think upon a C^ book, which (...), where (...) ^ped to^, (...)spirit. In
Latin letters the it is, (...), (...), (...), (...), El, Ad^i, (...), M^ssias,
S^er, E^nel, (...), A^ha, Paracle^, Propheta, S^des, K^s, Pant^r, all which
should enforce the spi^, to do as the Coniure^ ^oulde have h^. Such a ^umble
and bugge-beare you propo^de unto us here: and the Heresies vv^h you (...) are
so much the liker to these words used in Coniuration, because (...) these
for the most part do signify one thing, even that immaculate essence and
omnipotent being, GOD, how^ it they be wickedly applied, so for these good
fellows whom you muster here, many of them differ little in their opinions,
although you to make a ^ourish do name them severally; like a b^dde Captain
who keeping in his list, the names of soldiers who are slain or gone,
knows how to make use of dead p^y for his own benefit. But this is the
cust^ of you (...) to make a show with names; (...) ^en (...) a C^loge, an^ to
the same purpose, has In Epistol. apolog^t.
(...) that (...), In (...) base answer for (...) unto D. (...). And may it
not be, that diverse of these whom you both name, may be good Christians;
as the (...), (...) and the Scri^s, if they ho^ no vvo^ do^ (...) their titles
may importe? As S^nt (...) De haere^ ad Quod vul^. Deum.
remembers, that (...) in rehearsing of Heresies, did differ from Philastr^,
and (...) from him, because that seemed to one of them to be an Heresy, which
did not so seem to another; so certain^ if some wise man either of (...) your
sid^, should sca^ the tr^ opinions of all whom (...) yo^ (...), (...) would
prove (...) many to be no Heresy, wh^ (...) do condemn. But we praise the
everlasting Lord, that wh^as in (...) there is as flourishing a Church, as in
any (...) world, we here kn^ the names of (...) of them, (...) with the p^sons
of none of them, who hold such (...) ^tions, And we ver^ly believe that you
lurking in our own co^ey, have to do (...) as (...) of them. But when yo^ ha^
done (...) that favor, (...) to (...) th^se good (...), and (...) they (...)
hold, you shall understand* our (...) And in the m^ne time kn^ you, that (...)
taught (...) doctrine, neither do the (...) challenge to them, if they hold
ought (...); (...) ^emne them and writ^ against (...), (...) bin d^red.

7 But ^o allow you so much, as in any probability you can pretend, the since
Luther^ time, so many several opinions have spr^g up as five and fifty, (for of
so many you would make show) yea and that the most of the would willingly
shrowde themselves under (...) (...), yet does this (with understanding
Persons) ^ke any (...) against that truth, which either we or Luther did
profess? For might not the same have bin objected before his death, to S^.
(...) the Eva^gelist, which you here object against us? (...) of the remainder
of the malicious Jews might thus h^ said. We al agreed upon the law of Moses,
til you came and in^ (...); (...) unity for our sacrifices, and concord about
our (...) harmony of consent was every way to be found among us. But now while
you talk of Jesus this new Savior, yo^ cannot agree among your selves, what
he is, or how to be served. You (...) many ^cts, and those iarring ^h with
other, the scholars of (...) Mag^, of (...) and (...), of (...) and (...),
whereof some deny the ^-hood, and some deny the (...) of your Christ, and some
vary in other matt^: And you have (...) Apoc. (...) ^5.
(...) and we cannot tell how many kinds, and the^ (...) will b^ (...), and
pretend (...) dra^ their do^ from you (...) the Apost^. S^. (...) hearing the,
would not have bin a^shed at al; but would have signified, that there was (...)
^ght way which was chalked out, in the writings of the old and (...) Test^, and
(...) b^ing walked in, wo^d b^ng men unto life; and the ^st (...) by^ (...),
which (...) had open, (...) being (...) to draw some thither, unto their own
(...). But if you will look lower to the fourth age after Christ, (...) shall
find that you^ objection might mo^ ^ly have (...), by (...) Ge^es, in (...)o^
(...). (...) did (...)(...)* (...)(...) (...) you many strifes, (...) I know
not (...) I should choose, what I should prefer. Everyone such, I say the
truth. (...) I should believe I (...), since I am (...) of the Scriptures, and
they on both sides do pretend the same. Yet his Conclusion is, that (...) of
the Scripture, and such necessary consequences, as are drawn from thence, the
judgment what is truth, is to (...) had. But what small unity was there among
the Christians, when he wrote this? Or when Saint Austen mentioned more then De
haeresib. ad quod vult Deum.
fourscore heresies, which had arisen in the Church; all whom but for
tediousness I would retire from him, as also one of Epiphanius and Theodoret,
that the Reader might see that we need not to be frighted, with the pretended
show of your 55. Now might not such a one as that Symmachus was, who under the
Emperor Valentinian, and in the time of St Ambrose, made so earnest and
effectualla Ambros. Epist
speech, that Ethnicisiue might be restored in Rome, and altars might be
permitted to their Paimme Gods, Jupiter, Mercury, Apollo, I^o and the rest,
have disputed in the same manner against the Christian faith, as you now do
reason? While we retained the service of our formerly known Maiores and
minores Dij, we agreed upon that worship which every God should have, we
knew their Temples, their altars, their sacrifices, their Priests, their
feasts, times and seasons, we had unity in our hearts; and sweet harmony in
our speeches. (...) which you have ^hed among us, we see nothing (...), to
which we may cleave* for how should we be resolved what is to be embraced,
when you cannot agree among yourselves, what is the (...) and right way? And
the dif^ is not, that some go to the (...) hand, and (...) the other, (...) a
man had (...) many hands, (...) Plutarch. de multitud. a^corum.
Br^ (...) which (...) d^ed hands was imagined to have, there (...) some be
wanting, who with (...) dis-ioined (...) from (...), would (...) to every one
of them. If Symmachus had spoke thus, as he^ (...) not behind hand to utter
other (...) she^ available (...) his purpose, St. Ambrose who answered (...)
objections, ^d (...) have (...) this, (...) would (...) I (...) ^Line^ and the
same individed truth, should be hemmed about with many different doctrines of
Heresy.


T. HILL. AND what divisions you have there in England, you may in some sort
know, who do (as I think) now and then hear Preachers of different doctrine.
What combats your Bishops, Councillors, and moderate sort of Protestants have
to defend their Parlimentary Religion, and the Queens Proceedings as they
term it, against Puritans, Brownists, and other such like good fellows, that
by show of Scriptures impugn it, you cannot but know and see with your eyes.
Neither can it be answered, that the Sects here rehearsed differ one from
another only in matters of small moment, for they differ and disagree in
weighty points of our salvation; as might here easily be declared, but that it
would not benefit this mine intended brevity so to do.


G. ABBOT. 8 WHen you have put on your spectacles to see, and have picked your
ears to hear, you and all your confederates can neither justly see nor hear
(Gods name be blessed therefore) that either at this time, or at the divulging
of this your treatise, there be or were any differences of opinion in England,
concerning the faith. Our Preachers do not differ, or teach diverse doctrines
in any of their Sermons. We have for our rule the old and new Testament, and
the Articul. Relig. in Synodo. 1562.
Confession of our Church in the Articles of Religion, set out by the warrant
of the Scripture alone: and to these as to the Analogy of faith we do cleave,
and there is no graduate in our Universities, and much less, Preachers and
Pastors in our churches, but subscribe thereunto. And if heretofore, there
have bin some few Brownists mis-ledde, by a man who afterward was sorry for his
own oversight, the name of them now (as I think) is not to be heard of among
us. And such as you call Puritans, did never differ from the rest in any point
of substance, but about circumstances and ceremonies, as cappe, surplesse and
such like, and about the manner of Ecclesiastical regiment; even as your
secular Priests lately did not think fit to be ruled by your Archpriest
and his Assistants, and yet Garnet your Provincial, and Persons the Rectour of
your English Seminary at Rome, and the Pope himself (whether by any
surreptitious Breve, or no, do you look) did think fit to have them so
ordered. But never were the Cou^sellours of Estate, nor the Bishops of this
kingdom, so disquieted with those dis agreements, as the Court of Rome and the
Cardinals there, have been with your ga^les in England, in as much as the
bruit of these differences here, went but to the Bishop of the Dioces, or the
High Commission at London, but your broiles and brabbles have passed the Sea,
crossed France, traversed the Alps, and have never ceased running, till they
have rapped at the gate of Appella^ (...) Clement. 8.
Clemens Octav^. What the issue of the^ farther will be, time must discover; but
of this we are assured, that to your great coffeehouse, and to the end that
we might all the better observe you, in our late Sovereigns days of most
happy memory, the fatherly wisdom of our ch^stest Church governors, and the
moderate temper of other men, being not so far of from seemly conformity as
heretofore, did to the joy of all good men reasonably well cure that wound,
and salve that sore, and so the shame was taken away from Israel. And had not
this been: yet if your brevity (which is but a shuffling color, to make show
of some things which are not) had been turned into one years or seven years
longity, you could not have showed, that in substantial points of faith there
was varia^ce among us. And therefore for that matter you do well to do as you do,
that is, put up your pipes and make no more noise. Yet I cannot so leave you,
but put you in mind concerning Protestants and Puritanes, that it is probable
that the Controversies which then were; by your sly and secret co^veiances
were the more forwarded; at the least you Romanistes did your best, by
hypocrites and other your naughty instruments to continue them. For the
practice of your religion, being of late nothing else but mischievous policy,
your Emissaries were instructed at their coming into England to sooth both
sides, and to commend them, that so they might persist in their opinions. And
here I shall open to the world some thing of your cunning, which is not
known to every body. There At Rhemes Anno 1579.
are certain instructions, which, Doctor Allen in a long continuated
speech, (which he dictated to his auditors, and they in vvriting took it
from his mouth) did bestow on such Priests, as were then to be sent from
the Seminary in France, into England. And these were to inform them, how
they should deal with all sorts of people, to pervert them from their faith.
Thus therefore he advertiseth them, If you chance to deal with a Puritan,
you must say unto him, Truly brother for you, there is more hope then of these
that be Protestants, because they for fear of the Prince and the law, are
ready to say and believe any thing, and therefore me thinks they be Atheistes:
but for you there is more hope, being either hot or cold. If you deal with
a Protestant, tell him there is more hope of him, then of such rash brained
Puritanes, because they with Religion have put of all humanity, and civilitie,
with all other good ma^ners. Who would not think that for mischievous
devises, this head of Allens, was soon after worthy to be covered with a
Cardinals hat? But by the leave of our Seculars, who strive to magnify him, he
did not learn this of Saint Peter, but rather of Sir Nicholas Machiavel, a man
of their good acquaintance. Here, with our Seminary Preests, both Protestants
and Puritanes were for a purpose honest men; I would that we had cause so to
repute of th^se Romanists.

9 Now whereas you call the faith which we profess, our Parliamentary
Religion, you are for that term behoulding to diverse of your good masters.
For yo^ chief schoolmasters Bristow long since bestowed that phrase on us,
intituling one of his Chapters, Brist. Motiv. 42.
The Parliament Church, and Parsons who could ever readily enlarge an
untruth; Wardword ca. 4.
says that Peter Martyr, and Master Bucer at their coming into England, in
King Edvvardes days, were conditioned with to teach that Religion, which
should be established by the Parliament approaching. It is well confessed by
him, that our Realm in that Kings enteraunce, was not so weak in the
knowledge of Divinity, that they needed to be guided, by any from beyond the
seas; but they themselves could search the Ioh. 5. 3. 9
Scriptures, to sifte out what was the truth. It was not so happy with that
Conventicle at Trente, whereas it seems all the learned men were so simple,
that they did nothing but almost verbis concep^is from Rome, which gave
occasion to that meriment, that the holy Ghost who should have bin President
of the Council, was brought from Rome in a box. But the Religion which was
then and is now established in England, is drawn out of the fountains of the
word of God, and from the purest orders of the Primitive church, which for the
ordinary exercise thereof, when it had bin collected into the book of common
Prayer, by the pains and labor of many learned men, and of mature judgment,
it was afterward confirmed by the upper and lower house: yet not so, but that
the most material points, were disputed and debated in the Convocation house,
by men of both parties, and might farther have bin discussed, so long as any
Popish Divine had ought reasonably to say. Holinshed An. 1. (...).
But there in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign, the Antichristian Bishops
to their everlasting infamy, and to the perpetual prejudice of their cause,
refused the disputation or conference, and crying creake, for sooke their cause
in the plain field, knowing right well that when Popery must be brought to
the touchstone of Gods word, it will prove base and counterfeite. And then it
being intended, to add to Ecclesiastical decision, the corroboration of
secular governeme^t, according to the ancient custom of this kingdom, (as
appears by An 20. and 25 and 38. R^gis. Edvard. 3
Record from the time of K. Edward the 3.) the Parliament which is the most
honorable Court of Christendom, did ratify the same, That so all of all orders
and degrees, might be bound to serve the Lord of heaven, not after their own
fancies, but as himself had prescribed. And that this heretofore has bin the
custom of good Princes, to call their Nobles and their people to join with
them for the establishing of Gods service, every man may know, who will but
look into the stories of the Bible. For there it will appear, that Iosuah.
(...). 2.
Iojuah being old, and minding as far as in him lay, to perpetuate the
sincere service of the Lord, to all succeeding generatio^s, did assemble all
Israel, their Elders, their Heads, their Judges, their Officers, to give
consent thereto. So did (...) Chron. 28. 1.
David, not only minding to commend to all his subjects, the succeeding of
Solomon in the crown after him, but above all things pure Religion. And was
not this the course which Asa did take, for the reforming 2. Chron. 15 9.
of those errors, wherewith Gods service was inta^gled, when assembling all
Judah and Benjamin to Jerusalem, he did cause them by an oath of association,
and as in way of a strong covenant, to bind themselves to God, yea and that
under the pain of death, to fly Idolatry, and to embrace true piety and
devotio^. The like might be said of other Princes who were god ly. And these
meetings no doubt being such assemblies as our Parliament is, or rather being
some more general matter, he who should have termed their conclusions, a
Parliamentary Religion, might have bin reputed no better the^ a scoffing enemy.
And so may you Doctor Hill be accounted, and Bristow in like sort: but Persons
over and above that, may have the name of a slaunderer, who can gloss and
invent any thing which may serve for his purpose, as that is that P. Martyr,
and M. Bucer were indented with all to teach as the Parliament should decree,
implying that whatsoever it had bin, they must have condescended unto it. This
lying Jesuit can show no letter, no Act of Record, no testimony of semblaunce
of truth, to aver this his calumniation. But the matter indeed was, that the
reformers of Religion here, intending to level all by the line of Gods word,
knew that those two worthy men were so affected in all their teachings; and
therefore, as also for their admirable learning and judgment, they made choice
of them before all the great Clerks which were in Europe. And that those who
called them hither, were not deceived in them, the excellent monuments which
they have lest in writing behind them, do testify to the world.


T. HILL. THIS unity of Catholics and discord of Protestants most manifestly
shows, that as the Apostles were they for whom our Savior prayed to his
father, and was heard of him. Holy father keep them in thy name, whom thou
have given me, that they may be one as we also be one, John seaventeene: so
they of the Catholic Roman Religion be they, for whom in the words following
he prayed, and was heard, Not for them do I ask only, but also for them which
shall believe, by their preaching in me, that all may be one, as thou father
in me, and I in thee, that also they in us may be one, and hereof it
necessarily follows, that they be of the true Church, for that none but they
observe and keep the Unity, which he obtained ^or them of his heavenly Father.


G. ABBOT. 10 THese texts did your master Motiv. 27.
Bristow cite, and this argument in express words did he frame to your hands,
gentle M. Doctor, and you might have done well, to have added some our place
more of your own reading. But to answer you both together, this makes
nothing against us; for we join in consent for all material points of the
substance of salvation, not only with our selves, but with all the faithful
and rightly believing, which have bin in the world, with the Patriarchs, the
Prophets, the Apostles, the Fathers of the Primitive Church, and the Martyrs;
neither can you, or the greatest Goliath of your side, ever prove the contrary.
Touch any article of our doctrine, or any conclusion which we maintain, and
we will make it good against you. Staphilus Apolog. (...). Staphil.
himself could cite it as the saying of Smideline, that among the Lutherans
and Zuinglians, there is no variance of any weight or force, touching any
articles of our says, of Christian Religion. This tale therefore of discord,
do you tell to your bleare-eyed followers, who cannot discern colors: All
right believers are satisfied for this matter. But on the other side, the
agreement which is among you, is but a conspiracy against Christ's honor, even
such a combination as was between Mat. 16. 57 Luke 23. 12.
Herod and Pilate, and Annas and Caiphas, the Scribes, Pharisees, Priests and
people, to bring our blessed Savior to the cross. Your consent is not in God,
nor in his son Jesus, but to rob them both of their glory, and to bestow
it on your I doll at Rome. You agree to keep your Congregations in ignorance,
to proclaim your kitchin-warming Purgatory, to set your Masses and Pardons at
sale, to pick men's Sparing discovery of Jesuits.
purses by your Iesuitical exercise, to lead the^ as bond slaves to hell, and
this is it wherein you consent. So that as one did once read Vanity for Unity,
in the Psalm, Behold how good and joyful a thing it is, brethren Ps. 133. 1.
to dwell together in Vanity, so your unity is vanity, and your consent is
cousenning, tobe guile God and al good Christians, so far forth as you may.
The title of this your present Chapter, might better have bin Vanity and
Cousenning, the^ Unity and Consent; for you conspire to do evil, eve^ to betray
the souls of me^, redeemed with the blood of the everlasting covenant. The
text of Jeremy would well fit this your combination. Ier. 11. 9.
A conspiracy is found among the me^ of Judah, and among the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, They are turned back to the iniquity of their forefathers, which
refused to hear my words, and they went after other Gods to serve them: thus
the house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant, which I
made with their fathers.


T. HILL. AND surely it cannot proceed but from the Holy Ghost, that all
Sacredwriters of the Catholic Roman Church, although being Aug. lib 18. de
civitat. dei Cap 41.
men of diverse Nations, Times and Languages, yet have so wonderfully
consented, and agreed among themselves, as we see they have done.


G. ABBOT. 11 YOU would make your sily disciples believe that this proposition
of yours so fra^dulently propounded, is confirmed by St. Austen, whose words in
the place quoted in your marge^t, are as much to your purpose, as if a man
being at Barwike, should take St. Michaels mount in his way, to go see Powles
church at London. If you had but looked the title of that Chapter in Austen, it
would have told you that the author does there speak, of the agreement of the
Canonical Scriptures among themselves. And if you had read the Chapter, you
might have found the drifte to be, that whereas all the old Philosophers in
their opinions and writings dissented each from other, the penmen of the
Scriptures, being the Secretaries of the Holy Ghost did not vary at all. His
words are these, Lib. 18. cap 41 de ^v. Dei.
To conclude, our Authors in whom not without a cause, the Canon of the Holy
Scriptures is set and bou^ded, God forbid that they should dissint among
themselves in any respect. Now will you be so blasphemous, as to join your
broken and barbarous writers, your Schoolmen, Dunces, Friars, with these
Oracles of God? for if you do not mean by your sacred writers of the Catholic
Roman Church, your Divines and teachers of the Popes rotten Religion, you
speak not to your own purpose, you abuse your Reader with aequivocation, and
your words as most Idle do prove nothing at all. But do your writers indeed
of such diverse Nations, Times and Languages, so wonderfully consent, as you
speak of? Belike you have read but a few of them, or else you would see,
that many of their tales do hang together, as their Matthew. 26. 60.
words did, who came to witness against Christ. I suppose you have heard of a
certain book, called the Sentences of Peter Lombard. Now I pray you good Sir,
is there no where in the margent there, Hic magister non tenetur? Look in the
end of him as he was Ex officina lacob, Du-pu^s.
printed at Paris in the year 1573. and there you may find, that the faculty
of Divines at Paris, have condemned for errors six and twenty several
doctrines, avouched in the works of that master of the Sentences, in the
first book four, in the second four, in the third three, in the fourth
fifteen. Of these one was, that brute beasts do not receive the very body of
Christ, although it seems that they do, when they devour the Host after
consecration. And is it not to be supposed that the Scholars of this great
Clerk, did follow their Rabbi in maintaining the same assertions? And if you
will look there farther, you shall see that those Sorbonists were many times
troubled, with refuting and censuring diverse doctrines, which were set abroach
two or three hundred years since, and that diverse times in the depth of
Popery. That little Treatise alone will satifie any man that reads it, that
in this your assertion of wonderful consent, you are wonderfully out. Should
not a man think that one of your learning, had heard of Thomas Vias Caietanus
once Cardinal of Rome, how deep a scholar he was, and how many books he
wrote? And did all your Popish learned men, join in unity of doctrine and
opinion with him? How say you to Ambrosius Catharinus no babie among you, who
wrote purposedly against him? I had leifer that Sixtus Biblioth. Sanct. lib. 4.
Senensis should tell you the tale, because you perhaps will better believe
him. Having then reconed up the works of Cardinal Caietane, he thus
subioyneth: Ambrosius Catharinus Archbishop of Co^psa, of the order of the
Preaching Friars, did write as well against the foresaid Commentaries of the
Scriptures, as against the other lesser works of this man, six very sharp
books of Annotations or Invectiues, concerning which I leave to every man his
own free judgment. And what maine matters and of great importance in
Divinity these were, he who lists to pervse the Bibl. lib. 6.
sixth book of the same Author, shall see in particular. I mentioned before,
that it is not agreed upon between your schoolmen, whither beasts eating
the consecrated host, do receive the body of Christ or no. Li 4. Did. 13.
Peter Lombarde says No. Albeit if he should be asked, what then the mouse
does eat, he must answer, God knows. But Part. (...). quaest. 80. art 3.
Aquinas is resolute, that solong as the sensible elements do remain, solong
in the Eucharist it cease not to be the body of Christ, although a mouse or
a dog do devour it, or it be cast into the mire. And Part. 3. quaest. ^5.
Alexander de Hales is of the same mind. The master of the Sentences
following Aug. Epist 28 lib. 4. Did. 1.
Saint Augustine, who was but a hard father to Infants, did teach that if a
child dyed without Baptism, it went to hell. The Divines of Paris in the
Margente, give him a plain check for the same, and our later Papists, will
not have the babe go to hell, but to the limbus infantum, where their pain
is paena damni, and not paena s^sus, a want of the joys of heaven, but the
feeling of no torment. Lib. 4. Did. 11.
Peter Lombarde says, that the Eucharist is to be received of all in both
kinds, but the Session 13
Council of Constance says that the people shall have but only the bread:
And yet Gerardu^ Lo^chius a great Papist, protests that they De missa
publica pro roganda.
are false^ Catholics, hinderers of the reformation of the Church, and
blasphemers, who deny the people the cup in the Eucharist. You have heard
of the difference of your Thomistes and Scotistes, concerning the merit of
Congruum and Condignum, the difficultye arising out of that place of Saint
Paul, I Rom 8 (...)
count that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the
glory which shall be revealed unto us. Can you until this day bring your
Dominicane and Franciscane Friars agreed, vvhither the Virgin Iud Vives in
Annot. in August de (...) Dei li. 20. 26.
Marye were conceived in Original sin, or no? The Dominicanes moved by the
authority of Aquinas, repute her spotted, the Franciscanes fighting under the
banner of of Scotus, maintain her to be free from all, which assertion of
theirs when the Council of Se^. 3^.
Basils had ratifyed, the Dominicanes except against that, as against a
Council not lawfully called, and the distension continued still so great there
about, that Pope Sixtus was feign to interpose his authority in it, by a
solemn Decree, commanding that it should not be disputed of afterward; but
let the question yet be moved by any in their presence, and they will be as
hot in it, as ever they were. Can there be a mainer article of all your Romish
faith, the^ the acceptance of the Conc^ble or Co^venticle at Trent? And yet
the Popish Divines of See the answ to the (...). Reason.
France do not admit it to this day. Did Pighins and Ferus accord with their
fellow Romanists, in so high a question as Justification by faith alone? If you
know any thing of them, you cannot be ignorant that in that point they are
Protestants. Does De liber. (...) bi^r.
Contarenus the Cardinal agree with all his fellows, touching the doctrine of
free will. To conclude this Period, your two great Champions for the Pope,
Bishop Fisher and Sir Thomas More, could never accord upon that question,
whether there were water in Purgatory or no, both perverting the text, but the
one alleging that of the Psalm, ^al. (...). 11.
UUee have gone through fire and water, and thou have brought us out into a
cooling place, and therefore there must be water there; and the other citing
that of (...) Zachary, I have loose thy prisoners out of the pit wherein was
no water, which places to die for it, they would not have understood ^chr 9.
^1. Suppli^ of So^.
of any thing but Purgatory, and that literally too. So there was water in it,
and there was no water.


T. HILL. AND lastly it is wonderful to behold, how all decrees of lawful
Councels, and of Popes, do agree in all points of doctrine one with another,
although they were made by diverse men, in diverse places, (...) ^es, upon
diverse occasions, and against Heresies, not (...) by (...) but oftentimes
contrary one to another. This no double (...) of God.


G. ABBOT. YOu talk here of wonderful, and me thinks that it is wonderful,
that your Komish Rabbis will let such fellows as you are, write, and publish
books of matters in controversy. And it is almost as wonderful, that any
English Papist will lay his soul, upon the credit of such fellows as you
are. And it is a piece of a marveile, whither you taking on you to be a Doctor
without Divinity, have read nothing about this business, or understood nothing
when you read it, or forgot it since, or what you have done with it. Of
Councels we shall hear by themselves: but the agreement of your Popes may
make a harmony fit for hell, and the Devil may dance by it. What means that
of Hist. lib. (...).
Guicciardine, who lived not far from Rome, The Popes by law do decree, that
(...) shall be lawful for them to recall all promises and covenants, although
they were most firmly made by their Predecessors. And may it be thought, that
they have any such Decree? Let that of Innocentius the 3. to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, determine this Controversy, Decretal. l. 1. Tit. 6. c. 20.
Although the Canon of the Council of Laterane set forth by Alexander our
predecessor, do so persecute those who are not lawfully horn, that it does
signify that the election of such is a (...), yet notwithstanding there was
not by him taken from us the power of dispensing, since that was not the
intention of him forbidding it, who could not in this respect breed any
prejudice to his successors, who should enjoy the like, yea the same power
after him, since an equal has no authority over his equal. What is there in
the world, which when one Pope yea by a Council has done, may not be reversed
by his successor, according to this rule and the reason thereof? Unto this
agrees that of In vita St^han. 6.
Platina, who when he had told that Stephen the 6. had taken the body, of
formosus his Predecessor, out of his tumbe, and spoiling it of all his
Pontifical attire, did cut of two fingers of his right hand, and threw the^
into Tiber, infers this afterward, This was a great stir, and a matter of
naughty example, since almost ever afterward this custom has been observed,
that the following Popes do either infringe, or altogether abrogate the acts
of the former. Yet not long after he has In Serg. 3.
again, that Sergius the 3. not content with the usage of Stephen to Formosus,
fell upon his body a second time, threw it out of his grave, and as some thing
unworthy of burial did cast it into Tiber. The examples of this sort are so
many, how one of the^ have raged and revelled against another, as if their
predecessors had been miscreants or rather hell hounds, as that they might
fill up a pretty story. Which when it cannot be denied, your answer must be
that these are facts, and not matters of doctrine. Where I might call to your
mind, the reversing of the Bible by Clement the 8. which is a matter
containing in it the substance and foundation of all doctrine, but of that
before. Now go we a little higher.

13 Virg. lib 2. Acneid.
Fands aliquid non forte (...) pervenit ad aures, that Gregory the first
condemned the title of Universal Bishop in any man, and called it aprophans
(...) appellation? These are also his words, I Li. 6 Epist ^4.
do boldly say that whosoever calls himself the Universal Priest, or
desires (...) Lib. 3. Epist. 80.
to be se called, in his haughtiness does fore-runne Antichrist, because by
being proud he prefers himself before others. And yet every man knows
that the Popes since the days of Anastas. in vita Bonifac. 3.
Boniface the 3. have usurped that title, and will by no means part with it.
As now a days it has his consequence and dependence, what greater point of
doctrine is there in the whole Christian religion? You might have heard that
there was a long continued controversy, between the Curates, or beneficed men
of parishes on the one side, and the Friars on the other, whether it were
lawful or expedient for the Church of God, that the Friars should take
co^fessions, in all places where they came, and preach at their pleasure,
without license of the Incumbents, or no. 10. Fox in Eccl. Histor (...). Edw. 3.
There were many learned men who stood stiffly against the Friars, as Gulielmus
de sancto Amore, and Henricus de Gandavo, and many other^ yea Armachanus before
the Pope and his Cardinals, laid hardly against them. Here one Pope would
define it to be good for the Church, that the Friars should be thus suffered;
and another Pope would decree against them. Their favorers were Honorius 3.
Gregory 9. Alexander 4. Clemens 4. Boniface 8. Clemens 5. But those who held
for the Curates were, Innocentius the 3. Innocentius the 4. Martin the 4.
Benedictus the 11. and many Bulls walked about the world, for and against the
Friars. There was a great question, whether after the marriage of a couple, the
one of them falling into heresy, it might be lawful for the other, to
relinquish his or her yoke fellow, and to mary^ another. In Cap. Quanto, extra,
de Divortijs. and cap. 1. Distinct. 3^.
Innocentius the 3. and Celestinus the 3. gave contrary judicial sentences in
this cause, the one permitting to the innocent party to mary again, the other
quite forbidding it. It is not to be imagined but that in the dark time of
Popery, many Kings and Nobles and inferior persons in France, had Indulgences
from diverse Popes, for their own souls, and for the souls of their friends
and parents; whereby if we will allow the Roman doctrine to be good, it must
needs be, that according to the time granted in the Pardon, many a soar soul
which had fried in Purgatory flames, was set free by such favor, as the holy
father who had the custody and dispensation of the treasure of the Church, had
affoorded them, and then immediately they went to heaven. But when Philip the
fair was King of France, he fell out with the Pope, and having his Clergy and
whole Realm united to him, he disgraced that Roman Bishop, vilefied him, and
exceedingly both abridged, abrogated his power in France: Pope Boniface the 8.
who would carry no coals at any such mean man's hands, as a King of France
was, co^sistorily revoketh all the Du Hailla^. Lib. 13.
grants, immunities, Privileges, Indulgences, graces, and whatsoever any of his
Predecessors had given to France or any french. On danger of your life you
must not make doubt, but this Boniface did well, and his sentence must stand.
What he binds in earth, is bound in heaven, and what he loses is loose.
Hence then arises a question, insinuated by Apolog. pro Herodot. cap. 40.
Henry Stephanus, which I fear that all the Seminary of Doway will hardly be
able to answer. Whether the Popes sentence mustnot stand good: or else
whether the souls which had escaped, and were flowen out unto heaven, were
immediately upon the pronou^cing of that horrible sentence, to retire to
Purgatory, from whence they had come out, by a grace which was now frustrated.
How poorly and how pitifully would these souls look, when they should so on
the sudden be doffed of their felicity, which they thought they had as sure as
heaven and Angels could make it? This would make shrewd speaking, in some other
the^ being in heaven, least also the souls of some other countries should
meet with such a bargain. Thus you see, the Bishops of Rome do not ever say
the same things, nor define after the same sort. And although all these by me
named, be not the graund points of their doctrine, yet their will should not
have bin wanting even there also, if it had bin for their advantage. They who
would go so far, would have strained a string farther, if they had seen
reason for it, But in sooth why should they vary from their mainest grounds?
Popery was not so hastily built, that the high Priests of it, should in a
wa^tonnes tumble any of it down. And it is so concatenated, that destroy one
part of it, and you ruinate a great deal. Therefore their wisest way was to
play N^ (...) tangere. And to whose use should they thwart their principal
foundations? To the benefit of Christ? No, their plotting was against him. To
the profit of Antichrist, and Satan his master? Why, all the world could not
devise it in better terms then it was. To add unto it, they least feared:
for that was to strengthen it. But to reverse or deface any of it, was to open
a gappe. And why should they once dispute of it, who had by it what they would?
for they had almost eaten up all Christendom. Their wilest way therefore was
to keep their own counsel, and know when they were well. If they
themselves should in the most capital matters have fallen out, other honester
persons might have come by their goods: And they were not so silte, but to
understand that by knocking together, some fire might fly out, which easily
might set their Babylon on a flame. So it was their good nature, or rather it
was the finger of god, which let so much discord be among them, as that good
Christian might see them to be naught: but vvithall it was their vvi^te, or
rather the cunning of Satan, that they should look to the maine chance so
long as they could, least the kingdom of that wicked one being Mark. 3 24
divided against it self, should quickly be desolated. And we cannot blame
the Devil, after so long experience, and trial what is good for himself, if
he endovour with all vigilance to keep that in quiet, whereof he had
gotten possession: And for his servaunts, they being inspired by him were so
wise in their generation, as by all means to hold that which they had once
gained.

14 YOU see that Unity is it, which in this third Reason is urged: but the true
substance of the matter is scant once thought upon. For what Christian can say,
that For a many of men to agree together, to dishonor God, is a laudable
consent? That then which cheefely is to be looked unto, is that the agreement
be in truth: Otherwise it is no better then a coniuration or conspiracy. How
did the people hold together when Jeremy reports of them, that Ier. 7. 18.
the children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women
kneade the dough, to make cakes to the Queen of heaven? What a co^federacy is
that against Gods Church, when the faithful are forced to complain, Psalm. 83.
3.
They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and have consulted
against thy secret ones? And again, They have consulted together in heart,
and have made a league against thee, The tabernacles of Edom and the
Ishmaelites, M^ab and the Agarims, Geball and Ammon and Amalek, the
Philestines, with the inhabitants of Tyrus. Nay does not David describe such
consent to be against Christ himself, Psalm. 2. 2.
The Kings of the earth hand themselves, and the Princes are assembled together
against the Lord, and against his Christ. And this was fulfilled not only at
his death, but at his birth also, when Math. 2. 3.
Herod and Jerusalem were troubled about him, and a Council was gathered
of Priests and Scribes, combining not to honor him, but to destroy him. Of
this forte was the confluence of the Dan. 3. 2.
Nobles, the Princes, the Dukes, the Judges, the receivers, the Councillors,
the Officers, and all the Governors of the Provinces, when they came up to the
dedication of the Image, which Nabuchedonosor the King had set up. The
multitude were there of one mind: but it was to commit Idolatry: and only
the three children of the Jewish nation, condescended not to their
wickedness. I might add more examples, as that of the Joseph de bell. Iudaic.
lib. 6. 1.
seditious at the last seege of Jerusalem, who albeit they sometimes turned
their swords each against other, yet in this they agreed, that there was not
a good or honest body in the city, but they joined to vex or murder him.
And as these are sufficient witnesses, that in some evil actions men do
concur together, and dissent not each from other, so there have been
sequences, and discents of many ages, wherein whole nations and countries, have
with conjoined minds, perpetuated a service to their Gods, the form whereof
was never so much as questioned among them. What corresponde^cy of each to
other was there among the Ethnickes, when all nations in the most known and
best habitable world (the Jews only excepted) did pray and sacrifice to
Jupiter and I^o, to Mars and Apollo, or some other like these? and when so
wise a man as Joseph. lib. 2. contr. Apion.
Socrates was, did but seem to extenuate the estimation of those Gods, it
cost him his life. It is now a Cael. Aug. Cur. Sarac. Hist lib. 1.
thousand years, since the Arabian Saracens, and those who have issued from
them, have accepted of Mahomet for the singular Prophet and servaunt of the
LORD, and have never dared to make question, much less division, about their
ceremonies and orders, because Mahomet under pain of death has inhibited,
that his Vives de verit fidci lib. 1.
Religion should be so much as disputed upon. And (the Persians excepted who
are under another Prince) this stands good among so many millions, as be in
Africa, or elsewhere under the Turk; neither is there, or has been among
them of the same profession, the least dis-agreement. Whence it follows that
if we should allow the Church of Rome, so much as she demands, that is
to say, that all things were carried in the same stream among them, yet it
concludes no more, then for the Ethnickes and Heathens, or for the Mahometans
and Saracens, unless they can demonstrate, that their conioyning has been in
verity, and in the inviolable unity of Gods holy spirit, which if they could
aver out of the Scripture which is the touchstone of truth, they needed not
to run to uncertain arguments, and vveake foundations of traditions,
customs, and otherlike trashe as they continually doc. Their agreement has
been to set up that Idol of Rome, to rob God of his honor, to infect and
poison the fountains of living waters, to destroy the souls of the people,
and for that reason they are rightly fitted with that of Ezech. 22. 25.
Ezechiel, A conspiracy of her Prophets in the midst thereof, like a
roaring L^ ravening the pray, they have devoured souls, they have taken the
riches and precious things. A good description of the combination, and
concurrence of the Pastors and shepherds of Rome.

15 On the other side whereas it is objected, that since the ple^tifull
breaking out of the Gospel, and the irradiation of so many parts of Europe,
with the glorious beams thereof, there have risen up many contradicting the
verity of the same, and there have been diverse distractions by the
whisperings of heretics; the intelligent Christian Reader may easily perceive,
that this makes not against us, but illustrateth the truth of that which we de
fend: First it has ever so been with the Church, when God has given somewhat
more free passage of the Gospel then ordinary: the Mat. 13. 25
good seed is no sooner sown, but presently the evil man takes opportunity
to sow tares among it, which Parable our Savior in his divine wisdom did
speak to this purpose. Where it is not amiss to consider, that the old
veteratorious enemy Satan, who has Mill nocendi arts, a thousand devises to
do hurt, striveth to bring about his practices by manifold tricks and
stratagems. Here his first and chiefest purpose, as best making way to his
dark kingdom of hell, is to keep all in ignorance. If that cannot be, but that
he is over-mastred, the^ his next study is, by the sword of violent
persecution, to destroy the professors of Gods truth. If that will not
succeed, then he raises up heresies and distractions, among the^ who pretend
the same verity: Even upon the coming of Christ into the world, Satan had
almost al things at his own will. The Gentiles were not yet come to the light:
the Jews were wel-neere past it: but neither among the one nor the other, was
much faith to be found. How did this Beelzebub struggle to keep the world in
these terms, when he would have had Mat. 2. 13.
Christ to be murdered in his cradle, and afterward left him not till he
brought him to his cross? Well, this would do no good, but for one ste^me cut
down, their grew up many young plants, al taking their vital nourishment from
the first root. The Romans 10. 1^
sound of the Apostles doctrine, went out through all the earth, and their
words into the ends of the world. Here then Satan being put to his shifts,
turned over a nevve leaf. If he could not stop the stream, he thought he
would poison it, and therefore sends in the Nicolaitanes, Ebion and
Cerinthus with their accomplices immediately, who should mix the good grain
with cockle and darnell. This was his manner of assaulting at the first. Yet
was he not so simple, but to his best power, he held his first ground:
Better no Christians at all, then some Christians true and some counterfeit. A
second time therefore he falls on the well head, with earnest desire either to
dry it or to damme it up. By Decius and Ualerian and the rest of the bloody
Emperors, he exciteth ten most terrible persecutions, by the which until well
near 300. years after Christ, he thought to have r^zed out from under the
heaven, the name of the embracers of the Gospel. And in the intervalla or
interstitia of these persecutions, he did not forget his feats of Heresy, as
may be seen by the Novatians. But after the time by his own counsel
appointed, God was pleased to stey the fury and rage of tyrants, sending that
his blessed servant Constantine, and the other Emperors, who openly professed
for the Christian faith. And now the floud-gats of the Gospel being so wide set
open through a great part of the world, the Devil had his hands and his head
too full to do something which might serve for his purpose. Then grew
immediately such a rabble of Heresies, as is almost incredibles which as it
appears by that, which formerly has bin cited out of Epiphani^ and Austen,
so it is more confirmed by the words of Hierome saying thus, Lib. 2. contr^
^ovinianum.
It is almost four hundred years agone, that the preaching of Christ does
shine in the world, since which time ^erable Heresies have re^e his coat. And
yet as I noted before, well near three hundred years were passed over, in
that continued time of persecution. Now amidst these Heresies, what vvarres
and dissentions were among the Christians, it is not easy to report. If the
inferior So^om. 6. 25.
Clergy, among themselves sell to disagree about any thing, it grew to that
stomach, that it ended in some Heresy. And the Bishops when some Socrat. 2. 19.
schism was once amongst the^, they kept their bucharist apart, and would not
come to the communion e^he with other. Will you in this case hear the
testimony of a heathen man, who no doubt recounteth the story with great
gladness, as pleasing him well, and in the endvseth almost the same words as
the Romanistes do of some other, VV^ Am. Marcill^. l. 22. 3.
the Christians did disagree among themselves, (...) su^y intending to deal
with them, did call the Prelates and the people into his Palace, where he
permitted to every one the use of his Religion, s^ meaning to increase between
them so great discordes, a^ that they might not be alaid^; knowing that beasts
are not more deadly minded toward beasts, then Christians are to Christians.
You may learn here, from what schoolmasters, the Commentar. Relig and Reip.
in Gall. Lib 3.
Cardinal of Lorraine did take his lesson, when at the conference of Poissy,
to thwart Mr Beza and Peter Martyr, and other of that company, he sent for some
Lutheranes out of Germany, who might in the matter of Sacrament, have turned
their disputations against those of the Religion, when as both of them should
rather have joined against the common enemy. And in the ancient times before
spoken of, if we will think of private quarrels, what Hier Apolog contr.
Ruffin. Ruffin in Invectiv.
rancour and bitterness was there between Hierome and Ruffi^s as also what
stomakefulnesse between Sozom. lib. 8. 15.
Chrysostom and Epiphani^, when they parted and never saw each other again.
Yet to say that among any, or all of these Christians, there was no verity or
solidity of faith or Religion, had bin an absurd conclusion, and such a one as
our Romanists themselves would quickly deny. There were many who walked in
by-pathes, and yet there were who kept the right way also. GOD had his
Saints, and Satan his schismatickes.

16 The reason why such heresies did spring up in the church, was partly to be
derived from Gods determinate counsel, and partly from the malice of our old
deadly enemy. They had both their purposes in it, but the one holy and good,
and the other like himself full of improbity and impiety. 1 Cor 11. 19.
There must be Heresies among you says Saint Paul, that they which are
approved among you might be known. And Contr. hoeres. c. 15.
Vincentius Lirinensis tells us, that therefore there be herisies, that the
Lord our God may try us, whether we love him with all our heart, and all our
soul or no. Whether by the authority or vvitte of any man, we will be
drawn from the integrity and simplicity of faith, which is proposed unto us
in CHRIST Jesus. And to this purpose speaks Saint Augustine: Epistol 50.
Heresies and scandals are foretold shall be, that among our enemies we may
be instructed, and so both our faith and our love may be the better proved.
And elsewhere he teaches that a good use may be made of Heretics. De vera
Religion. cap. 8.
Many, that they may see the day of God, Deivel diei.
and reioyc^, are by heretics raised out of their sleeps, VV^ therefore may
use even Heretics, not that we should approve their errors, but that
maintaining the Catholic discipline against their trecheries, we may be the
more vvatchfull and vv^, although we cannot reduce them unto salvation. For
these and the like instructions of his people, God saffereth Heresies, rentes
and schisms to be: but Satan's project is, by infection to destroy the souls
of men, and therefore he is busy in stirring up of them; which was well
know to Cyprian when he said, De simplicit. praelator.
The Devil did invent Heresies and schisms, whereby he might subver^ the
faith, might corrupt veriti^, might tear in pieces unity. This is the drifte
of our ancient adversary being put to his shifts. Saint Austen speaks yet
plainer, De vtilitate jejunij.
The Devil does understand that our life is charity, and our death is
dissension, he sent strifes therefore among Christians, because he could not
frame unto the Christians diverse Gods, he multiplied sects, he sowed
errors, he erected Heresies, but whatsoever he did, he made of the Lords
chafe. And this did he, immediately after that Constantines reigning had
brought peace to the Churches', that good Emperor greeving much, to see Arri^
and other, so soon by the ears with the Orthodoxe. But Satan was unwilling
to loose any time, and therefore even at the first bestirred him. Now in the
dark time of Popery God having been pleased to determine before, that an 2.
These. 2. 3
Apostasy there should be, and the woman should be with-drawne into the
Apoc. 12. 6
wilderness, and Antichrists kingdom should be erected, flourishe and
dominere, what reason had Satan, to set men to contend about the foundations
of his building? He rather cried, Hab^ quod ^olo. I have what I desire. As it
is the the efes safety, that all in the house should sleep, when he comes
to rifle and rob, so it was Satan's best contentme^t, that the world should
be at rest. By his will how many ages and secula should have passed over, ere
the old heathens should have awaked out of sleepe^ And how many did there pass
over the Petr. Martyr. Decad. 1. (...).
Americanes, and he never made any question, or cast in any bone among them,
but let them go on in worshipping their Zemes, those horrible spirits of
darkness? I would but know of any man, what Satan should have gained, to set
them at variance about their Religion? If ignorance would kill souls, the
days abounded in ignorance; if superstition would destroy, they had it in
great plenty; if idolatry would do him any pleasure, they wanted none of
that; if security would further him, they had it and made much of it. What
could he wish more, when the greatest sort of worldlings daunced after his
pipe, and were as glad to come in, as he to open his doors? He had doated as I
think, if he could not have kept his own counsel. But in that fault you
shall not take him. The care therefore of him and his ministers was, to keep
all upright, or at least to preserve the groundwork of his building, and if
any of his children at their play did fall out, he closed it up again as well
as he could, and had his officers for that purpose. If any other did but baye,
or open, against this his settled commonwealth, he was not amicus Curiae, a
friend to the Court: either bring him to conformity or Crucifige. So you may
behoulde the reason, why in the deep time of ignorance, there was such a
confederacy or conspiracy rather, to have all under silence. It was like the
Justin. l. 5.
Sacra El^sina, where nothing might be reveiled, nothing might be disturbed.

17 But when God was once purposed to open the gate of his mercy, and the door
of his truth, the case was altered with the worlds old master. As Basile
therefore says of virtue and vice, so Satan did with verity and error. De
vera virginitate.
Where a door is of virtue says he, there on either side is set a door of
vice, the entraunces of which are very like to the other of virtue. By which
likeness it comes to pass, that many a one coming to enter at the right
passage, mistaketh the door, and by a wrong opinion gets him into the house
of vice. Thus did the Devil deal by truth. Only there is this difference,
that for one door of verity, he made very many of error and heresy, and by
the mist which he ^steth before men's eyes, they run in at the wrong gate in
steed of the right. But this is an evide^t Demonstration, that the right door
is now open, that he labors so to d^sle it, more the^ formerly he has done.
For why else would he trouble himself, by raising so many opinions? And this
is an excellent argument, which was made sometimes by Chrysostom, and serves
fit for our purpose, in these days. Hom. 33. in Acta.
This is an argument that it is a notable doctrine, if many dee couunterseit
it, and imitate it a for they would not counterseit it, unless it were good.
And that I will now make manifest unto you. The ointments which are fragrant,
have many who will adulterate them: but no man by counterfeiting, will ^bour to
express him who does wickedly, but that person who is eminent for his singular
life. And this did that holy father utter, even in the very matter which I have
now in hand, making answer touching the diversity of opinions, and the
manifold heresies, which in his time were among the Christians. He shows it
to be an argument of excellency, and not of badnesse, that many would shrowde
their conceits, under the name of true religion. I would that our English
Papists would weigh this answer of Saint Chrysostomes well, and then they
shall find, that if there have been many vp-startes since the time of Luther
and Calvine, who under color of their patronage would broach somewhat, when in
very deed they dissent from them, and are condemned by them; this does magnify
the verity of those holy men's doctrine, and shows the Devils policy, to set
many to resemble them, that so he may disgrace the truth, by a multitude of
various and independent lies. What money coiner was ever so foolish, as to
cou^terfeit a cou^terfeit coin, or that which of it self is base? but the
purest gold, and most fine money is that, which lewd persons offer and attempt
to resemble. Thus the weakest Reader may behold the vanity of the Doctors
third Reason, and see that their Unity is against God, and ours is in God and
for Christ: and if there should be difference in actions amongst us, it is no
other thing then was between Act. 15. 39.
Paul and Barnabas: and if in opinions of great causes, (the foundation being
surely held) it is no more then was between Gal. 2. 11.
Peter and Paul, and Saint August. Epist. 19.
Hierome and Saint Augustine debating that fact of theirs, and yet the one
couple of those were Apostles, and the other were great lamps in the Church,
even as both the Lutherans and Calvinists as you call them, are in one article
dissenting, but both holding Christ crucified, and the manner of Justification
aright, and al other circumstances belonging thereunto.

18 I had thought here to have ended this Chapter: but I fear least our
Seminarians at Rome, and my adversaaty himself should think that in so doing,
I did not them their right. It is said before, that in the Papacy there is a
general uniformity in the peace of men's minds, and to be brief they have all
one heart and one soul. Would a man think this, who reads M. Parsons his
Apology of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and subordination in England^ For to
omit all matters before intimated, of the schism here between the Archpriest
and Seculars, as also of all The estate of Eng^ish fugit. u^s.
contentions between our English fugitives in Italy. France and the low
Countries during her late Majesty's days, what horrible tumults have there
lately bin, in the English College alone at Rome? Apol. c. 5.
There did the students bind themselves by oath, not to live any more under the
government of the Jesuits. Yea so vehement was the sedition once, that like mad
men they did run out toward the Popes palace; but from his Holiness that
now is, they were commanded to retire to their lodgings. They made many
seditious sermons against their governors, in the College. In the year 1596
when Car. dinall Sega prefixed his letters, signifying his intent, by a
Visitation to look into them, they disgracefully tore his letters. Among these
gallants perhaps was our M. Hill, but then not Doctor, but known by the name
of Thomas Hill Priest, although afterward he, if it were he, cried Creake for
it, and together with five other Priests, was induced to write to Aqua viva the
General of the Jesuits, a solemn letter of thanks, because in the year
1507. he left father Parsons, to take up controversies in the College at Rome;
And the same May 15. 1597.
commendations of father Persons appeasing all, did Thomas Hill write to D.
K^on Vice President of the College at Doway. But yet the Jesuits are not too
forward to attribute much credit unto this Thomas; for it is but a poor
testimony, which the Rectour there gives him; we do not heart but Hill has
behaved himself well since. But he affirms that before time he was vehement
against the fathers, upon error and evil informed zeal as may be supposed. I
make some doubt whether that Hill mentioned in the Apology be my Doctor, or
no; because (as I am informed) there were two in the Seminary called by the
name of Thomas Hill. One of this two desiring to be fine, before that he was
handsome, would needs in imitation of the Italian Friars, teach his Auditors
in his Sermons, how they should fly in a coach to heaven, whereof this coach
must be made, what ones the horses should be that must draw it, wherewithal
they must be fed, and such other stuff, till that his hearers did laugh at his
eloquence, and deride his discretion. This later do I suppose to be the Author
of this volume. In all this forenamed controversy I do not much find any
uniformity in the peace of men's minds, or one heart and one soul. This
preaching one against another did show the contrary thereunto. But yet that
other preaching long since, did show it mere, when (as the Waldenses did
complain) the followers of the Pope in Confess. Wald. In fascic. rer. expetenda.
their sermons did call one another schismatikes, heretics, sacrilegious,
false Prophets, ravening wolves, the beast and whore in the Apocalypse. This of
all likelihood did show diversity and distraction in doctrine. And shall we not
imagine that so it was, when thirteen Benno Card. de vita Greg. 7.
Cardinals seeing the Apostasy of Hildebrand, or Pope Gregory the seventh, did
depart from his Communion, that is, would not be partakers of the Eucharist,
where he was to communicate. If I should urge any more examples, it should be of
the Jesuits, who are charged, in ordinary practice to dissent from the rest of
the Popish Church in France, in more then fifty matters. Some of them may well
be said to be points doctrinal, as these, Jesuit Cat. Lib. 2. 1.
that the Pope is not under any General or Oecumenicall Council; that the
Pope is Prince of all kingdoms as well in matters temporal as spiritual;
that the kings of France may be excommunicated by the Popes: that the Pope
according to the occasions of matters, may transfer not only kingdoms, but
the Empire (...): that Clergy men may not be judged by a secular Judge,
although they keep not civil laws: that the rebellion of a Clergy man
against his Prince is not high treason, because he is not subject to the
Prince: that a king may be deposed by the State for tyranny; and if he do not
his duty, when there is just cause, another may be chosen by the greater part
of the people; yea th^gh they have sw^e perpetual obedience to him: that
Jesuits admit of the Council of Trente. These with their circumstances are
high points of doctrine, maintained and defended by the Jesuits, but oppugned
by the Papists of France, and other nations which are not Iesuited, so that
now they may in these respects, have safely more bells then one ring to their
Sermons, contrary to that which Staphilus would have taught Smideline, when he
said thus, Apolog. Fridir. Staphyl.
S^deline should learn of the parish Clerk, why when he ringeth to Sermon, he
ringeth but one ^ell, but to E^song or Service he ringeth many at once, both
great and ^ll. The ringing (...) bell to Sermon repres^th the Unity of the
Catholic faith taught at Sermons, which ought to be but on^ and uniform in
all men. ^t the ^angling of many diverse bells to co^ prayer, signifies the
diversity of men, some praying fervently, some coldly, some serving God one
way, some another. The difference of the Jesuits from other Papists, will
safely permit them to ring to their Sermons, more (...) then one. And so I come
now to the next Chapter.


THE FOVRTH REASON. Conversion of Countries.
T. HILL. IT (...) most pl^ne and manifest, that all (...) which ever believed
in Christ, were first converted to his (...) by such, (...) either (...)
precisely sent, or (...) the least wise had their authority from the (...),
which lived in the time in which they were con^rted. (...) thing is (...) set
dow^ in the History of the first conv^rsion of every country, as no Protest^
were (...) ^ver so (...) (...).


G. ABBOT. 1 TO deal favorably with you, and not to answer you as in this
place you deserve is there any man of tolerable learning, or any whit seen in
the Ecclesiastical story, who does not here think that you want some body,
who may not only exagitate you, but exco^te you also? when, as if you were
become some Aquaviva or General of the Jesuits, you so and aciously give down
such general propositions, not only far from truth, but much estraunged
from the very show and semblance thereof. I do less pity you, because the
farther I go, the more I perceive you to be a sworn servant to Antichrist,
and therefore there is nothing which may advance your masters credit, but you a^
devoted to him, must say it and do it. But in my very bowels I pity, and take
compassion of diverse my bewitched cou^treymen, sily women and young fondlings,
who receiving from you such stuff; so boldly and ass verantly averred, have
not the skill to discover you, nor the grace to repair unto such, as may lay
open the Ambuscadoes and snares, which you have prepared for them. Where there
needs no other proof to descry this your dealing, then to observe, that in
this your so potent and puissant challenge, you cite not one author, you name
not one particular, you single not out the Pope, you point not out the
country, you assign not the preachers by whom it is done, you mention not the
time, nor yield us any reason wherefore you do say it, but only this that you
do say it. Wherein you over-lash beyond the most that ever wrote on your side;
for other assumed somewhat, but you throw at all; and losing have nothing to
pay. The Jesuits whom afterward you commend in this Chapter, do not use to
extenuate their holy Fathers commendation, but to set it as high as may be: and
Controv. cap. 2. (...) Wats. Quodl. 8. 4.
Costerus among the^ being one, who had a (...) deal more reading, and
learning and judgment, the^ you seem to have, pretermitting (as he tells us)
the Churches of the East and of the South, says, it is certain that Germany
and France were first converted by such as Peter sent. And afterward he would
bring in the kingdoms of England and Scotland as brought to the faith, by the
successors (...) Peter in the sea of Rome; and to those he adds Africa,
meaning as (...) should seem some pa^ thereof, lying near to Italy: for he
himself allo^h Aethiopia to Saint Matthew, and Egypt, Libia, and the
Africanes there about to Simon, and Saint Mark the Evangelist. But the
conversion of Spain he (...) St. James: of Thracia and Scythia Europ^ ^o Saint
(...) o^ Scythia Asiatica to Philip, of Armenia and the hither part of India to
Bartholomew, of Parthia, Media, Persia, (...), the Brach^ane and Bactrians unto
Thomas, as also the farther part of India; which is yet believed in that
country, as Osor. degest. Eman. lib. 3. Maff Hist. Iudic. lib 2.
appears by such as have written the navigations of the Portingales into
those parts. And at these things are witnessed by some of the old writers, so
Eccl Hist. lib. 3. 1.
Eusebius has this farther, that Asia fell to John the Evangelist, meaning Asia
the lesser or Natolis, but that Peter as it seems did preach the word to the
Jews, who were 1. Pet. 1. 1.
dispersed in Pontus, Gal^tia, (...), (...) and Asia.

2 Thus in the time of the Apostles, the greatest part of the known world had
heard of the faith of Christ, and in some good measure embraced it: that being
verified, that Romans 10. 1^
their sound that is the Apostles went out through all the earth, and their
words into the ends of the world, and Christ's Prophecy being fulfilled, that
Mat. 24. 14
the Gospel of the kingdom should be preached through al^ (...) world for a
^nes unto all nations, and then should the end come, which was done before the
destruction of Jerusalem, that Verse 34.
generat^ being not yet passed, which lived in Christ's time. And this is so
undoubted a truth, that Costerus says, The Controv. cap 2.
Catholic Church as first was propagated by the Apostles themselves, almost
through all known countries. Now all this while there was no Pope; and if it
should be objected (as no other shift there is in the world, and that is but a
simple one) that Peter as Pope sent the rest of the Apostles, some to this
place, some to that, I require one text o^ scripture to be showed, or one
monument of antiquity to be produced, which may confirm so much. It is not
vnlikelye, but that the Apostles in some assembly at Jerusalem did consent,
what regions each of them should betake themselves unto: but that any one did
appoint to the rest their charges, we no where find. Nay plain it is that
Peter himself, had his portion assigned him, to preach to the Gal. 2. 7.
Jews, as Paul had to preach to the Gentiles, which was the greater charge.
And whither this were appropriated to him by God, as the text seems well to
incline, or whither by the consent also of the Apostles; Paul had his
Commission in the same manner; which he so little thinks inferior to the
others, that he Ibidem.
names it before Peter's, and stands upon ver. 8. and 9.
terms of equality in power, and fellowship in action. But that I may force
the author of this libell to say, Pen thou writest untruth, Samaria received
Christ, by the preaching of Act. 8. 5. 14.
Philip, before that Peter knew of it, and the 27.
Eunuch of Aethiopia on the way, was in like sort brought to religion by the
same Philip, and he went home immediately, and planted the faith in his
Country (as Eccl Hist. Lib. 2. 1.
Eusebius shows) which was done without Peter's privity: for a good space
after that, he made doubt, whither the Gentiles might have the word opened to
them, until that by a vision Act. 10. 10.
from heaven that scruple was removed. And I pray you was there nothing done by
Saint Paul, whose authority was immediate from Galat. (...). 1
God, and not from man, he being not set on work from other, but receiving
his commission from Jesus Christ himself? The history of whose labors in
turning men to Christ, although Saint Luke does particularly relate in the
Acts of the Apostles, yet for brevity sake we will look to one place only, of
his own testimony; and he says that Romans 15. 19
from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, he caused the Gospel of
Christ to abound. And to take away all pretense of objection he adds, that he
preached the Gospel where verse. 20.
Christ was not named, least he should have built on another man's foundation.
If these things be so plain as no Christian can doubt of them, blush and blush
again at such desperate audaciousnesse, as makes no conscience, egregiously
to feign.


T. HILL. TRue it is that Heretics have corrupted such as were Catholics
before, but that they ever converted any Heathen Nation to Christianity, can
never be showed. I know very well that John Calvine to get glory, sent
certain of his Ministers into nevve-founde lands: but I never could hear
that any of them converted so much as one sily woman to their Gospel in those
parts. The truth is, their agreement in doctrine was so great, that one
destroying another buildings, they became laughing flocks to the Heathens,
and so were glad to depart with shame.


G. ABBOT. 3 THAT Heretics have corrupted such, as were weaklings or
discontented persons, is true: and may well be exemplified in your brood
perverting diverse credulous and indiscreete folks, from their obedience to
God and their Princes: but they are not sound Catholics, or well settled and
grounded in the faith, who will listen to you, or any seducer. And if there be
any heathen nation which has heard of the name Christ by you, and your
polluted Christianity; it is most certain, that it has bin by Heretics, the
servauntes and attendantes of the whore of Babylon, being a hundred ways
infected with heresy; and the whole body of Popery where it differs from
us, being nothing else but a mass of abominable heresy. But vvhere-as you
say that Calvine sent some of his Ministers into the nevvefounde land, if you
understood your self in this, which like a Parret you speak from other men,
and know not what it means, the Io. Leriu^ in navigat. in Brasil. ca. 1, 2, 6.
viage into Brasile in the year one thousand five hundred fifty and five, was
the original work of Villagagno a Knight of Malta, who pretending himself to
be religious, and seeing the persecution, which at that time was used in France
against Gods children, under K. Henry the second, gave out in words that he
would search out a place in the newe-found Western world; whither persecuted
Christians might fly out of France, Spain and other countries. And for this
purpose he had aid of Cha^llion, that worthy Admiral of France, who was
afterward sl^ine at the An. 1572.
Massacre in Paris. And whereas by his letter, Uillagagno had made request to
the Church of Geneva, to send with him or unto him, diverse Ministers of the
Gospel, they at his entreary condescended thereunto, and some went: who as
especially they desired to prepare a place for their afflicted countrymen,
whereof at that time many were burnt for Religion, so their next intendment
was, to use their best means to convert the Barbarians unto the faith of
CHRIST. And when diverse of the Ministry leaving their country, kindred, and
that estate which they had in France, were come thither with those
resolutions, they never dissented in the least point of the^ doctrine. But
Uillagagno like a notable Hypocrite, together with a Popish Priest of his, one
Cointas, (who had before abiured Popery there, as also the General
voluntarily had done) relapsed to their vomit, evil entreated their
Ministers by all means that they could devise, set the company upon a
mutiny, and forced such as lost not their lives there, to return to their
country, when they had scant spente one year in those parts, and that full of
vexation, by reason of their Conductours perfidious falsehood. This was the
reason, wherefore that viage sorted to small purpose; and not the discord of
the Ministers. And this wicked practice did arise from the Cardinal of
Lorraine, who either in secret before the departure of Uillagagno, or afterward
by letters drew him to Apostate from his faith, ^s Lerius who was there in
presence, and reports the specials of all that viage, and their Generals
usage there, does amply remember. And that this was the true cause of their
return, we need not appeal to any of our men, fince Costerus the Jesuit
will tell it thus, u The Calvinistes not many years agone, Controver. cap 2.
did attempt to bring in their errors to the people of India and Peru, but by
the ^ide of CHRIST, and by the industry of the Catholics they were excluded.
Indeed the Cardinal of Lorraine be stirred himself in that business, being
so bitter an enemy to the Gospel of CHRIST, that he could not endure, that
the Frenchmen should have it at home or abroad, least belike multitudes of
them should have left their country, and built Colonies elsewhere. So he cared
not what loss or dishonor the kingdom of France had, so there might be no
Sanctuary, or refuge for those whom he reputed heretics, dealing as honestly
and faithfully therein, as Steven Gardener while he lived, and afterward
other of the Clergy, did with Caleis in Queen Mary's time: which town they
understanding to be the receptacle of many good Christians, fled out of England
for their conscience; were so averse from regarding, repayring and supplying
it, that the French discrying the weakness thereof, by attempting it both
sodeinely and subtilely, and afterward pursuing their enterprise fearcely, did
get it from the English. Such was the blessed mind of that Machiavellian
Cardinal, whom GOD Commentar. Relig. and Reip. in Gal. Lib. 13.
remembered at the last, suffering him by a cold (which he had taken by going
barefoote, and whipping himself for his lascivious sins) to grow first into
a fever, and then into a madness, which sent him raving, and foolishly
speaking, to receive his judgment. The Queen mother as ashamed that Ahitophel
should prove Nabal, caused it to be reported about the Court, that the man
went to GOD, in most sweet meditations; but the other was so evident, that
every body laughed at the simplicity of their devise, who would have that
covered, which the Lord had showed of purpose, that every ones 1. Sam 3. 11.
ears who heard of it might tingle.


T. HILL. BUT who knows not that the Catholics as they have converted all to
Christianity that ever were Christians: so in this age they have brought
infinite numbers to the Christian faith in the East and West Indies, by the
means and labors of the most happy and holy fathers of the holy Order of St.
Frauncis, of S. Dominicke, and of the blessed Society of Jesus, which blessed
Religious men in our own Country there of England, only in regard of their
sacred function are executed as Traitors. And have not these I pray you their
authority from Rome?


G. ABBOT. 4 THE vanity and vnwisenesse of this asseveration; I have
plentifully showed before. But here I do add, that there is scant any Country
whose Authentical Records do prove, that your Romanistes (for these you
must mean, as in your former speech) brought first the faith unto them. Of
Italye, France and Germany I will say nothing: let them aunsvvere for
themselves; but we English men may best speak of England. Bristow Mo^v. 17.
Some Papists have said it that Augustine the Monk was the first, who
brought the faith into England by Gregory's means, and therefore they doubt
not to call him our Apostle. Let it be that some Saxons first received by him
Baptism; yet who beholds not in Bed^ Eccl. Hist. lib. 1. 7. 8.
writing that story, that Christianity had bin in Britain long before? There
were then British Bishops who well knew the faith of CHRIST, and liked Lib 2.
2.
not of Austen for the pride which they saw to be in him. But long before
this, was the name of Christ known in this Island, Bed Hist. 1. 7.
Albanus being here martyred, Helena the mother of Constantine the Great being
Huntingt. Histor. lib. 1.
borne here as it is storied, and Pelagius the heretic against whom Saint
Austen the Bishop of Hippo wrote, being of this country. Bed lib 1* 10:
So that it is but a toy, that Gregory's Monk was the first that ever brought
Christianity hither. The wiser sort of Papists, having it out of Lib: 4. 19:
Monumetensis, who long since was branded for a (...) in pro^m: Hist^r:
fabulous writer, and from Lib: 2: c: 21
Freculphus who was one of some better credit, say that King Lucius of
Britanny, about the year of our Lord 180. did send to Eleutherius the Bishop
of Rome, and from him had some sent in, who baptized him and his people. This
so overthrowing that other opinion concerning Austen, is ordinarily taken up
among our Romanists themselves, in so much that M. Watson in his Quodlib: 814:
Quodlibets, names for preachers of Christ, Fugatius and Damianus, supposed to
be sent hither by (...): 4: 19:
Eleutherius, among the old Albion Britains, and Saint Austen amongst the
English Saxons, of who^ we all came. But as touching that of Elentherius, the
(...). For in Hist: Eccles:
letter ^owe extant as sent from King Lucius unto him, is rather for a Copy of
the civil and Imperial laws of Rome, to be sent unto him into England, then
for any thing else there mentioned. I may not therefore here forget, that it
is received for a verity, that yet long before the days of Lucius and
Eleutherius, the seed of the Gospel was sown in Britain, eve^ in the prime
age of the Apostles, by Joseph of Arimathea; which by the Jesuit Controv. cap.
2.
Costerus is not concealed when he says, For men will have, or they say, that
Joseph of Arimathea in the Apostles time was in England, and that Simon the
Leaper didgovern the Church Cenomanensis in France. And to manifest that this
is very probable, it shall not be amiss briefly to cite such reasons, as
Master Eccle. Histor. l. 2.
Fox has collected, to show that the Britains had received CHRIST, before
the days of Eleutherius and Lucius, who lived about the year of our LORD
180. First he cites out of De victor. Aure^ Ambros.
Gildas, that in the year 63. Philip the Apostle sent Joseph of Arimathea
hither out of France, and he first laid the foundation of Christian Religion.
Secondly out of Tertullian, that Contr. Indaeos.
the places of the Britains which were inaccessible by the Romans, were
subject to Christ. Thirdly out of Homil. 4. in Ezech.
Origene specifying that since the coming of Christ, Britain did consent to
the knowledge of the only God, and both Tertullian and Origene, he reputeth
to be, before the time of Eleutherius a little. Fourthly out of Bid Histor.
Eccl. l. 5. 22.
signifies that the Britains in his time, especially such as had not
conformed themselves, a little before to the Roman fashion, did keep their
Easter after the manner of the East Church. Fifthly out of Petrus (...) writing
to Saint Bernard, and affirming that the Scots kept their Easter in the same
manner, which shows that all the parts of this Island were brought to
CHRIST, by some who came out of the East; or else the ceremonies should have
been planted after the fashion of the Western Church. Sixthly out of Lib. 2.
40
Nicephorus, affirming that Simon Zelotes brought the Gospel into the Isles of
Britain. Seaventhly Epistol. ad Eleuther.
from Lucius himself, who plainly signifies that he had received CHRIST,
before the sending to Eleutherius for the Roman Laws. These reasons
collected by Master Fox are more of force, then the slight testimonies of
such late vvriters, as may mistake one thing for another, the sending for of
the Imperial laws, to be to call for the faith of Christ. But admit it were
thus, and we should yield to the conceit of these later authors, what makes
this for them, or against us? Since the words of the Apostle Paul may be used
in this behalf, 1. Cor. 14. 36.
Came the word of God out from you? that is to say, were you the first city
whence the Gospel was derived? was it Rome it self that had it originally? or
was it not rather converted, by that which came from Jerusalem? That city in
Judea was the fountain of all, and therefore if any place should be respected
for that which is past, Jerusalem should be renoumed, and magnified even of
Rome it self, and of all other, because from thense all primarilie, (albeit
some mediately and some immedi^tely) sucked the doctrine of the Christian
faith. But as our Papists in this case make no account of Jerusalem, since
the glory both inward and outward thereof is decayed, so we make as little
reckoning of Rome, which is so utterly swarved from the purity of that
profession, which it had not only in the time of the Apostles, but even of
Eleutherius, that vix Terent. in Eunucho.
cognoscas cand^m esse. We can in no sort discern it to be the same.

5 What a harvest your Dominicane and Franciscane Friars have made in the
Indies, I defer to recount till I come to the next Chapter. Only here I
tell you, that upon uncontrollable warrant we find not, that almost any man
of worth, for learning, wisdom, warfare or government, has by his conversion
given any testimony to Christendom, of the good which your Friars have done
among the Indians. You please your selves with fancies, and mulus mulum scabit,
one of you does falsely trumpet the praises of another. If you be such
convetters, why go you not into Africa, into the kingdoms of Marocco and Fez,
to Tunis or Argier? From Spain or Italy, the distance is not much to these.
Or why do you not cross the Adriatike sea, and step into Grecia or Morea? why
traveile you not farther to Constantinople, Tripoly or Aleppo to win men from
Mahomet, which is so much the easier, because all these Turks and Saracens
admit of some Positions belonging to the Christian faith, but the Indians
accept of none. Truth it is, that unto these places, other nations of
Christendom for traffic do resort; and therefore if you should report any
untruth concerning these, you would quickly be disproved. But far traveilers
may say more then ordinary men, and for that cause you tell us a tale of the
Indies, and some of your men say that there they cast out Devils also. They do
well to lay it in places so distant^ for although they egregiously feign, yet we
shall hardly take them tripping: it is no ready work to convince them. But we
imagine that your attemptes for conversion, may have the same success in the
East and West Indies, as the offer of your Maff Hist. Lib. 1.
Portingale Priests and Friars had in Congo, where adventuring upon very
small acquaintance, to baptize the king and the inhabitants, the most part as
your Historiographer says, (but it is to be feared that all) quickly renounced
Christianity, and returned to their heathenish wallowing in the mire. They
disliked not the first principles of the faith, neither the Ceremonies therein,
but when they were called upon to leave their gross vices, as adultery and
witchcrafte and seeking to Devils, to remitte injuries, to restore things
unjustly taken each from other, they would not endure these exhortations, but
like reneging Apostatas they became as before. And of likelihood so it fell
out frequently with the Spaniards in America, where they Petr. Martyr. Decad.
3. 10.
were exceeding nimble in administering baptism, to those who knew very
little. Had it not been fit, that before the Sacrament had been imparted, the
Infidels should out of Gods book largely have heard of many things? which
course John the Baptist did take, preaching repentance; Math. 3. 2
and that would well have tried them before hand, and so Gods name might not
have been dishonored, nor Baptism abused, nor the people made the worse, nor
the Priest never the better. Does not the true Church of Christ gain much by
such titulary bargains, and is not Gods kingdom much increased through it?
And yet doubtless such good matches your Friars also make in the Indies, but
especially in those of the East, where the inhabitants have more wit, and
your messengers have lesser power. And if it be so and no otherwise, yet with
us here in Europe, all these must go for good Christians, and if there be a
score of such Nu^s Christians, we shall hear of five hundred. So much may a
tal^ grow in co^ so (...). And the reporters speak for their own reputation,
and therefore without questioning you must believe them.

6 But I cannot choose but here smile, at the virtuous titles which you
bestow upon the Jesuits, when you call them the blessed Society of Ies^,
and the blessed religious men. How gladlye vvoulde you clavve them, who
perhaps lately at Apolog. of the Archpriest^c a. 5.
Rome did clapper-clavve you? And albeit you be now got to be a Doctor of
Divinitye, yet since it was certainelye against their Answer to the
Manifestat. c. 1
vvilles, you are with them but in nature of a Probationer, and an eye is
c^rryed over you, so that if once again you exorbitate from the rule of your
superiors, have at you for an old grudge. Since your coming into England,
to the end that you may deserve better of your good Lords the Jesuits, you
have set out this present Pamphlet; yet the cold commendation which was upon
you, continues still, leaving an imputation of vveake judgment in you by
your credulitye, and of heat and rashness in your apprehensions and
contentions. Yet now standing upon your trial, there is some hope that the
tongue which formerlye you exercised upon these iollye Jesuits in the College
at Rome, shall be turned against your King and Country, that in time you also
may be if not a Jesuit, yet one of those blessed men, who having their
authority from Rome, and not from heaven, from Antichrist and not from God,
may be entertained as a T^ytour. You begin pretty well, and if you hold
on but a while, and increase as you desire, you may deserve such a
prefermente. The Jesuits as you tell us have their authority from Rome, not
from Jesus, and what a forge of mischief that Rome has been against
England, he is blind who does not see. Sand. de Schismat.
Thence came the sentence against King Henry the eight. Thence was continual
hatred derived against our late Sovereign, from the day of her birth, until
her dissolution from this mortality. Thence came the excommunication by Pius
the fifth, the declaration of the same by Sixtus the fifth, the ratification of
it by Clement the eight, if the Spanish General in An. 1601:
Ireland did witness a truth. Hence came the Conspiracy of one Noble man,
now acknowledged by Catena in vita pij 5.
him who vvrote the life of Pope Pius the fifth, the insurrection of other
Nobles, the attempts on Ireland in the Lord Grayes time, the encouraging and
ayding of the vincible fleet in the year 1588. the late tumults in Ireland,
besides such infinite proiects by Ballarde, Parrhy, Lopez, Squire, and such
infamous varlets, to destroy her who was the most famous and renoumed Prince
of Christendom. These things were sufficient, to cause the honorable
Council, and chief Magistrates not to sleep, but as with eyes opened toward
you: And if wisdom will say Virgil. Aen. 2.
ab vno disce omnes, or ex vnguibus leonem, pretend you as long as you will,
that the Jesuits are here executed for their sacred Function, we have reason
not to doubt, but somevvhat more there is in it. He who wrote the Jesuits
Catechism in French, as he has many memorable matters, touching the sweet
and sacred vices of these unblessed and irreligious Fathers, so he has some
thing touching England, as that Lib. 3. 3.
Parrhyes attempt in the year 1584, And Cap. 4.
Squires in the year 1597, was plotted, encouraged and abetted by the
Jesuits, as he shows by the whole process of it. These devises can be the
execution of no function which is holy, unless you will take it to be holy
after the Devils fashion. And may it not well be supposed, that they who
were so wickedly affected tovvarde our last Sovereign, will carrye the same
mind tovvarde our present King, the mirror of all Princely virtues, unless
the everlasting blessing of God, and prudent fore-fight otherwise do restrain
them? What love this Jesuitical crewe does bear to his Highness, let that
one thing in steed of all testify, that they combined abroad, and to their
best plotted at home, to bring a Spanish Princess the Infanta into that
throne, which by all right divine and humane belonged to his Majesty, as the
indubitate heir to the Imperial Crowns of these kingdoms of England and
Ireland. This intendment of theirs, is as clear as the noone day, by Doleman*
Persons his book of Succession, by the urging of the Students in the
Seminaries to subscribe to the Spanishe title, if it were but in blankes, by
the frequent charging of the Jesuits therewith, in the late books of the
Secular Priests, and their Assistants; unto all which the Author of the
Apology and Manifestation, does not so much as faintly, and for a fashion,
give the least denial. We doubt not therefore but his most illustrious Majesty,
will be circumspect against such vipers, and that his Highness considers the
fruits of them, and their doctrine in France, the murder of King Henry the
third, the animating of Paris and so many great cities to rebellion against
the puissant King now regnant, the attempts of sasuit. cat. lib. 3. 6.
Peter Barrier, and Cap. 8.
John Chastell (by the lesuites means) to commit murder and parricide upon
his royal person, besides all the doctrine which they have of the want of E^ds,
to slay Kings whom they hold tyrauntes, of the Popes 'power to excommunicate
Princes, and to absolve subjects from the oath of their allegiance, of all
Clergy men in a kingdom exempt from the chastisement and government of the
temporal or Civil Monarke, and only subject to the Bishop of Rome, the
verity of which points he may at large see, who will read that little but
excellent treatise, Le Fra^c Dis^rs. Their vow of blind obedience to their
Superiors, their position of ordine ad Deum, their rule of propter bonum
societatis, will infer any varletry, traiterousnesse, vilainy, or impiety in
the world, be it whatsoever. Lastly the experience which is had of them, does
manifest that they are like the old Pharisees, of whom Antiquit. lib. 17. 3.
Josephus could say, that they were aprowde generation and dangerous unto
Kings; for they entered Polony, and Quodlib. 3. 7.
straight there followed upon it a rebellion against their Sovereign, they
have been the means that Ies. Catec. lib. 3. 16.
Stephen Batori now king of Poleland, is thrust from his ancient kingdom of
Sweden, and the whole life of the activer sort of them, being nothing but a
Quodlib. in praefat.
tampering in state causes, and Princes affairs, their felicity is to set the
Realms where they come into a combustion. If then for these and the like
reasons, the King of France professing for the Romish faith, has by solemn
Edict banished these Iebusites out of his kingdom, and that on pain of death,
and they are not harbored in his Realm, but only in Bordeaux and Toulouse,
which is to be hoped will also shortly be redressed; is it to be wondered,
that our kingdom professing the reformed religion, and being England which of
old could endure no wolves should abandon this lewd Society? It might rather
be reputed a singular weakedesse, in so wise and vigilant a State, as God be
praised this is, if there should not be provision made to keep out such
Caterpillars, or rather Foxes and Bears, who come to destroy the flock, and
instead of converting of countries whereof you speak, intend the perverting of
consciences, and turning them from that due obedience, which they owe to the
Almighty God of heaven, and to his Vicegerent here among us. It has pleased
the Lord long agone, to open the eyes of our Governors, to see the drifts of
these men, and we are to pray that their hearts may ever be inspired, to see
the execution of such wholesome laws, that some may take the Cant. 2. 15
Foxes, the little Foxes which destroy the Uines, that is to say, such
body-killing, and soulemurthering spiritual enemies, who destroy many a weak
woman and unadvised rash young man.


T. HILL. I will not here speak of the infinite number of Miracles, wrought by
Catholics in conversion of Countries, and namely of those which are now done
in both the Indies, by the holy Fathers aforesaid, for that I reserve that
matter for his proper place: but I would advise you here diligently to weigh
the sequel of the Assertion of the Protestants: how that if Papists be not
true Christians, and of the right religion then does it necessarily follow,
that neither Spaniards, nor Portingales, nor Sardinians, nor Sicilians, nor
Italians, nor Germans, nor Transylvanians, nor Hungarians, nor Polouians, nor
Danes, nor Flemmings, nor Scots, nor Irish, nor English, no nor any Nation
under heaven had ever true Religion, before Friar Luther married Moune Bore,
before John Calvin run away to Geneva, before Peter Martyr with his Fustolugges
came to teach at Oxford, and before a number of such like good companions,
led only by sensuality and carnal zeal dishodded themselves and became
such spectacles to the world as every man knows. Which thing to affirm is
flatly to deny Christ, and all Christianity, as I showed in my first Reason.


G. ABBOT. YOur mounstrous Miracles you put over to another Chapter, and
thither (God willing) I will follow you, so that in good time you shall hear of
me. The foolishness and ridiculousnesse of this your other assertion I have
Answer to the 1. Reason.
already manifested: but here you are disposed to commemorate the nations of
Christendom, although to small purpose well I wot, (unless you would have us
note that you put the Spaniards first, and the English last.) For if you have
named the French also, and the Bohemians, and Muscovits and Graecians, we must
answer you that among these or so many of these, as it seemed good to the
divine Providence, there was true Religion; and yet the grosser sort of your
Papists had none of it, albeit some touched with some small stains of Popery
did belong to Gods kingdom. And these were not only before the birth of these
excellent men who^ you name, but in all ages since Christ his time. Wherefore
your bold talking here, is no better then idle trifling. That Doctor Luther
was a Friar and his wife a Nonne, will be easily granted unto you; but in a
Christian man's understanding, what more prejudice is therein, then that Exodus 2.
10
Moses for a time was brought up as the son of Phara^s daughter, or that Act.
23. 6.
St. Paul was a Pharisee, or that Luk 82. 3.
Mary Magdalone was agrievous sinner, or Luke 19. 1.
Zacheus the master of the custom? It was no fault for Genesis 19: 12
Let to come out of Sodom, neither is it to be blamed, that any haste^ out of
Apoc: 18: 4
Babylon. But the greese is that he a Votary did mary her a Votary, which
Campians malice so expresses, Ration: 3:
d^ec incesto (...) votam Deo virginem f^sset, and this quarrel you have also
against many other rare instruments of Gods glory. But if you will look to
that where your eie^ ought to be set, the true fault was, that in their
younger-daies being swayed by the course of those times, they had without
mature judgment taken a vow upon the^, which was very rash and unadvised. From
the making of such vows Solomon Eccl. 5: 5:
does dehort, Suffer not thy mouth to make thy flesh to finne: He wishes that
men should be so provide^t as absolutely to promise nothing, which they had not
strong assurance that they might well perform. And that vows should not be
made, which afterward lead to inevitable sin. Concerning the oath of I^phthe,
In quaest: and Resp: ad Orthodox: quaest 99:
lustine Martyr says thus, God did suffer the daughter of Iephthe to be
offered as a sacrifice, not that he did delight in man's blood but that
posterity might hau^ that sch^ling, that they should never dedicate their
vows to God at large, or indefinitely. Then by the judgment of Iustine there
is no doubt, but men may make too large vows to God himself. In as much then
as these persons had taken on the^ a yoke, which though it be not so,
absolutely to all, yet to them in their conscience was insupportable, and they
felt with themselves that they might not continue under that burrhen without
grievous sin for the preventing whereof the Apostle had propounded a remedy,
1: Cor: 7. 9
If they cannot abstain let them mary, for it is better to mary then to burn,
I doubt not but in the fear of God, with sober and long deliberation they did
undo that, which by the incitement of their friends, or indiscreetely of
their own heads they had formerly done. And that Lord who under the Levitical
law was so merciful, as to appoint a Levit: 5: 4:
trespass offering for such a one as had made any vow rashly, assigning him to
confess his fault and the^ pardoning the same, would also remitt unto his
excellent servants, who^ he had singled out to help so much to the building of
his tabernacle, that temerations bond which they had made, since with
repe^ta^ce and grief, they acknowledged their former presu^ption that way. And
that such who after their vow could not live co^tine^tly, might mary,
Epiphanius does witness, who when he has distinguished between judgment and
condemnation, and said Epiphan: Haeres: 611
that better is judgment whereof the Apostle speaks then co^demnatio^ he
resolves the case thus: It is better therefore to have one sin and not more. It
is better that he who is fallen from his course, should openly take unto him a
wife according to the law, and from his virginity a great while should repent,
and so again be brought into the Church, as one that has wrought evil, as
one who is fallen and broken, and has need of binding up, and not to be
wounded every day with secret darts, by the wickedness which is brought upon him
by the Devil. Thus the Church knows to preach. These are the medicines of
healing. These are the kinds of anointing confession. And Jerome although
when he was young he had written, Virgins Lib: 1: contr lovinian
which after their co^seerating have married are not so much adulterous as
incestuous, which is to be understood, if they might any ways contain, yet
thirty years after (for so it is to be collected out of his Epistle Ad
Demetriadem) seeing how the Church was blemished by the incontinency and want
onnesse of some Votaries, says thus, The name of some Virgins who bear not
themselves well, does defame the holy purpose of Virgins, and the glory of the
family of heaven and Angels. Unto whom it is openly to be said, that either
they should mary if they cannot contain themselves, or should contain, if
they be unwilling to mary. Thus this father permits marriage to vowed
persons, if they cannot chastely lead a single life, neither does he think
their marriage to be a sin, as neither did Saint Austen: but if there be a
fault, it is because they break their vow. Aug. de bono vidui. tat cap. 9.
Not because she marriage it self, even of such is judged to be condemned or
damnable, but the breaking of their purpose is condemned, the faith of their
vow being broken is condemned; there is condemned not an Susceptio a bono
inferiore
undertaking from an inferior good, but a fall from a higher good. So speaks
he who both there and In psa. 83.
elsewhere likes not the slipping from vowed virginity; which we also do
not like, if there be any godly means to continue in it, without perpetual
enormous sin; wherein the trial must be a man's own conscience soberly and
most advisedly consulted, as between God and the soul, and not the opinions
of other men. And I may not do such wrong to Luther and his wife, or to other
of that time, as not to think that with long and ponderous advise, they
weighed what was fittest in this case to be done.

8 That John Calvine did run away to Geneva is a ridiculous accusation, much
false, and more foolish. And whereas you suppose that he was the first who
preached the Gospel at Geneva, as now it is there preached, that is one of
your ignorances: for a reverend man Farellus by name, did plant the same
doctrine in Geneva, before that Calvine came thither: Which if no body else
would have told you, you might have learned of in Antid. Matthew 23.
Stapleton. But before both those, as also before the coming of Peter Martyr
to Oxford, even from our Saviors time, the truth which we profess, is and
has ever been: and when you have brabbled as long as you can, you shall never
show to the contrary. Now when you name these three, Luther, Calvin and Martyr,
you do not dishonor them, but grace them, since when they are rightly thought
of, they are like 2. Sam. 23 12.
three of David's worthies, or in a sort like the Dan. 3. 12.
three children which were in the fiery furnace and not burnt, being ever in
the flame of Popish rancour and slander, and al maledicous defamation, and yet
lovely to the places where they lived, dying all of them in peace, and the
memory of them blessed, as being great bel-wethers in Gods flock, and renoumed
Captains in the Lords battles. How happy are those men, who for their
constant standing in the gappe, against Satan and Antichrist, are every day
illustrated, and made celebrious, by the maligning of the adversaries of truth?
Their souls are in peace, and their glory is promulgated by their enemies
trumpets, who the more they oppugn them, the more we do love them, and
eternise the memory of them. These and other their consorts, as the Archbishop
Cranmer with other of the English, Mela^cthon and Bucer, and Fagius and many
more of their rank, were no such loose companions and sensual men as you
fondly do here intimate, neither ever did they become bad spectacles to the
world, but led their lives in study, in preaching and writing, which may well
appear by such volumes of their works, as having been laid on the Popes
back, have broken many ribs of him, that they never will be able to close
again. Their learning, their industry, their faithfulness, their virtuous
conversation every way, might be a glass and mirror to your Cardinals and
Bishops, and all your Romish Clergy, where for the most part ignorance and
idleness, and wantonness does abound. And what marvel can it be, that men
so foreordained by the secret providence of the Almightye, to do such noble
service in the camp of the everlasting Lord, and to ransake the walls of
Babylon, should upon the apprehension of Gods pleasure therein, make speed to
come forth of spiritual Gomorrha, and lay aside their superstitious and
Frierly weed, which was the livery of him, who was mortal enemy to their
Master Christ Jesus? if Genesis 39 12
Joseph were praiseworthy for leaving his own garment behind him, rather
then to yield to any lewd action which might concern manners, how are they to
be honored for leaving the Devils cloth, when they might not enjoy it,
unless they did prostitute both body and soul to idolatrous abominatio^? And
whereas here you bestow your remembrance on Peter Mattyrs wife, how blessed
was she living, and how happy is her soul now, that she should in such
sort be exagitated for Christ his sake? She was neither flaps nor fustelugs,
but a woman indeed of body reasonably corpulent, but of most matron-like
modesty, for the which she was much reverenced by the most: she was of
singular patience, of excellent arts and qualities, and among other things,
for her recreation she delighted to cut plu^mestones into curious faces and
countenances, of which exceeding artificially done, I once had one with a
woman's visage and head attire on the one side, and a Bishop with his miter on
the other, which was the elegant work of her hands. By diverse yet living in
Oxford this good woman is remembered, and commended as for her other virtues, so
for her liberality to the poor, which by Master In Histor. Eccl. Sub Maria Reg.
Fox writing how she was entreated after her death is rightly mentioned. For
love of true religion, and the company of her husband, she left her own
country to come into England in K. Edwards days, and so good was her fame
here, that when the Papists in Q. Mary's time being able to get nothing against
her being dead, were yet desirous to wreske their teene upon her integrity,
they would needs rage upon the bones of her, a woman and a stranger, and took
them out of her grave from Christian burial, and buried them in a doung-hill.
Pascitur in vivis livor, post fata quiescit.
Envy does use on living folks to gnawe:
But be they dead, she does her self withdraw.
Yet this was their Romish charity and Popish humanity, which one wondering at,
did recommende the remembrance of it to these verses:

Foemineum sexum Romani semper amarunt:
Proijciunt corpus cur muliebre for as?
Hoc si in quaras, facilis responsio danda often,
Corpor a non curant mortua, viva petunt.
The Popish crow have evermore the female sex embraced,
How is it that a woman's corse they have from grave displaced?
Thus if you ask, right readily mine answer may be this,
Their bodies dead they care not for, live ones they clip and kiss.

T. HILL. ANd surely I am greatly confirmed in the Catholic religion,
beholding the Heavenly manner, used by the professors thereof in gayning souls
to Almighty God, for that I see them neither to spare goods (...) labors, ^o
nor their own lives, so that they may w^ people to Heaven. Gregory the
thirteenth Pope of that name in these our days, spent all the reve^wes of the
Popedom in founding Se^ies and Colleges i^ diverse L^des and Provinces,
thereby to restore the Catholics religion.


G. ABBOT. 9 IT is not this which confirms you in Popery, but your
discontented humor, your passionate credulity, and most of all, want of the
grace of God, who leaving you to your self because you took delight in humane
inventions, now suffers you to strive to prove some body, in keeping up the
rotten and ruinous temple of Antichrist. For there is nothing named by you
here, which should be forcible as to detain you in your perverseness, since if
those acts which you pretend, were granted you, yet they are matters common
with mis-creants, the Turks yearly sparing no cost, nor forbearing to adventure
their lives in Hu^gary, that they may repel the forces of the Christians, and
farther propagate their Mahometane profession. And the manner which your men
use is not heave^ly but earthly, since their care is more to bring in all whom
they may gain, to the Bishop of Rome, or the king of Spain then to the ^old
of Jesus Christ. But this your asseveration you exemplify first in Gregory the
13. who in the founding of Seminaties and Colleges in diverse lands, spent all
the revenewe of the Popedom. I have told you before of your general speeches
without sense, reason and probability. Were you great Treasurer, or Master of
the Fisco in those days, that you either knew his receipts or his expenses?
How did his Holiness maintain his estate, his family, his soldiers, his
guard, his galleys, and those huge su^mes, whereat great Co^manders are every
day? How did he send abroad his spies, and mainetaine discord among Christian
Princes? Did not his purse walk, think you? And since his own revenew was
spent as you say, did he borrow, or go to best be trust for all the rest? A
sober man would be ashamed, to think that such a speech should come from a
Doctor of Divinity. What, was it his rent for a Papirius Masson in vita Greg.
13*
house in Bonony, which was left him by Bo^-Compagnon, his father, that bore all the rest of his charges? he much helped his poor ^inred, as his brothers
son, who^ he made a Cardinal, and Philip his sisters son, and others, and
this so ple^tifully, as that the author of the story in some words is
constrained to Apologize him for it. And if it should be thought that the most
of their preferme^ts were in spiritual livings, yet what say you for his base
son (no news that with the Popes) James Bo^-Co^pagnon, who^ he would call
Ibidem.
his son according to the flesh? He made him Marquess of Vineola not far From
ferrara, and general of all his forces as well horse as foot: he married him to
a daughter of the house of the Comtes of Saint Flora: he bought the town Sora
for him, and got the King of Spain to entitle him Duke thereof; he purchased
for him Arpmum the country of old Cicer^, and left him much wealth besides.
And I pray you where had he all his money; but out of Saint Peter's purse, and
from the in-come of the Papacy? Yea, since wars be more costly then peace,
where had he all the treasure, which he bestowed on the Italians; whom he sent
into Importa^t considerat.
Ireland (whereof few brought him any tidings back again) or on Stukley and
his train, and many other such good businesses? How do you bob your scholars,
when you give them such googeos? Truth it is that he spent more in erecti^g
such houses, the^ either his Predecessors or Successors have done. He who
writes the life of Co^cenat Eccl Cathol. in Angl^
Ca^pian, says that he erected a Seminary at Rome for the English, and at
Rhemes another, one at Lauretum for the Sclavonia^s, one for the Germans at
Rome, and another for the Greeks. In vita Gregor. 13.
P^pirius Mass^s does not leave him there, but says that he commanded, that
such houses also should be erected out of Italye, as one at Uienna upon
Danubius, another at Vilva in Lituani^, a third at Claudiopolis in
Transylvania, and in Iaponia near ^udia he commanded three Colleges to be
built. But he does not tell us at whose charges these were erected, or what
was given to maintain them, And certainly they were for the most part but
poor and starved things, such as whereof they themselves do make small boast.
The glory of his acts was the maintenance of the English Colledg^, where at
the first, he gave monthly at Apolog. cap. 3.
Rome out of his treasury three hundred crowns, and one hundred to the other
nearer England, as Persons reports, which arising at the uttermost by the
year to no more then fifteen or sixteen hundred pound English, it was but a
small pull out of the Popes revenew. Yet how long this full pay lasted no body
can tell. And we must take it to be so on Father Persons his bare word, who as
one of the Io. Colletons just defense. page 298.
Seculars reports, has in that book as many lies as leaves, or perhaps
pages, if not so many as exceed either. Now who does not know, that the tribute
which the Curti^anes of Rome do yearly yield to the Pope, by many degrees
amou^teth that trifling su^me? And out of that honest pay he might well spare a
part, to maintain such as would be his vassals, and do their best to help him
in far greater matters. And their allowa^ce being extracted out of this sweet
Impost, the speech of one of our cou^try-me^ might the better be verified,
which I co^fes was very blou^t, but you must take it as it is. He gets it,
quoth he by whores, and therefore he may more boldly bestow it upon knaves.
His zeal to his Prince and country which were disturbed by such Emissaries,
made him speak more plainly then many will like.

11 But it is your favorable interpretation, when you construe Gregory's
meaning to be nothing but winning of people to heaven, and the restoring of
religion. The Court of Rome has an e^e to somewhat else besides this. It was
not for naught that it was wont to be said, by a truer speech then verses
Curia Romana non captat ovem sine lana. In court of Rome do not abide such
geese
A sto catch after sheep that have no fleece.


A great part of Christendom has with-drawen it self from that see, and
therefore somewhat must be adventured to get some part of it back again.
Nothing adventure, nothing have, Gregory was not so ignorant, but that he
knevve that rule of Comm^tar. lib. (...).
C^us, that great men must do good, and that to diverse, and if many be
unthankful, or some by in-ability can do nothing, yet it may fall out, that one
may require all that cost, which has bi^ bestowed on the rest. If but one of
those countries in Christe^do^e, which are now freed from the Pope, could be
brought back again by the help^ of his Alu^nes, that would pay for the charges
of all the other. But England especially was a fair flower in the Popes
garland, and therefore nothing must be left vnatte^pted, to see what good might
be done thervpo^, When Onuphr: in Iulio: 3:
Julius the 3. was advertised from Q. Mary, that England was by Parliament
re-submitted to the Church of Rome, he made solemn Processions and public
thankesgivings throughout his whole chief city. The men who were coming
toward him, were somewhat to rejoice his old spirits, but the money was more.
What with the souls, and what with the silver which he devoured in his hope,
he was exceedingly co^ te^ted. Their Records could tell the^, that England of
all places was their garden like Paradise, that here they had more work the^
in any one nation in Christendom, which may be seen by so many solemn
Rescripts directed into this our country, and now to be found in the body of
their Cano^law. And they did not loose their labor by looking this way. It was
business to the^ more gainful, then the robbing of beggars. If Matthew. Par. in
Henric. 3.
three hundred years agone the Popes could say of England, Est (...), It is a
pit that cannot be draw^ dry, they cannot but imagine that now the world is
well amended, some skrapes and fragments of the Indian gold and silver, being
come amongst us also to amend our little store. This I tell you is a fair
bait, to make Gregory the thirteenth, and Clemens the 8. also, to have a
months mind unto us. You ^ell us of another matter* but we do not doubt of
this. But God ever bless us from any more such bargains. And as the man of
Rome in maintaining of the English Colleges, may well be supposed to have
longed after this our Realm, that here he might exercise his spiritual
Jurisdiction: so it is as easy to con^eave, and as probable to believe, that
when Philip the second and this present King of Spain have been at that
charge to keep an English Seminary at Dovv^y, and a College at Validolid,
and other companies else-vvhere, and that with so large expense as to send two
Apolog. cap* 3^
thousand crowns at a time, they were not without hope, that the te^porall
dominion of this kingdom, might one day befall a Prince of Spanish blood. And
this our fugitive Jesuits have been ready to put into those Monarkes heads,
assuring that the end of one Ladies reign, would be the beginning of another.
But he who sits in Psalm. 2. 4.
heaven does laugh their devises to scorn, he has deluded their sooth
sayings, frustrated the^ Weston. in Pe^oration.
Prophecies, made their hopes in vain, so that shame and confusion is on their
face which as we trust, will humble them, and bring many of the^ to discern
the truth. The Lord be praised for all his wondrous works, and give us grace
to be thankful for the^. Notwithstanding in the mean while it is much to be
feared, that the Pope and Spanish King finding themselves to be abused by lies
and tales, and fond bragges of Persons and Cr^swel, and UUorthington and
Weston, and such other mates, and that in all worldly presumption they are
farther from their expectation, then ever they were, will withdraw that
exhibition wherewith hitherto they have charged themselves, and turn both our
old and young masters a grasing, to see if they can make any other shift, and
with their Iesuitical facings beguile other Princes also. Perhaps for safeguard
of their own honor, this shall not at first be done, least all men should
say, that it was not for absolute devotion that they were at this expense: but
before it be long we will expect such news. It may be that God may use this
as a means to bring some of them to heaven.


T. HILL. MAny holy and religious Priests do go daily into Germany, into
Hungary, into Greece, into Palestina, into Egypt, into Syria, into Aethiopia,
into Africa, into Moscovia, into Ireland, into Scotland, into England, and into
other heretical and heathen countries, yielding themselves to all dangers by
sea and land, and to all vvorlali^ miseries, having mortified all their carnal
affections, renou^ced all riches, honors and kindred, and having made
themselves most ready for their grave, and consequently for another world,
moved only by the zeal of saving souls. And it moves me not a little to see
what patience, mildness and quietness these men use in all their doings.


G. ABBOT. 11 THat the men whom you send abroad are holy and religious, you
must give us time to credit hereafter. but that many of them are simple men,
and sent like Prove. 7. 22
Salomo^s fool blind-folded to the stocks, we easily believe. Your great
crafty companions such as Allen and Barret, and H^lt were, and as Gifford and
Worthington now are, keep themselves safe enough. It was but a copy of
Concert. Eccle. ^athol. in Angl part. 2.
Goldw^ll some times Bishop of S. Asaph, his countenance, that he would come
back hither. By that time he came to Rhemes his mind was altered: he was
sick forsooth, and he was too well known in England. Persons was once here,
but he thought long ere he was gone. He would Apolog. cap. 12.
excuse his running away, but the Seculars hold it inexcusable. It may well be
seen what mind the old foxes have to come hither, by that so many of them
took their Degrees of Doctor-ship of Divinity, as that there were seven of
the^ English in that one College at Doway, (if a bird of their own nest did
report truth) within these five years. When these did hold themselves more
exempt the^ common me^, from the ordinary missio^, his Sept. 18. 159^. ^o
Collet. ust. Defense. fol. ^54.
Holiness was enforced to inhibite, that any more of the^ should take that
highest Degree in Divinity or law, but by special leave of Superiors, and on
straight conditions. And I would gladly learn of any man, what one of any
worth has now for these diverse last years bin sent hither from the Seminaries.
All the late co^mers (for ought that ca^ yet be discovered) are but simple
fellows, howsoever they sometimes are magnified, by some of their own party
more unlearned the^ themselves. Luscus dominatur inter cacos. But the true
matter of their going abroad is this. When they are admitted into the
Seminaries, they are all bound by a positive oath or vow, that they shall be at
the direction of their Superiors, to go whither soever they shall employ
them, And this does Anolog. cap. 11.
Persons boast to be his devise, touching the English Seminaries at Rome and
in Spain. Heerevpon they take occasion to rid them often away, sending them
not as sheep but as wolves to the slaughter. If they be seditious, they have
learned the precept of De legib. Dial. 5.
Plato, for the purging of ill humors: they must away. If they see them
sufficiently armed to do mischief, they must away. So must they do if their
maintenance grow short. And if there be nothing else, yet the sink must be
emtied, if not wholly yet some part, to make room for more filth coming. This
sends the poor boy-Priests and other silie ones abroad: who being put to
this exigent, make the best of it, and encourage one another in the hope of
gaining souls to the Devil. But when they come to places of danger, blind
bayard may be bold, but that sort which has more wit then grace, will make
some shift for themselves. The^ they may co^ceale one part of a sentence to
themselves, and speak the other falsely; then they may equivocate and speak
doubtfully, yea the^ if need be they make an untrue oath, as being c^ru^ non
Iudice. The^ some truly turn to our religion, and save both body and soul.
Other will counterfeite so much, and at the next occasion relapse to their
vomit. Some under a color of detecting much to the State, come into the
chief magistrates, and open all that they can, and so they are the freer from
danger. Other being Prisoners sue to the LL, that they may be heard to excuse
themselves, and lay all the former treason on the Jesuits, and the partakers
with the Archpriest. And the rest lie hid, more respecting their own safty,
the^ the charge of their Supe riours. Thus we are sure that here they do. As
for Greece or Palesti na, Egypt or Aethiopia and the other farther regio^s
here named, few of the^ go thither: and such as are employed, do only serve
for spies, to view the actions of great Princes and Stats in the world, so to
inform the Spanyard, or other who much depend, upon him: whereby the Spanish
King may take opportunity so to enlarge his dominions, or to enter new and
commodious traffic, or at least to defeat such forces, as are prepared
against his Portingales in the East Indies. Hence it is, that these Priests
co^cealing their profession, take the greatest care that they ca^ to learn the
languages, or to make mappes of the countries. But where be those Turks or
Sarace^s, or Ethiopia^s, or Infidels, which may truly by the^ be said to be
wo^ne to the Christian faith* I would hear of some one man or woman of note
indeed, brought by the^ to the flock of Christ Jesus. I know they talk much
of the Eastern parts, but there the harvest may be laid into a little barn.
In the days of Gregory the 13. their great States-ma^ Possev^. de rebu^ Moscov
(...).
P^ssevinus the Jesuit was employed to co^vert unto the Romish belief, Ivan
Uasilich, the Emperor of Russia, and his people of Moscovia. And indeed the
Great Duke did listen to his mediation for peace between himself, and Stephen
Batour King of Poland, who had then by war a great hand upon the old man:
but not a man or women in Moscovy did there-vpon embrace the Roman doctrine.
And such are commonly the gains which they make in other remote places, if
matters be well sifted. Now if it be so, that Priests do go to such countries as
you intimat; what should they otherwise do? for to their own native soil many
of the^ dare not return, as being fled thence perhaps for sl^gitious crimes:
other have there no maintenance nor friends and so besides the dager of the
laws, they should be to al me^ ridiculous and conte^ptible, who have traveiled
so far and brought home with the^, I say not liuelyhood and ability, but no
learning or good quality. And in the Seminaries they may no longer stay, but if
they should refuse Apol^. 12
Priesthood, or offer to stay being comanded away, they would be held
perjured persons, and with co^tumely be turned out; and therefore I cannot blame
the^, if they rather adventure any where upon uncertain hope, the^ run upon
certain danger. If needs they must beg, they think it the more their credit to
do it in far countries, then where they are known. And this if they should
grumble, as whither they do or no, themselves can best tell, to whom may they
complain, or who shall amend ought, since their penurious or hard hearted
superiors, ingeminate unto them the vow of obedience, and that is their amends.

12 But how some of these Priests and Jesuits have mortified their affections
and lusts, and composed themselves to their graves, may be judged by their
galla^tnes in apparel, their gaming, their striving for place and superiority,
their tos-pot^ing and other such behavior as hereafter I shall touch. Now let me
rather see whither they have renou^ced al riches and h^nors or no? That our
Seminarians come into England most poor, it is not to be doubted. Yet that
some of the^ here have purles full of gold, as Dec'arat. of popish Impost^es
exam of Sar will.
Dibdale and other, that some spend many Sparing Discor. of Jesuits.
hundred pounds by the year, that some ride in their Ibidem.
Coches up and down the country, is a matter confessed and not to be doubted
upon. How many are the cousening and cunny-catching tricks, whereby they have
drawn out Quod 3 10.
thousands of pounds out of their ghostly childrens purses? Is it not avowed
that Sparing Discovery.
2200 pou^ds at one time was by the^ sent over seas out of England? Nay are not
the riches of the Jesuits so great, that warning has bin given by one of their
own religion, that all christendo^e had need to look to the^, lest they aspire
to a Quodli. 9. vbique.
Monarchy here in Europe, as they have done to the government of sapona. And
lest this speech may seem to be uttered without all ground, conceive the
infinite wealth of that society. It is too well known to those who have lately
travailed, that the possessions of the Jesuits in some parts of Germany, but
especially in Italy and Polonia are incomparably great, some thousa^ds of
manours, towns and villages being theirs. What their wealth was in France may
be judged by this, that the credible report is, that at their last Quod. 9. 7.
expulsio^ from thence, they lost three millions at the least. In Spain they
have what they will almost. But their greatest benefit is, that under the king
they have free traffic to the Indies to their inestimable gain. How this may
be, you shall hear one of their English-Romanists briefly report. The 2.
letter of A. C. fol. 20.
The Jesuits in India do more the^ co^petent, respect their temporal bo^te in
that spiritual traffic. And, with gold, pearl, spice and such like Indian
wares, they every year from thence enrich copiously their society in Europe.
If this yet do not satisfy, and you desire to hear more of Iapona, and that
from the mouth of another witness, have it then from a low Countryman reporting
the travail of some who went round the world. Additam. None par^s Americae.
In Iaponia, of the Portingale, no man has any authority or power besides the
Jesuits, who do there exercise mar^ha^dising of al matters most ample. And
these almost al are Portingales, who while they were in Iaponia did inform the
greatest part of the nobles and people concerning the popish religion, and when
they had persuaded the^ with diverse dreams, they did so draw the^ unto their
side, that by these they are now esteemed and reverenced as in the place of
little Gods. These Jesuits also do diligently take heed, that no mo^k of any
other order be received into those lands. So making themselves Lords of all
matters and men, they do there exercise most rich and most freque^ted
traffickings. Here the^ is now the first credible relation that they have won
some to their popery; but whither these were wise people or no, to be thus
circu^vented, other men may judge. In the mean time it is manifest that these
Machiavilian and most earthly minded Friars, have not renou^ced al riches and
honors, and as men mortified have composed themselves to their graves. Which
being true of these who pretend the highest state of perfection, what may we
imagine of Secular Priests, the shevve of whose sanctity is contemptible in the
eyes of these Mounsieurs? This is a taste to you D. Hill of the truth of your
asseverations, although I must acquaint you also, that if your Priests should
do those external things which you name, that is endaunger themselves, and
leave earthly commodities, yet this does not warrant that their laboring is to
win men to Christ's faith. No more then theirs was, who Mat 23. 15
compassed sea and land to make a Proselyte, and when he was so made, he was
two-folde more the child of hell then they themselves. Job. (...).
Satan himself does compass the world; but it is not to good purposes. As a
1. Pet. 5. 8.
roaring Lion he walks about, seeking whom he may devour. The Fox goes
far from his den, and adventureth his life also, if he should be caught,
and yet his going is to destroy. The Aug. lib. (...). con^ C^escon Gram.
Circumcellian heretics not for truth but for their fancy, 'parted with all
things that this world might yield them, yea with life it self. 1 King. 1^ 2^.
(...).
Baals Prophets did to the uttermost, hazard themselves for Baall. The Eus.
Eccl. Hustor. 8. 20
Marcionites had their Martyrs, and so also had the Socr. 4. 27
Arrians, who lost their lives. But it is not what a man suffers, but the
cause wherefore he suffers, that makes him acceptable to God.


T. HILL. ANd I see also on the other side, that no Protestant ever had so
great zeal of his religion, as that he would for spreading abroad the same,
forg^ any vvor^ly commodity, either by founding Seminaries, or Colleges in
Countries, or by going or sending where any difficulty or danger was, but as
one wholely respecting this world, he vva^ovveth in wealth, and pleasures
at home, or if by any accident he be compelled, to fly into foreign
Countries, he may not travail except his prettye par^ll goes with him:
but such a one to go simplye, and as they say bona fide to convert others
was yet never (...).


G. ABROT. 13 You will tell us anon, that the children of this Luke 16 18
world are wiser in their generation then the children of light. And this we
knew before; as also that you are more diligent to do evil, then many of us
are to do good. But the Protestants have a vocation, and keep themselves in
their watches, where God has placed every one of them, and do not stir from
it, but when as by the godly Magistrate they are employed. They are not assured
that to leave their own charge, and lead a Circumcellian life without
special appointment is acceptable unto God. Antiochus indeed being stricken by
Gods hand, is reported to profess that he 2. Ma^hab 9. 17.
would become a ^ew himself, and go through all the world that was
inhabited, and preach the power of God. But we propose not to our selves the
example of Antiochus. But the Apostles did so. And had they not a Matthew. 28. 19.
commission so to doe^ Yet might they not go till they had that Commission:
and sometimes they were restrained by the spirit of the Lord, from Act. 16. 6.
7
such and such places. Yea and the calling of the Apostles is ceased. Do you
read that Saint Ambrose, or Saint Austen, or the old fathers in the Primitive
Church, did take any such course? And whereas Gregory sent some into England,
it was upon a special occasion. Eccle. hist. lib, 1. 23.
Bid says that Gregory was warned thereunto by an instinct from God. Indeed
it is probable, that Cap 26.
Berta wife to King Edilbert then of Kent, had secretly a finger in that
business: for she being of the French nation was a Christian woman before, and
would not condescend to be married to Edilbert, but on condition that she
might without impeachment retain her religion, and a Bishop which she brought
with her for that purpose. It may well be supposed that her French friends being
nere to Italy, or her self might solicit that affair. But whereas you say,
that never any of our faith did leave his pleasures at home, and adventure
abroad, the Proverb M^dacom op^rtet esse memorem, Alyar had need of a good
memory has seized upon you: for in this very Chapter you mention the sending
of Ministers abroad, by the advice of John Calvine, which was among the Lerij
Navigat in Brasil.
T^pinambaliij in Brasilia, such a journey every way considered, as never Friar
or Jesuit undertook a more dangerous, as is evident by the extreme famine
endured in their return, besides the vexation and perils sustained there. And
if Frenchmen had been planted in Expeditio in Florida^.
Florida, there had of likelihood gone many more. But there the purpose of
many French was to have resided, had not the murtherours and massacring cruelty
of the Spaniards hindered it, they contrary to their own word and honor,
cutting the throats of all who^ they could lay hold upon. Yea and if it had
pleased God, to have prospered our English See Hacluits viages
Colonies in Virginia, there would not have bin wanting me^ of the Ministry,
to have adve^tured and spent their lives there: and so it may be said for any
other place, where God shall dispose the hearts of our Prince and country, to
think fit, that they probably may honor the Almighty. And whereas you speak
of charges to advau^ce true Religion you needed to have gone no farther then to
your own late Sovereign, who with the assistance of her peoples purses, did
for the true pla^ting of the service of God, spend more treasure in Ireland
alone, and that without any assurance or likly-hood of reco^pe^ce again (which
the Spa^yard ever stood upon in his Indies) the^ al your late Popes, and Popish
Princes have done in se^ding abroad their Age^s. And had it not bin Gods glory
alone, and the honorable mind of a Christian Queen, who desired to bless and
not to spill that which was committed unto her, her Highness might with less
charge, danger, and trouble, have desolated the country of the ancient
inhabitants, and peopled it with English, beginning with the Sea-coastes, and
going forward into the Inland, whereof your Catholic Kings of Spain would
peradventure have made no bones, as is evident by their proceedings in America*
but a true regard of Christianity, and a mind to deal regally in that as in
all other matters, induced her Majesty to waste an inestimable deal of goulde
and silver, besides the loss of men; and all this to bring that rough and
intractable people into the sheepefolde of Christ Jesus, if possibly that might
be. And albeit the times and present occasions were such, that by necessity
the expense of her Highness, was rather employed upon Soldiers, the^ on
Seminaries and Colleges, yet the resolution of her as of a most Christian
Princess was illustrious that way, when beyond the consultations and advises
of all her Graces most noble Progenitors, yea beyond the opinion of Stephen
Gardener himself, as L. Chancellor and a Privy counselor, (howsoever as a
Bishop he was otherwise minded) she was pleased to grant unto that nation,
that at Dubline they should have an University where one College long since
was erected, and before this time more might have been but for the wars. And
if all this had bin done by her Majesty's charge, yet how small would that
have been, in comparison of those masses of treasure, which in warlike service
have been within these few years expended.

14 Your scoff of Pretty Parnel, and many such more we must bear. But if it
be true, that never any Protestant went about such a work, as the planting of
the faith, how do you know that they would not go without their wives in
their company? your tale is tied together with points. But is it such a sin,
that men going from their country, even about the Lords business, should take
those with the^, who^ God has joined as their perpetual yokfelowes, to comfort
each other in sickness and in health? It was wont to be that Marc. 10. 9
what God had coupled together, no man s^ separate, Would you have used this
speech against 1. Cor. 9. 5.
St. Peter, and the brethren of the Lord, and the rest of the Apostles, that
they could not go up and down to preach the word, and spread the faith,
without their pretty Parnels? And yet you know, or may know if you be not
grossly ignorant, that these led women about with them in their ordinary
ministratio^. And is it not more probable that these were wives of their own,
the^ any other weme^? Libr. de Monogamia.
Tertullia^ indeed is of opinion that they were not their wives, but ministra,
other weme^ to attend the^, as to wash their feet, or their clothes;
notwithstanding others do otherwise interpret the place. I will not now dispute
this since al is one in respect of this perse^t purpose. But how say you unto
Aquila, and Priscilla his wife, who first came, together from Rome to Act. 18.
(...). 18.
Cori^th, and the^ from Cori^th to Ephesus, which were pretty iourneies if you
have any skill in Geography, and this later viage also was in S. Paul's company,
who thought himself not the worse, that he had a virtuous woman to go a long
with him. And if you read the s^rie, this Verse 26.
Priscilla by her knowledge in the scriptures, did further the conversion of
Apollos, to the immediate believing upon Christ. For which respects the company
of other women, who are of approved fame, is not unprofitable, when men go
about the winning of souls; since they in private and with their own sex,
may be potent. And we doubt not but many of them in their places do God very
good service, his mercy accepting of their obedience and faith, as well as of
that in men; whereof besides a thousand other, this may be one argument, that
our blessed Savior himself, in his ter-sacred and immaculate affection,
fancying (as I may say) some more then other, with an extraordinary humane
kindness, is reported by the Evangelist to have loved in that sort but four,
whereof two were men, and two were women: the disciple Ioh. 13. 23.
whom Jesus loved, and Jesus Cap. 11. 5
loved Martha, and her sister Mary, and Lazarus. Your scorn therefore against
woman-kinde, may be returned upon your selves, who rather love to commit sin
cante, then in honest marriage to live cast; and there-vpon some of you like
travailers, do make bold rather where you come, then be at any further
trouble, as that Mat. Paris in Henr. 1.
Cardinal of yours did, who in England did all the day in a Synod inveigh
against the marriages of Priests, and at night was taken himself in bed with
a strumpet. How do your younger and youthfuller fry make bold with their
neighbors, when your grave ancient Cardinals do show themselves so carnal?
And here I pray you take knowledge, that for a little while I do favor you.


T. HILL. AND if by any occasion offered unto such, they go about to plant
their Gospel any where, they do it in such a turbulent and (...) manner, and
(...) by Epistles after Saint Paul's use, but by Pistole as Beza did, as every
one may see what spirit pricketh them foreward.


G. ABBOT. 15 THat the doctrine of the Gospel should by Satan's servantes be
reputed turbulent and mutinous, is no news. Some said that they found Saint
Paul a Act. 24 5
pestilent fellow, and a moover of sedition, among all the Jews throughout
the world, and yet good Sir, I pray you, do not you believe that accusation
against him. And no truer is this slau^derous Calumniation against us, who
teach all Christian duetye to Princes and Magistrates, and that for Rom: 13. 5
conscience sake. But Calvine and Beza, as appears by their writings, and
diverse of our English men, as may be seen to the everlasting infamy of you
and yours, by the letters of the Martyrs in Master Foxes great volume, have
planted and watered and confirmed the faith, by very learned and godly Epistles,
imitating therein not only Saint Paul, but diverse other of the Apostles, and
Saint Ambrose, and Saint Austen, with many more the greatest lights in the
ancient Primitive Church. Their books speak to your shame, and to their own
everlasting praise; since as by preaching and verbal exhortation, they showed
themselves instant in 2. Tim 4. 2
season and out of season, so by their writings of all sorts, and among other
by their Epistles, they omitted no duty, which might appertain to the Ministers
of Christ. And this is it, which makes the Romish Synagogue so much to s^arle
at them. But this word of Epistles, as a flaze of your Rhetorike is here put,
but to bring in your tale of Pistoles, wherewith falsely you do labor to
defame M. Beza. Campian tells us your meaning, when he says, Ration 8
A notorious cut threate, being full of Beza, shoting off a Pistole secretly
did kill that French Noble man the Duke of Guize, being a Prince of admirable
virtue: then which fact our world in our age has seen nothing more deadely,
nothing more doleful. The Jesuit had quite forgot the Mossacre Commentar:
Relig: and Reip: in Gallia: l: 10.
at Paris at Bartholomew-tide 1572. when at the marriage of a king to the
daughter and sister of a King, so many thousands of Noble men and meaner
persons, assembled thither upon the fidelity of a king, were slain in their
beds, or in their own or their friends lodgings. That was it whereof
Campian with those words should have spoken. But his malice rather served him,
and fitter it was for his purpose, falsely to accuse that Reverende man Theodore
Beza, that he had persuaded Poltrot to kill the Guize at the seege of Oreleans.
We allow not of the deed, but utterly condemn the fact: and there was never
learned man of our party, who defended it or excused it. The malefactor also
received condign punishment for his labor. Indeed the Ibid. lib. 6. and 7.
Guizes after the death of their father, did publicly give out, that the
Admiral and one other noble man had hired Poltrot thereunto, and that Beza had
approved the deed; but when the admiral heard of it, he knowing it to be a
malicious slander, did by public writing require, that according to the laws
of Justice, Poltrot who was reported to have said so much in his torture, might
be kept alive, that he might come face to face to justify himself: but this
was denied, and Poltrot in all have was executed. But when the rumor still
continued, that the Admiral was touchable with the fact, he puts forth an
honorable declaration, and Protestation of his innocence therein, which was so
apparently true, that the king at Molune in Bourbon, did by open sentence
clear him, and acquit him of that unjust imputation. Now the maine fact being
avoided, Beza proves to be innocent; since by his most desperate enemies he
was never thought to be more then an accessory, by allowing it at the instance
of the Admiral, whereas in truth he spoke not with Poltrot, but was more then an
hundred miles of from him. And yet, notwithstanding that all this is as evident
as the Sun, good Doctor Hill, do you keep the lie going, and let it not die
in your hands.

16 But if we shall rightly scanne who they be, whom an ill spirit in this case
pricketh forewarde, let us remember the practice of the Papacy in this behalf.
Was it not the Ibid. li. 10.
younger Guize, as holy a Catholic as his Father, who suborned one to shoot
the Admiral with a Pistole, at the cruel Battlemewtide in Paris? And when
that wound proved not to be mortal, did not he in person come to his lodging
at midnight, and send up cut-throates to murder him? Was it not the Popish
crewe, (wherein by great probability King Philip himself, and the Duke of
Parma also had a finger) who first procured Dinoth. de bell. civil. Belgie. li.
5.
lauregny to shoot the Prince of Orange with a Dagge, and some years
afterward Balthazar with the like weapon to kill him? If ought could be said
for these things, yet what can be answered for the death, of K. Meterran. Hist
lib. 5.
Henry the 3. of France, one of your own religion, who was stabbed by the
Friar? And this fact was not only liked of by infinite numbers of Papists in
France, yea and as it should seem See the Franc. discourse
defended also by public preaching and writing, but it was allowed of by the
Pope and his Cardinals: bone-fires and processions were made for it at Rome,
yea Sixtus Quintus made a solemn public Oration, in gratulatio^ of the good
event, De interdicto Regn Franciae. edit. Francosurti. Anno. 1591
pronou^cing that Clement the Iacobine who perpetrated that vilany, was worthy
not only to be reputed a Martyr, but to be reckoned a Saint. All the Papists in
the world name the example of such a deed attempted, or achieved by the
Protestants, yea or that which may come nere it by 1000. degrees. And was there
not in like sort an intendme^t of Jesuit Catech li. 3. 6.
Barriere, for the slaughtering of the present K. Henry the 4. which was a
second time put in practice by Cap. 8.
Chastel a scholar of the Jesuits, who assaulted and somewhat hurt the same
King? For this cause by an Arrest of the Parliament of Paris, there was made a
decree against the Jesuits, banishing the^ out of France, as also before the
palace in that Imperial City, a Cap. 20.
Pyramid was erected, which contains a narratio^ of the same. This Edict was
ratified by the highest court of France, which yet notwithstanding consists
most of Papists: and the force of the Edict stands yet upright, albeit
besides infinite other means, La Saint Mess declar. In praefat. ad Regem.
Richeome the Jesuit has made such a flattering and clawing petition, to the
king in behalf of his Society, and has to win her favor also, Tableaux Sacrez
des figures mystiques.
presented and dedicated a brave baby book of the Mass, to the Q. Mary de
Medices now Regnant, that her Highness withal honorable favor would second
their request. Ca^ English me^ forget that, which in the name of his holiness,
was by the Differ between christian subject. D. Bilson part. 3
Cardinal of Como signified to D. Parry by letter; that to kill our late
Sovereign, a woman and a Princes, was not only lawful, but had his merit in
heaven? and ca^ it be out of memory that Meterran lib. 13.
Babingto^ and the rest of the resolute Ge^tleme^ should violently have slain
her, but that god did divert it, and her Honorab. Counsel did discover it? and
who was the chief leader here but Answer to the Manifestat. cap. 3.
Ballard a Priest: and Recusa^ts must be the Actors. You know we could tell you
of more English thus Italionated, and so grown according to the Proverb,
Devils incarnated, who have attempted other such lewdenesses. All this while
then you have great reason to talk of Beza his Pistoles, a matter wherein is
no ground of truth, when as some of your La verite defend vide (...). disc.
books do directly tend that way, and many of the undoubted actions of
diverse of your side, do testify that you and not we, are the only
Prince-murtherers, and traitorous King-assaulters that be or ever were in the
world: which I would have understood of the Jesuited faction. The Lord deliver
our present Sovereign from you, as frequently and in miraculous manner, he
preserved his late gracious hand-maiden Elizabeth.


T. HILL. NEither do they take any other course in their proceedings, but to
destroy States and kingdoms, and to displace lawful Monarchies and
Magistrates, as the lowe-Countries, Germany and Scotland can sufficiently
witness, and ever then beginning is of pride and envy as Luthers was: or by
abusing themselves in their former estate, as Sir John Calvine did, or by
yielding themselves slaves to ambition as they did in Scotland, or by following
Lust and Lechery, or of some such like brutish occasion, and never indeed upon
any ground, using their religion only as a serveturne, when other means fail
to atcheeve their unlawful desires.


G. ABBOT. 17 IN this Chapter you continue so like your self, that a man
should be behoulding to you, if you would speak but one true word. The Reader
perhaps will wonder that I take such pains with you, to lay you so plainly
open: but if I could tell how, I would purge you of that Ps. 140 3.
poison of Adders, which is under your lips. At least I would let both your
friends and strangers see, what a man of your word you are. But it is fit that
Papists should be such as write they care not what. Good Sir I pray you what
State or kingdom has bin overthrowen by us? you may see if you please, that
France has bin kept up by the aid of England, the Germane Princes and
Switzers: that when King Meterra^. Histor: l: 14:
Henry the 3. was like to be beaten out of his king ^ome, by the Guizes
Barricadoes at Paris, and by the vile co^bination of the unholy League, the
King the^ of Navarre, and the Protestants were the only men, to who^ safely he
might fly for succor. And if the King that now is would declare his own mind,
he must acknowledge that the safety of his Realm and Person, does not least of
all depend on the fidelity, circumspection and vigilance of h^s Hugvenots. The
kingdom of Denmark was never so potent, nor so orderly governed, as it is at
this day, since religion there flourished. Since the Gospel has had free
course here, England may truly be said for felicity and all humane happiness,
to be the peerless paragone of the whole world. At the moderation of
superiors; at the obedience of inferiors; that the people every way are found
so Iud. 5. (...). 9.
willing, stand amazed al you fugitives, and ill-willers to your country. And
especially, that when you though that at the death of your late Prince, you
should have had your long ex pected lubilee, and all this ^and should have
been as the field (...) blood, stand aghast to hear how with uniformity of
heart and (...)* all the good subjects of this land did conioyne to expr^ (...)
joy, that they might have such a Lord and Governo^r, as now by cods mercy they
enjoy. They were not glad that they we^ qu^t of one, that so they might live in
an Anarchy or tumultuous co^fused State, but it was their unspeakable comfort,
that since the blessed God had taken unto him, her who was their most gracious
Lady, he had another in store, who^ they might serve in peace, and follow in
war, and from the bottom of their hearts pray for in both. So has the word
of God seasoned the hearts of old and young among v^, with true subjection and
Christian obsequiousnes to the higher power. Now for Germany, when was it in
the Electours and other Princes more flourishing, the^ of late? When were the
governme^ts of the Pals-grave, Duke of Saxony, Laurgrave of Hasse, and others
of the religion, more in riches or settled tra^quillity the^ now? And if the
Empire it self be weakened and the strength thereof be pulled on the knees that
is not the fault of the Gospel there professed: for that error was long
since run into, by Ha^lan. Histo^. l. 15.
Charles King of Bohemia and Emperor, who to get the Empire to his son,
released to the Electours and Princes, the tributes and other revenewes
Imperial: And when they had once tasted the sweetness thereof, they would never
part with it again. Scotland was never more prosperous, in deeper peace, and
surer traffic the^ it is at this day. And if heretofore there have bin any
tumultuous, it was the fault of some humorous persons, and not of Religion, as
may appear by the co^paring of that time with this, when nevertheless now the
same doctrine is there professed. The Cantons of Suitzerland and the
Protestants about the^, do all well maintain their States and governments: And
the United Provinces do make a pretty shift to keep that which they had: and
it wholly seems to be in such a co^plete order, that the King of Spain
knows not well what to make of it. Then certainly al States and kingdoms be
not quite destroyed by us, but those countries which harbor the Gospel, live
in as good reputation as other their poor neighbors do by them.

18 But somewhat else there is in it. The low Countries have shoken of the yoke
of the Spaniards service. Some of them indeed have, but so many of their
Apolog. Prin^p. Aur^. Vid^ ^ter. lib 1 and Dino^h lib. 1.
Apologies and other Defenses published to the Christian world, show that it
was not hastily and unadvisedly done. They have let it be understood, that the
Duke of Burgu^dies government over them, was not so absolute as the power of
other co^fining Princes is over their Subjects. That there is a very great
reciprocal duty of his part toward them, even by the Positive Orders of their
country. That their first submission of themselves to their Dukes then being
French, and afterward to the house of Austria, was ever on that condition
sworn unto, that the^ Privileges should be kept. Among them those which are
the liberties of Brabant, are the chief. Now as these Hollanders say for
themselves, when King Philip the 2. took that harsh counsel, to govern the^
by Strangers, to over-ru^ne the^ by his Spaniards, to bring in the Inquisitio^,
to behead their Nobles, and burn up their people, to erect new Bishoprics for
a bloody purpose, and in a word without ^bling or co^sul^g the Stats, to alter
by the sword the whole face of those Provinces, they sent often to the Court in
Spain, they used ^nfinite supplications which would not be heard,
intercessions of neighbor Princes, many pawses and sta^es and hopes, and at
last being driven by extreme necessity they proceeded farther, even
proclaiming that he had lost the Interest which formerly he had over them.
Nothing made them so averse, as their understanding by a Meterr: lib: 2:
letter intercepted, that there was a project in the King, to use diverse of
their Nobles well at first* and afterward to destroy the^. This letter was
written from Fran^cus Alava Ambassador for the K. in France, to the Lady
Governes the Duchess of Parma. But when all this is said, your Papists were
every way Actours in this, as far as any other: they did join with the rest,
and were most forward for the maintenance of their Privileges. And this so
far appeared, that they jointly would have submitted all to Meter: l: 12*
Henry the 3. of France, a Prince of the Romish religion, which in very deed
formerly they had done to Lib: 10:
Mounsieur the Duke of Alanso^, choosing him to be their Duke of Braba^t, when
he gave no other signification, but in his faith to be Popish. Yea the case of
these Low-cou^try-me^ seemed to me^ of al sorts so just and reasonable, that
first Lib: 8:
Mathias, and afterward Libr: 17:
Ernestus Archdukes both of Austria, both kins-me^ and of blood to King Philip,
and both of the Roman faith did come personally into those parts, and were
Governors of the forces of those united Provinces, which in the eyes of every
indifferent man does leave a strong impressio^, that the dealing of the
Spanyard was more disco^me^dable toward the^, the^ theirs was toward hi^. And I
do verily believe, that if matters were now fresh to begin, the King Catholic
who now is, and his very wise and sage council, would be well advised, before
that they would undertake any courses so appara^tly offensive to the whole body
of that people. Notwithsta^di^g I do leave this whole question of the
Low-cou^tries, to the understanding and consideration of the wise, and to that
which time shall farther discover. The rising of the Sleidan: Comment: Lib: 4:
and 5:
Co^mo^s in Germany, was not caused by Religion; for those of greatest fame who
professed the religion, as Luther namely, did dissuade them from it, and wrote
against them: but it was such a mutiny as sometimes Subjects make in other
Nations, and the like whereof of late the old Peda: de historias.
King of Spain had in Arragon, and so had England in the days of King
Richard the second by Jack Straw, VVat Tiler and other such noble
companions; and another such in the reign of King Edward the sixth. Of such
insurrections what opinion we have, may partly be seen by that treatise
of Sir John Cheek, The true subject to the Rebel, and partly by our
preachings and writings since. We dislike it, we detest it, we condemn it, we
pronounce it to be Rebellion. In the stirs which were in Scotland there is no
doubt but there were many errour^ on both sides. If the ambition of some,
whither in Parliament or otherwise, or the disorderly tumult of some multitudes
did sway to far, let the^ be are their own blame. But this did not overthrow
the kingdom: no we know that it stands to this day in great glory, albeit
perhaps that be not wholly to be ascribed unto the^, who in their cha^ges did as
much look to seeming civil policy, as to the veritable and approovable rules
of religion. We do not hold it to be the power or pleasure of the Subjects, to
depose their lawful and obsolute Princes. By God Prove. 8. 15.
Kings do reign: he it is who sets the^ up, and he it is who must pull the^
down. If they grow to be tyrants, yet as tempests, inundations and other
plagues sent from above, they are to be endured. The more wicked a body was
Rob. Persons, who in his book of Doleman Lib. 1.
Succession would subject the royal throne to the vulgars discretion, of whom I
say no more in that point, since a H^ywar. answ. to Dole:
learned man has tendered an answer to those disputations. Only pretty it it
to see how the author excuses himself, for using another man's name in that
work. He calls himself Doleman, as alluding to that ^sa 53. 3.
Uir Manifest: cap. 4.
dolorum mentioned by the Prophet. So Dole shall be as Latin, and man shall be
as English, a very handsome conjunction. So that shall by Persons be arrogated,
to himself a wicked miscreant, which is peculiarly spoken of Christ the
blessed son of God. So we must believe him, that he did not know that there
was any Priest whose name was Doleman. What will not this man say or vn-say for
his advantage? And how gross does he judge all the world to be, when he would
flappe the Readers in the mouth, with such absurd and senseless tales as this
is. If he will needs ^ve vir doloru^ to intimate him, let him take it from
dolus, doli, and not from dolor doloris, and so he may rightly be termed, vir
dolorum, or dolosus a deceitful man, which appellation he rightly did sit to
himself.

19 When you have alleged these examples of different kinds and different
judgments, you little remember what Papists do in such cases, When after the
conference at Poissy, the An. 8561. Comment. Relig. and Reip. in Gall. Lib. 3:
Edict of January had (upon some conditions and restraint in circumstances)
permitted liberty of religion in France, did not the old Duke of Guize being
then combined with the Constable and the Marshal of Saint Andrews (without
ground or title, but only to advaunce the Popish cause) with Lib. 4.
drawn swords set upon the Protestants assembled at a Sermon at Vassy, and
slew many of them, which afterward cast all France into a civil war? In the
time of King Henry the 8. the Io Fox and Holinsh in (...) Henr. 8.
Yorkshire and Lincolneshire men being incited thereunto by the Popish
Priests, did rise up in arms to recover, or retain their Romish
superstitions. What was the cause of the last An. 1569.
insurrection in the North, but to expel the Religion now established? It is
confessed by him who In Co^cer. ta^. Eccles. Catholic. in Anglia.
wrote the life of Thomas Earl of Northumberland, that he rose only in the
Pseudo-Catholike cause, being animated thereunto by the Popes Bull of
Excommunication, and therefore he is there reputed a Martyr, and so called,
whereas all men know that he dyed for open Rebellion. And if in this case the
whole world otherwise should be silent, yet the insurrection of the Irish in
those late years, for and in behalf of Popery, as also the coming thither of
so many Priests, and their stickling in that business, besides the aid (...)
nomine sent in by the Spanish King, would sufficiently demonstrate it. So
when that you said that this was the manner of the Protestants proceedinges,
to plant their Gospel in turbulent sort, you should have said Papists, and
then you had spoken truly. The rest which you here add, contains vain
words, and that which is nothing material. That which first gave light to
Luther, was the horrible profanation of the merits of Christ's blood, by
setting pardons at sale, and the horror of his conscience to see Religion in
that sort to be abused, for gain to Leo the tenth and his kindred. And
against whom should he be proud or envious? Against Sleidan. lib. 13.
Tecelius for sooth and ignorant and impudent Friar, who gave such immoderate
commendations of his Indulgences, as that if a man had defloured the Virgin
Marie, and begotten her with child, yet for money he could pardon it. Was this
man to be envied? or rather to be pitied? or rather to be punished? or rather
to be crucified with some irregular torture? It is a most poor and base
slander, to report that Luther was offended, because the sale of the
Indulgences was permitted to the other, and not to him. He who looks upon the
Centu. 16. An. 1517.
95. Propositions, which even upon the instant he propounded to be disputed
upon, in the Schools at Witte^berge against Pardons, cannot but see that he
had song disliked the usage of that merchandise, and all the circumstances
belonging thereunto. He may easily discern that his very heart and soul was
moved against the matter, and not against Persons only. The abuse of those
Indulge^ces was so foul, that Hist. lib. 13
Francis Guicciardine a Papist himself does much dislike it. How Calvin did
ill order his life, neither you nor any of your crew can truly report. I know
you have a gross slander spread of him by a lewd companion, contrary to all
show of verity, which when you See the 5. Reason.
farther touch, you shall have farther answered. Of whom you speak in Scotland,
you cannot tell your self: and therefore I know not for whom to answer. If any
being stirred by ambition did amiss, we hold it a fault as well as you do: but
if any did well, and it be but your conceit that he did it for vainglory,
the error is yours for judging so rashly. As for lust, leachery and brutish
behavior, do not you suspect, but I shall largely prove them to be rather in
your men then in us. In the mean while concerning those who have been
spreaders of our Religion, it is as much when they are charged with evil
things, that Quintil. Lib 5. 12.
Aemilius Scaurus negat as that Quintius Uarius ait, that one does deny, as
that another does affirm. And for the ground on which they stood, it was and
is such, that none of you can shake it, no nor the Mat 16. 18
gates of hell any way prevail against it. It is built upon the Cap 7. 25
rock, and therefore fret you, and rage you while you will, it cannot be
overthrown. And whereas you say, that they use their religion but for a
serue-turne, to compass evil practices, you are fowly besides the mark. For
they questionless were in earnest, and would not otherwise have left country
and friends, and all earthly preferment for their conscience sake, yea their
very hues, as thousands of them have done, within these hundred or two hundred
years. Yea many of great judgment have come from you, as he whom D.
Calvino-Turcism. li. 1. 5.
Gifford calls Cardinal Vergerius, but indeed was but like to have been
Cardinal, for being without a cause somewhat suspected of Lutheranisme, he to
Slcid. l. 21
purge himself thereof takes pen in hand to write against Luther; where
laboring about the point of Justification, he had his eyes opened to behold
the verity, and embraced true Religion, although he lost his Cardinality for
his labor. There might many other be named, who by choosing want and
imprisonment, and al worldly miseries, for the doctrine which we profess, did
show that what they did, was to serve no earthly turn, but to save their
souls, and in that they were in very good earnest. These are idle objections
without matter or authority.


T. HILL. IT is plain therefore in my judgment, that the Catholics are they,
who ever fished simply and sincerely with Saint Peter's net, and therein have
inclased miraculous multitudes of fishes, and that the Protestants by their
extraordinary and late angling have caught ^ore, but such as were in a better
and more sound manner taken before. And although Freculphus writes that the
Arrian heretics converted the whole nation In Chron: tom. 2 lib. 4. cap. 20.
Socrat. li. 4: cap. 27. Sozom. l 6. cap. 37. Theod. l. 4. cap. vlt.
of the Goths from Paganism to the faith, in the time of Ualens the Emperor:
yet it appears by Socrates, Sozomenus and Theodoretus, that the greatest part
of those Goths were Catholic Christian, before, and afterward seduced by the
Arrians: for Heretics cannot possibly convert any to such faith, as may make
the co^verted better then they were before.


G. ABBOT. When you say It is plain in your judgment, it is the wisest word
that you wrote a great while: for your judgment is a very weak one, as by that
which is gone before, and that which follows after, has and will appear. If
Catholics be they who fish with Saint Peter's net, what is that to you, who are
not the one, and do not the other? You are heretics, fallen from the
sincerity of Christ's faith to humane fables, and your fishing is not like
Saint Peter's to Luk: 5: 101
catch men to GOD, but to his Arche-enemye at Rome. And what store you have
taken with your Babylonish baits, will in your next Reason appear. Now whither
the Protestants have caught any or none, let whole Christendom judge: nay the
power and revenew of your Pope so much diminished, will speak if all be
silent. But whither they were in better case before, or no, Christ shall
pronounce at the day of the general resurrection, and his word in the mean
time shall determine. They who have felt the servile yoke of your
superstitions and inventions, and now do truly taste the sweet promises of
the Gospel, will not leave their passage to Canaan, and turn back into your
Egypt, to gain all the world by the bargain. We can never yield sufficient
praises unto God, who of his mercy has freely vouchsafed us that favor, which
he has not afforded to many other. And we desire to stand Galat. 5. 1.
fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free. Here you are a happy
man that you chanced to hit upon the story of the Arrians, for now you cite us
something, whereas for three whole leaves together, we have had neither text of
Scripture, nor authority of any divine or humane writer^, but only your bare
word, and that is worth but a little. Well, Freculphus says that the Arrians
converted the whole Nation of the Goths, in the days of the Emperor Valens,
from paganism to the faith. But there be three Ecclesiastical historiens
who seem to cross that. Let us hear them speak. Socr. 4. 27
Socrates says, that under Valens, or in his time many of the Goths received
the Christian faith, and he adds that to please the Emperor, they addicted
themselves to the Arrian sect. Here then there is nothing which hinders, but
that many of them might be new converted at the very first by those heretics.
Theod. 4: 32.
Theodoret indeed has it, that being formerly converted to Christ, and
believing aright, yet when they were enforced to seek friendship at the hand
of Valens, by the instigation of Eudoxius a great Arrian near about him, they
were swayed by the Emperor to entertain the Arrian heresy. And Vlphilas
their own Bishop was a maine forwarder thereof. (...) Sozomen for the most
part accords (...) So^. 6: 37.
with this, that is to say, that Vlphilas who before had been a means to bring
them to the Christian faith, was afterward won over to be an Arrian, and by his
incitement, as also to satisfy Valens, the Goths became of that belief.

21 But the error whereinto these writers did run, partly by living so far of,
and partly for lack of distinct knowledge, how many diverse people of the
Goths there were, whom they, (especially the two later writers Theodoret and
Sozomen) do confound and put together, is explicated by Iornandes, who of
purpose writes a Iornandes de rebus Geticis.
story of the Goths, and lived among them now more then a thousand years
agone, even under the Emperor Iustian, about the year of Christ 530. He then
relates it thus. That there was a people called Ostrogothes, and another
termed Vese-Gothes, dwelling not far each from other, and the one of the^ in
ancient time descended from the other. The Ostro-Gothes had formerly received
the faith, but being beaten and pitifully killed by the Hunnes, a rude nation
and not heard of before, breaking in upon them, the Uese-Gothes then frighted
by the example of their neighbors, least the Hunnes should overrun them also,
agreed to fly unto the Romans for aid; and the more to persuade Valens to
relieve them, they being infidels formerly, desired him to send some teachers
among them, which might instruct them in the Christian says. Valens sends
them Arrian preachers, who taught them heretically to believe in Christ. These
Uese Goths thus converted, being outragiously abused by some of the Emperors
people, took up weapons against the Romans; which when Valens understood, he
goes with an army against them. Loosing the field he flies, and being glad to
betake him to a Cotage, he was so pursued by those Goths, that they set the
house on fire, and burnt both it, and him in it. By the judgment of God says
Ibidem.
Iornandes, that he should be burnt with fire by them, whom seeking the true
faith, he had turned aside to perfidiousnesse, and had writhed aside the fire
of charity to the fire of hell. The Vese Goths then being so great a nation,
were by the Arrians first co^verted, or perverted to believe falsely on Christ.
And this is plain also by Orosius, albeit he use the name Goths in general,
and without any distinction. The Goths says Oros. li. 7. 33.
he had by their legates humbly entreated, that Bishops might be sent unto
them, by whom they might learn the rule of the Christian Faith. Valent the
Emperor with deadly pravity did send teachers of the Arrian sect. The Goths
held the instruction of the first faith which they received. Ualens had before
the rule of the Catholic faith; but leaving it, he did entangle himself
with the perverse opinion of the Arrians. Therefore by the just judgment of
God they burned him alive, who by reason of him, when they are dead, are to
burn by the fault of their error. And that is the truth your own conscience
D. H^st tells you, which is manifest by the mincing of your words, the
greatest part of those Goths were Catholic Christians before. Not all, but
the greatest part. Therefore some, which is in truth the whole Nation of the
Uese Goths, were first co^verted to Christianity by Arrian Heretics. And so
your own Proposition that Heretics cannot convert Infidels, is made void by
your own example. Now whereas you say, that such turning is not to make the
converted better the^ they were before, we must confess that if you speak of
such as be Heretics indeed, and not those whom you only call Heretics,
being Gods good servants, that the gain the^ is but this, that formerly they
knew not Christ at all, and now they know him in some sort, although it be not
so rightly as they should. If this be to be accounted but a little, then your
Indian Converts of whom you boast, gain but a little by you, for you mingle to
their hands the doctrine of the Gospel, with many pollutions of vile
Idolatry, and most horrible superstition, like to that of the old Heathens.


T. HILL. FOR that they having indeed the Scripture in some sort, yet have
not the true sense thereof, which properly is the sword of the spirit, and the
words are rather the scabard in which the svvord is sheathed. And therefore
they fighting only with the scabard without the sword, cannot wound the
hearts of Infidels, And no marveile though they perverte Catholics, for that
men are prove to liberty, and to looseness of life, which by such doctrine is
permitted. So that they are indeed most aptely by Saint Augustine likened unto
Partridges which gather together Libr: 13: cotr: Faust* cap. 12.
young^ones which they begot not: whereas contrariwise the Holy Church is a
most fertle Dove which continually brings forth new Pigeons.


G. ABBOT. 22 Heretics you say have the Scripturs in some sort. Certainly many
of them have the words without any difference from the Orthodoxe. For whereas
many of the^ spru^g up in the Greek Church, they had for the Old Testament the
Septuagint in Greek, and the New Testament word for word, in that language
wherein it was written. But they want the sense thereof, which is the sword of
the Spirit: for the words are but the scabard, and the scabard cannot wound
the hearts of the Infidels. What mischief with the letter of the text, and
their own perverse interpretation. Heretics may do to the^, who were formerly
unbelievers, may be gathered by that of the Arrians last named, by the
Pelagians, by the Donatistes and many other. But those have not the true sense.
What is that to us, unless you can prove that we also want it, which M.
Ration. (...).
Campian in kindness would threape upon us. There is not in the world, any fit
means to come to the right sense of Scripture, which our men do not frequent.
They seek into the Original tongues, wherein the book of God was written. They
confer translations of all sorts: they lay one text with another, and
expound the harder by that which is less difficult: they compare circumstances
of Antecedents and Consequents: they look to the Analogy of of faith
prescribed in the Creed of the Apostles. They search what the first Councels
did establish: they seek what was the opinions of the Fathers concerning
textes in question, and refuse not therein to cope with you about the highest
points, as the Primacy of your Pope, Transubstantiation or any other
whatsoever. Yea they look over the interpretations of your vvriters, to
know if any thing there occur worthy observation: they confer one
learned man with another: they pray to the blessed. Trinity to open and
lighten their understanding, and in a word they omit no means, which
either Saint De doctr: Chriist l. 3: 4
Augustine or any other good writer, does or can prescribe unto them. Only
here they lay a straw, that they are not persuaded, that the Bishop of Rome
has all knowledge and judgment so in Vide Platin, in Paulo: 22
Scrinio Pectoris, that by his final sentence all may be resolved, no not that
he with the Bellar. de veth. Dei li. 3. 3.
Council which he shall like to call, is the only determiner of the true
meaning of al controversed passages. The Poes all of them are men, and
therefore may be deceived; many of them are ignorant men, in comparison of any
great Clerk-ship, and many of them have entertained unsound opinions, as
Liberius and Honorius, and diverse Councels have grossly erred, as that second
Synod of Nice, and therefore blame us not, if we pin not our salvation, upon
such weak or partial men's interpretations.

23 When you report that Heretics pervert Catholics, by your own second Reason
before handled, you must mean Papists by your Catholics, or no body, and
then you are a right good Proctor to speak in their cause. Their matter was
bad enough before, and in the telling you make it worse. Your Catholic men
(for your words can touch no other) are pro^e you say to liberty and looseness
of life. Would you have a fee for this pleading? We do not doubt but many of
the^ are very licentious, great breakers of the Sabbath, swearers and
blasphemers, and much inclined to other viciousnes, whereof if a man would see
the spectacle of all spectacles, let him but go to Rome. And who would
forbear this lasciviousnes, when a pardon from a Pope, and absolution from a
Priest, can make all as clear as it had never been? But we on the other side
teach our people, that these your peccatill^ do offend Almighty God, and that
they, yea every Mat. 12. 36
idle word must be reckoned for, and our Church discipline does bring notorious
transgressors to the censure of excommunication, and open penance for their
crimes. They who have turned unto us, are some of the best and gravest of your
sect, and those which be most virtuous of life, whereas contrariwise, many such
as among us have been wanton and toyish people, or deeply touched with
suspicion of lubricity, have bin observed to retire themselves to your shores,
as being the fittest harbor for such rotten vessels. It were an easy thing to
name many, who leading lives as they do, a man rightly may say of them, They
are fit to be Papists. We do not envy you such persons, although we could wish
that even such would come to the truth, and not amend their former vice with
future idolatry. But while you receive such, as have had education otherwise,
(howsoever it has been neglected by them) you are rather the Partridges, of
whom Saint Austen by remembrance of the words of the Prophet Ier. 17. 11.
Jeremy does speak, such Partridges as gather the young which you brought not
forth, as your Seminaries do declare. But God be praised for it, some of them
do serve you, as Saint He^mer. lib. 63.
Ambrose reports that the Partridge is served. For whereas one Partridge does
steal away the eggs of another Partridge, and hacheth them, if the opinion of
that learned Author be true, diverse of the Epist. lib. 7. 48.
young being hatched, when they afterward heat the voice of their own and
natural dams in the field, leave their stepmother, and come again to her, to
whom by original right they belonged. So many of your infection after true
grace imparted from above, do return from your Seminaries, and adioine
themselves sincerely and laboriously to the Church of England. They are bound
to bless God who delivers them in such sort, even as Ion. 2. 10.
Jonah was freed out of the whales belly. They are come out, not of the
Doue-house, which fertilely brings forth Pigeons, but from Babylon, where Is.
13. 21.
Z^ and O^ be, and Ostriches and Dragons. For as the old be there, so are the
most part of the young. Malicorvimal^ ^vum. A bad crow, a bad egg. And now
telling you, that a great part of this your fourth Reason, is taken out of M.
Bristowes five and twentieth Motive, I let you go play you, though but for a
turn or two.

24 But to come to the Reader, whereas here the term of Heretics is so often
used against us, we briefly answer with Saint Gregory, Moral. lib. 10. 16 ex
Exodus 8. 26.
That is service unto God, which to the Egyptians was ^nation. And whereas
among so many other foolish ones, that is made a reason, why the Popish
religion should be truth, saving M. Doctors vnpointed and vnco^cluding
discourse, what can there by sound argument be enforced thereupon? What shall be
the ground that must be stood on? For cannot Heretics pervert? The Apostles
have told us, that their 2 Timothy 2. 17
words fret as a Canker, that Cap. 3. 6.
they creep into houses, yea that 2. Pet. 2. 2.
many shall follow their da^able ways. And you heard before what the Arrians
did, Or is it not unto truth? Why, as touching this disputation, that is the
maine question between the Romanists and us. And to build upon that, is but
Petiti^ prin^: to se^ke to have that granted, which is mainely and especially
denied. We do not yield that any of them, winning their Converts to the
subjection of the Papacy, do bring them to Christ; but rather to Antichrist. Or
is it a necessary co^comitant of verity in doctrine, that such as have (...)
among them, should be bound to convert Nations to the faith? The^ to say
nothing of the Jewish Church, which had the word appropriated to it alone, for
so long a time, what shall we think of France and England and Ireland, and
many other provinces of Europe, which for a thousand years together, are not
known to have converted any one country to Christ: but have had enough, and
perhaps too much to do, to keep themselves in the integrity of piety. And yet
our Pseudo-Catholiks make no doubt, but that all that while they had the right
belief. These things do manifest the fickleness and vnstaiednes of the
foundation he^ laid. But if to tur^ men to Christ be so necessary (...) duty,
what will they say to such a strange bringing home, of so many kingdoms and
regions of Europe, within these hundred years, and that by a few at first, and
those weak ones, when Satan, and the Bishop of Rome, and many potent Princes
confederated with him, did leave no means unsought, to stifle Truth as in the
cradle? When the sword has not been spared, the fire has not been forborne:
when their mighty men have strove, their learned men have written; there have
been wanting no libels, no slanders, no defamations, yea no rebellion and
treason, and massacting and poysonfull attempts, and yet nevertheless Truth
stands upright. You talk of conversion: but all the lovers and wel-willers
of the whore of Babylon, may and do stand amazed, and gaze and wonder at the
ruin of their kingdom, by so many millions going from them. And we trust in
Jesus Christ, the conserver of the faithful, that in peace, in war, in all
things that can come, this Ark of Noah shall swim in safety: floate, being
beaten upon with many billows, but yet evermore be preserved. God has not in
his mercy given so much light, that it should be extinguished, or the glory of
it much dimmed before his sons appearance, With the breath of his month he
has (...). These. 2. (...):
ken and blasted that man of sin, and it now remains, that he should be
utterly abolished at Christ's coming. Gaze therefore you Romanists till your
eyes and hearts do ache, to see the ^ine and confusion of the Gospel; and yet
as we trust in Almighty God, you shall never have your purpose.


THE FIFTH REASON. Largeness of Dominion, through the multitude of Believers.
T. HILL. THE Church which the M^ssias vv^ to plant, must be ((...) is
aforesaid) dispersed through all nations and kingdoms, (...) the Holy Pro^ts
^st pl^ly fore-shewed, and namely the Royal Prophet speaking of the Apostles
and Preachers, which should succeed them, says Their sound went forth into
all parts of the Psalm. 18.
Earth, and their words unto the ends of the circle of the earth. And ^st
^festly (...) ^sse of Christian domi^ in the (...) Ps^. And S. (...) the (...)
beasts, and the f^e ^d twenty El^ (...) before the L^be ^ging thus: Thou art
worthy Lord to take the book, and to open the seals thereof, Apoc. c. 5:
for thou have bin slain, and have redeemed us to God in thy blood, out of
every Tribe and people, and Language and Nation. and (...) her pl^ After these
things says he, I saw a great company, which no man (...) able to number, of
al Nations and Tribes, and Peoples and Tongues. Cap. 7.



G. ABBOT. IT was long since said, that whereas our blessed (...) Savior whc^
he was taken up to an exceeding high mountain, and showed all the kingdoms
Math: 4: 8:
of the world, and the glory of the^, did refuse that offer of Satan, Al these
will I give thee, if the wilt fall down and worship me, the Pope coming long
after, and hearing that such a liberal profer was made, took the Devil at his
word, and in hope of such a wide exte^ded dominion, did fall down and adore him.
You come in this place to plead for your Grand-maister the Bishop of Rome, by
the validity of this Donatio^: but forgetting that he who first mentioned the
match, is the (...) father of lies, and so consequently may promise that, which
is not in him to Johan. 8. 44.
perform, you gladly would challenge the co^pleting of the bargain, that your
master under Satan may have so large a kingdom. And that you may the better
prove it; as that cunning deceiver alleged and mis-alleaged the Luke 4: 10:
Scripture it self, so you do to your Auditors; yea so strictly you do
follow him, that whereas he cited what he had to say, out of a Psalm. of David,
you also begin in that sort, laboring to evict a false Co^clusio^, from a
right and true Proposition. That the Church of the Messiah, must be throughout
al Nations, David you say foretells, and you cite us for that purpose a verse
of the 18. Psalm. as you read it after the Septuagint, of the 19. as we more
truly account it out of the Hebrew. Psalm: 19. 4:
The (...) is gone forth through all the earth, and their words into the ^ds of
the world, which se^te^ce whosoever co^sulteth that text, shall se properly and
originally to mean the course of the heave^s, which being in continual
motion, and being whirled about the Ce^te^ the earth, do testify to all nations
that there is a supreme power guiding and governing the whole world. And this
doctrine, to wit, that from the ordering of the Creatures, the being of a God
may be collected, S. Paul does also teach. But that saying of David, the same
Cap: 10. 18
Apostle as Rom 1. 20.
you suppose, extends farther to the doctrine of the Apostles and Preachers.
Verily the words also cited by S. Paul, do ca^ the same sense for the
Creatures and no otherwise, if you naturally and literally do take the^: and
then I may truly say that you cannot Bellar de verb. Dei lib: 3. cap: 3
invincibly and demonstratively, infer that out of them which you desire.
Notwithstanding because S. Paul!, per spiritum Apostolicum, by the Apostolic
spirit which was in him, and which is not to be found but in the compilers of
the New Testament, might add and alter, and explicate and apply places of the
old Testament, to that which the words did not literally carry at the first:
and because our Savior Christ himself did so, being full of that spirit which
spoke by the Prophets: and because also some of the old (...) fathers alluding
hereunto, have not properly but by allusion, referred this Chrysostom: in Mat:
24^ August: Epist, 80.
Scripture to the preaching of the Apostles, we will not stand with you, but
accept it for the generality, as you here would have it, and as it is to some
such purpose formerly alleged by me. It is therefore condescended unto, that
immediately almost after Christ's asce^sion, the Gospel was divulged East and
West, and North and South, in very many countries; but whither in every
particular Nation under heaven we dare not say, since all is in the Scripture
taken for a great part, as Math: 3: 5:
then went out to John, Jerusalem and allud^, and all the region round about
Iordon, which is to say, very many inhabitants of those places, and they
persons of all qualities. And elsewhere Luke 2: 1:
all the world being a most general speech, yet is so restrained, that it must
imply no more, then so much thereof as was subject to the Romans. Which was
much at that time, but far from the whole earth. It is also truth, that in
another Psalm, the Roial Prophet under Salomo^s person who was a figure of
Christ, does foretell that the Psam: 72: 10: 11:
Kings of The fit and of the He^ shall bring presents, the Kings of Sheba and
Seba shall bring gifts, ^ea all Kings shall worship him, all nations shall
serve him, inte^ding the Messiah. But will any man so take this according to
the letter, that there should never be King, not Agrippa, not Domitian, not
Sapores, but should be Christians, and al nations at al times should entertain
the faith? This extent must be so considered, that at one time or another,
before the day of judgment, Christ Jesus should be preached, in some part of
all ^uine regions, and here and there Kings and Queens whc^ God should be
pleased to call the^, should submit their scepters unto the Lord of heaven. But
you might well perceive that these things are spoken by an An^ he sit,
between the lewish Church, which was restrained within the compass of one
land, and so continued for many ages; and the Church under the New Testament,
which should at one time or another, be variously diffused through all general
places of the world. And what else do those two texts out of the Revelation
insinuate unto us, but that Christians should be picked from many nations and
people, far otherwise the^ while the lewish Synagogue did flourish: but you
will not I trust infer, that all nations at all times, or all people of all
Nations, should belong to the true sheepe-folde; but there may be ebbes and
flows; the Church in the Apoc. 12. 6.
wilderness at the time appointed, 2. These. (...); 3.
Apostasy and revolting; Luke 18: 8:
faith (cant to be found among men, since there is nothing fore-tolde by the
Spirit of God, but must have his accomplishment: And therefore since we are
warned of both, there must be an age of paucity, as well as of plenty; a waning
of the Moon, as well as a full or waxing. But what urge you heere-vpon?


T. HILL. THese things with many such like on Holy write are no wise verified
in ^y Relegion under Heaven, but only to the Roman Catholic Church, for that
(...) but it (as every man knows) has had any large s^pe to account upon in
any age. And it has bin for these thousand years at the ^east throughout both
the Hemispheres, in such forte that the S^nne stretches not his b^s further
then it does and has done: yea there is (...), nor people, nor climate in the
world, which has not heard of, and (...) some measure received the Catholic
Roman Religion.


G. ABBOT. 2. IF you take Religion here for the true service of God, we deny
Popery to be Religion. If you take it for devotion in what sense soever, then
what say you to the Sarac^nsfaith; which for many hundreds of year, while it
possessed so much of Asia, as Persia, with Media, Arabia with the country,
adjoining, besides what is added within these 300. years by the raigns of the
Ottoma^^: in Africa all the Northren part from Egypt to Marocco, alonge the
Mediterrane Sea; and in Europe some thing, as the kingdom of Granado in
Spain, and diverse times more then that, there, was nothing inferior for
circuit of land, to the bounds of the whole Western Church, wherein only the
Pope dominered. And shall Mahumetisme herevpo^ be concluded to be that faith
which must save men's solus. But good Sir, when the Primitive Church did reach
so wide for diverse hundreds of years without any maine corruption; and when
the truth afterward though eclipsed yet was not extinguished in the Eastern,
Indian, and Africane Churches; as also in very many poor men in West See the
answer to the 1. Reason.
Europe throughout the worst ages, and when now of late it is spread so wide
again, these things do plentifully satisfy all the speeches before named,
and Rome by the^ shall have no more possession of piety, the^ a gross harlot
has of honesty. You would gladly draw all Prophecies to you, and appropriate
them to your selves, whereas (those few excepted which living among you
loathed your abuses) you had and have the least part of Gods congregation to be
found with you. And here gentle Doctor, according to your custom, not your
mouth but your pen does exceedingly run over, while you speak things
incredible, improbable, impossible, and your Geography is just as sound as your
Divinity. Has your Romanishe belief for a thousand years together, been as
largely difused as the beams of the Sun? Before I go farther, I vvoulde
gladlye know, whether you can blush at all or no? Here your dreaming does
far exceed the doting of Hannibals Phormio. You must have a face of brass
on, when you do but come forth, to make good the least part of this
proposition. Cosmographers now divide the world into the old known
Countries, and into the nevve found Lands. And first do you think that in
the Lands lately discovered, which in quantity are more then one half of
the world, the Sun did not shevve his be^^^s till within these sixe-score
years. And can you bring any mo(...) or presumption in the world, that ever
Christian man did know them, or they knevve any Christian man, but
especially that they heard of your Bishop of Rome, till Christopherus Columbus
did discover them in the year of our Po^. Martyr. Decad. (...). Benzo.
Nov^orb. Histor. (...). 1. 6.
Lord 1492? And if you cannot do this, much less will you evince, that they
accepted of his faith for a thousand years together. And as for the South
Co^tinent, that was discryed but about or since the time of finding of America.
As for the old known world, that consists in Africa, and Asia, and
Europa, in every part of all which the Sun shines some times in the year,
yea even to the very Pole, as the rules of Astronomy (which it seems you
never understood) will tell you. Until that of late the Portingales
attempting Osor. de gest. Emanucl. lib. 1.
to go to Calecut, found the Cape of B^na (...), and since that time have
straggingly got here a town, and there a petye Castle upon the Sea coast,
all which was but a little before the going out of Columbus; what was there
within the whole compass of Africa, which knew ought of the Romish
doctrine, unless peradventure you will name ^dem.
Septa, and a town or two in Barbarye, where some Portingales before that time
did dwell, or else perhaps that it was possible, that some Merchants of
Europe, might go to Alexandria in Aegypte for wares, and there while they
resided keep their own superstition? But the country it self was under the
Saracent, either Sultanes or Turks for seven or eight hundred years. And as
you spedde in Africa, so did you in Asia, the whole compass of that huge
region taking no notice of your Pope and of his Idolatry. For the Christians
which were there, were either of no dependence upon Europe, I speak for the
greater part of these last thousand years, or were of the Greek Church. The
only thing which can be pretended, is that Malmisb. in Gulielm. a. lib. 4:
Girusale^me del Tasso.
Godfrey of Bullion, and other Christians of the Western p^s, did for a time
conquer and keep thr holy land, which is scant the hundredth port of Asia,
and this was hold but by the sword, and that but for H^veden. ^rt (...) in
Henry (...).
fourscore and seven years, but long before that time, and so since again
the Saracens ever had it. What shame is there the in this man, who so
asseverantly protests such gross falsehoods? At the world the^ in a miner is
shrunk into our Europe; and there again is cut of the Eastern Gr^ church, who
could never be brought to join with the Pope of Rome; no not at the Platina in
Eugan. 4.
Council of Florence, when Italy had thought to have entangled them in her
net, And all the dominion of the Muscovite, which could not be caught by the
bait of Possevin. de vebus Muscovit.
Possevinus; Besides the Northren parts of Scythia Europaea, now inhabited by
some of the Tartars. So that setting aside religion and common honesty among
men, if you had but a compet^ wit, you would never so audaciously have
pronounced of this matter. Yet I make you the largest allowance which in any
probability you can crave.

3 But since your hand is in, you will not so give it over. There is no tongue,
nor people, nor climate in the world, which has not heard of, and in some
measure received the Catholic Roman religion. Should you not here be
answered rather (...) ^stibus then with words? What say you to the South
Continent, which is so huge a country, that if the firm land do hold unto the
Pole, as it commonly is received and believed, it very near equaleth all Asia,
Africa and Europ^; And what part in all that world, is thoroughly discovered as
yet by any Christian? and I do not capitulate with you, touching all of it,
but what part at all is there of the same, that has received the faith of
^ome? How much is there in Peru, yea of the maritime parts of Brasile, and
down toward the straightes of Magellanus? how much is there in the inlande,
as that Terra Patago^ or of Gi^es, yea how much toward the North from thence
is there, all which remains yet in the possession of mere Infidels, who
neither have been yet subjected to the heavy yoke of the Spaniards, nor have
once tasted of their religion; Indeed for Hispania Nova, and up as high as
M^xice, the Spanishe have incroched very much into their hands; but if we
look higher into the Northren and colder parts of America, which are not so
fit for the breeding of gold the s^m b^m of Spain, what huge countries be
there of incomparable bigness, which have nothing of Christianity in them?
Look either on the farther side, as men pass through the South Sea, in that
Hacklan the viage of S: F: Dr:
Nova Albion touched on by Sir Frauncis-Drake, and all the parts adjacent; or
on the nearer fide by the North sea, in Florida, Virginia Norimbega,
Estotilant, with all whatsoever is within the straightes, together with the
maine Mediterrane countries, being more then the kings of England and France
with diverse other Princes of Europe have under all their dominion; and these
remain yet mere Ethnikes, not knowing of Christ Jesus or Christianity, much
less the trinkets of spot ted Popery. The who regi^ toward the North Pole, as
Groneland, and Nova Z^la, and I cannot tell what besides, remain in the same
taking. The top of Scandinaviasas, as L^ppia, B^ia, Seriefi^ia, and Finland,
are so merely Gentiles, as that Ol^ ^agn lib. 3. 2. vide Dam. ^goes de Lappij^.
lately they adored for God, whatsoever they did first see of any living thing,
at their coming forth of door every day. The mighty land of Tartaria, which
contains in it so many millions of men the dominion of Russia which extends
in length above Aeg. Fletche. de ^uss. cap. 1.
four thousand miles, as far as Astrac^ and the Caspian sea? have nothing more
to do with the Roman religion, then with that which is farthest from them.
Who ever did hear that the Great Cham one of the mightiest Princes on the
Earth, did admit ought of Popery. As for China and diverse portions of the East
Indies, ^alfo the Southern part of Persia, and the maritime coasts of Africa
and Aethiopia; these have indeed some Portingales in them here and there upon
the Sea cost: but what have the Princes of those countries, or their whole
states to do with the Bishop of Rome And what Monarkes Prester John, and the
Sophy or Shaw of Persia be, men of learning know well enough, although you
understand it not. To say no more, what is there of the Roman religion
received in all Turkey, unless you will say that there be some few Venetian or
French merchants, in Constantineple, A leppo, Alexandria or such mart towns,
who upon permission, have their Liturgy in some one set place; or unless you
will name those few Italian Friars, who paying a tribute to the Turk for it,
do lie at Jerusalem, that there they may show the counterfeite sepulcher of
Christ, to such superstitious Christian Pilgrime^, as in their blind devotion
travail to the holy land Thus grossy and absurdly, and ignorantly, and
audaciously, you write you know not what. But if lying will prevail, you are
resolved to have it. Miserable are out Papists who read such books as these
be, and esteem them as Jewels, and believe them, and dare not look on any
man's writing which displayeth the falsehood of them, for fear least they
should learn the truth, or catch some goodness by them. God open their
blinded understanding.


T. HILL. NEither can the Protestants sait, that the Church (...) begins ^th
to flowrish, and to dilate it self in the world after so many age^t for that
now it ss grown old and aged as is most pl^e, Colos. (...). Ireneus l. 1.
cap. 3. Tert. li. co^t. Iudens c. 4. Cypr. de vnitat. Eccl. Athana. lib. de
humanit verb. Chris. and Hier. in Mat. 24. Aug in Epist. 78. and 80. ad He
sychium. Theod. lib. de legibus. Leo M^g. ser. 1. de S. Petro and Paulo.
and to say that she (...) her young years, but now in her old age it to
make her a Monster. She must therefore of necessity have gravv^ and increased
and occupied if not all the world, yet (...) doubt the greatest part thereof,
and so has the Catholic Roman Church, and (...) but she done: for in the
Apostles time she began to fractifie in all the world. And in Saint Iren^
his time, she was spread all ever the world then knownne, as she was
afterward in Tertullian his time, and (...) the days of Saint Cyprian,
Athanasius, Chrysostom, Hierome, August^, Theodoretus, Leo the great and
Prosper, who in his look De Ingratis has these words, Seeds Roma Petri, quae
pastoralis honoris
Facta caput mundo, quic quid non possidet armis,
Religione tenet.
Which thus may be Englished Rome Peter's seat, whose Bishop is of Prelates
Peerless Lord
Religion Lady makes of all, which arms do not afford.



G. ABBOT. 4. The objection which here you frame in our name, is of your own
inventio^, and shallow like your self, and so is your co^pariso^, that the
Church ^st not breed now at this time, least she should be like a mo^st (...).
And yet you will have your Church now within these hundred years, spread her
self into the East and West Indies, where she never was before. I will not
here remember you that, Genesis 18. 11.
Sata in her younger years did never conceine, but in het old age ^ote a
son, and yet she^ (...) monster. But howsoev^ ordinarily women in their
younger years do breed most children, and it were a monstrous matter as you
would insinuate unto us, that in old age they should have many, yet this makes
nothing for your purpose, nether has it any affinity with the spouse of Jesus
Christ. For women til convenient age breed no children at al. And will you
think that the Church was ever at that pass? And women after a time leave
bringing forth altogether: and whereas the age of some of the^ has extended to
a hundred, for the latter half thereof they have continued childles. Will your
wit serve you to think, that so it is with Christ's beloved? Then the later
generations of the world should be in a fearful state. You may therefore
understand, that the fruitfulnes of the Church, is nether tied to the first
age, nor middle age, nor the last age, but to such times as the Lord has
appointed, who decrees that at some times there should be balcyons days, but
some other seasons great tempests, in which the Church shall have a being, but
yet be reduced to straights, and to a smaller number. Let any man look into
this before the coming of Christ, at which time, the Church was in her youth,
for almost 2000. years, being contained in the houses of a very few of the
Patriarchs. After Exodus 1. 1. 7
Jacobs coming into Egypt, and the multiplying of the Israelits, her branches
were spread wider. And so did she continue upon reasonable terms, until 1.
King. 12 28.
Ieroboams time. But when the Princes of Israel utterly forsook the Lord, and
the kings of Judah also many times turned from the way, both themselves and
their people; were not the good brought to a great paucity? Yet when 2 King. 18
(...). Cap. 22. 2.
Hezechias came, they were more a sloat again: but after him they went as fast
down. Then d Josias once more very admirably did put life into the^ again,
yet when he was dead, till the coming of Christ which was well-neere five
hundred years, there was great scarsity of the faithful, saving about the time
when the ^r. 2. 1.
temple was re-edified. In that state did our Savior find it: and then nor
many of the Jews were reduced to the faith, but the maine harvest was of the
Gentiles. Now if any of the false Priests, either in the days of Josias, or of
the Apostles, would have bin of your mind, he might have argued as you do, that
if the Church the^ should be said to bring out more children, the^ formerly
she had done, she must have gone for a mo^ster. So it is since the time of
Christ. God has his appointed seasons which himself has foretold, sometimes
promising that his spouse should flourish, and some other times be obscured. So
in the days of Constantine, the hew of her, not for purity but for extent, was
more glorious then under all the former Emperors. Under Constantius and Julian
her territory was abridged: yet under the Theodosij and some other blessed
Emperors, she grew again, and notwithstanding was no monster. After ward her
beauty was dimmed, the authority of Antichrist spreading it self in the
world, as it was before hand Apo. 13. 14
prophesied that it should be. But God at last did determine, that when other
things should be accomplished, the 2. These. 2. 8.
wicked man should be reveiled, as all the world may see that in our time he
is, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, that is with the
preaching of the word, which who does not se to have diminished the kingdom
of the Pope, and shall abolish with the brightness of his coming, so that
Antichrist albeit much maimed shall be til the last day of judgment, and therefore
his Ministers must strive to keep his kingdom upright, as our Jesuits and
Seminary Priests do. But his Babylon in part and by degrees must fall, and so
it is already. The Church was ever somewhat, but of late she is more glorious
then in some ages before. What will you therefore say farther?

5. She began in the Apostles time to fructify in all the world. That we do
not deny but the question is, whither the Gospel did spread otherwise, then
every way, toward all the coasts of the world, in such sense as formerly I
have showed. It was toward the East and West, and North and South, but not in
every particular province under heaven. The words of Lib. 1. 3.
Ireneus are, The Church having gotten this faith, although she be dispersed
through the whole world, does diligently keep it. Wherout if you will gather,
that in his time the Church was in all the known world, you will make us of
Britain very ancient partakers of the faith, since Euse. Eccl. Histor. 5. 19
Ireneus was the scholar of Polycarpus, whose Master was John the Evangelist.
And this excellently fitteth your report of king Lucius and Pope Eleutherius.
Tertullian says thus: Contra Iudaeos c. 4.
The kingdom and name of Christ is every whither extended, is every where
believed, is embraced by all the nations above named, reigns every where, is
every where adored. The countries before named are from India to Aethiopi^,
Germany, Britain, Mauritania and some few other. Cyprian says De simplicit.
prelato. vel de vnirat. Eccles.
The Church with store of fruitfulness does stretch forth her bows into the
whole world. The speech of Athanasius is, De incar. not. verbi.
As many nations as be any where, abiuring th^r countries rites, and the
wickedness of their Idols do now place their hope on Christ, and do give
their names, unto him, as even by the very eyes a man may deprehend.
Chrysostom writes thus: In Mat 24
That before the overthrovve of the City of Jerusalem, the Gospel was
spread through the world; hear Paul, Their sound is gone out into all
lands. And Hierome commenting on the same text, Hier in Matthew: 24:
A sign of the Lords coming is, that the Gospel should be preached in all
the world, that no man may be excusable, vvhichwe see already fulfilled, or
shortlee to be completed: For I do not think that there is any nation
remaining, which is ignorant of the name of Christ. And although it has not
had a Preacher, yet by the bordering nations it cannot be ignorant of an
opinion of the faith. St, Austen being enquired of, concerning the end of the
world, says that before it come, the Gospel must be preached to al nations,
which in as much as he supposed not to be done in his time, he resolves that
the day of judgment was not presently to follow. Hear himself, Epist. 78:
But if by reason of certain places, which are inaccessible and in hospital,
it is not believed to be possible, that the world should be traveiled over
by the servaunts of GOD, and it should be faithfully reported, how many and
how great nations there be yet without the Gospel of Christ; muchlesse do I
suppose, that by the Scriptures it may be comprehended, how long times there
shall be unto the end, in as much as in them we do read, No man can know
the times which the Father has put in his own power. In the second Epistle
which you cite out of Saint Austen, the best words that I can find for your
purpose are these, Epist: 80.
The Prophet shows, h^vve there is no part of the world left, where the
Church is not, since there is (...) of the Islands left, but that it does adore
him. What more is in this place you shall hear by and by. Theodoret has thus
much; speaking of Antichrist, In divino. decretor. Epitome.
by the prediction of God, the Gospel must be preached among all Nations,
and then he that is Antichrist, must be so seen. The words of Leo are, Leo
sermon. (...): in Not iv. Petr. and Paul.
To the end that the effect of this unspeakable grace of CHRIST'S taking flesh
upon him, might be spread through all the world, the providence of God did
prepare the kingdom of the Romans. Prosper writes how Pelagius the heretic
being sprung up in Britain was oppugned.

Prosper do Ingratis.
Talia cum demens late diffunderet error
Commentisque rudes traheret let halibus aures,
Adfuit exhortante Deo provisa per orbem
Sanctorum pia cura patrum, non dispare ^otu
Conficiens diros taculis coelestib^ hosts.
Hisdem namque simul decretis spiritus vnus
Intonuit, pestem subeuntem prima recidit
Seeds Roma Petri, quae Pastorales honoris
Facta caput mundo, quicquid non possidet armis
Relligione tenet; non segnior inde Orientis
Rectorum cura emicuit.
6 These words if you will urge for the Primacy of Rome, they do in substance
import no more, then that which was decreed in the first Nicene Council, where
the Bishop of Rome was termed Vide Gratian part: 1: Distinct: 99. 3:
Primae sedis Episcopus, and the words poetically serte out by caput
pastoralis honoris do signify no more. Therefore you go to far, when you
say the Bishop of Rome is of Prelates peerless Lord, which your self may
see, since Prosper in co^futing Pelagius, joins many other Bishops as equals
in care with the Pope. But then he reckons him up first, secondly the Bishops
of the East, afterward Hierome. And whereas he terms Rome the seat of Peter,
that was according to atradition much received among the Ancient, but for the
manner thereof much differed upon by all. Besides Prosper lived in the days of
Pope Leo the first, with In vita Leonis Mapni.
who^ he was very familiar, and with In vita Prosp. Aquitan.
who^ he was at Rome, receiving many favors from Leo, and therefore might more
easily incline to the opinion of that Pope, who began to arrogate too much to
his See, and to magnify it so far as that his Successors, but especially.
Lib. 3. Epist. 76.
Gregory would not stand to it. This does often appear in the works of
Leo, but I will cite by name one place, whence Prosper might have the prose of
that, which heeturned into verse. Speaking unto Rome, as concerning Peter and
Paul, he says thus: Leo Sermon. 1. in Nativit. Petr. and Pauli.
These are they who brought thee to this glory, that thou should be a holy
nation, a chose people, a city of Priests and Kings, and that by the holy
seat of Saint Peter, thou being made the head of the world, should more
largely rule by divine religion, then by earthly dominion. When Prosper heard
this from Leo as an Orator, he might set it a strain higher as a Poet, who in
his amplification would leave out no word, which might grace the place who^ he
would honor. And then he could not see the inconvenience, that afterward did
arise by too much magnifying that Episcopal or Patriarchical city. And these
things are especially to be remembered, if you would urge his words to that
purpose, which in this place principally concerns you, that is to say, that
the faith was spread over all the world. Truth it is that much of the world
joined in the same belief with the Clergy and city of Rome, and from thence as
being one of the Imperial residences, they had great light; and many also
repaired to the Bishops there, as being for a long time eminent persons, in
respect of their holiness of life; but if we will speak exactly, neither did they
take their religion from thence, more then from Jerusalem, Alexandria and
Antioch, neither did, I will not say the faith of Rome, but that faith which
was in Rome, as well as in other places, possess the whole world. For first the
Loco cita^o.
words of Leo himself, do signify the Christian Religion to be no farther
spread over the earth, then the Roman Empire had bin, or little more; and we
know that albeit under that Empire was much of the old known world, yet there
was also a very great deal which never came under their subjection. And
secondly even at that time, being about 450. years after Christ, neither by the
Apostles, nor by their successors had the Gospel bin me^cioned in many parts
of the old world, which is it that seems here to ly on you to prove. And for
this we need no better testimony then his whom before you cited, S. Austen I
mean, who was an old man living when Prosper was young. Besides I will choose
no other place, but one of those whom yourselfe cite, which being thoroughly
scanned by the Reader, will evidently show that you D Hill do take up your
wares at trust. Or else, had you looked and known the place your self, you
would never have cited that, which so expressly confirms the point by me
taught, and over-turneth your assertion, of the Gospel being spread in all
countries of the world, taking countries and Nations, particularly and
specially, and strictly as you do in your discourse.

7 Saint Epist, 78:
Austen then being asked by Hesychius, concerning the n^enesse of the day of
judgment, had in a former Epistle given reasons out of the holy Scriptures, why
that time was not likely to be very shortly: and among other that was one, that
the Mat. 24. 14
Gospel of the kingdom had not yet bin preached throughout the whole world.
Hesychius is not yet thoroughly satisfied, and thereupon S. Austen so advertised
sets to him again in a second Epistle, and farther prosecuting that point
of the faith not yet received every where, he utters these words: Epistol. 80.
Whereas your Reverence does think that this is already done by the Apostles
themselves, I have proved by certain arguments that it is not so. For there
are with us, that is to say in Africa; innumerable barbarous nations, among
whom that the Gospel is not yet preached, we may every day read^ learn, by
those who are brought captives from thence, and are now mingled with the
servants of the Romans. Then he adds that some of the African people, being
lately subjected to the Romans, had given their names to Christ But those more
inward who are under no power of the Romans, are not at al possessed with the
Christian religion, in any of theirs. Yet he says it was not to be doubted,
but that more and more would come in, that the Prophecies of the Scripture
might be fulfilled. But that the Western part of the world had the Church the^
already. Afterward, look in what nations therefore the Church yet is not, it
must be not that atwhich shall be there must believe, for all nations are
promised, but not all men of all nations. And yet again, How then was this
preaching fulfilled by the Apostles, in as much as yet there be nations (which
is unto us most assured) in whom it lately began, and in whom not as yet it is
begun to be fulfilled. He shows that it was and must be performed in the
Apostles and their successors, to the end of the world. And to that purpose
he expounds that speech, Psalm. 19. 4.
Their sound is gone out into all lands, by the future tense as well as by the
time past. He shuts it up thus, It is fructifying and growing in all the
world, although the Gospel did not yet possess the whole: but he did say
that it did fructify in the whole world and increase, that so he might
signify how far it should come by fructifying and increasing. Now who
does not see that the same which this worthy Father said in his time, of
innumerable nations in Africa not yet called to the faith, might then and many
hundreds of years afterward, yea in some till our time, be verified of the
Northren parts of Europe, and of the North and East countries of Asia, to say
nothing of all the new-discovered lands, toward the North, South and West, of
which before I have spoken. And this together with Hieroms own words before
mentioned, Or else we see shortly to be fulfilled, In Mat. 24
does show that the speeches of the ancient Fathers above named, are not
strictly and precisely to be taken, but that all is to be understood, for much
and many, and for all the general coasts lying to the East and West and North
and South, not including each special. And so consequently such a multitude of
authorities is but very idly brought: for we will and ever do grant so much, as
any man can in truth wish to be collected out of them. But what is all this to
the purpose, since neither then nor since, they do agree with the polluted
doctrine of your Sinagoge: and the faith which old Rome spread or
mainetained, is no more consonant to this infidelity which our new Rome
maintains, then an apple is like an oyster. Which one answer although it cut
of al your cavils, which you fetch from antiquity in praise of Rome, and we
freque^tly inculcate it unto you, yet because it so biteth, you will in no sort
remember. It is a trick in Rhetorike, but it is withal but a base shift, to
slip by that, or to seem to forget that, which wounds to the heart and
utterly destroys.


T. HILL. BUt the Protestants per adventure will grant, that the true Church
flourished in those days, but not afterward until this age, in which they
have reformed the same: yet is it most manifest that it flourished afterward
even until this our time, no less then it and before, if not more: for in
Saint Gregory his days it was spread all over the world, as appears by his
Epistles to the Bishops of the East, of Afrike, Spain, France, England,
Sicily. And by Saint Bede in cap. 6. Cantic. as also by Saint Bernard, who
disputing before Rogerim King of Sicily, avouched that in those days, the
East, all the West, France, Germany, England, Spaniardes, and many barbarous
nations obeyed the Bishop of Rome.


G. ABBOT. 8. The Protestants not fearing that you shall gain any thing by that
which is truth, will refuse to yield you nothing that is true. In the first
Church, that is while the Apostles lived, the spouse of Christ for doctrine was
most glorious, and for some hundreds of years afterward, her honor flourished
not a little: yet so that some pety superstitions began to creep in here and
there. But about six hundred years after Christ, she for the outward face did
more and more droupe in doctrine. 1. Ioh. 2. 18
Antichrists began to peep up in the Apostles time, but then they could not
properly be called the great Antichrist. And that which was the^, was not so
eminently, as that the followers of the Apostles did much observe it, being
then more troubled with persecution or heretics, then with superstition. In
process of time matters grew to a worse state, evil opinions creeping in, and
at last the maine 2. These. 2. 3
Apostasy followed. But in this Apostasy and very great declining, there were
who yielded not to the time, but kept themselves unspotted of the world,
especially for mainest points of salvation. And it being thus when things were
at the worst, God in this later age, has suffered that truth which was more
hidden, to illustrate the Christian world again. Yea but you will prove, that
since the Primitive Church, faith flourished more the^ before, or at the least
it was not diminished until our time. You can do wonders Sir, or else your own
reason would inform you, that nothing been added til these lare navigations
of the Portingales and Spaniards, Christianity must needs be exceedingly
diminished, when the Saracens and Turks for so long space, have devored so much
of Asia, Europa, and Africa, as is or has bin under the^. You are but a simple
man for story, and weaker for Cosmography, or else you would not so improbably
talk at randon. But any thing serves your turn. Well, the faith was in
Gregory's times over all the world. How prove you this? Forsooth he wrote
Epistles to Bishops of Spain, France, England, Sicely, yea and of the East,
and of Afrike, Ergo the faith was over all the world. A young man of the age of
sixteen years has by his diligence learned without book, the Epistle to
Philemo^, and that to the Colossians, yea the book of Ruth and the Prophecy of
Aggeus, therefore he can say all the Bible by heart. This is Logike for the
Seminaries, but not current elsewhere. What wrote he into Tartaria, or India,
or Manicongo, what to Finland, or Iseland, or a thousand places more? And what
says Bid? In Cantic. 6.
The sum of the citisens of that celestial country does exceed the measure
of our estimation. But this is spoken of all the faithful that are, were, or
ever shall be in the world? As also that following upon the text, Adole
scentularum non est numerus, There are says he young maidens whereof there
is no number, because there are sound innumerable co^pantes of Christian
people. Which within seven lines after he makes most evident, The universal
Church which in the same her faithful members, from the beginning even unto
the ending of the world, from the rising of the Sun unto the setting, from
the North and the Sea do praise the name of the Lord. Does this show any
extraordinary thing in the time of Beda, or any flourishing of the Church, or
more the^ that there were faithful toward al parts of the world? Such is that
which was brought touching S. In vita Bernard. L^. 217:
Bernard, who upon a great schism in the Church of Rome, between Innocentius,
and the Antipape Petrus Leonis, being sent for to compose this strife, and to
see whether he could win over to Innoce^tius, Robert the King of Sicely who
stood for Peter, in his Oration says, that if Peter's side were good, they who
acknowledged Innocentius for Pope should be in very ill case: And these he
names, Then the Eastern Church shall perish, which at that time could
comprehend no more but those few Christians, which were warring in or about
Palestina: for the Greek Churches did not then acknowledge the Popes
Jurisdiction, the whole West shall perish, France shallperish, Germany shall
perish, the Spanish and English and the Barbarian kingdoms shall be drowned in
the bottom of the Sea. Where he does not add these special countries over and
above the West, but signifies what was meant by that general name, that is
to say, France, Germany, Spain and England with some inferior Kingdoms.
So that now if S. Bernard do say any thing here, your all the world is
wonderfully shrunk in the vvetting. So you strive against the stream, and
the farther you go, the worse you go.


T. HILL. AND in these days it is all over Italy, all over Spain, and in
France, in most parts of Germany, in Poleland, Boheme, besides England,
Hungary, Greece, Syria, Aethiopia, Egypt, in which Lands are many
Catholics, and in the new world it flourishes mightily, in all the four
parts of the world, Eastward in the Indies, VVestward in America; Northward in
Iaponia, Southward in Brasilia, and in the uttermost parts of Afrike


G. ABBOT. 9 AS many as be disposed to know the Popes strength, harken now to
his muster-maister. Al, Italy comes first as being nearest the Popes nose;
then all Spain is the second legion. But how would it be in these lands, if
your Inquisitours did give scope; when do what you can, with all your bloody
torments, you cannot root religion out of those places? Yea it seems that
some where in Italy it bears a pretty show, when your Cardinal Bellarmine to
the cold comfort of his old heart, could complain that Lutheranisme (for so he
calls it) had In praefat. Generali:
at last passedover the Alps, and pierced even unto very Italy. But is your
Pope come to that poverty, that now of all the firm land of Europe you can
single out but two countries, which stand wholly for him? Yea and one of those
also liable to so evident an exception? This is a good step within one
hundred of years. In the next age God Almighty may pluck many of these from
him also. But his will must be done. In other Realms there be Catholics, as
in France. It is not so far from us, but we know how the world goes there.
It is possible within that Kingdom to find more then seven 1. Reg. 19. 18.
thousand who never bowed their knees to Baal. And be they such Papists in the
most parts of Germany? I am sure you have heard of one Luther, whose scholars
and himself have not lost much time there. I know you have great joy to
remember him. For Polonia and Bohemia, I beleve that you heard some body say,
that there be both Nobles and of other sorts, who have a religion besides
Popery. Those who love Hus and Luther are not all dead in the one: And in the
other, somewhat there is in it, that in the open assembly of the States or
Prefat. Ap^log. I^. In ^ui. (...)
Parliament, it has bin dared to be proposed, that the Jesuits and their
Colleges should be extirpated thence. That in England there be some who^ we pity
and pray for, we cannot deny, that is especially the weak and beguiled ones,
As also that there be some more obstinate ones left, to be like the Canaanits
Numer. 33. 55.
pricks in our eyes and thorns in our sides: but surely you can make no great
boast of the Popes tyrannizing here. Nay it is to be hoped, that his number is
likely day by day to be diminished, since many indifferently affected returning
to their own judgment, will see that they have been abused by the Priests, who
never ceased to inculeate into their ears, that if once the ere of her late
most Christian Majesty were out, England would be nothing but as a feelde of
blood, to the Professors of our Religion; and what by the strength of the
united Romanistes within the land, and of the assistance of some Popish
Princes from beyond the Seas, Papistrie would here flourish in maine
magnificence: Which vain tales many of them in their weakness believing,
thought is was best to betake themselves to their congregation betimes, least
such multitudes coming in afterward, there would no notice be taken of the^ or
perhaps no room be left for the^. That in Hu^gary true religion is not
unknown, may b^ gessed by those (...) Sleidan. lib. 14 and 26.
manifold petitio^s almost of the whole Realm, to have the Gospel countena^ced
by law, even so long agone as in the time of Ferdinandus afterward Emperor.
But for the state of diverse of these countries, I had leifer you should hear
Bellamine the^ me. Thus the he choaketh your assertion: In presat Generali.
Who is ignorant that the Lutherane pestilence, which a little before did begin
in Saxony, did presetly possess almost all Germanye then that it went to the
North and to the East: that it wasted Denmark, Norway, Sueden, Gotheland,
Pannonia, Hungary: then that with the like spead being carried to the West and
South, it did in short time destroy France England, Scotland, which
ere-whiles were most flourishing kingdoms; at last passed the Alps, and
pierced eve^ into very Italy? For the rest which you do name, you are in worse
case then pitiful P. What many Catholics have you in Greece? Some few
Venetian merchants which trade to Constantinople, or some other of like
quality. For the professed Religion through Greece is Turcisme: and the
Christians there inhabiting as being of the Greekish Church, do decline your
Pope as the Cockatrice of the world. And is it not thus in Siria, where the
people are also Turks; only you have a few Friars lying at Jerusalem to show
some cou^terfeit Relics, and either forged or suspect places, to pilgrims. To
furnish up this little ba^d, I pray you put to, your marcha^ts lying at Aleppo,
and for Aegypts sake, foget not those also at C^iro or Alexandria, for if you
should take these away, you will not leave your selves a man there. So that
while you me^tio^ such stuff, do you any thing else the^ dally with your
Reader? And what have you in Aethiopia under Prester John's dominion? In
religion he differs far from you as Lib 9 de gest is ^manuel.
Osorius and t Damianus a Goes show: he never heard of your Pope til of late,
and he will hold nothing from him. Perhaps you have some one or two Friars
there, who are sent to learn the language, or may serve to do Demoribus
Aethio. pum.
some turns for your Portingale Mercha^ts, dwelling on some maritime places of
the farther side of Africa. Or some of those traffiquers do go with their wares
to some towns of Aethiopia. This is a worthy matter to be cited for the honor
of your holy mother.

10 I do wonder that being here in this sweet enumeratio^, you tell us not
out of Contr Machiavel. Lib. 3. 4.
Bozius, that of purpose to acknowledge the Popes prerogative, and to swear
obedience to him, there came out of Africa to Clement the 7. the Legates of
David the King of the Aethiopia^s, and of the Princes of Mexico, from the most
remote Kingdo^es of the Western Indres: and to Julius the 2. Embasladors out of
Africa from the king of Mantco^go: and lately to Gregory the 13. from lapona in
the East Indies, and from the mighty kings of the Tartars in Asia. Such
cu^ny-catching tricks have bin practiced a great while, to magnify the Bishop
of Rome. Sometimes there has bin no body at all: some other times some hu^gry
cunning slave put into a strange coat, and two or three beggars after him,
(who like rogues have wandered up and down, or ru^ne away from their country,
or come from some great ones as spies) has bin the Legate or Patriarch,
without penny of maintenance, or ship to bring them, or ought to grace the^.
Gentillet, in examine. Council Tridentin Self, 1.
Engenius the 4. to give credit to his Co^venticle at Florence, against the
Synod held at Basile, gives out that Iosippus the Patriarch of
Constantinople, came to submit himself and his country unto him: and when
Iosippus was dead, an Epistle was published, which he was said to writ in his
death bed, signifyi^g to al those that were within his Patriarchate, that he
approved the doctrine of the Papacy, and acknowledged the Pope to be the Vicar
of Christ. This was about the year 1439. And to show his facility in this kind
of invention, the same Eugenius provided some to come, not into the counsel for
fear of the pack being discovered, but about the ending of it, who said that
they were the Legates of the Patriark of Armeni^, who also professed to allow
the faith of the Pope, and to approve that which was concluded in the
Co^ve^ticle of Florence. And because such fine tricks as these should not grow
clean out of use, at the last meeting at Tre^t, Idem in Session. 21.
Pope Pius the 4. had such a Pagea^t. For he caused Amulius the Cardinal the^
abiding at Rome with him, to write a solemn letter to the Fathers at Tre^t,
that one Abdisu the Patriarch of the Assiria^s in the East, dwelling near the
river Tigris, was by the advice of his people come to Rome the year before,
accompanied with some Priests and a Deacon: That the Pope in a full consistory
of his Cardinals, had pronounced him to be the Patriarch, and Pastor of that
people, and yet not so, but that first he did hear him make the confession of
his faith, and took an oath of him to keep obedience to the Sea Apostolic:
That departing away, he desired to have sent him a copy of the Decrees of the
Tridentine counsel, when all there should be accomplished. But in the mean
while he did testify, that the same faith which is now held in the Church of
Rome, had without any variatio^ bin among the^, since the days of the
Apostles. All this was divulged after that Abdisu was gone from Rome: to the
end that no man might disprove it. What a wrong did you to your cause, that you
did not put these in, especially since the Jurisdiction of this Patriarch was
so large, that he had under him in the Great Turks dominion, seven
Archbishoprickes; all Metropolitans, and thirteen Bishoprics; under the
Sophy of of Persia five Arch-bishoprickes Metropolitan, and thirteen
Bishoprics, ^yea under the dominion of the Portingals in India, three
Arch-bishoprickes and one Bishopric. Would not this have made a fair show
when your troops were in the field? you have done your Lord and Master the
Pope wrong, so to oover-skippe these in such a fashion. For our part we must
wink at such simple tricks as these be. Yet these will serve to abuse the
children of unbelief, and to gulle many a good silye Papist.

11 Some kind hearted man will pity me, that when you lead me such a dance over
all the world, as you do, I must be bound to follow you. But let my friends
take no care, for if you make not very good have, I shall be in some of the
places as soon as you. Now we come to the new worlds, whereof our great
Grandfathers never heard, and there we must think that Popery springs by
thousands. In what country are you Sir, when to make up your four quarters,
you put Iaponia in the North? It is within less then ten degrees of the
Tropicke, and more Southward then Spain, yet with you it must be North. So
Brasilia is Southward, when yet the upper part thereof, is very near to the
line. If you had named the South Continent for South, and the Isles tovvard the
Northern Pole for North, or else Cathay, we had better allowed thereof. But
we must take what you give us, and you must give what you get. We will
for the while do you the favor, as to imagine you to stand just under the
Aequinoctial. But the common brag which is agreed upon among you, is that you
have large harvests in the new world. Bristowe Motiv. 2^.
says that the Church has in those parts vvonne more incomparably, then i^
has lost by Heretics in these our parts. Stapleton goes as far beyond
him, as he goes beyond the truth. Thus then he talks: (...) Though in very
deed through the A Discourse upon the doctrine of the Protestants.
pernicious persuasions of that wedded Friar, certain places and couers of
Christendom, have svvarved from the Catholic Church, and authority of the
Apostolic Se^, in these North parts of the world, yet it has thousands fold
more been enlarged, in the West parts and the new lands, found out by
Spaniards and Portingales in these late years, as the letters of the Jesuits
directed from those countries into these parts do evidently and Miraculouslie
declare. He who wrote the Apology of the Seminaries, harpeth upon this
string, but with a lower tone, Chap. 6.
The Jesuits in the East Indies, have brought countries which were very
barbarous, and the most potent Princes of them, together with the provinces
and people subject unto them, to the Catholic and Romans faith. Con. Davidem
Chytraeum.
Possevinus your great Statesman proclaims, that in these lands lately
discovered, it is a miracle of al miracles, to see how many be co^ verted, me^
going through so many seas to do it, and then without weapon or force alluring
the^ to Christ. But al these great clamors not withstanding, they who will read
either your own writers or other, know how it stands well enough. Then briefly
to open the truth. In the year Pet. Mar. Decad. 1. 1.
1492, Colu^bus the Genoway with some Spaniards, at the charge of Ferdinandus
and Elizabeth king and Queen of Castile, did fail so far to the West, that he
came to the Islands since called Cuba and Hispaniola. The matter which there
they aimed at, was store of gold and silver, which the country did yield, and
afterward they did light also there-about on abundance of pearl, all which
were sweet baits for the greedy and needy Spaniards. The fame of this stirred
up both the Princes to send, and the subjects to go in huge numbers thither:
when not long^ after the maine land of America was descryed, and after that,
Peru, the South sea, and the kingdom of Mexico. Benzo in nova novi orbis
h^st^ria. li. 1 and 2.
In all these rich Provinces did these Spaniards set footing, and finding them
little better then naked men, without armor, iron or steel, having only for
their weapons, clubs and simple bows and arrows, they without leave or liking
of the inhabitants, built at first Castles in diverse places, and afterward at
their pleasure towns and cities. Some of the ancient people there they slew
down in war^some other of them they caused to destroy one another, either
raising new discords among them, or cunningly perpetuating their old:
thousands of them did these new comers slay taking them single and alone: such
as lived they enforced to be their slaves, causing the^ to work like brute
beasts in their mines, without any compassion of them: where if they were
slack, they were chastised with intolerable torture: which made many of the^
drown the^selus, some others throw the^selus from rocks or into the mines: yea
generally they so loathed their in human cruelty, that thousands of women great
with child either destroyed themselves, or the children in their bellies, that
they might not bring into the world any creatures, to be slaves to so vile and
outrageous persons. In the mean while they go on with rebellion against
Columbus their governor, who for recompense of his honest service was by some
of the^ tumulting, thrust out of his co^ma^ding charge, and sent bound into
Spain, to the dislike of the K. and Q. they fell to murder one another, they
spent their time in dieing, swearing, cu^sing and blaspheming God, in rapes and
violent deflourings of the wives and daughters of the Americanes, and in all
such incogitable and execrable vilainy, as if they had bin Devils and infernal
spirits, let loose and sent from hell, to the desolation of those countries.

12 These matters grew so horrible, that the Captains who were more civil,
complained of it first to K. Ferdinandus, and afterward to Charles the 5.
Emperor, and K. of Spain: the poor Friars that had bin there, ran with open
mouth to diverse of the Popes, desiring their mediation, and that for
Christianities sake it might be ameded. The writers, as Decad. 3. 8. and 5. 9.
and (...) 4. Benzo. li. 1. 25.
Pet. Martyr of Millaine, Benzo, Bartholomeus de Casa and other, have never
done in reproving it, and crying out upon it. All this while here is scant any
speech of baptizing any, or bringing the^ to Christ: that which was done, was
only by the Friars: and it being hastily administered, and without al sound
understanding of the mysteries of salvation, did so little prevail in truth
with the ignorant Infidels, that they oftentimes Benzo. l. 1 c. 13.
reviled the God of the Christians, affirming that he must needs be a wicked
God, which kept such naughty servants: and thereupon renounced and reneaged
their Christianity. So that the Spaniards should be so far, from making any
boast by themselves or their friends, that they have there converted souls,
that if there do remain any spark of grace in them, as in charity we hope
there does, they may justly fear, that the everlasting destruction there of
innumerable souls, will be laid to their charge, and the blood of them will be
required at their hands, either by some severe punishment on them or their
posterity in this world, or by the condemnation in another world, of the souls
of as many as have bin gilty thereunto, and have dyed without repentance.
Whereas at the first, with their Christian behavior, and ma^like usage, they
might have won many from their Ge^tilisme, and if they had not infected the^
with Antichristian superstition, they might have bin means to help the^ to
heave^s what store of those Ethnicks offspring is left in those parts, which the
Spaniards do posses, may be gathred from a proportion taken out of Hispaniola,
which is one of the biggest Islands be hither America. Benzo a great traveiler
was there, and spent much time in those parts. Hear then what he says: Nova
novi orbis historia, l. 25
By the intolerable cruelty of the Spanyardes it is brought to pass in
Hispaniola, that of two millions of the Indians, that is twenty hundred
thousand persons, by whom that Island was inhabited, some being slaiue by their
own hands, and some beeeing killed and wasted, by the cruelty of the
Sp^yardes and the bitterness of their works, there are scant remaining at
this day a hundred and fifty. The words are somewhat obscure in the close,
whither he means a hundred and fifty persons, or a hundred and fifty
thousand; although I rather take it to be the former. I find also elsewhere by
a Addita^ 9. partis Americ^. page 44
travailer mentioned, that in one city of those Western parts, the name whereof
is Imperial there were before the coming of the Christians thither, three
hundred thousand Indians inhabiting, of who^ about 20. armed Spaniards by such
devises as they had, did kill 2. hundred thousand. And what is since become of
the rest we may judge. If these should be thought to be partial, harken to the
Jesuit who co^piled the book called Nona pars America. This then is his
relation: The principal cause wherefore Nova Hispania is very much un
inhabited, is this, that very few escaped Lib. 3. 22.
when it at first was possessed by the Spaniards. Our M. Watson speaks as
plain as the best Quod. 8. 6
The treatise of that worthy Bishop Bartholomeus Cusaus (a Spantards borne)
dedicated to the last king of Spain, has laid the Spanish proceedings
amongst the West Indians, so plainly out in their colors: how many millions
of men, women, and children, they have there murthred: and that with such
inhumane barbarensues, and much more the^ Phalerical cruelty, as until they do
repent the^, and are become a new generation, all kingdoms and countries in
the world are to pray at the least to be delivered from the^. By all which it
is plain, that the now. dwellers in those parts of America which are said to be
Christian, are few others but Spaniards, who taking thither their wives and
daughters, are much multiplied within these hundred years; the men making no
spare to beget children any way, after the Spanish fashion. But as touching the
naturals of the Country, first there are few left among them. Secondly those
who be there, being in truth no better the^ vassals, slaves and drudges to the
Spaniards, come on slowly to be baptized. And thirdly they who for fear or
fashion come, do in heart hate them and their religion, and lack but
opportunity to revolt Quod. 5. 4
from the^: And this is the propagating of the faith which they have made in
the West Indies. Look what they have there Spanish, so much have they Popish.
In the upper part of Peru they have somewhat, in the like sort as before I have
showed; but down toward Magellanes straights, as also in Brasile which properly
belongs to the Portingales, they have only here and there a castle, or little
town standing on the sea coast; but in the Inland they have very little. And
in these Castles, look what devotion their own people have, that is
papisticall: but the men of those parts, meddle not with them more then they
must needs, and with their religion not at all.

13 And for the East Indies thus the matter stands. The country of the
Portingales being but dry and barren, and the people more then well could be
maintained thervpo^, Osor. de gest. Emanuel. lib. 1.
Henry their king who dyed in the year 1460 was willing to employ some of his
me^, to discover by Sea the West side of Afrike down toward the South. And
having done somewhat that way, the next king succeeding him but one, that is to
say John the son of Alphonsus proceeded yet farther, and opened even to the
Promontory or Cape by him called Caput Bonae Spei. King Emanuel the Great
Portingale who succeeded John, did se^d out 1497.
Vascus Gama with some few ships, to compass this Cape, and passing toward the
East, to salle as far as Calicut in India. Where arriving, and not long after
pretending an earnest desire to enter traffic between the two nations, to
the enriching of the^ both, the Portingales entreated, that for their safeties
sake they might have leave to build them a little Castle; giving out that they
werein much danger otherwise, as partly from the subjects of the king of
Calicut, so especially from the Sarace^s who envied their trading into those
parts, as prejudicial to their former commodity. This Castle they furnished
with armor and ordinance, which was then scant known in those parts, and
therefore was less able to be resisted. And to this place every year they sent
new supplies of me^ out of Europe. As they did at Calicut, so proceeding in
time, on more and more to the East, they every where erected their castles and
fortresses, the drift whereof the kings of the countries at the first did not
perceive: but afterward to their cost finding how themselves were annoyed,
they desired to remedy it when it was too late. Besides this, the Portingales
finding discord between the pety Princes of those parts, they secretly
stickled that forward, as between the Kings of Calicut, Cananor, Cochimum and
other: and where they saw advantage, they gave open assistance to one party: by
which means they wasted the Indians, and procured to themselves much
reputation of valor, me^ standing in dread of them for their suttlety,
ordinance and good shipping. Their incrochments so increased, that they got
into their hands some cities, as Goa, which now they have made their
Metropolis, or imperial residence for their Viceroy; yea they have set footing
into some of the Isles of the Moluccoes. And since the time that al these,
together with the crown of Portingale it self, is come into the possession of
the Spanish King as chief Lord, Spaniards have come about from the West side
of America through the South sea, and they giving assistance to the Portingales
they between the^ have grasped yet more, although still the managing of al
about Goa and those coasts, be by Portingales, unless the King of Spain have
prevailed lately so much, as to gain in that power from the^ But all this was
first gotten, and since it is kept by the sword; howsoever that cogging lesuit
Contra Chytraeum vt supra.
Possevinus to make a miracle of it, do avouch the contrary. Their own stories
written by De gest. Eman.
Osorius and Histor. rerum Indicar.
Masseus, do make it plain, and he who will but read the Diensis oppugnatio.
Seege of D^um, written by Damianus a Goes, will be satisfied for ever. Their
manner is in their towns and Castles to stand on their guard against sudden
assault: and if any by open hostility do in vade them, (as the great Turk and
some of the country have done) they do not only strengthen themselves, with
such help as they ca^ get out of Europe, if the time do permit, but they send
to the Viceroy, who draws aid from all places within his regiment, and with
the readiest diligence that he can releeveth them.

14 This course having continued now full out a hundred years, and they being
there seated so long with their wives, and with their children (whom aftter the
Spanish and their own country fashion they be get a paces and the King yearly
sending to them out of Europe, to no small commodity of his, by the bringing
home of spice and other rich commodities of the Indies^ yea and aid not
wanting to them from America, and the Isles beyond it, as the Philippinas,
Manilla and some more thereabout, they are strong in those parts, especially
against the attemptes of any small and pety Prince, as they all are who be in
the East Indies; some king having not forty miles over in all his dominion, and
no one having very much. But here the Portingales themselves have little or
nothing up into the land: but what they have is on the sea coast, and some
little way about it: farther they dare not offer. Now the wonderful extent of
the Romish faith thus spoken of, consists in these Porti^gals and the
Spaniards that come to the^: for as for the naturals of the country, they keep
close to their heathenish belief: some worshipping the Sun, some adoring other
Idols of their own. But such a fa^cy they carry to the religion of the
Portingals, whose mischievous suttlety and incrochi^g rapine is odious unto
the^, that scant any of them do participate of their devotio^; but would gladly
if they could tell how, be rid of their company, yea if they might do it by
cutting al their throats. And whereas boast also is made of the uttermost parts
of Afrike, that is much less then the Indies; the Spaniards and Portingals
having only here and there, a castle standing upon a co^venie^t watering place,
to vitaile and refresh their seafaring men passing to and from the East
Indies. These pety fortresses stand in diverse regio^s indeed, as in Mosa^bique,
Melinde, Magadoxe, Manico^go, yet they are but very triflles in comparison, all the people of the countries being either Infidels, or such Christians as hold
the faith of Osor. lib. 9. Damian. a Goes de morib. Aethiop.
Prester John, but co^sort not with the communion of the Bishop of Rome. As for
Iaponia how the Jesuits have circu^ve^ted their simplicity I have showed
before. They boast much of their co^versio^ there, and many Epistles are by
Select (...) pistol. ex India.
Maffcus collected to that purpose. But he was one of themselves; and how
vain-gloriously they use to lie touching their own acts in Europe, we are well
instructed: therefore of those far-dista^t places they may tell us what tales
they will, as also of their miracles there (which in the next chap shall be
discussed) and every man may believe his part. Certain it is that in Iapa^ or
Iapania, by their cunning and couse^ing shows of casting out devils, they have
more Additam. 9: part. America^.
prevailed upon the government of the country, the^ in any other place of the
world; and yet I may say, what man, I say not Prince or great personag, but
what one has appeared in Europe, out of all the company of the Iaponians or
other Eastern Indians, who might publicly yield an account of his faith, and
give testification by an orderly acknoweledgement of his hope, that he
belongs rightly to the flock of Christ Jesus? It is not sufficient to
salvation, for an ignorant person to be baptized into he cannot tell what, or to
be taught by rote to mumble up a few prayers, whereof he understands no part,
or to use a pair of beads with nothing but superstition: or to fall down before
a Crucifixe: when the manner of our Redemption, and the course of our
Justification, is no more known to him the^ to very beasts. And how their care
is to instruct their pretended co^verts, in those far distant regions, may well
be co^ceived by that, which they inform to their own countrymen living
there-about, who are much more furnished with wicked devises, leading them the
ready high way to damnation, then with ought which belongs to true
Christianity. For example sake within these three or four years, Ibid. p. 75.
some Holla^ders passing the South sea, came near to the Island Manilla, where
certain Spaniards then inhabiting, would needs entertain them with an eager
fight at sea. Diverse of these warriors entering the Hollanders ship were
slain, and among the^ there were five found, who had about them certain boxes
of silver. Which being opened, there were in the^ little rowles or schedules
beset with charms or diabolical consecrations, whereby they supposed
themselves safe from all weapons. For, says the Author, they are oftentimes
instructed by their Priests concerning suching^ing tricks, whereby it comes
to pass, that by their divelish superstitions, such as have sworn faith to
the Pope in these places, are much more defiled, then very they who line in the
middle of Rome or Spain. With what acornes are these Nuoves Christianes fed,
when in these remote regions Spaniards themselves are dieted with such husks?
This is the propagation of Christianity whereof you speak; the abusing and
profaning of the Sacrament of Baptism, by communicating it to them, whose best
profession is ignorance, superstition, idolatry, and wilful obstinacy against
the truth, if it should be reveiled unto them.


T. HILL. ANd to name somewhat more in particular some Countries, in which it
is happily received of many, of not universally of all, but yet in many lands
it is received of the greatest part of the inhabitants, in Goa, in Malabar, in
Cochin, in Bazain, in Cola^, in Tana, in Dama^, in Ciaul, in Coran, in
Salsetta, in Pescaria, in Manar, in Trava^cor, in Cogiro, in Bugen, in Cicungo,
in Cicugne, in Oian, in Gomotto, in Gensura, in Xichi, in Ormuz, in Ternate, in
Momoia, in Ambonio, in Macazar, in Cerignano, in Siligan, in Butuan, in
Pimilira^, in Camigu, in Supa, in Stan, in Bacian, in Solar, in Malacca, in
Tidor, in Selebi, and in the Islands of S. Thomazo, S. Domingo, Madera, and in all those innumerable Islands which the king of Spain there possesses. So that
the Catholic Roman religion has had, and has yet a far greater sway in the
world, then any othar religion ever had or has.


G. ABBOT. 15 Our Papists do imagine that they have to do with none but fools,
and therefore they think to serve the^ thereafter. They believe that if we hear
a few great words lustily bu^basted we will stoop sail, and (...) sently come
in, as ships under a Castle, for fear of a peale of ordinance. Such a devise
was that, when to credit Abdisu the Patriarch before named, and in him the
Popes prerogative, Gentill. in exam. Council. T^de^t. Sess, 21.
they gave strange and formidable names to the Bishoprics and Arch-bishopricks
fained to be under him, as Sirava, Hancava, Meschiara, Chiarucbia, Cuchia,
Durra, Goa, Salamas, Baumar, Schiabathan, Vastan, Calicuth, Mac^hazin,
Carangol, and other such brave appellations, which being like coniuring words
when any one should hear, he durst not for one days space come with in forty
foot of the stake. Is not this somewhat like that of the bragging soldier,
Plautus in Milite glorioso.
in campis Gurgustidonijs Vbi Bombomachides Cluninstaredysarchides
Erat Imperator summus, Neptune nepos.
I tell you D. Hill, such devises as this of yours, is but for children, when out
of some Portingale merchants remembrances, or from the Index of some writer, or
some such other mock, matter, you tell us what towns, or angels of the maine,
or what little Islands, the Portingales have themselves in the East Indies, ^or
some of the Jesuits have gone thither, or some pedlers have bin in the markets
there. A town with you is a city, a city a country, a skirt of some li. tle
province, is a land or a kingdom, an Island like Garnesey or Gersey, is a
matter as much as Sicely or great Britain: one in the quality of a gentleman
is a Prince; a pety co^mander like a mean West-Indian Cacike, is a potent king
or Emperor. You begin with Goa as if it were some huge region, whereas it is
but a Maffcus Hist. Indic. li. 4.
city, appointed indeed by Albuquercius, to be the Impettall chamber for the
dominion of the Portingales in the East Indies. It stands on the hither side
of India, some thing North from Calicut, on the Western side of that great
Promontory, which is nearest of al India to Ormus, and to the Persian bay or
Gulf. Idem lib. 1 Osor. lib. 2.
Malabar is the general name of the Country toward the bottom of the
Promontory before me^cioned, the chief city whereof is Calecut. Maf. lib 1.
Cochin is the city of a poor Prince by Calecut. Li. 9.
Bazain a town of Cambaia, 5 or 6. days iourny Nothward from Goa. Lib. 2.
Coian a city distant from Cochin 24. leagues toward the South. Lib. 9.
Tana or Tanaba a little town nere Bazain. Lib. 11.
Daman another town nere it, being on the coast of Ca^baia; Lib. 4.
Ciual, or Chanla a city fast by those last spoken of. Lib. 14.
Cora^ is the temple of Ma^met at Ormus: but you mean Lib. 2.
Coromandel in India, where it is said that S. Thomas the Apostle did long ago
preach. Lib 11.
Salsetta is a little Island lying near Bazain. It should seem that there is
more then one of the^. Lib: 3. and 12
Pescaria or Piscaria is a little sea coast about the bottom of Malaca, and
lies more toward the East. Lib. 12.
Manar a little Island nere thereunto. Lib. 12.
Trava^cor a small kingdom on the west side of the lowest part of Malaca. Of
Cogiro, Bugen, (unless you mean Lib. 12.
Bunge a pety kingdom in Iapan) Cicungo and Cie^gne I find no mention, euhere
there be no such places, or they be so base, that no good Au^hour does mention
them, or else you have mis-written them. Lib. 3.
Oia or Oian is a mean city near Melinde in Afric. Your Gomotto perhaps is
put for Lib. 12.
Goto, or Gotum a small Island nere Iapan. So I take your Gensura to be, and
the rather because it is put next. Xich^, or Ibidem.
Xich^cum, one of the three chief parts of Iapan. Lib. 3.
Ormuz we know to be an island and city, near the entrance into the gulf of
Persia. Lib. 5.
Ternate is one of the five Molucco Islands, and so is Lib. 10.
Tidor also which anon follows. Momoia is a town in a little I Will called
Morum, Ambonio or rather Lib. 5.
Amboinus is a small I Will near the Moluccos. So it Lib. 10.
Macazar. Not far from thence is Lib. 10.
Cetigano, you term it Cerignano, one of the Islands called Celebes, Siligan is
a town, Butuan, Pi^iliran, and Camigu three things called kingdoms, but all
these Ibidem.
four within the I Will Mindanaus. Lib. 12.
Supa is a small place nere (...) Sian, and that is an Island and town beyond
the Promontory of Malaca, turning up far to the North. Lib. 8.
Bacian, is one of the Moluccos. Solar or rather Lib. 16.
Solor is an I Will about 300. leagues from Malaca, being 8. degrees distant from
the Equator, toward the South. Lib. 1.
Malacca is a city in that Promontory of India, which was wont to be called
Aurea Chersonesus, and is now termed Malaca of the city. Selebi or rather Lib.
8.
Celebes is principally one Island nere the Equinoctial, but other adioining
have that name communicated to the^. Thus have we ended all that be nere to the
East Indies. The Island of S. Osor. Hist. li 3.
Thomazo or S. Thomas, lies directly under the Aequinoctial line, over against
that part of Africa which is termed Manicongo, or rather a little higher the^
it. That which you name S. Domingo is it which in Latin is called Pet. Mart.
Decad. 1. 2.
Dominica, having that appellation given to it, because it was discovered on a
Sunday, which in Latin is named Dies Dominicus. It lies toward America but
much nearer us then Hispaniola does: and it was one of the Islands where the
Caribes or Canibals did dwell, before the coming of Colu^bus toward the West
Indies. ^d. Decad. 1. l. 6.
Madera is one of the fortunat or Canary Ila^ds, lying some few days iourny
South-west ward from Spain. You might if it had pleased you, have added the
rest of the Canaries, and the Azores, as also all that lie near America, as
Cuba and Hispaniola, and many about them; also the Philippinas, and I cannot
tell what. But my conceit is that you went no farther, because the Author or
Copy which you followed went no farther. For I deal plainly with you, I do not
hold you gilty of the knowing where al these places be. And yet it were no huge
labor, in the reading over of such an Author, as the Hist. India aut select.
Epistol.
Jesuit Maffeus is, to take the words here and there as he relates the
coming in of the Portingales, or the pretended labors of his fellows. But I
smell it to be borrowed from some other man, as your Ratio^, 3.
enumeratio^ of Heretics was from Staphilus. In which respect I call to mind
how once on a New-yeares day in the morning, a Parish-Clarke in Oxford brought
to the Minister of that Parish, certain Latin verses as a token for the New
year. The Minister seeing them, before he read them said, that he thanked
him for his pains, but added that he did not think, that he could have made a
Latin verse. The Clarke with an humble smile looking on, did no way deny but
that the verses were his own. But when the other had read them, he altered
his opinion, and told him that they were taken out of a Printed book. It is
true indeed says the Clarke, but Sir, I took the pains to write them out
for you. Even so much pains have you taken, ignorantly from some ignorant
fellows collections, to write these names out for us.

16. I am induced to think so, not only because you have played such pageants
before, but much rather because a sober man may well think that if you had
known what you did, or had had any true understanding of the matter, you would
never have made such a clatter to so small a purpose. For it may well be
supposed that there be no such places, as some are named by you: some other of
them are so mean, as that to this day they never could find place in any
map whatsoever published to the world. Only they are mentioned by one
Jesuit, who cannot lie; and he makes every mean man a King: if he once
parled with a Jesuit he shall want no title. You have reckoned us up here one
and forty names, many of them in themselves small base and inferior things,
and if diverse of them be ordinarily termed Kingdoms, yet the whole country is
not so great as a pretty shire in England, and some of the Islands are as mean
as the I Will of Wight is. If you will stand on it that these be kingdoms, yet
we can make you answer, that very many of the Kings of the East country, are
Lords but as over moale-hils, and so it was some thousands of years agone.
Genesis 14. 2.
You may read of the King of Sodom, and of the King of Gomorah, as also of
the King of Admah, and of the King of Zeboim, and yet all these lived within
a small compass of ground. For the one and forty names which you note unto us,
you may read of Iosu. 12. 9.
one and thirty Kings indeed, with whom Iosuah had to deal, and yet all
their dominion was so within Canaan, that the territories of all their
regiment, was not so much as England alone, without Scotland joined to it. And
yet if an ignorant man should hear the names of all those Kings, as they are
set down by Joshua, he would look as much about him, as one of your silie
Papists does at those here in your book. To let them therefore know how you
egregiously abuse them, you have said as much as if I should speak in this
sort. His Majesty of England has a great many good subjects (I begin to give
the instance in Suffex, because I hear that this Pamphlet is much in request
among backward people there) as in the great city of Chichester, in Arundel, in
Rye, and in many other good places there about. Also in Sandwich with all the
Cinque ports and the liberties of the same, yea in the Isles of Shepy, and
Tenet, with other lying at the lands end fast by Essex, yea add hereunto Hul
and New Castle upon Tine and the strong town of Barwike. And if a man should
tell this to some unlettered Italian who lies a great way hence, he might be
made to wonder: but the truth were no very high matter. Thus it is with these
places named, which are only cities, towns or angles standing along the sea
coast, upon the shore of the Indies, and interrupted or intersorted with
heathenish dominions, or else they are Islands in the self same quality. And in
many of these, if there were some said to be baptized 20. or 40. years agone,
or if there be now but 5. Portingales or Spaniards, which keep a shop or
warehouse, yet there is the Romish faith. Which our Author who never uses but
to cast at All, as it seems does acknowledge, when contrary to his custom he
has an extenuation, It is happily received of many though not universal of
all, And when he says in many lands it is received of the greatest part of the
inahbitants, he means not that the naturals do accept of it, but the
Spaniards and Portingals have killed the greatest part of them, and now they
themselves do make the mayor part. This advantage you have for your words D.
Hill, but yet notwithstanding all your fraud and facing, we conclude that your
Popery is not predominant as you make it, for put it altogether (if I should
say nothing of that which we teach, but leave it wholly to God and his good
blessing) Gentilisme is yet by many degrees more then all the Papisme in the
world, and Mahometisme in Barbary, in Turkey, in Persia, and in the dominions of
all those who hold for that false Prophet does exceed it. And yet the great
propagatio^ of Ethnicisme or Saracenisme does not make them to be in the
right; neither does the same evince in behalf of your Roman fancies, but that
only must go for truth which has warrant out of the Scriptures.


T. HILL. AND worthy it is to be noted that in no land or country under
heaven, ever was or is any persecution of any moment against Papists (as you
term them) or against the Priests of that Religion, in regard that they be
Papists or Priests made by authority from the Sea of Rome, but only in
England. And in very deed the whole world does wonder, that little England
dare and is not ashamed to do that, which never was seen in the world
before: for let a Seminary Priest (as they call him) keep him out of England,
and he is safe enough in any region under heaven. This I say by the way, for
that it grieveth me at the very heart, to bear that my dear country does
persecute that religion which all the world has joyfully embraced, or at the
least does willingly tolerate, as though she were wiser then all the world
beside is, or ever has been, or then al her Elders. Or as though English
Protestants knew and saw more, then all the whole learned men of Christendom
have done for so many ages together.


G. ABBOT. 17 IT should seem that by this time in the showing of your me^, you
have spent al your powder: for from hence to the end of this present Reason,
you talk like a good fellow, in more familiar sort, leaning on the nose of
your piece, somewhat angry, but will not fight. How your Pseudo-Catholikes in
England live afflicted and persecuted, not only our books Execution of
Justice. A Letter to Mendoza.
declaring a truth, but the matter it self sensibly does speak. They lie
well, and they farewell, and many of them do purchase and increase their
livelihood, yea some by your leave find means to extraordinary
lasciviousnes. The bigger sort of them are by the monthly mulct upon them so
punished, that besides that they have for much idle expense, they can by bribes
keep spies about great personages, they can give large gifts to win their
private purposes, they ca^ have their cursetors all the Realm over to give and
take intelligence, they can relieve Prisoners, they can maintain diverse
Jesuits, like such gallants and swaggerers as requires for each some hundred
pounds by the year. And yet in searches sometimes more ready money and good
gold is, found in their custody, then ordinary men of their quality can be
masters of. To these things they attain by keeping no house or very little,
under a show that for their conscience they pay all away. I think that you
your self will confess, that in Queen Mary's days men of our Religion could
not live so quietly, although they had nothing to object against them, but that
they believed not the article of Transubstantiation. Now for Priests, that they
have bin more looked unto, the reason is sppatant. The examples of 1. Reg. 18.
40.
Elias ill entreating Baals Priests, and of 2. Reg. 23. 20.
Josias so serving other of like disposition, as also of Cap. 10. 25
Iehu proceeding in the same course show that wolves and destroying foxes if
they will not keep from the flock, must be woorried: that is, must be cut off
by the sword of the magistrate. Otherwise shall the perishing souls of the
flock be required at the civil shepe-heards hand, as well as they are
exacted of the spiritual pastor for negligence. But how rough the state
generally has bin to such, may be coniectured by their hasting hither, fiftye
in a D. Elyes notes on the Apology fol. 211.
year out of Rhemes alone. Also by the sending away of Heart, Pilcher and many
other, where of some were already condemned, and other by law were to suffer:
yet their lives were granted unto the and they only were banished their
country, from whence they had volu^tarily exiled themselves for diverse years
before. thirdly by the keeping of so many of the^ at Wishbich and Framingl^a^,
some for 10. years, some for 20, where al was so to their will, that they had
leisure to fall out who should be Relation of stirs at Wisbich.
greatest among the^, and sit highest at table, yea to Apolog, cap. 6.
feast, to bowze, to game, to fight, yea as since it is expressed in plainer
words, to fall top dicing, drunkenness yea and whoredom, fit exercises for men
who would be taken to be designed martyrs. And if some few of them have
suffered, let all sober men judge, whither the state had not cause to proceed
so with them, whose minds were discovered so plainly beyond the seas. The
excommunication of Pius the 5. was procured at Rome by the instigation of some
of our own countri-men, and thervpo^ a rebellion was raised. Sander. lib. 7. de
visib Monar. Concertat. li^cle Cathol. in Angl. Part 1.
Felton is commended for faste^ing up the Bull at the Bishop of Londons gate.
And it is held as his praise, that he called the Queen no otherwise but by
the name of the pretended Queen. Sanders also ordinarily uses that phrase
against her. And it is held as a glory in Doctor Story, that writing to his
wife he bestowed no other title on her. Such as suffered for the rebellion in
the Noth are termed Ibidem.
Martyrs, and so is Brist. Motiv. 1^.
Felton also. These matters are compiled together in the book called, Edit.
Anguste ^reviror. 1588.
Concertatio Ecclesiae Catholica in Anglia, out of which I will gather two or
three flowers more. It is said as a praise; of Everard Hanse, that being asked
of the Bull of Pope Pius he answered, I hope he did not err in his sentence.
He said I hope, because that declaration was not doctrinal, and therefore
there might be an error. Speaking of James Laborne executed at Lancaster, it
is related as a Catholic act in him, that E. Sander. de Schism. Lib 3.
he took two exceptions, why Lady Elizabeth was not Queen, one by reason of
her birth, the other for that she was deprived by the Pope. Mentioning the
story of one Fenne, it is urged that the dignity of St. Peter's successor was
conferred upon a profane woman. Afterward these verses are set on her sacred
Majesty. Sathanico praesul Calvini imbuta veneno est
Elizabeth, diraque impietate tumet.


And lastly this is bestowed upon her, Elizabetha scelerum caput. These things
being written by diverse of them beyond the seas, do argue what spirit was among
our Divines there. If we will have more proof of the faithful hearts of our male
contented fugitives, toward our late Princess, let us look on the words
closely couched of the Rhemists in diverse places: As that about Annot, in 2.
Ioh. 10.
Heretics excommunicated by name, what things men are to withdraw from the^.
And let the traitorous actions of the^ in our Realm, expound that covert
speech of Iezabel In Apoc. 2. 20.
elsewhere. But in steed of al, let the Action attempted against this kingdom
here in the year 1588, speak, which was vehemently urged by our Priests
abroad, and the people to the best of their power fitted for it at home.

18 If these generalities do not yet satisfy, the^ let it be remembered, where
these Seminary Priests are brought up, and how, flying from their native soil
in the highest disco^tentment, they go into the dominions of the Pope and King
of Spain, to who^ howmuch England has bin beholding, a blind man may almost
see. At their expe^ce they are maintained, who in behalf of their charges
look for some service again. And under who^ have they their educatio^? Under
men Iesuited as now D. Worthington the Rectour of the College at Doway is, or
under the Iusuits themselves, of whose virtues I have before spoken. To their
Governors by oath they owe obedience, and of liklihood at their return they
take their direction from the^. Now what manner of me^ these be, Allen who was
long the Rectour of the College at Rhemes, and Persons now Governor of the
Seminary at Rome, may declare. Concerning Alle^, our Secular Priests of late
displaying the Jesuits, do labor to extenuate the malice and poisonful
behavior of that hungry Cardinal, but his works are extant, testifying that
there was never any man more virulent in heart against the state of England the^
he was. Apolog. cap. 11.
Persons reckons up four of his books, The Answer to the English Justice,
The defense of the twelve martyrs in one year, The Epistle allowing Sir
William Stanleyes delivery up of Daventry, And the Declaration against her
Majesty and the State in the year 1588. In the first of these, the Chap. 2.
protestation of Laborn before mentioned, is remembered; that by other Papists,
as occasion should serve, it might be imitated. And the whole treatise howsoever
it seem to be more closely co^veied then ordinary, is forced with pestilent
calu^niations: Of the same nature is the whole subject of the second, pe^ned of
purpose to direct men's affection from the state. The third is a little Pamphlet,
short but not sweet, maintaining the treaso^ful actio^ of Sir William Sta^ley
by many an vn-Christia^ ce^sure, and most slau^derous imputatio^. As for Allens
answer 1584:
example, That our country is fallen into Atheism. That the Queens
confederacies were only and always with Christ's enemies. That the wars of
the English in the low Countries were sacrilegious wars, and of a heretical
Prince. And because he will be like himself, he goes on, That all the acts
in this Realm since the Queen was excommunicated and deposed from regal
dignity are void: therefore she can denotence no war, neither may her
subjects there serve her, when a Prince is become an open Rebel to the Sea
Apostolic He wish^h that the rest of the English soldiers would do as they
with Sir William Stanley did. He says that the English take no quarrels in
hands, but for the dishonorable defense of Rebels, Pirates and Infidels. I do
of purpose here omit many vile and execrable speeches by him added, least
the very rehearsing of them might justly be offensive. But the wicked man did
make no conscience to stain his whole country with horrible defamations. I
would hear any Secular in the world who can excuse this cursed fellow.
The fourth was printed in English, and should have beened vulged, if the
Spanyardes could have set footing in England in the year 1588. He who
list to see it, may find it word for word in Belgic. Histor l. 15.
Meterranus. Among other matters there are these. Our Sovereign then being,
is called the Pretended Queen, and the present usurper. She must be deprived
of the administration of the kingdom. She is an Heretic, a Schismatike,
excommunicate, contumacinis, usurping the kingdom against all right as for
other causes so because she had not the consent of the great Bishop of
Rome. She moved the Turk to invade Christendom. She has set at sale and
made a man of Laws and rightes. Some of her factes make her incapable of the
kingdom, some other make her unworthy of life. Therefore Pope sixtus the
fifth does renew the excommunication against her, and does deprive her of her
title and preteaces to the kingdoms of England and Ireland, declaring her
illegitimate and an vs^per, and absolving all her subjects from the ^th of
sidelity toward her. Then he chardgeth all to withdraw their ^de from her, that
worthy punishment may be taken of her, and that they ^e themselves with the
Duke of Parma. Also it is proclaimed lawful ^y hands upon upon the Queen, and
a very great reward is promised to those who do so. A safe conduct is then
given to as many as will bring any w^ like provision to the Spanish camp, and
to all who would assist that enterprise, the Pope does by Indulgence give full
pardon and plenary remission of all their sins. If these things do not
sufficiently show the viperous mind of this lewd Cardinal against his Prince
and Country, nothing in the world can manifest it. His dis Englished woolvish
desire was, that his natural place of educatio^, for which the old heathe^s
would have lost ten thousand lives, should have been in the everlasting
bondage of the Spanyard. Our Seculars then commending and excusing him to their
powers, are pitifully out: but the error of them, and of some English
gentlementravailers was this, that they imagined him in his latter years to be
altered; when indeed it was nothing else, but that after the year 88, his
hopes being deluded, and neither Pope nor Spaniarde nor all their adherentes
knowing how to remedy or recover that inestimable loss, and incomparable
dishonor unto them, his heart was as good as broken; and he would seem more
desirous to show all tolerability, to single men of our English nation, that he
might have some grace with the^, since he began to have so little with the
Spanyard. But doubtless venime had so putrisied him, that although he were
willing to paint himself without, he was quite rotten within. And whither for
want of his pretty staruling pensio^ from Spain, after that illustrious foil,
he might not be much humbled in the height of his proud thoughts, it is hard to
tell. Such a manner of man was one of the fathers of the Seminary.

19 As for Persons the present Rector, his mind is nothing inferior to the
others, albeit his degree be in a rank behind him. But that is his own fault
too, for his The copies of certain discourses extorted fol. 116.
fellows here tell us, that it was reported here in England that all the
boys at Saint Omars had conspired to make Persons a Cardinal, and had
written such effectual letters to the Pope for it, that he, the General of
the Jesuits, and all his friends in Rome, were little enough to keep him
from being a Cardinal. Well his heart for England is as good, as any of
his Predecessors. Answer to things concerning him in the Apology.
Doctor Bagsh^vve says directly that he persuaded the Students at Rome,
that they should have at state and all; for with state-medling they could but
die: and die they should without state meddling, if they were taken. If we
will not trust that Doctor, as one professing some hostility toward him, let
his Greene-coate concerning the Earl of Leicester, and another Commonwealth
of his touching another great and worthy man that dead is, speak in their
masters behalf. His Doleman shows him to have nothing in him, but bastard
English blood. And that is the more manifested, by his laboring the Students
in Spain, and at Rome, to consent to the title of the Lady Infanta. What
affection he cariyed to our late most blessed Sovereign, his short but
substantial approving of the judgment of Allen, Sanders, Bristow and
Stapleton touching the Bull of Pius the 5. in his Cap. 4.
Ward-word does declare. It is also laid to his charge, that he solicited a
man of Quodl. 7. 2
high place in this kingdom, to be a close Pensioner to the late king of
Spain to further his invasision. He Apol. c. 12.
challenges to himself these books, The reasons of refusal of going to the
Protestants Churches, the Epistle of persecution both in Latin and English, the
defense of the Censure against M. Charke: and these show that all his wits and
study were then bent, on the one side to supplant the religion that we
profess, but on the other side to defame the honor of his Prince, and
country, and of all the chief officers of Justice in the same, and with such
suttletics to steal away the hearts of many subjects from them. His resolutions
Solutiones (...). and P.
in his pretended Cases of conscience, as they are impious, so are they most
pernicious to the state. But the less they are there to be wondered at, since
he openly labors in (...). (...). 1^.
his Apology, to mainetaine falsehoods and lying dissembling A quivocations,
with little less then blasphemy to our most holy Savior. His Manifestatio^
has many proper things in it, as being that where he shows himself without
a vizarde. This is he who has had in Spain, and now has at Rome the
training up of those who are and must be our Seminarye Priests; the only
Arch-traitour now remaining alive, and to be balanced by none unless
peradventure, and it is but peradventure, D. Gifford may be the man. I might
add to these, as great men at Doway in their times, Bristow and Stapleton. The
one shows himself a rebel in heart by his Cap. 15.
Motives, which book D. Allen did allow to the Press. And how far the other
that is old chollerike and bitter Stapleton, (the Apol. c. 9.
learnest man living of our Country, if we will believe Fa. Persons) was
engaged in these matters, his manifold virulent aspersions scattered in his
books, against his natural Prince and some personages of high worth, do
abundantly testify. Such are the teachers, Readers, and Governors of the
Seminaries, and such an honest man is Weston at Doway now if he be yet at
Doway, where no doubt they train up their Students in good meditations. Which
I may the rather say, if that be true which Colliar.
one of their own company delivered to me to be so of his own knowledge,
while he was there in D. Barrets time. As our Students in our Colleges have
used to make verses, and to fix them up on the skreenes or elsewhere
publicly, on the day of her late Majesty's coming to the Crown, so they had
sometimes at Doway when they made verses in like sort, and whither on the day
before named I do not remember. In this case, the invention of one of their
gracious strudents was, to speak of the three furies in hell, Alecto, Megaera,
and Tisiphone, whose virtues when with his Poetry he had described, he adds
at last that there was now of late a fourth come in, Furiarum Quarta, whose
description he makes accordingly. And this lewd devise was much commended by
the Superiors there, albeit he plainly designed her, for whom by the laws of
God and man, they were rather bound to have spent their best blood, then that
the least dishonorable thought concerning her should have entered into their
h^^t. And who will wonder that the fruits of such persons do show what the
root is whereupon they do sit. We may add to these things abroad, the
experience which we have had at home, of Babingtons, Somerviles, Squires and
such ungodly miscreants, who incited by Ballard, and other sent from the
Seminary, have attempted most horrible treasons, to the hazarding of the
happiness of this whole kingdom. And were not our state blind, if they could
not guess the mind of the soldiers by such captains, the disposition of such
scholars by their tutours, the affection of the Priests by such Superiors,
especially since they daily saw in our own land, that such as had to do with
these emissaries and secret creepers, did testify that they had touched some
Eccl 13. (...)
pitch, being quickly alienated if not in open action, yet in apparent
affection from therest of the Realm? And might not all religious folks have
groaned in their souls, and all good subjects have lamented in their hearts, if
some severe proviso had not been made, to restrain the audacious coming in,
and the ravenous dissipations of persons so intending mischief? It should have
been an vnrecompensable weakness to have permitted such incendiaries to
bring all to combustion, and our magistrates in the mean time, to have stood
by the houses of themselves and their neighbors being on fire, and to have
thought it a pretty thing to stand and warm themselves by the flame. But they
being inspired by a better spirit, did make good and wholesome laws, inhibiting
the approaching of such dangerous guests, or if they would not forbear, paying
them the wages due for their work. Ex malis moribus bonae nascuntur leges. Ill
manners breed good laws. And if England alone have received such bad measure
from unnatural bredde English, who can blame the Magistrates and lawmakers of
England, if by special ordinances they provide for the safety of that charge,
which is committed to them, which cannot be but by cutting off such
malefactors. When other kingdoms have been so much burnte, they will dread
the fire: when other nations have been so bitten, they will beware of dogs
teeth. What other countries would do if there were cause, you may guess by
France, which standing yet on terms of Popery, have removed the Jesuits, so
that if they will come there it is on hazard of their life. I will set down
the words; as they be in the Decree of the Parliament of Paris against the^,
that no man may doubt in that case: Jesuits Ca ^h lib 3. cap. 18.
The Court does ordains that the Priests and Students of the College of
Clai^mont, and all other calling themselves of that Society of Jesus, as
corrupters of youth and disturbers of the common quiet, enemies of the King and
State, shall avoid within three days after the publication of this present
sentence, out of Paris and other Cities, and places where their Colleges are,
and fifteen dates after out of the Realm, upon pain, wheresoever they shall
be found, the said term expired, to be punished at guilty and culpable of the
crime of high Treason. And afterward, It forbids all the Kings subjects to
send any scholars to the Colleges of the said Society being out of the Realm,
there to be instructed, upon the like pain to incur the crime of high This
decree was made (...) ^mb. (...).
treason. Thus the Papists of France deal with the Jesuits, who are the
bringers up, brethren and cousin germans of our Seminarians. If they keep
them out of France they are not touched or reached after, and so here it is
with the Idolatrous massing Priests sent from the Pope of Rome who loves us
immeasurable, and from the dominions of the King of Spain, or those who
depend upon him. We need them not, we send not for them, and therefore if they
come, it is upon their own peril.

20 Yet because this proceeding seems to you to be so hard, and in your
books in England and elsewhere published, you so exclaim of the rigorousnes
of our kingdom in this behalf, I will a little remember you, what milder me^
of your own Seminaries have published in this matter, acknowledging that justly
by books and enterprises the State has bin exasperated against you. I
confess that they lay all the blame on the Jesuits, and Iesuited: but those we
ca^ hardly distinguish from me^ otherwise minded* And if we could it were to
small purpose, since the followers of the Archpriest are al Iesuited, and as M.
Persons says they are Apolog. cap: 8:
300. to 10. of the other. Since the^ the sway and sweep goes the other way,
and for the adverse part we have no warrant but that they may leave their best
goodness when themselves will, which Watson and Clerk have lately ex emplified,
it is best to let the law stand against all, leaving the forbearance of
stricte execution to the wisdom of those in authority, who incline to mercy
where it is fit to be extended, One, A: C* in his 2: letter: page 42:
who although he be not a Priest, yet was brought up in the Seminary, says
thus: At the Queens coming in many of us were too soon turned so Iesuitish
and Spanish, to the attempting of disloyal plots against her State and person,
that she was driven to trust wholly to her Protestants holding us all suspect.
And Ibid. p: 29:
again: The Jesuits outrage Princes, as murdering the last French King, and
had done our dear Sovereign sundry times if Gods hand had not been the
stronger. Another Reply to the Apology: cap: 17:
tells us, that in the Colleges erected by the means of Parsons, Priests
and other have bin induced to subscribe to foreign titles, yea and to come in
person against their own country. He who answers the manifestatio^ supposed
to be the writing of Persons, acknowledges that D. Fol. 35.
Sau^ders his works De visibili Monarchia, and De schismate Anglic, co^tain so
many errevere^t speeches, and the divulging of such odius matters against her
Mr. and her noble ^genitours, as the untruths of some and the incertainty of
others co^siderd, could not but irritat the most Christian Catholic and patie^t
Prince in the world. A Fol: 3^
little before he tells us, Neither for ought I se, does the State wake show
of persecution quoad vita^ et nece^, for matter merely of religion and
conscience, but upon pretense of treason, or atte^pts against her Majesty's
person or state, or (at the least) upon the fear thereof. But yet more directly
he proceeds, Fol. 31. and 32
I would but ask Fa. Persons (because I know him to be a great Statist) this
one question, whither in his conscience he did think, there be any Prince in
the world, be he never so Catholic, that should have within his dominions a
kind of people, amongst whom diverse times he should discover matters of
treason, and practices against his person, and state, whither he would permit
those kind of people, to live within his dominions, if he could be otherwise
rid of them, and whither he would not make straight laws, and execute them
severely against such offenders, yea and all of that company and quality,
rather then he would remain in any danger of such secret practices and plots?
I think Fa. Persons will not for shame deny this. Then the fault is not in
the Prince and State for being cautious, but in the Romanists for being
pragmaticall in dangerous atte^pts. I will join to these the testimony of M.
Watson who is copious in this point. He says that the In the pre face to the
Quodlibers.
Seminaries at first, made the Jesuits cause, attempts, intentes, practices and
proceedings their own in every thing: their plots and practices they seemed at
first to defend, or at least to wink at. Hence they were entangled by penal
laws justly made against them equally as against the Jesuits. In another Quod.
8. 9
place thus: At the affliction of Catholics in England has been in very
deed extraordinary, and many an innocente man lost his life, so also has the
cause thereof been extraordinary, and so far beyond the accustomed
occasions of persecution give^ to any Prince in Christendom or monarchy, that
is, or ever was in the world to this hour as rather it is to be wondered at
(all things duly considered) that any one Catholic is left on live in
England, then that our persecution has been so great: for name one nation (I
know none can) under heaven, where the subjects (especially if they were
Catholics) ever sought the death of their Sovereign, (though of a different
religion from the^) the conquest of their native land, the subversion of the
state, the depopulation of the weal public, the alteration and change of all
laws, customs and orders, and in few the utter devastation, desolation and
destruction of all the ancient inhabitants of their land, etc. Now if this may
be said of the laity of the English Papists, what censure may be given of the
Priests, the vrgers and instigatours of all these things? He speaks elsewhere
more particularly of the Seminary Priests: Quod. 9. 4
How can they expect any favor when they are taken? none can deny that their
coming over is to increase the number of Catholics: and that Fa. Persons
reigns, and has the whole direction at this day for all the missions that
are for England. How then (alas) how may her Majesty and the state conclude
against them? What laws can be too extreme to keep them out of the land? Or
if they will needs come in, what severity for the execution of laws against
them can be more then sufficient? Into what gulf are we plunged? Nay into
what an obloquy are we plunged? Nay into what an obliquie must the Catholic
Church of Rome grow, in that the execution of Priesthood and treason are now so
linked together by the Jesuits in England, as we cannot exhort any to the
Catholic faith, but dogmatizando, in so doing, we draw him in effect to
rebellion? You see that this writer does not sumble nor doubly budgen, but
delivers his opinion roundly. And if any one should except that these be the
assertions of private and single men, he may see a treatise put out by joint
consent of diverse Seculars, and written of purpose to clear the proceedings of
the State in England from bloody cruelty, or vn-advised rigorousnes in cutting
of such rotten members. You may judge the contents thereof by the Title which
is this Edit: An. 1601.
Important considerations, which ought to move all true and sound Catholics,
who are not wholly Iesuited, to acknowledge without all equivocations,
ambiguities or shiftings, that the proceedings of her Majesty and of the State
with them, since the beginning of her Highness reign, have been both mild
and merciful. By this time if there be any wit or sense left in you, you may
put up your pipes for complaining of the hard usage of Priests sent hither from
the Seminaries. I have been the more large in this argument, partly to stop
your clamorous mouth, and partelye to satisfy weak persons either on our or
your side; and not least of all to free the honorable Parliamentes and
Magistrates taking order against such venomous vermin, from the forged
imputations and scandalous defamations in this particular laid against them,
and by name of him Supposed to: be D. Worthington.
who falsely reports the suffering of sixteen pretended martyrs in one year,
that is the year of Iubily, 1600. Now I follow your steps again where I left.

21. When you fall to daring, you show your self but a simple man. There is
one by whose help David did dare leap Psa. 18. 29 34.
over a wall, and to attempt with his arms to break a bow of brass, by whose
protection in a righteous cause, that England which by a diminution you call
little, does dare to stand against the strongest enemy that it has. What should
hinder it good Sir, to cut of lewd persons, (wherewithal God is well pleased)
when the late Queen thereof at her entrance to the Crown, did not fear all
the Potentates in the world, nor the backwardness of many of her own
subjects, nor the combining almost of all her own Clergy, but that in the
name of God, and in the undaunted confidence of his maintaining of his own
truth, she did spread the banner of the Gospel, and without discouragement
did persist in that resolution till the day of her death, the English
fugitives, and the Irish Malcontents, yea the Pope and Spaniard contriving to
the uttermost to impeach it? Why should not this our country dare to do well,
when by the singular favor of God blessing his true religion in it, it has
been able to repel that invincible Navy, to sack many of the kings towns in
the West Indies, to batter his Groine in Galitia, to march with ensign
displayed almost an hundred miles in the heart of his country, to knock at
his gates of Lisbone, to sink his fleet at Cales, and to burn that town at
pleasure, the Spaniards looking on, and scant offering to strike one blow. The
time has been that this England which is such a little more in your eye, has
sent Holinshed in Rich. 1 and Edw. 3. and Hen. 5. and 6.
a mighty army as far as to Palestina, has had two kings prisoners in it at
once, and two of her own Kings crowned in Paris. And he is blind who sees
not*, that at this time it has decayed no part of her ancient valor or worth;
Then do you never fear but it may dare to execute such companions of yours, as
will here disturb the peace of the Church and Commonwealth. Now that it
grieveth your pretty heart that you have not your will among us, I do verily
believe: and do not you think that wolves and bears do much grieve, that
they cannot come at the sheep-folds, but the shepherds will meets with them?
As our Luke 23. 28
Savior sometime said to the women of Jerusalem, that they should not weep for
him, but for themselves and their children, so we may bid you not to grieve
for the evil case of England, but to be sorry and weep for your sins and most
malicious blindness, that God without his more future mercy should give you
over to a reprobate sense so as to fly truth and to hate it, to bark against
the light, to carry undutiful thoughts to your Superiors, and vn-natural to
your country, where the Lord be praised for it, there is nothing unhappy,
unless it be that it has hatched into the world such vipers and such
monsters, who care not what become of her, so that Satan may be king, and
Antichrist may be general. How your brethren are persecuted with plenty ease
and abou^dance, not long since I told you. The wiser sort of the^ cannot but
acknowledge, as eve^ now you heard, that no Prince under the heaven, being so
zealous in Gods cause, and having sustained such indignities at the hands of
many of that faction, as our late most Christian Queen had done, would have
proceeded with that mildnes. For the manner of your speech you are now returned
to your old custom again. Here is nothing but all'all. How all the world has
embraced your profession, I have showed you before. The ancienter part of the
Primitive Church knew almost nothing of it; the latter part of the first 600.
years had some weeds coming up in it, but the good corn over-topped it.
Afterward it grew faster, but the Greek Church did bala^ce it, Mahomatise did
emulate it, Ge^tilisme did infinitely exceed it: in the West, true religion had
faut ours, in themselves many; but compared with the Antichristian troop but
few, and now of late the vizard of her holiness is pulled of, and a maine part
of Chri stendo^e do see that it is but a painted 2. King: 9. 30.
Iezabel. That some where it is tolerated we deny not: but it may be where the
2. Sa. 3, 39.
sons of Zarvia are too strong for David, or for other special reasons best
known to the governors,: but of all likelihood it is where the embracers of it
have learned to be so temperate, as not to complot for desolatio^ of those
countries where they are tolerated, and upon a hope that those who are now
perverted by error, may be converted to truth. But our Princes have learned to
walk in the ways of 2. King: 18
Hezekiah and Josiah, and know that they are not co^me^ded by the holy Ghost,
who suffered the high places to stand in their dominions. That England while she
follows the prescript of the God of wisdom, should think that she does more
wisely, the^ some other who are dru^ke^ with the harlots enchantments, is no
greater a fault the^ that of David's was, who could say, By Psalm: 119: 98 99:
100.
thy co^ma^deme^ts thou have (...) vviser the (...) enemies, And I have bad
(...) understanding th^n all my teachers, And again, I understand more then
the ancient, because I kept thy precepts. The same objection which you make,
was made long agone by the proud Scribes* and Pharisees, that they thought
one way, and the simple Ioh. 7: 48: 4^:
accursed people were of another mind. For our Elders we shall have time to
come to you toward the end of this Chapter. And what you say of all the
learned men of Christendom: for so many ages together is a Popish brag; for
as before I have shevved, there were men of singular learning, who savve the
horrible abuses of the Synagogue of Rome, and mourning in their souls to
behoulde them, wrote against them, taught against them, prayed against them:
and many utterly separated themselves from the Numer: ^6: ^26:
tents of Core and Dathan, laboring to keep their conscience undefiled,
although for so doing, they endured contempt and torture, and imprisonment, and
loss of life. Your own books bear witness of them, as formerly I have
showed.


T. HILL. AND I pray you tell me, if an hearb^ should be presented to you to
(...), that all learned Physicians for a thousand ye^res together, have judged
to her (...), and only some one or two of later years have begun to teach
the contrary, without actual experience whether it be so or no, but only by
discourse and now arguments of their own brain, would you abstain to eat
it or no? Or if an action should be offered you there in England, which by
all old Lawyers judgment of former times has been taken for high treason
Ipso facto, and consequently loss of life and lauds, though some nevver
Lawyers were of contrary opinion that now it is not, would you not look
twice before you did leap, except you were out of your vvittes? But in this
other case, although all ancient Divines and Doctors, for about a thousand
years together, have taught the Catholic Roman religion* ^ee true indeeds,
and only F^iar Luther a loose Apostata, and Sir John Calvin^ a seare-backe
Priest for Sodo^ye, have begun in our days to teach the contrary, for fear
of being punished by the Magistrates of the said Catholic religion, for
wicked and badde life, ye will the Protestants (...) ou^ and cast at all,
and will hazard He^ and all Etornity of torments thereon depending. UUho
will deny this to be headlong and hare-braine dealing? Surely this
Universal consent of Christendom against two or three so (...) ^hours of
novelties, are more then sufficient to induce any (...) of reason to look
about him, and to consider what he does, and whether he may adventure his
soul upon such inequality of testimonies, as this is betvveen two or three
Novellantes, and twenty millions of holy and grave ancients, and no doubt
(...) West minster hall, this difference of witnesses would (...) with a^
equal and discreet Judge or (...).


G. ABBOT. 22 SImilitudes are familiar: but if you had ever read any thing
touching the Principles of Rhetorike, they are of no force at all, where men
have to do, with a renitent Auditour, of which sort per adventure you may
take us be. But as learned Physicians as any who gain* said it, found this
that you speak of, to be Mithridate, and an Antidote or especial
preservatiue against poison. And now there be more then one or two, who have
studied this point, and that not only for the Theorike, but for the Practike
also* and their arguments are not new, but fetched from the Patriarchs and
Prophets and Apostles. Our Physicians have observed that rule of the Diod. Si^:
Antiquit: lib: 2: 3:
Egyptians, who in all their cures looked to their book, and by that they did
heal or pronounce incurable. Yours left the book: and thereby as they
destroyed their patientes, so it is to be feared, that after the manner of the
Egyptian Law, they lost their own lives for their labor. And that which
you mention concerning Lawyers is just of the same quality: for very great
Lawyers did differ about this title in question: and then it appeered that
those of our side did look to the lawgiver, and had recourse to his words;
whereas your me^ locked up the book, and professed that they could say by heart
so much as was expedient. But there their memory did fail them. Now as the
former were out, so such as came after, and believed their blind masters,
were more out then their predecessors. The Romish Dictatour took the
advantage by this, and finding that his best profitte was to be his own
^arver, and make laws for himself, added what he would, and intrepreted as
he list, and if he would go astray, (whereunto he was most ready) his
pety-foggers must not question it, but they must admire him and adore him,
since this stood as an Oracle, that if the Gratian^ part. 1. Distinct. 40. Si
Papa.
Pope should lead innumerable souls to hell with him, he must not be
capitulated with; neither might the question be once asked, Domine cur si^
facis? there was store of such Lawyers when CHRIST came into the world: but
they had a Luc. 11. 46.
VVo by him denounced against them. And yet when our Savior turned all their
constitutions vpside-dovvne, and gave new interpretations of the Law, one
might before the people have used the same argument which is here made: All
the great Clerks, the Scribes and Pharisees, for so many ages have taught you
one way, and this man teaches you another way, whom therefore will you
believe? our Savior would in this case have bidden men look to the
Original: Math 19. 8
from the beginning it was not so. When the Saracens possessed C^l. Aug.
eurio. Sarrac: Histor. lib: 1.
Granado and that part of Spain which is about it, for seven hundred years
(...) if a Christian should have come to have pleaded the title of that
Kingdom, they might have produced Lawyers who should have advouched, that for
so many descents, and that time out of mind their Ancestors had enjoyed it.
But King Ferdinand who expelled them thence, might better replye, that the
Christians had a more ancient right unto it: that the Saracent were but
encroacher and usurpers* and there were books of authentical record, which
vvoulde without partiality assign every man his own. Things go much by
opinion, till truth be displayed. How many learned men did err in that
conceit, the a Bodin: Method: cap 4:
Svv^nne before his death did singe most svveetelye? The Petr: Martyr. D^ad:
(...): 3:
Castilians when they came first into the West Indies thought it had been
poison to have eaten of roasted serpents and yet afterward they found it to
be most dainty meat. When matters for a long space have been mistaken,
and at last they be discovered, it is no commendation to dwell in old
oversightes, but it is best with advise to reform them. Ad Pomp^ium:
Custom without truth, is a^nesse of error ^aith Saint Cyprian. Touching
your Lawyers then we say, that if they take truth to be treason, they are
more afraid then hurt. And as for your Physicians, they are but like the
(...) Chron: 16. 1^.
Physicians of Asa: for while more trust is reposed in them, then in GOD, many
a good patient dies under their hands. That which they report to be poison,
would save and restore the sick o^ll affected person.

23 When you have a little raunged among Lawyers and Physicians, because we
should think that you have heard of all the three faculties, you return to
your own profession, and and there as a man who say all, but indeed know
little of ancient. Doctors and Divines, and smally acquainted with the
monumentes of the Church* you profess that for a thousand years nothing has
been ^aught but the vn-Catholike Roman Religion, till Luther and Calvines
time; which is as true a speech, as you are a truth-speaking man, and that is
never a whit; all the Popes Prentice being bound but to a lying occupation.
Your slanders against these holy men are so well known unto us, that in
respect of you we think them rather to be laughed at, then to be refured;
albeit in regard of other simple souls whom you vvoulde abuse, we are
otherwise minded. When our Savior had long before lived, and dyed, and
ascended into heaven, Julian Libanius, and Porphi^y had inventions mough
against him, and he could not escape without that slander that he was a
Augustine. in Johan. Tract. 3^.
Magitian When Narcissus a godly virtuous person lived, he was by three false
witnesses speaking against him, and using Eusebius Eccle H^stor: 6. 8.
grievous imprecations toward themselves if they spoke not truth, accused of a
heinous crime. It was constantly given out of Socrat: (...). ^0: lib. 2* 1^:
Theodor: 1: 26: 28: 30* Soom* 2: 2^: 22: 2^: Athans^ Apolog^
Athanasius, that he was an adulterer, a Necromancer, a murthe^r: and this was
so assevered by the A^ians, that although many did see Arsenius who^ he was
reported to have slain, or caused him to be made away, yet they would scant
believe their own eles: but it was not once to be doubted, but that by the
means of Athanasius who intended to use it in Coniu^tion, one of the hands of
the said Arsenius was cut off, although he himself stood before them, and had
both his hands whole and untouched. Yea a harlot was brought face to face,
which chardged him to have committed fornication with her: and yet she was so
far from knowing him, that when another took on him to be Athanasius, she
not being therein mistress of her craft, chardged him to have done that,
which she purposed to lay on Atanasius. Since these and the like matters have
bin in times past, it is no marveile that the Devil of late should stir up
Cochleus or B^lsec or Staphilus, against two such lamps of the Christian world
as Luther and Calvine were, who made such breaches into his strongest
fortresses, and freede so many prisoners from him. He whom you term an
Apostata, was no otherwise such a one for leaving your Babylon, then Saint
Paul might have been said to be, for relinquishing the Phil. 3: 5:
Pharisees, whom a long time he had followed. And whereas you call him loose,
his behavior all his time was strict and severe, industrious and studious in
penning and preaching much. The heathen Orat pro: M. Caelio.
Tully could have toulde you, that he who would be an Orator must cut of all
licentiousness, yea his needful recreations with his most entier friends,
Judge if Luther did not so, who has left remaining after him such volumes of
books, as few men in any age have left more. But he rubbed the Pope to the
quick: and a horse which is gawled will wince. And it was another of his
faults, that he touched the Monks bellies, as Carrion: Chr^ucts a Melan. l. 5.
Eras^ said, and therefore blame not them and their friends, if they do their
best to lash him. One while with Lib 4. Chronograph.
Genebrard^ he shall be the grand Antichrist, or the next member to him,
because Luther (as he says) in Hebrew, makes 666. yet by and by afterward,
the In Apoe. 13. 1^.
Rhemists of their gracious bounty and singular integrity, profess to
discharge him, and quitte him of that honor. While he was a Friar at
Witemberge, he was a man without exception, passing towardly and learned, yea
fit to take the highest degree in that University, that is to say, a
Doctourshippe in Divinity; but since he came out of Sodom, it is now written of
him, that Persons censure on M Char^e.
before he was a Friar, he was stricken in a medowe with a thunderbolt, and
being so frighted he put himself into a Monastery. And there afterward
reading in the Church the Gospel of the third Sundaie in Lent, of the deaf
and dumme Devil thrown out by CHRIST, he suddenly fell down upon the
pavement, and the Devil cried horribly out of his mouth, saying, I am not, I
am not dumme; I will speak yet unto the world. So shameless are men in
their improbable detamations, when they once make it their summum bonum, to
draw people after them they care not in what manner. There is no measure of
lying: there are no bounds for untruth, whereof Luther has well tasted, if
ever any experimented it for doing GOD good service.

24 Your scorn at Sir John Calvine may be easily returned on the best of your
side, as Sir William Allen, Sir Robert Bellarmine; but we must allow you a
great deal more then this. Your slander against Calvine, you take word for
word, from Persons his Cap. 7.
Ward-word against Sir Frauncis Hastinges, to which if you please you may read
the answer, discovering that odious calumniation. O. E. to N. D: Cap 7:
There you may find, first that Calvine was never Mass Priest, and therefore
that Baals servauntes did falsely object Priest-hoode unto him. Secondly that
Bolsecus the author of this slander, did in an open Synod confess with
tears, that without any ground he had laid that slander on him. Thirdlye
that the tale is not only an unjust imputation, but a sottishe and improbable
Narration. For first there was never any such legal punishment by any law
decreede; and secondly no Record or testimony is of any such matter, ever
done or suffered by Calvine. You may there also find how truly that
crimination, does fall on the Romish generation* concerning which point my
meaning is to forbear you for a while, and now to follow you in the present.
That then these men should leave the Papacye, for fear of censure from Popish
Magistrates, for that whereof they were no ways, no not so much as in shevve
guiltye, it your foolish collection: and so much the more absurd, because
Calvine by your lying report had been punished already. Anyethinge yvill
serve the turn, to keep this slander going. You might rather have said in
behalf of Luther, that since he was so esteemed by the whole University,
where he abode for a great part of his time^ since his name after his death
is honorable among them; since he was so protected to the hazard of all his
estate, by that Noble and wise and virtuous Duke of Saxony, it is certain that
no exception can be taken to his life. And for Calvine that since for many
years, he lived in so reverende reputation at Geneva, where they are so
strict against sin, that by the testimony of Method. hist: cap. 6:
Bodine a Papist, no open wantonness, no lasciviousness is once permitted
there, by reason of the austerity of their discipline, and that they have (as
travellours report) so stern a law against lewd malefactors, as is scant to
be found in all the world again, that an offendour flying out of any country
thither, shall there be subject to as grievous punishment, as he was in his
own land (if he be convicted of the crime) unto which severity they are
forced, least their city standing near the dominion of so many Princes and
States, should be the common receptacle and sanctuary of all fugitives and
runnagates, therefore John Calvin was a man of singular honesty of life, and
every way vntouchable in his conversation. They who are generally so strict,
would not with such high acceptance have admitted, and for so many years
retained a person notoriously defamed, to be the chief standdard bearer of
their profession, whereas they might have had many other worthy men and
without exception to have supplied that room. This tale then commeth^ from
Satan the father of lyes^. Now it is not upon these persons that we do
repose our selves, but on that which they bring out of the holy Scripture,
which being the word of truth, and inspired from the Spirit of God, we fear
not to adventure upon it, our selves, our salvation, our hope of everlasting
blessedness. Neither do we this headlongly or hare-brainedly as you suppose,
for we are Act: 26: 25
not mad O noble Festus, but with our maturest judgments and most sober
understandings, we study, we confer the Scriptures in many languages, we
pray to God to inlighten us, we look into the Fathers, the Histories, the
Councels, we compare old things with new, we leave no good means vn-attempted
to sift and found the truth: and still the farther we look, the less ground
we find for Popety. Divines most ancient amongst us, do more loath it in
their old age, then they did in their young. Yea we turn the books of your
writers, and exemine their reasones and much ado we see they have to set up
the tower of Babell, and yet it cannot be at they would have it. Nay we hinder
not your learned Papists, freely at our book-seller^ to buy all books of
controversies in religion, so they be not mingled with state cause^; which
course concerning the writings of our men you permit not to your learned
disciples, but interdict them eve^ to many of your Seminary Priests. And above
all this, we are so far from longing to be in hell, that all who are rightly
instructed among us, take as great care of the saving of their souls, as the
deepest Romanist of you, with all your Pharisticall and counterfeit hypocrisy.

25 When then you make comparison between an universal consent, and that also
ancient on the one side, and a few contemptible authors of novelties on the
other side, and you double it again that here be but two or three Novellants,
and there twenty millio^s of grave and holy ancients, which inequality, say
you, would sway much with Judges or with Iuries in Westminster hall, we reply
that you do but talk at rando^ after your fashion. For first Westminster hall
is no place for the trial of religion. Secondly your men consent not in such
sort as you speak; their agreement is not so generally spread, as a man may see
throughout all Bellarmines works, where almost in every question he cites
different opinions and judgments of writers in the Papacy: and many things
wherein Romanists agree are but falsehood: and you much mistake the number of
those who have and do oppugn you. Thirdelye what you say is anncient, is but
vpstarte and crept in, as a worthy D. Sutclifs challendge c. 2.
man has of late most learnedly showed, in a tract for that purpose: and for
the trial of our differences we lay the Bible before you, then which I trust
you will not offer to bring ought more aucient. He who out of that book can
win it, in Gods name let him wear it. We say with Tertullian, De praescript
contra haere^
that that is of the Lord and true, which was first delivered. And fourthly
we do tell you, that multitude is not it which must decide what is truth.
Among heathen men one Plutari in Phocyone.
Phocyon standing single, spoke more advisedly then all the Atheniens. Should
Elias be overborne because he was but (...). King. 18. 25.
one, when the Priests of Baal were many? Who was the greater company, Ier. 2.
(...). 4.
Jeremy, or all Jerusalem, with the whole land of Judah? If you had been
present at the erecting of the image of Dan 3. 1.
Nabuchodonosor, and had seen all the great Princes fall down before that
Idol, and the three children stand up, you would have laid freely at them,
Dare you strangers and captives, and boys, and vpstart companions, set your
self against a million of wise men, Princes and Counselours? They should have
had your voice, to have gone to the fiery Furnace. Do you not pity your self
when you reason in this fashion? Among them that be wise pendenda sunt
suffragiapetius quam numera^da, voices are to be weighed rather then to be
numbered. I can say no more unto you, but that when this is your best Divinity,
Lord have mercy upon you. Saint Austen would have told you, for Epist. 19.
all these and above all these, we have the Apostle Paul.


T. HILL. NEither may the Protestants now at length glory in their great
number, as some of them have done, for that their Religion is there in England,
and in Scotland, and some thereof in ^aland, and in the Low Countries and in
some parts of Germany, and a few of them in France, Apol. Eccl. Anglic.
for they never yet passed into Asia, nor into Africa, nor into Greece, nor
into many places of Europe, much less into the Indies. But indeed if you
rightly scanne their doctrine, you shall find that your Religion Protesta^tine
of England is no where in the world else, and that English service contained in
your book of Common prayer is unknown, and condemned of all other Nations and
people under the cope of Heaven. So that in very deed the doctrine of your
Protestants is taught or received no where but in England, and the Puritant
Doctrine of Scotland (the contrariety thereof duly considered) is no where but
in Scotland, the Lutherane Doctrine taught in Denmark, is no where but in
Denmark, and in a few places of Germany, the Libertine doctrine taught in the
Low Countries, is no ^here but in the Low Countries, and the like may be said
of other sects.


G. ABBOT. 26 YOU are mis informed that the Protestants do glory in their
great number: they know that truth is truth, be i^ in more or few. As for M.
Jewel whose Apology you quote in your margent, he has no such matter. Only
where as it is objected that our Religion overturneth kingdoms and
governmentes, he answers there unto, that there Apol. Eccl. Anglican.
do remaiue in their place and ancient dignity, the Kings of England,
Denmark, Sweden, the Dukes of Sa^cony, the Cunties Palatine, etc. This is to
answer to an objection, by giving many instances to the contrary, and not to
glory of any multitude. And if any other of our Church do note in brief, that
the Gospel has taken root in some large nations, that is to stop the mouth
of the clamorous adversary, and to satisfy the weak, as also not least of all
to praise God, who so spreads the beams of his compassion; but it is not to
boast vainly as you ignorantly imagine. Yet who doubts but a good Christian
may joy in his heart exceedingly, and thankfully express it in his tongue, that
many who sat in darkness may now behold the light, and the sheepefold of
Christ is more and more filled. But if we would be too forward, you will pluck
us back again. Although it be, say you, in some places of Europe, yet in some
other it is not. As who should say your Popery is general in all. Where I pray
you in Greece is your Papistry? It is not in Asia, and Africa, and much less
in the Indies. The East Indies are part of Asia, if you could think upon it. By
what means your Idolatry came into those Countries, I have showed before, and
how plentifully there it is. If we would talk idly, as you for the most part
do, we might say that in every place where the Merchants of Holland trade, and
have people residing, our religion is accepted. But since the English Merchants
have companies and houses in Russia, in Constantinople, in Aleppo, in
Alexandria sometimes, in Barbary, in Zacynthus, in Venice, and Legorne, we
might say after the fashion of your boasting, that our religion is in those
parts. But we desire to make no more of things then indeed they are. Yet we
tell you for those remote provinces, that as now one hundred and twenty years
agone they knew not one whit of your faith, so it may please God, before one
hundred and twenty years more be passed (if it so seem good to his most
sacred wisdom) to plant the truth which we reach, in the East and Western
world, especially if a passage by the North end of America, or that by Asia
beyond Ob may be opened, wherein our M. Haclui^ vnges:
Nation has much adventured, and speng good sums of treasure, which also
the Hollanders have done. But the issue of this whole matter must be lest to
the divine providence, which is to be magnified therefore, if he add this
blessing to his Church, And if he deny it either there or in any other place,
we must not be carried too far with grief or pity, since it does not please
him who is the father of mercy to condescend unto it. Now whereas you
avouch, that our doctrine is only in England, I know not vvhither I should
put that in your ignoraunces, or rather in your malicious cavils. Truth it is
our common prayer book is used only by those who are of English
allegeaunce, but is there any point of doctrine in it, whereunto other
Churches reformed, in Europe, do not condescend? The Catechism of the
Council of Trent does differ in words from the Catechism of Canisius, and
both of them from that of M. Vaux: yet you would think it a wrong if any man
should tell you that they disagree in points of doctrine. So the service of
the reformed Congregations in Europe, as in England, Scotland, France,
Switzerland, in the dominion of the Palsgraue, in the Regiments and free cities
of Germany which are of the Pallsgraues confession, as also in a good part of
the low Countries, is the same in all points of moment, not differing one
into: their Professions are the same. There is no question among these in any
one point of religion. The Ecclesiastical policy being different, as in some
places by Bishops, in some other without them, does not alter ought of faith.
The Apostles in that they were Apostles had a kind of government, which the
Church had not afterward in the very same particular. In the ancient Church,
some cities and Countries were immediately ruled by a Patriarch, Grande
Metropolitan, some other by an inferior Bishop who was subjected to the
greater: yet they all might agree in the faith. The chief at Rome immediately
is the Pope, at Millaine for spiritual things the Arch-bishoppe, in some
places be but Suffragaines, in some other Jurisdictions, a Deane or Priour by
Privilege has almost Papal authority, which also in times past was in the
Chauncellours or Vice-chauncellours of our English Universities, some few
things being excepted and reserved. Yet will you say that these do differ in
religion, or retain not the same doctrine? Even so it is touching the belief
of the Protestants in England, of those which you in spite call Puritaines in
Scotland, and of them whom you term maliciously, Libertines in Holland and
Zeland. They teach no other liberty then what the Galat. 5. 1.
Apostle teaches, and bids us to stand fast in it. For the showing of your
skill, I entreat you to let your scholars hear one point of moment, or
material, wherein all those Churches which before I named, do differ. Speak
it out, if you can tell what. Touching the Lutheranes in Denmark and many
places of Germany, I have toulde you before that in one point of the Eucharist
they disagree from the rest of the Churches, which the LORD in time may send
to be reconciled; and we pray unto him for the same. But your comfort upon
that discord is small. For as Anthony sometimes King of Navatre, and father
to the most Christian King of France now reigning, Commenta^. Relig. and
Reip. in Gall. lib.
said to the Ambassador of the King of Denmark, exhorting the reformed
French to be of Luthers doctrine, There be forty points wherein Luther and
Calvine do differ from the Pope, and in nine and thirty of them they agree
between themselves, and in that single one they dissent. Their followers
therefore should do well, to join in the greater number against the Pope, till
they had ruinated him; and when his heart is broken, they should fall to
compound that last single difference. God in his good time may grant this to
be done, although in the mean while, he do exercise his spouse asseemeth
good to himself.


T. HILL. LAstly I do bore consider with my self, if I should refuse the
Catholic Romans religion so universally taught', received and professed
throughout all the world so many ages together, and embrace any of these new
silly sects, adventuring my soul there-vpon, what all my progenitors
auncesters of they were here again and saw me die so, would say unto me. I
guess they would use such speeches as th^se: what do then condemn all our
judgments and doings? Do thou malign that Religion, which we so highly
esteemed and sought to advance? Do then send us all to hell and damnation?
Will thou judge thy self vviser, and more in Gods favor, then any of us were?
And many such like speeches I think they would use.


G. ABBOT. 27 I doubt not but in this Reason you have borrowed of your
neighbors, as well as you did in others before, although it be not my hap to
trace you here, as formerly I have done. But the reckoning up of those your
places in the Eastern parts of the world, are by me certainly held not to be
your own, which I conceive by the complexion of all the rest of your book. For
your phrases and appellations bestowed on Luther and Calvin. Father Persons is
your schoolmasters. But because you are devoted unto blind Bristowes Motives,
if you have been sparingly with him in all this Chapter before, yet here you
conclude with Motiv. 36.
him about our Predecessors. Where you might have remembered that (to speak
properly) neither our auncesters shall judge us, neither shall we judge our
auncesters, but Jesus Christ shall judge both, and he will not take for good
payment, that which we follow by imitation of our parents, but what we do or
have done after his own commandments. How often in the Scripture are men
blamed, for walking in the ways of 1. King 15 34. cap. 16. 19. 26.
Jeroboam, and of other their Auncesters? How often do the Psa 106. 6 Dan. 9.
6. 16
godly confess and deplore their fathers sins before God? What precepts be
there to that purpose, as that Salomons wife, who represents the spouse of
Christ, should Psalm: 45: ^1
forgot her own people, and her fathers house? What a praise is it to a: Kin^*
8^. (...).
Hezekiah, and to Cap. 21: 24
Josiah, and diverse other, that having idolatrous parents, they did rather
look to their father which is in heaven, then to flesh and blood upon earth?
If this instruction of yours should have gone for current, the Jews should
scant have received the doctrine of Christ, but the Gentiles without all
question should have kept them to Jupiter, to Apollo, to Aesculapius, because
if they had done otherwise, they had condemned the way of their forefathers. By
this rule our auncesters here in England should not have received baptism,
and the Indians and Iaponians whom you say so fast without book, should have
worshipped their old Idols. The complaint which you here make in the person of
our predecessors, was made before by Symmachus to the Emperor Valentinian, in
the days of Saint Ambrose, speaking thus in the name of the city Rome, Ambro
Epist: lib: 5:
Most noble Princes, you fathers of the Country, reverence yet my years, unto
which my roots of devotion have brought me. I will use my ceremonies which I
received from my grandfathers, for I repent not my self of them. I will live
after mine (...) fashion, for I am free. But Saint Ibidem.
Ambrose coming afterward to answer all these objections, teaches that there
is one who in matters of religion, is rather to be believed then all the world
besides. Concerning God, whom should I rather believe then God himself? But of
this argument I may have occasion to speak more at large.

28 Only now thus much I add, that if any of our parents offended God, and
dyed in damnable ignorance, who would say that for their sakes and company, we
should thrust our selves into hell' If any of them were right, they will not
grudge, that we should have more light opened unto us, then they in their time
saw: even as those holy Jews under the law, foreseeing what would be under
the Messiah, envyed not to the Apostles and other of that age, the more perfect
and lively knowledge of Christ. But leaving the definition and determining
sentence of all, unto the Lords secret judgment, into which we must not ofter
to prease or intrude, we do hope that many of those who lived in the time of
darkness, had that mercy showed unto them, that their souls do rest in
peace. Such is Saint Cyprians opinion in the like case, De sacr^mento dominici
cali^: Epist: 68
And see most dear brother, if any of our Predecessors either ignorantly or
simply did not observe and hold this, which the Lord taught us to do by his
own example and ministry, by the favor of the Lord there may be pardon
given to his simplicity. If any of them did hold the foundation, concerning
their being justified by the blood of Christ alone, and besides that did repent
of all their errors, known and unknown, committed by ignorance or
wilfulness, we fear not, but that the same God who gave unto them some
measure of knowledge, and would require of the^ according to that which they
had, and not according to that which they had not, would receive them into the
number of his blessed and elect. And that the knowledge of the truth was not
extinguished in England, may easily be seen by that which is mentioned Ration:
1:
before touching the VViclevists, and many other who confessed Christ, yea some
of them unto the death. That noble L. De Ecclesia cap 9.
Du Plessis handling this argument for his country France, does give
instaunce in Saint Bernard, in whose works we find hay and stubble, and
some dross, which the fire of Gods spirit in trying would burn away. He was
swayed with the stream of the time, and received many matters indiscussed,
from other who were some body in the outward face of the Church. But when this
excellent man recutreth and retyreth himself unto his own understanding, how
does he De co^ve^s ad (...): 29: Epist. 4^ (...) ^Word. ad cle^ Co^^: Rem^*
lament the disorders and almost Apostasy of the Clergy of his time? How does
he inveigh against their negligence and security? But for the point of
Justification by Christ, how Epist: 190 se^. 50. in Canti^a:
sincerely does he speak, that nothing brings satisfaction unto the wrath
of God, but his own mercy in the Savior? How does he expound that place, 2.
(...): 4. 8
henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, De gratia and lib.
arbit:
explicating it, that it is just that we should have it, not because we deserve
it, but because God has promised it to all believers, and it stands with his
justice that he should perform his promise? How does he say of good works that
they are Ibidem:
via regn^, non causaeeg^ands, the way of, or to the kingdom, but not the
cause of our reigning? How confident is he in the Lords adopting of him, when
he says, I De sep^ (...) 3.
consider three things wherein my hope consists, the love of his ad^tion, the
truth of his promise, the power of his performance. Now let my foolish thought
murmr as much as it will saying, for who are thou, or how great is that
glory, or by what merits do thou hope to obtain it? And I confidenthe will
answer, I know whom I have believed,' and I am assured that in very much
love he adopted me, that he is true in his promise, that he is potent on his
performance, for he may do what he will. But most sufficiently and
effectually of all other did he speak to this pupose, when he lay In vita
Ber. nard. l. 1. 12.
upon his death-bedde, which place that French noble man does cite. As it was
with this holy person who had an extraordinary talent of knowledge, so we do
not distrust, but diverse other in their life time, and many at the hour of
death did thus apprehend Gods mercy, renouncing all their merits, and the
merits of other men, which in our time so stiff a Papist as Sir Christopher
Blou^t did, of whom notwithstanding because he dyed obstinate in other
Romish opinions, we do not too much hope, but leave him unto the censure of
the highest Judge. They which betook themselves to faith in Christ alone
(neither directly, not indirectly crossing that ground) and also in general
repented, and asked forgiveness for all slips known and unknown, those we
judge to have died in Gods favor. And of this sort we trust that many of our
Ancestors and Predecessors were.

29 HERE to turn to the Reader, this Chapter as you see, is reduced to this
head; That which is largest spread is most true: But the Romish faith is so,
Therefore the Romish faith is truest and most Catholic. What exception may be
made to the Minor Propositi^ it is intimated before. But how far the Mayor is
from truth in Divinity, what Christian does not see? For albeit that sometimes
God permits his Gospel, to have a very large scope at once, as in the first
Church, and under Constantine, and graciously in our age, and otherwise
successively and by vicissitudes does scatter it here and there, so that at
one time or other, al great places and quarters of the world, have, do, or
shall hear the sound thereof, yet ordinarily the number of the godly compared
with the wicked, ar^ ^t like to a little flock of kids, opposed to a huge
heard of great cattaile. That this was so before Christ's coming, it is so
evident that no man can doubt it. And when he first showed himself, is not
his speech to those that followed him, Luke 12. 32.
fear not little flock. Does not he say that few Matthew. (...). 13: 14:
enter into the narrow gate, but many into the wide passage, which as it
intends the final standing or falling of men, so it notes the state also of
the^ which are abiding here on earth. In the Cap. 13: 3.
Parable of the seed, it is but one of four parts which lights in the good
ground. And how infinite are the places, where for many ages together, the
seed never came? there was no^e sowed at all? I here the people are but
Ethnicks and infidels, without all spark of understanding. And where the word
is preached, what store is there of heretics, what multitude of hypocrites,
what plenty of worldlings and Atheists, men who delight in security? Are we not
put in mind by our Savior Luke 17: 26
elsewhere, that when the Son of man is to appear upon earth, it shall be
as in the days of Noe, and in the time of Lot, when the most part of persons
shall eat and drink, and buy and sell, and plant and build, mary and be
married. And how few there were united unto Noe in faith, we know by the small
number of them who were saved in the Arc: and how few joined with Lot is as
plain, when none but his daughters would follow him out of Sodom. And of this
sort it must be toward the end of the world, The faithful in comparison of
the carnal and reprobate, shall be but a little company.

30 Then it is no marveile if the old fathers have not taken for any argument
of verity and right, the greatest and widest multitude; a^ Homil: 12. in Genes.
Origene when he said, There are always more evil persons the^ good, and
vices are of a greater number the^ virtues. And as they are more in tale, so
their dwelling and spreading is much more lardge. Do Lib. 1. Epist. 3^
not respect says Cyprian the number of the^, for better is one man fearing
the Lord, then a thousand wicked children, as the Lord himself has spoken.
That worthy man Ludovicus Vives in his books De veritate fidei, brings the
objections which the Mahumetanes make for themselves, wherefore their
profession should be truth, and among them, this is one: Lib. 4:
Yea but you do see the admirable increase of that sect which is ours, so that
it is apparent that it is augmented even by the help of God, which is the
selfsame reason that is here urged for the Papacy. But Vives does make
answer, The multitude does not argue goodness. There were more Gentiles i^
time past. And what can be more true, then that in times past even from the
beginning of the world, there were more Ethnickes, then are Saracens since the
days of Mahomet, or true Christians since Christ's time? So Hierome Savanarola
who was a learned man, and of an excellent spirit, as appears by his works,
(howsoever the Romanists afterward took his life away from him) in his book
Lib. 4. c. 7.
De Triumpho Crucis, being opposed by a Mahumetane, that Mahomets profession
is truth, because so many do follow it, he answers first that men are
enforced by the sword so to do: and secondly that if multitude should bear
the palm away, then the devils religion were the best of all other, because he
has possessed incomparably more, then either Christ or Mahomet. Such a Reason
as this is, does the writer of this Pamphlet here bring for his Romish
doctrine, which if it prove any thing, is most substantial fo Satan the great
Antichrists graunde master. For there is not any portion of the habitable
world, but the Devil has his crew in it. In enquiring the^ for verity, we
should attend, what the solid rule of perfection, that is Gods Sacred word,
does lay out before us, and not what the hugest multitude directed by humane
fancy shall prescribe unto us. Exodus 23. 2
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. The most walk the worst way.
Sapiendum est cum paucis. A wise man, as Seneca tells us, Lib. in sapientem
non cadere iniuriam cap: 14.
does not go that way which the people goes, but as the Planets do go a
contrary course to the world so he goes against the opinion of them all. Thus
we must do in Divinity, not look how many say, but on what ground it is
spoken. If many agree in that which prooveth to be just, we are to joy that
many give consent to that which is right, but the truth is it which must try
them, and not they enforce a truth. Sound religion is not the worse when it is
but in a few: and the multitude which do hold it, or the wide spreading
thereof, cannot make the false to be otherwise.


THE SIXTE REASON. Miracles.
T. HILL. TRUE Miracles were never wrought but by them, who were of true
religion, for that they are done only by the power of God. Now it is so
manifest that there has bin almost an infinite number of miracles wrought by
those who were of the Catholic* Roman Religion, and never any by them who
were not of that Church-since Christ's time, as he who shall deny it, may be
proved no less impudent and shameless, the^ he who shall deny, that ever
there was any Mass said in times past in England, or that ever there were
any wars between Turks and Christians, or that there be any such countries
as the East and UUest Indies. which thing if a man should deny, would be not of
all men be deemed not only impudent, but mad, drunken or a fool? And
surely the one is no less known, by all approved writers and eie-witnesses,
than the other. For as in the Gospel and in the Acts, the holy Scriptures
witness, that miracles were wrought by Christ and his Apostles, so do most
approved authors of every age until this day testify, and record the
continuance of the working thereof in the Catholic Roman Church, the which
Authors for the most part were eie-witnesses of the said miracles, as for
example.


G. ABBOT. 1 WHen you first began this pety tract of yours, you undertook to
do a miracle, and that a strange one too; for it were a miracle of all
miracles to prove the rotten rags of Popery to be sound; and therefore we
wonder not that in this your process you speak of miracles. But according to
your fashion, at your first setting out you stumble: for we may well hold
those to be true miracles, which are really and verily done, although it be to
an evil purpose: And such as these are wrought by them who are far of from
true religion, as by the Devil, and by some of his instruments, indeed not
without Gods permissio^, although speaking properly, it is not by his immediate
power. The sorcerers of Pharaodid Exodus: 7 1^: 22: cap. 8. 7:
three several times show wonders before their master, by turning rods into
serpe^ts, and water into blould, and by producing frogs. A false Deuteronomy. 13: 1:
Prophet or dreamer of dreams may give a sign or a wonder, and the sign or
wonder may come to pass. S. Austen directly De civit. Dei l: 10. 16.
affirms that among the old Romans and their au^cestors there were miracles
verily do^e by the power of the devil, as that the pe^ates or little images
brought from Troy did off themselves go from place to place, and that Tarquine
with a ^asour did cut a whetsto^e in sunder. Live. lib: 1:
Livy reports it to be done by Accius Mavius the Augur at the commandment of
Tarquine. And when among so many probable and credible writers, strange things
are related to have bin done among the Ethnickes, but most of al among the
Romans, as the raining of stones, blood, and the like, yea as Tom: 2^ lib. 4.
c: 13:
Freculphus says, very wool in Artho^se under Valentinian the Emperor, to
whom is this to be attributed but to the grand enemy of mankind? which the same
Freculphus does not disse^ble, when in another Tom. 1: l; 5. cap. 5:
place he delivers it, that by the naughtines of the devils it was brought
about, that a river did flow with blood, and the heaven did make a show to be
on fire and such like. And this is the opinion of Bozius a special man of your
side, Lib: 2: contr: Machiavel.
who tells us that Livye reports, that it has rained stones and blood and
flesh. Whereupon he says we believe that these wonders in time past were so
frequent, because devils did procure and cause the^: and when such things did
fall out, public supplicatio^s were made, and general sacrifices, whereby the
devils themselves were worshipped. Then real miracles may be wrought by such,
as be not of true religion, unless that Satan may be this religious man, and no
difference is there for this matter before and since Christ's time, as will be
seen ano^e by example of Antichrist; And if it should be excepted, that
diverse of these already specified, may be said not to be true, because they
are done to an evil end, that is, to deceive and beguile, your late Popish
miracles are liable to the same exception, being when they are at their best,
to win me^ not to Christ but to Antichrist.

2 The Seminaries lack writers when they set you up to be one: but like lips,
like lettice; like cause, like advocate. You powsh^ through like blind bayard,
as if all were right, when here be a great many propositions which you should
prove, and good man you are not able to go through with the least of them. We
first require of you to make good, that such certain and undoubted miracles as
were wrought by holy men in the Primitive Church, were done by Persons of that
Roman profession which now you hold. We utterly deny this, and affirm, that
if those good Christians did now live, and saw the Chaos of your Popery, they
would cry out that you are a degenerate and bastardly succession; even as
Abraham would have said to those Johan. 8^ 33:
Jews, who craked in the presence of our Savior Christ himself, that they
were Abralia^s seed. Secondly you must prove, that since Christ's time no
miracle was wrought, by any which was not of the true Church. Where by the way
I hartyly pray you to take that text with you, Mat: 7. 22:
Many will say to (...) in that day, Lord have (...) not by thy name
prophesied, and by thy name cast ou^ Devils, and ^y thy name done many great
works, And then will profess to the^, answers our Savior, I never knew
you, depart from (...) ye that work iniquity. Thirdly you must assure us,
that these strange things that you will bring, for the co^firmatio^ of your
Popery, are true narratio^s: for I doubt not but to make it plain to every
intellige^t body, that a large company of those who^ you mention, are but a
rabble of foolish fables. You may not take on you, to be of an estate as high as
Antichrist your master: you must come a little short of him: lying (...)
These. (...) 91
wonders are his part, and wondrous lies are yours. Fourthly you must tell us
who gave you a license to talk so wide of your miracles, as that all approved
vvritters, and those eie-witnesses do deliver so much for you, and that these
testifiers (especially your late Legendary writers to whom anon you must have
recourse) are worthy to be sorted with the witness of the Gospel, the Acts
and other the holy Scripture. A comparison right worthy of you. I wish you no
hurt; but if you should be apprentice to a Tankard-bearer in London, till you
had proved these points, there would nothing but death part you and your
master. That Mass has been said in England, it as certain, as that the
Matthew: ^4: (...):
abomination of desolation was in the holy place. That wars have bin long,
and yet in Hungary are continued between Turks and Christians, we deny not,
as also that there be East and West Indies: but that your assertions are as
evident as these, there is none which will say, but your self: neither would
you affirm it, but since the time that you have left blushing. Wit or
learning, or shame, or honesty, if all were not asleep, would keep you more
within compass. But while you do thus, this is the benefit which you gain,
that with fools you make some show, but wise folks even among Papists will
despise you, and be ashamed of you. Their cause is naught, and you still make
it worse. Yet (...), (...) ^i (...), (...). You do well to set a face upon a
bad matter.


T. HILL. IN the second age were wr^ght those wonderful miracles by the
Christian Te^t in lib: ad Scap: and in Apol. c. 5. Eusebius lib: 5. hist. c 5.
Oros. lib. 7. hist. c. 15.
souldi^rs in the army of M. Antonius, which Tertullian, Eusebius, Orosius, and
the Emperor himself have recorded. In the third age were the miracles of
Gregorius Thaumaturgus witnesses S. Basile lib de spiritu ^a^cto, c. 29.
Gregory Nyssene in vita eius. Hierom. de viris illustrib. Ru^inus l. 7. hist.
c. 25 In the 4. of S. Anthony, Hilarion, Martine, Nicolas and of others. In the
5. those which S. Austen sets down. l. 22. de civit. c. 8. In the 6. those
which S. Gregory makes mention of lib. 3. dial. c. 2. and 3. In the 7. those
which were done in England in the co^version thereof, written by the same Greg.
l. 9. ^p. 58. And by venerable Bede l. 1. hist. c. 31. In the 8. the miracles
of S. Cutbert, and S. John (...) England, also Bid, l. b. 4. hist. and 5. In
the 9. the miracles of Tharasius written by Ignat. Nicen. and of others. In the
10. the miracles of S. Romuald. recorded by S. Peter Da^: of S. Wenceslaus and
of others which Surius writes. In the 11. the miracles of S. Edward K. and
vir, of S. Ans. and of others. In the 12. the miracles of S. Mal. S. Barn. and
of others. In the 13. the miracles of S. Fran. S. Dom. S. Bonavent. S. Celest.
and of others. In the 14. the miracles of S. Bernardine, S. Katherine of
Sienna, and of others. In the 15. the the miracles of S. Vi^c. S. Ant. and of
others. And last of all in this (...) 16. age are the miracles of the glorious
S. Fran. de Paul^, of the holy Jesuit Zav^ (...) the Indies and of many (...).


G. ABBOT. 3 THe first miracle that you cite, was that under M. Aurelius, as
Locis supra citatis.
Tertullian and Eusebius call him. Orosius terms him M. Antoninus Verus: he
himself in his Epistle which is to be seen in some Copies of Justinius Martyr,
M. Aurelius Antoninus, but none of them has M. Antonius. The matter was, that
in Germany he with all his army was like to perish for want of water: and in an
extremity, when all other means did fatle, a legion of the Christians, which
afterward was ther-vpon called Legio Fulmi^ did join in instant prayer to
their God, and presently there fell abundance of rain, to their exceeding
comfort; and withal there were thundrings and lightnings, which fell among
their enemies and desolated them. Gregorius Thaumaturgus, first was called.
Hier: devi. ris illustrio.
Theodorus, but now uses to be termed also Gregorius Ponticus, or
Neocaesariensis: he was a scholar to Origin, and of him it is Basil de spir.
Sanct. cap: 29:
written, that he had power against Devils, yea as Socrates affirms, by
sending Lib: 4: 22.
letters concerning that business he could cast them out: he cured the sick,
he turned the course of rivers: he dried up a marish, converted diverse to
Christianity, and foretold many things. Anthony the Monk was a mere ignorant
man, devoide of all knowledge of letters: he could foretell somethings as Lib
1: 13.
Sozomen says, and did diverse wonders as Lib: 1: 17:
Socrates has. Of Hilarion the Heremite, In vita Hilarionis.
Hierome reports, that by prayer he procured a barren woman to have a child:
healed diverse which were extremely sick, and dispossessed some of Devils. Of
Martine I find in Lib: 3: 13:
Sozomen, that it is believed of him, that he raised up a dead man, and did
show other signs not inferior to the wonders of the Apostles. The tales of
zach Lip. pel. in vita Nicolas.
Nicolas are, that when he was a sucking child he knew what it was to fast,
and therefore on Wednesdaies and Frydaies would not touch the breast till night.
When he was a man he foresaw a tempest at sea, and when it came, with his
prayer he alayed it. He appeared in a vision to the Emperor by night, and
caused him to pardon three innocent men, whom he intended to execute. Saint
Austen De civit. Dei li: 22: 8:
mentions, that at Milaine near the bodies of Protasius and Gervasius, a
blind man was restored to his fight. That at Carthage when he himself was
in the house, Innocentius a chief officer of that city, was by prayer
miraculously cured of a very fearful sore. Also that Innocentia was healed of
a canker in her breast, and a Physician of his gowt by being baptized, with
diverse such other matters. For the sixth age, that whichis cited out of Dialog:
li: 3: ca: 2: and 3:
Gregory is, that when John the Pope had rode on the horse of a Noble-woman,
the horse would not any more endure a woman on his back, no not his old
mistress: that the same John had at Constantinople made a blind man see: and
that Agapitus another Pope, caused one who was dumb and lame, both to speak
and go. The words of Li: 9. Epi. 58:
Gregory about the conversion of England, are only those in general, that
God by Augustine the Monk had there showed great miracles, and that he should
not be proud thereof. Bid Hist: lib: 1: cap: 31:
cites the Epistle of Gregory unto Augustine, and adds nothing of his own.
Of Lib: 4: 28:
Cuthbert he rehearses, that whereas sprites did haunt a place, at his coming
thither they gave over: that by prayer he got a well to spring up in dry
ground, that by his means barren land did grow to plentiful fertility. Of
Li: 5: 22 3: 4
John, that he caused a dumb boy to speak and healed a Nuns arm that was
much indaungered by unseasonable letting of blood, and such like. Lippeloo. in
vitis Sa^ctor. feb: 25
Thatasius Archbishop of Constantinople under Constantine and ^ene, was a
great defendour of the erecting and worshipping of Images in Churches. The
miracles related of him out of Ignatius the monk, are that after his death, at
his tumbe was cured a woman which was troubled with an issue of blood, a
man that had a sore eye, an innumerable multitude of such as were infested
with foul spirits, and oflame men, and of blind folks.

4 The Nova legend. Ang. in vita Ruwoldi.
legende has of S. Romuald, that as soon as he was borne, he did speak
Divinity, and forthwith being baptized did preach high points of doctrine,
lived in all but three days, and at his tomb in Buckingham, many lame and
blind were restored. Of Lippeloo Septem. 28 e Surio.
We^ceslaus it is said, that being but a very weak man, and entering combat with
Rad^s a most valiant General, by signing himself with the sign of the
cross, and by the help of Angels attending him, he caused his enemy to fall
prostrate down unto him. Also that the Emperor saw Wenceslaus guarded with a
couple of Angels King Idem: in ^anuar. 5.
Edward, who marrying the Earl Godwines daughter, did together with her by
consent of them both, keep perpetual virginity, is recounted to have cured a
lame Irish man, by carrying him on his back to the Church. Also to have healed
the very sore throat of a woman, to have give^ sight to diverse blind men, and
to have helped at his tomb many very ill affected. The tales of Nova legend.
Angl: (...) Anselm.
Anselme be, that when once he laked meat for his company, he did bid one cast
a net into the next river, and he caught a great troute, that being with a
noble man, and neither of them seeing what was done or coming, he told him
that one was bringing a sturgeon unto him. Another noble man being leprous was
cleansed by drinking the water, wherewith he had washed his hands at the Mass.
At Winchester the town being on fire, he made a cross with his hand, and
immediately the flame ceased. He caused a well to spring up suddenly on the top
of a rock. At Lyo^s diverse eating of the remainder of his meat, were healed of
sundry diseases. With his blessing he freed a woman possessed of the Devil. A
soldier that had the dropsy, by putting on the girdle of Anselm was
recovered. Bernard: vita. 5. Mal.
Malachy was by birth an Irish man, and with the anointing of holy oil he
healed a boy that was lunatike. He so restored hearing to a deaf man, that
when he put his fingers into his ears, there seemed to come out of either of
the^, a pretty pig. He cured one Michael of a bloody flixe, by sending him meat
from his table. Some who came to seek his life were destroyed by lightning.
One who spoke ill of him had his tongue eaten up with worms. He utterly
expelled a Devil, which remooved out of one woman into another, and many
other such matters he did. Saint In vita Bernard. l: 1: 10:
Bernarde as it is reported of him, laid his hand on his uncle Galdricke
being sick, and bad his fever depart and it did so. He freed of his trouble
a man much molested with the Devil, by laying him near the altar, and
putting the Eucharist under his head. At Milaine Lib, 2: 4:
he drove a Devil out of a woman. A boy Lib. 4: 5:
also that was a fool, and lame, deaf and dumb, was made perfectly whole by
him, and diverse other matters of like nature. Saint Frauncis when his preaching
was despised by the Mat. Paris in Hen. 3.
Romans, went into the fields, and there charged the crows and kites and
pies, to listen to his doctrine, which they did for half a day without any
noise or chattering. And thus he did for three d^ies together. Fifteen days
before he dyed, there appeared in his hands and feet, wounds dropping with
blood, as it was with our Savior Christ hanging upon the cross. And he had
such a hole in his right side, that a man might see the in most secrets of his
heart. But when he was dead, none of the wounds appeared upon him. Of S.
Dominicke, Ibidem.
Matthew Paris, In Greg 9.
Platina, and Chro. l 4.
Genebrard do say, that he was canonized for a Saint, but they name not his
special miracles. But the Lippeloo in August. 4.
abridger of the Legend of Surius, who never fails at any iumpe, tells of
him that when the Albingenses did cast a book of his into the fire, it would
not burn. And when another heretic did the same by a paper, wherein
Dominicke had written some Divinity, it had the same effect. Moreover that he
could foretell things, and that he raised up diverse persons from the dead. As
for Idem August. 14:
Bonaventure, the same author says, that the miracles which were done in his
life and at, or after his death, were very many, but in good truth he names
never a one; which he would not have spared to do, if he might have gessed
what they were. Ide^ in vita. S: Petri de Motono: Maij: 19.
Celestine before he came to be Pope, had sometimes Angels of heaven
ministering unto him, and setting before him dainty bankets. After that he was
chosen the Roman Bishop, a boy which was lame on both his feet, being set on
the Ass whereon Celestine had rode, was presently recovered. After that he had
resigned the Popedom, he cured another lame man, but by bestowing his blessing
on him. Ide^ in vita Bernardin: Maij: (...)
Bernardine is said to have lift a lame man from the ground, and so to have
restored him to his limbs. After his death, when his body had been washed to
the burial, deaf person by the virtue of that water recovered his hearing.
The legend has many narrations of Ide^ in vita Cathar. Sene^s. Apr. 29
Katherine of Sienna; that she had as great and intue familiarity with Christ,
as any one man has with his dearest friend: that she restored to life again
her mother Lapa being dead: that of a little very badde meal, she made a very
great deal of passing good bread, for the relief of the poor: that whereas a
Friar with weeping for her death broke one of his arteries, and so vomited a
great quantity of blood, by touching her hands he was perfectly restored.
She had by Christ himself imprinted in her body, five wounds like those on
him at his passion. For the space of eight years she lived without receiving
any food. Of Ide^ in vita Vincentij. (...): Aprilis.
Vincentius it is related, that with making the sign of the Cross, he could
heal such as were sick. He did prophecy unto Calixtus the 3, fifty years be
fore, that he should be Pope. A certain mad women killed a child of her
own, cut it in pieces, sodde some part thereof for her husbands dinner, yet he
coming in, and setting the pieces together again, prayed over them and
crossed them, and al stuck together as before, and the child returned to life
as if there had been no such matter. If we did lack a miracle in grain,
here were one for the purpose. We must imagine that if they had eat the
child, he would with a whiffe have fetched him out of their belly again, and
as they should have been never the better for it, so the boy should have been
never the worse. With fifteen loaves he fed two thousand men: he turned
sour wine making it to be right good to drink: he cured sixty at several
times which were possessed with Devils. With holy water he alayed a most
grievous tempest.

5 The first miracle which is set down of Id. in vita Ant. a. Maij
Antoninus Archbishop of Florence, is that when a maid had broken her
hearelace, or some fillet of her head attire, with making the sign of the
Cross, he made it whole. He by prayer healed a man that was grievously sick:
made a barren woman fruitful by blessing hericured a woman which for six
years was ill of a dropsietrestored a bewitched child, by his hand-kerchife
put upon it: raised another dead child to life. By denouncing the sentence of
excommunication upon a white loaf of bread, he made it as black as a cole, and
freeing it afterward from the same corse, it returned to be as fair as it was
before. Franciscus de Ide^ in elus vita. Apr. (...):
Paula could go upon fire barefooted, and carry stones read hot with fire, in
his hands, and yet take no hurt. He could cast out Devilles, and restore
those to health of whose recovery Physicians did despair; make the la^e go,
the d^afe hear, the dumb speak, the blind see, the lepers be clean, yea
the dead or those who were esteemed dead, to return to life. Concerning
the Jesuit Franciscus Xavier, Commentar. Anno 1565.
Surius says that in the Indies he would send such boys as were formerly
converted to the faith by him, unto sick folks, where when they did but
rehearse the Creed, and tell them that they must believe in Christ, the
patients were healed. Also that his body 15, months after he was dead,
remained perfectly whole and uncorrupted, yea gave a most odoriferous smell.
But Maffeus the Jesuit and fellow to Xavier will not Propter bonum sociatatis
let him go so. He therefore Hist: Indic. Lib. 15.
reports, that when two men in a boat at ses, were by a storm driven away,
he presently made the boat to come again, close to the ship wherein he was.
That at Goa immediately he made a sick man whole. That twice in a horrible
tempest at sea, dipping his box of relikes into the water, he made all to be
calm. Many other such matters are current of him among his companions,
touching all which I may say, that of likelihood they be not overmuch
believed of the Pope or Papists themselves, since his Holiness nor any of his
Predecessors, have bestowed the Sainting of this Xavier on him, neither has
any one of that Society been Canonized to this day, as the Secular Priests do
rightly object against the Jesuits. And yet our age is not debarred from
putting those who merit it, into the Cale^der or Cataloge of Saints, since the
Pope now reigning, eve^ this Clement the 8. has bestowed this favor in Icones
and vitae Paparum, in Clement. 82.
Hiacynthus a Polouian, so that the Romanistes have one Saint more to pray to,
then their forefathers had. I trust if you had thought upon him, you would
have done him the honor, to have closed up your miracle-workers with his name
and company. Yet it should not have been for need, if so you had done; for
already you have insinuated unto us many strange things, which I have touched
more at large, as being desirous that your Reader should know, what it is that
you do point at. But now my opinion is, that the examples before named, and
produced for the confirmation of the authe^ticalnes of the Roman Religion, are
very well worthy our farther examination, and advised consideration.

6 The story then of the Christian soldiers, for the general consent of
approoved writers therein, we do believe, and know that God in mercy inclines
much to the Iam. 5: 17.
prayers of his good servaunts. That Gregorius Thaumaturgus did something it is
likely, but whither he by letters could cast out Devils we do not hastily
credit. Great learned men recorded many things upon report of others; and
conceiving that all strange Narrations would breed admiration to the Christian
faith, were well contented to accept of them, and deliver them to other without
further disquisition. This more grossly appeared in Gregory and Bid: but it had
his beginning before their age. Of this sort we esteem that which is related,
of Hilarion, Anthony, Martin, and Nicolas: reports of them, went for records,
and small matters were made great. Hierome and the other old writers could
not yet fully discover to what head Satan did bend; (whose meaning was to
raise from the rumor of those miracles, innumerable occasions of idolatry, to
be committed at or to the relikes of those persons, who were said to do the
wonders) and for that cause these good men were the more facile to apprehende
such relations. But if these as also the other mentioned by Saint Austen,
should without exception be granted to be true, why do you Papists challendge
them to be yours? Or what does this more make for the Synagogue of Rome, then
if the Goths who broke into that city, in the days of Sozo. 9 9.
Honorius the Emperor should have arrogated and assumed to themselves, all the
Acts of the worthy Consuls, renoumed Dictators, and famous Em perors who in
times past had resided there? If it be said that some of these were Monks and
Heremits, it is true that they desired upon a wrong opinion of more holiness
therein, to live seiunct from the world, as the Joseph. de bell. Iudaic. lib. 2.
7.
Esseis among the Jews had done, and all their usage we can neither commend
nor excuse: but they said no Mass, sunge no Dirges for the dead, neither did
they lead a life any way concurring with these later Antichristian swarms:
distinguish the times, distinguish the persons, put a difference between the
actions then and now, and our Papists may no more challendge to themselves
their miracles, then the Senbes and Pharisees might have strengthened their
errors by the old wonders of Moses. Those which Saint Austen names are not
free from their exceptions; that some were reports: some grounded on the
narration of one: that frequently those things are attributed to religion,
which might be effected naturally, diseases having their periods, and medicines
which are applied, sometimes working more then can be imagined. But for
reverent respect to that father, we insist not too far upon these. Only this we
would have noted; that he cites not those as necessary proofs to confirm the
faith, (for what Saint Austens opinion is of miracles in that behalf, ye
shall see anon) but to yield to the importunity of some, who being unbelievers
did call for strange signs and wonders: for the stopping of whose mouths, he
shows that their age had some rare matters and events in it, though he cited
them not as much making or marring, for the verity of religion. I pray you
observe his words in the beginning of the Chapter, De civit. Dor li. 22. 8:
Why say they, are not those miracles now done which you do preach to have
been done? I might say, that before the world did believe, they were
necessary to this end that the world might believe. But whosoever does
inquire after wonders that he may believe, he himself is a great wonderment,
who believes not, now the world doath believe. And does he not more then
once make a difference of the wonders by him mentioned, and the miracles
declared in the holy Scripture, confessing that those of his time, were not so
known, so certain so, celebrious as the other. For that many of them were
done in Cities where scant any one understood of them. But those in the
Apostles age, frequently were performed in the presence of whole multitudes of
people.

7 As for the Dialogues of Gregory, I acknowledge that Hist l: 2: 1:
Bid and Tom: 2: li. 5 cap: 24:
Freculphus do reckon them as the works of the first and great Gregory. But so
are diverse things attributed to Saint Austen which are not his own, as
Adfratres in ereme, where the writer says of himself I Ser: 25: and 37:
Austenbishop of H^n or to that purpose. Diverse learned men of our side take
manifest exceptions to the whole tract of those Dialogues, as being absurdly
forged and fathered on Gregory. M. Sutliv. de Purgat. lib. 1: 1.
One says thus, I being induced by most certain arguments d^ indge, that the
Dialogues of Gregory are counterseit, and unworthie this such a man. For if you
look on the argument that^ can nothing be thought more fabulous: if on the
style, nothing could be written more barbarously and (...). And Master Fox
adds, that the Dialogues which are reported to be Gregory's the first, were
written in In Hist: (...).
Greek by Gregory the 3. and were translated into Latin by Zacharias the
Pope. But be they whose they may be, is there any credit to be given unto them
at all, when besides that they consist almost wholly of childish or old wines
tales, the Author himself unworthy of the gravity of such a one as Gregory,
professes in the beginning of his Dialog. lu (...)
work, that he would relate all things which he had probably heard Who is
there that has lived but a few years, which has not heard so many tales of
fairies, and walking sprites and dreams, with other such mean and riffe-raffe
stuff, as might make a large volume, and yet the least part thereof is true?
Beda who followed Gregory in time, saw this ye broke to his hand, and he
would needs after, being as plentiful for fabulous narrations at the other. By
this time, Popery began to grow more strong, and good men by credulity of
uncertain or unexamined reports were over-taken. They imagined that such
things made for Gods glory, and for the propagating of the Christian faith,
when it was indeed clean contrary; for fables do disgrace the verity of
religion, and the Lord needs not a lie to set forth his honor. That which is
here delivered after the days of Bid, in such barbarous, such base, such
baggage-rotten stuff, such lying, such legendary, such paltry and shameful
geere, that were there in you but one grain of, salt one mustarde seed of
judgment, you would be ashamed once to name such dunghill rags. I do many
times from the bottom of my heart, give thanks to my Almighty Savior, as for
his Redemption in general, so that it has pleased him to keep me and my
fathers house from the gangrene of Popery, that our souls are norted with such
shales and husks, and that our faith is not rested on such weak grounds as
these be. For first, who and what manner of persons are these, whom you here
mention for the exploiters of your miracles* I will except Saint Bernard, and
K. Edward the Confessor, who swayed with the darkness of their times,
believed and reported things most doubtful, and had the like for matters of
fact reported of them. But besides these I can hardly name another of these
late Saints, but that leaving the final judge meant of him to Gods secret
counsel, we may call to mind in his behalf that speech reported to be Saint
Austens, Glarean. in pref Annot. in Suetonium.
The bodies of many are adored here on earth, whose souls are buried in hell.
For what was this Tharasius by you mentioned, but a notable idolater,
mainetaining the erection of images in Churches, and the adoration of them?
What was Anselme but an hypocrite above ten thousand hypocrites, if God gave him
not repentance in the end? He Malmis. de gest. Pontific. lib: 1:
would seem so to hate sin, that he oftentimes vvoulde wish, that he rather
might be in hell without sin, then in heaven having offended and
transgressed: which speech is of that quality, that it can hardly be decided,
whither there be more ignorance or hypocrisy in it. He once Ibidem.
reported, that after that he had entered a Monkish life, he was never so angry,
that he gave any one a reproachful word but once. That he never spoke any
speech but one, the memory whereof did trouble his conscience. At supper once
remembering that he had eaten a raw herring, he smote himself on the breast
deeply sighing for that crime, that contrary to the law he had eaten raw meat.
But when one sitting by him, answered that the salt had consumed the rawnes of
the herring, Thou have healed me says he, that I need not be tormented with
the memory of this sin. Of this hypocritical quality was Francis the father
of the Fra^ciscane Friars, and one of your Saints. His commendation was, that
when the Pope Matt Par in Henr: 3:
scorned him as a ragged and torn companion, and when he presumed to speak to
him, badde him go tumble him with the hogs, he went his ways and did so
indeed: and coming again al be^mired and filthy, made the Pope wo^dring at
his behavior, more to praise the obedience of the fool, the^ any thing else in
him. What should I say of the rest, that they were a rabble of the Popes deer
vassals, and made Saints by him for rendering his service, and enlarging his
kingdom; surely little in grace with Christ because so esteemed of Antichrist.
Unto these you should have done well if you had added for Country sake,
achiefe Champion of his Holiness, Thomas Becket as good a Saint as the best,
and as great a man for Nova legend. Angl. in Thom. Can(...).
miracles, if we may believe your fellows reporting his life; bus in truth
a Rebel to his King, and very a Traitor to his country, dying in a damnable
quarrel, which even in those days, wise men saw, as may appear by this, that
forty Du Hailla^ Lib. 5.
years after his death it was disputed among the Doctors of Paris, whether he
were saved or damned, and Roger the Normand did most stoutly maintain it, that
he was a Rebel to his King, and deserved to dye. But Pope Alexander found him a
man for his purpose, and knew that it would be more profitable for the Papacy,
if multitudes might be gulled with the opinion of his sanctity, and therefore
he Canonized him by his Diabolical authority, and made him Saint Thomas of
Canterbury. A many such Saints there be, with whose souls a sober man would
be very unwilling at all adventure to change his soul, least his reward
should be eternal torment.

8 Secondly out of what Records are the miracles cited, which we do now debate?
Forsooth out of the Legend, the Lege^dary, the golden Legend, called the lives
of the Saints. In these the Friars and Popish Divines were ever more better
read, then in the holy Bible: but wise men and such as feared God did
continually detest them. De reformatione Eccl^siaet
Petrus de Aliaco, as he spoke against the Canonizing of so many Saints, so he
would not have Apocriphall writings (wherein questionless Legends may be
comprehended) to be read upon feast days in the Church. It was one of the
complaints Centum Gravamin. German: cap. 21.
of the Germans against the Popedom, that their unlearned Preachers did tell
them tales in the Pulpite out of Legends not received by the Church, and more
like to the fables of the Gentiles then to the Gospel. Ludo vicus Vives could
say that the golden Legend was written by a man De causis corruptar. ar^ l. a.
of an iron mouth or face and of a leaden heart. And do you after all this, rake
that sincke, to tell us tales of miracles, without head, without tail, without
all probability? Your Papists have good stomakes that can digest such cold
iron. You will say perhaps I slander you: for your water came out of another
well. The reverend Father Laurentius Surius the Carthusian has supervised all
the reports which formerlye were of the Saints, and now he has compiled
them into a very large story, and thence you have your citations, or from Res
gest. illustomarryrum.
Lippeloo, who has revewed, digested, and abbreviated the huge volumes of
Surius, and these sometimes do name the Authors in particular, from who^ they
have their relatio^s. Well, the matter the^ is this: these two have it out of
the Legends, and you take in from the^. But they have left out many things
which the Legendes reported. True: the lies were so many, that they filled too
many books. They divided then every thousand, and kept five or six hundred
of them which were most significant, and for their purpose. Or they abridged
them: but as now they be, there is none but a child, a simple woman, a
Papist, or a blockish brutish body, which will lend any credit to them.
Dross can be naught but dross; and do what you will, dregs will be no
better then dreges. Their discretion in sifting truth from false-hood, as it
appears many other ways, so in registring Saint Lungeis for a Saint, which
they borrow from Metaphrastes, and make him to be a Lippel. in vita Longini
Martij. 15
Jew, and not a Roman, and yet his name is Longinus, and he was the Centurian
that stood by the Cross when Christ was crucified: but he was afterward
beheaded for the Christian religion, by the commandment of Caesar and Pilate.
Now although in the Acts of the Apostles (where for the advauncement of our
Saviors glory, such a matter would not have been concealed) there be not one
word of this, no nor yet in any other good writer, yet this man is dropped or
slipped in to be a Saint, and he is to be prayed to, and his holy day is, to be
kept of those that will, on the fifteenth of March, and Surius with his
abbreviatour^, know his name, his office, his deeds, his death, as well as if
they had been by him. I name this one for a taste, but he who pleases may
find a hundred such, if he will take pains to read the Lives of the Saints,
as they are set down by the foreinamed Authors. Such trim men are your
miracle-workers, and therefore your miracles must needs also be of an
excellent suit.


T. HILL. AND therefore I say unto you out of Saint Austen, I am bound and tied
in the Catholic Church by the band and chain August devtil. cred c. (...) and
l co^t: Ep^sund: cap. 4:
of miracles. And I am bold considering and most steadfastly believing these
insinite glorious miracles of all times and ages in the Catholic Roman Church
to cry out to Almighty God with Richard de S. Victore lib. de trin. cap. 2.
Lord if it be not true which we believe, thou have deceived us: for these have
bin confirmed in us by such signs and wonders as could not be wrought but by
thee. But on the contrary part, never any Protestant could work any miracle
at all, but ass^ying to make some show thereof, to make their Doctrine the more
probable to their followers, felt the just revengement of God, who turned all
to their shame and confusion, as he did by Simon Magus, by Cyrola the Patriarch
of the Arrians as witnesses Grego. Turon. Egesippus: lib. 3: de excid
hiero^ol: cap. 2:
lib. 2. hist. Fran. cap. 3. by the Donatists. Optatus lib. 2. contr. Parmen.
(...) our dates by Luther, endeavoring to dispossess a wench, and by Calvin
going about to delude his disciples, as you may read in Hierom. Bolsec. in vit.
Calvin. cap. 13. And therefore they are most foolish, Vid: Staph: in abs: relp:
and miserably inconsiderate, who believe these new fellows, not being able
to quicken a flea, and leave the doctrine of the Catholic Church confirmed
with innumerable miracles.


G. ABBOT. 9 IN the text you cite one saying out of Saint Austen; but in the
margent you quote two. The (...) former place does only mention that the truth
of Christian religion De vtilitat. credend: cap. 17.
is confirmed by miracles. But you therein abuse your Reader notably. For he
speaks of miracles past, and that in Christ's time, and not of any which were
to come, or like to continue in the church. The words to which he alludeth are
more plain in the chapter next before going, where in a larger sort he
ha^dleth that argument. Such Cap: 16:
things were do^e at that time, wherein God in a tr^ man did appear as much as
was sufficient for men. The sick were healed, the lepers were cleansed, going
was restored to the lame, sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, And there
is speech of no other matter. And to no other purpose is the second place,
where the words are not which you cite. His saying is thus, that there; be
diverse things which do keep him in the bosom of the Church, Contr. Ep.
fundament: cap: 4:
The consent of people and nations does hold me: there does hold me an
authority which was begone with miracles; nourished by hope, ever ^ased by
charity, confirmed by antiquity. Does this make for you, as you think, or
against you? The authority of the Church was begone with miracles. It is true,
meaning of the time of Christ, and his Apostles: but he does not say it was
continued, and must be continued unto the worlds end, much less does he
affirm that it must be as a necessary argument of truth. So you have gained
much by these two places, even as you have done by the whole rank of your
wonders: whereof such as appertain to you, that is the late Lege^dary
inventio^s, are many indeed, but not infinite, and are so far from being
glorious, that they are plainly co^temptible and ridiculous, fit for your
vn-Catholike Roman stru^pet, whose throne must be supported with lies, and
variety of falsehoods. In being therefore ^old, you may be more bold the^ you
have thank for your labor* but do not say that you most steadfastly believe,
for you bestow too good a word upon your self. In such stuff as this is,
Palingen. in Geminis
Quifacilis credit, facilis quoque fallitur, He who lightly believes, is
easily deceived. You are strongly conceited, and you have a boisteous
imagination, from which the sooner you fly, the safer you will stand. The De
Trin. lib. 1: cap. 2:
words of Richard de S. Victore, are not spoken of your fabulous and instly
questionable wonders, but of such signs as gave evidence to the first
preaching of the Gospel, and were wrought by Christ and his disciples; which
were so true and so strange, as that they could be wrought by none but by the
power of God, and therefore we may believe the doctrine both of the Trinity and
other matters, which they confirmed; and not be deceived at all. Yet this
adds no credit to your forgeries and illusions, neither convinces that now
we are to depend on miracles. That we do not take on us to be able to work any,
we do most willingly acknowledge. We know that those days are past: although
God do not so restrain himself, but that (the prayers of his servants
interceding) he sometimes suffers strange things to be done. But we cannot
presume upon it; since we have no warrant for it, out of the word of God. And
who is there I pray you in the whole Hierarchy of your Papacy, who dare
professedly assume that gift unto him? Dares your Pope the ministerial head
of al your holiness, dare your Cardinals, your Bishops, your Friars, your
Priests? Long agone the Decretal. lib. 5. tit. 35. cap. 3.
Templars in Livonia did enforce the poor people to this; that if any of the^
were accused of any crime, to purge themselves they should go barefooted, over
certain read hot irons, and if they were burnt at all, then they were held
for guilty. But some newly co^verted to the faith, complained of this to the
Pope Honorius the 3. and he inhibited that any more such trial should be made,
calling it a thing forbidden, a greevance, and that wherein God was tempted. The
like may be said of any, who presu^ptuously should profess to attempt any
strange and miraculous matter; it is but a tempting of God, even by the
judgment of Isa: 7: 12.
Ahaz now long agone, who being but an evil man, yet was so fair tightly
instructed. Yet that good hypocrite your S. Dominicke, going to dispute against
the Ioh. B^isseul. contr. Spond.
Albingenses, and prete^ding that he would prove the^ heretics, did bid the^
write their reasons, and cast the^ in the fire, and if says he, they will not
burn, then we will believe you. As if the holy Bible were not truth, if being
cast into the flame it would burn to ashes. You can tell us tales of your men
doing elsewhere great wonders, but you should do well to send us some of
your miracle-mongers hither, that we may judge of their iugling. You mutter
much of an holy anointed Priest, that he by exorcizing can cast out Devils:
but we wonder that these Devils in England can no where truly be found, but in
Papists. In India our (...) Jesuits would make us believe that they Maffeus in
select Epist.
be as thick as hoppes: but if one of that holy Society fall on the^, he can
with as much case fetch him out of a man or woman, as one would get money
out of his purse by turning it vpside down. And in Italy and Spain there be
some possessed with spirits, that the Exorcistes may have work to show
themselves upon. Such artificers can have counterfeits of their own choosing,
and taught for the purpose. These keep in ure the old order of stage plays,
to have a Devil and a fool in them always. But it is no marveile if our
Priests familiars, being put in by one slight into their abused patients, can
be plucked out by another. They lose nothing by these tricks. And if there
should be a Devil indeed in any, and he should be so sullen as that with all
their crossing, relics, and holy water he would not out, yet they will save
their stake still, the Rhemistes being at hand with this salve, that In Matthew*
17. 19:
it is not in the power of their Exercistes to cast our Devilles when they
will. They must miss of their purpose sometimes. And if any Protestant be
near, they will say, It is the better also, that the Spirit for that time
will not out: for if then he should be eiected out of the possessed, he
vvoulde presently get him into the heretic, and then they were never the
near. Better keep him where he is, among his old acquaintance.

10 That Simon Magus did attempt to work a miracle, Saint In Rom: 8:
Ambrose tells us: but there we find no otherwise, but that in deed he did
fly up into the air. And so much does Egesippus acknowledge in the place Lib.
3. (...).
which you do quote: but he adds, that by the prayer of Saint Peter, in his
flying he was fetched down, and falling brake his leg. Moreover that he
attempted to raise to life a knise-man of the Emperors, who was dead; but
missed of his purpose. Greg. Turon. histor. Fran. lib. 2. cap. 3:
Cirola the Arrian Bishop seeing Eusebius and some other Bishops which were
Orthodoxe, to do strange things, whereby the people had them in admiration, and
accepted of their doctrine, devised to procure to himself and his Arrianisme,
credit by a counterfeit miracle. He therefore gave one 50. pieces of gold, to
pretend that he had bin blind, and to say that by his prayer he was restored to
his sight. But when Cirola was to pass by, and expected that this pagea^t
should be played, the counterfeit cranke who could see well before, was indeed
stricken with blindness, and could by no means be cured of it by the Arrian; but
by the Orthodoxe Bishops praying for him, he had his sight restored. Whereupon
exclaming upon Cirola he confessed the whole intended fraud. Thus the Author
reports it: but we dare not be to nimble in believing his Narratio^s in this
kind, since he was too great a relater, and admirer of the miracles of holy
me^, having written De gloria marty^ De gloris Consessor. De virtutib: and
miracule S. Marti^
books specially of that argument, and not only equalling but far surpassing
the Diologues which go^ under the name of Gregory the Great, for vndiscree^ and
vnbeleevable vanity. If you had stayed at these two examples, you had done well
but when you ci^e a third, of miracles so attempted by the Donatists, and
allege Optatus for it, you are out, for there is no such matter in that
Optat. li. (...) cont. ^arm.
whole book: neither any speech of any wonder saving this, that the Donatists
commanded the Eucharist of the Catholics to be thrown to the dogs. When,
by the vengeance of God, the dogs being stricken with madness, fell upon
them being their own masters, as if they had been strangers, and tore them
with their teeth. Also there is speech of a bottle of oil thrown by the same
Donatistes in disgrace out of a window, which falling on the stones did not
break. But if these be allowed, this is nothing to your matter: for these are
rather wonders showed by God against them, then any attempts of theirs to show
miracles, and receiving a disgrace by being frustrated in them. Now for Luther
that he did as you say, we find no such Record, neither do you cite us any
author worthy the least credit, for it. We are reasonable well acquainted
with your inventions, and especially against these two, whom here you
exagitate according to your custom. But if Luther had attempted and not
prevailed, is it a greater argument of falshoode in doctrine against him, then
it is against your exorcizng Priests, when they miss of their desires, as your
Rhemusts do insinuate? Indeed we have some what Ioh Fox inh^. Eccl. in vita
Luther.
else written of Luther clean contrary to your report: as, that understanding
of a young man in VVittemberge, who by a vvriting written with his own blood
had bound himself to the Devil, he together with a Congregation of many
other, continued so long in prayer, that the Devil cast in the vvriting at a
vvindovve, and the young man was freed from him. But what that Apostata
Staphilus says of him, to whom he was a deadly and malicious enemy, we do not
much regard. See the defense of the Ce^sure:
Prateolus in hatred to him did give out, that he was the son of an I^cubus,
begotten by a Devil. And of as lewd a mind toward Calvin was that wicked
Bolsec, who envying the famous reputation of Calvin's person, but most of all the
progress and increase of the Gospel by his means, thought by all vilanous
slanders to under mine his estimation, and by improbable defamations to
disgrace him. Now that by Romanists a thousand such tales should be begun,
increased and continued, we wonder not: their whole doctrine is a mass of
untruths, and so many wit^ as have the hammering of it, so many lies.
Stapleton in Antid. in Johan. 8.
whom we find the slander mentioned in your last Chapter, has Antid. in
Matthew. 16.
elsewhere a tale fit for your present purpose: that Calvin long devising to
show some miracle, so to get fame to himself, would need^ at length cause one
Matthew to counterfe^ himself to be dead, that he might be said to raise him
to life again^ yet that when they came to make the experiment, the man was dead
in earnest. Now this we may believe if we will; and if we will not we may choose.
Such things as were never known at Geneva, to any that conversed with Calvin,
are at Doway or at Rome as true as the Devils Gospel. Some one of you should
give our, that he attempted to fly, or some such other matter: and if one of
you would once write it, and cast but a little color upon it, your Seminary
students would swear it. Other men who know your tricket, will pity you,
or laugh at you, and so let you go.

11 Your conclusion is like your premises: they are foolish who believe these
new fellows who can do nothing (indeed you might have said who make
profession to do nothing of miraculous actions) and leave Popery so bolstred
up with miracles. Your Master Bristow from whose fifth and sixth Motive, yet
much shrunk and contracted, you borrowe your sixth Reason, to show the
strangeness of Miracles does play the good fellow with us, and gives us
an instaunce of one in our own age; that a Bristowe Motiv. 5.
woman called Margaret Iesope was contracted to a Dutch man in London, and by
him begotten with child before they were married. His friends hearing of the
intended match, send for him to Bruxelles, and there mary him to another wife.
Margaret follows him thither, is denied by him, and being brought a bed
there, falls wonderfully lame, and so continues three years and more. In
the mean while she sueth him in law both for the contract and for the maime.
But the end was that by the virtue of the miraculous Sacramente^* or hosts
in the Church of S. Gudila at Bruxelles she was cured; having used before,
much fasting, and going often to Confession. In remembrance of this wonder, her
staff or Crouch was hanged up, near the place of the Blessed Sacrament of
Miracle, and her healing was proclaimed every where in the pulpit. Can any man
choose but believe that Popery is truth, when he hears this tale, the grace
whereof is so excellent, that he spends eight whole leaves in delivering it,
making it up so much, as will serve a Popish woman to read in an after^noone,
allowing her a little liberty to think how she may say it without book, to
tell it to her friends or sisters. And some odds may be laid that it will
cost her a dry drop or two, of some trickling tears also. It may be here
noted, that the subject of the miracle, this gentle Iesope was an honest woman,
being with child before that she was married. Also that M. Bristow talking
in his gross ignorance, of her suing the Dutch man for a maime (which is a
jesting phrase in England, but no action for that particular being liable in
the Civil or Common Law) is a fit man to determine of Kings and Queens, of
the excommunication of Pius the 5. of the good cause of the Rebels in the
North, Ann. 1569. where he proclaims them to be Martyrs. Thirdly it is no
news to hear that Motiv. 15:
a harlot being put to her shifts, should be a counterfeit cranke, and to cover
her other baggage like tricks, should be willing to be talked of as one upon
whom a miracle was showed. In the time of the old pilgrimages there were a
thousand of these prankes played. And I could name where a woman lately dwelt,
who (as her honest neighbors reported) by her virtuous life came to that
state, that to say no worse of it, the French overcame the English. She
labored to conceal it, but being forced by infirmity to go with a pair of
crowches, she gave out that she knew not how she was taken in her limbs.
Afterward under a color of going to the Bathe, or some other such place, she
withdrew her self till by some surgeon like skill she was reformed again.
Yet coming home she would not leave her crowches, but professed that her
weakness grew on her more and more. At length when the time was come, which
best fitted her purpose, on a Su^day or holy day when the street had many
people in it, who beheld her going along, she goes with her Crowches to a
brook running on one side of the town, and there for an hour and more, she
sits washing her feet, telling such of her acquaintance as passed by, that
she felt her strength more and more increasing, according to a dream which
she had dreamed the night before. But the issue was, she left her crowches,
and came home as well as she desired. Being asked of it, she has not feared
to swear, that so strangly she was cured as I have reported, and some wise
folks believe it. You may be one of these if you will: and you may record
this woman for her strange vision. This may well fit Bristowes Narration
concerning Margaret Iesope. Touching which relation, so reported, so magnified,
so believed, to the great praise of the miracles done at Bruxelles, because I
do desire that my much-abused country men should take notice, how they are
bobbed by the fraud of their Priests, and what the iuggling of such good
fellows is, I think it not amiss to let them understand, that within Ann
1581:
feve^ years after this forenamed wonder, the Senate of Bruxelles did discover
the whole legerdemaine of the miracles, said and blazed abroad to be ordinary
with them, and after due examination did put forth to the view of the world an
Edict or Proclamation thereupon. Meter. hist Belgi^. l. 10
Wherein they declare, that the Sacrament of Miracle among them was nothing but
a bare piece of bread, both lately and falsely reported to do wonders, and that
the covetous greediness of the Roman Clergy there, had also obtruded to the
people, rotten pieces of wood to be worshipped, as if they had been parts of
the Cross whereon Christ was crucified; and in steed of the relics of Saints
they kept the bones of Apes and other beasts, pretending moreover that they
had some part of the Sepulcher of our Lady, and the skull of S. Michaell, which
things they permitted the people to adore. Yea they testify, that in the faces
of diverse of their images they found little holes, wherein oil was put, to
make them seem sometimes as if they sweated. And that there were devises,
whereby other Images had some parts of them made to move and sti^re by wires
and other instruments. The Proclamation at large is worth the reading: wherein
it may be seen, that God in his good time discovers the verletry of
couseners and beguilers; and gives leave to such as will not close their own
eyes, to behold what is truth, and what is falsehood. For some scores of years
together, this place was famous for Popish miracles, and so many strange things
were here said to be done, that of all the places in Europe, Bristow chose
this to fetch his wonder from, for the confirmation of Popish doctrine, and now
you see by a most authentical Record, what it prooveth to be. You Seminary
Priests that can blush, blush at this, and at the ill fortune of Margaret
Iesopes miracle.

12 Here to turn unto the Christian Reader; if our Romanistes had not
resolved to say any thing, which might make a show and flourish without al
substance, who would in our age bring this Reason of miracles, to decide or
determine which is the true faith? It is certain that when our blessed Savior
came first into the world, for the ratifying of his dotrine which seemed
strange, and for the testifying of his divine power, he wrought many wonders.
And yet he sharply Matthew. 12. 39. Ioh. 4: 48: cap. ^0. 29.
reproved those who would not believe without miraculous signs, as intending
that they should be but for a time, and then afterward little or no use of
them. But for the planting of his Church at first, he gave also to the Apostles
and some disciples that power, that they might work wonders; adding concerning
that time, that these Marc. 16. 17.
tokens shall follow them that believe, In my name they shall cast out Devils,
and shall speak with new tongues, and shall take away serpents, and if they
shall drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them: they shall lay their
hands on the sick, and they shall recover. Yet that soon afterward, the
ordinary exercise of these was extinguished, we have very ample testimony.
Eccle. hist. lib. 5. 3. and 7.
Eusebius shows that in the days of Irenaeus, which was soon after the
Apostles, there were yet done some miracles, implying by many things in his
Narration, that very soon after, that gift did cease. I noted before, the
words of S. Austen, De civit. Dei. l* 22. 8.
Why are not those miracles (say they) now done, which you report to have
been done? He answers that they were necessary till the world believed: but
now faith being spread in the world, he himself is no better then a vvonder or
a monster, who will not believe without seeing wonders. And in another De
vera Religion: cap. 25.
place thus, Since the Catholic Church is diffused through the whole world and
grounded, neither are those miraculous things permitted to endure until our
times, least the mind should always seek visible things, and by the custom of
the^, mankind should wax cold, at the new appeerance whereof it was all on
fire etc. Truth it is, that in his Lib. 1: 10*
Retractations, he expounds himself what he meant by this passage, It is
true in deed, for even until now, when the hand is laid on them which are
baptized, they do not so receive the holy Ghost, that they speak with the
tongues of all nations, neither now are the sick bealed by the shadovve of
the preachers of CHRIST passing by, and if any other such things were then
done, which it is manifest that afterward they ceased. But that which I
said is not so to be understood, that now no miracles should be believed
to be done in the name of CHRIST. For he says that himself saw a blind
man recover his sight, at the bodies of the Martyrs at Milaine; and some other
matters, he says, were done; alluding of likelihood to those many wonders
spoken of by him in the De civit: Dei l: 22: 8.
place formerly mentioned. And whereas he had said elsewhere, Why, De
vtilitat: credendi: cap. 16:
will thou say, are not these things done now? Because they would not move,
unless they were wonderful. But if they were common, they would not be
wonderful, he expounds that also in the same book of Retractations thus,
Lib: 1: 14:
And this I said, because not so great ones, nor all are done now, not because
that none are done even now.

13 Saint Austen acknowledges both here and elsewhere, that some strange
things were done in his age, but not such great ones as formerly, not so often,
not by an ordinary operation, but sometimes when God was pleased to permit it;
which is notwithstanding so to be taken, that the assured faith of no man
before hand could lead him unto it. And that such matters were done about that
age, or a little before, we have more witness. Iustine In quaest. ad ^thodox. 28.
Martyr says of the time wherein he lived, that the bodies of holy me^, and
sepulchers of Martyrs, did remoove away the intrappings of Satan, and heal
desperate diseases. Basile somewhat nearer the dates of Austen (...) says,
that in battles lately before fought, God (...)In Psalm* 18*
with hail and fire consumed the Northren Barbarians who overwhelmed them. And
by the same means he hindered the Persians who would have taken their cities,
killing some and returning others home, to carry news of the destruction of
their fellows. Haeres. 51:
Epiphanius tells of miracles, which we dare not be too bold to believe, as
that there were diverse places, whom also he names, where sometimes in the
year, the water in their wels and rivers was wonderfully turned into wine, in
remembrance of that which Jesus had done at Cana in Galile. May we not by
this example fear, that diverse of the gravest fathers of the Church, go a
little too far in their reports as Eccl. Hist. Lib. 7. 14.
Eusebius did also in telling of the image of the woman cured of an issue of
blood by CHRIST, at the foot of which as he said, grew three hundred years
afterward, an herb, which when it came up so high as to the garment of the
woman', it was of force to cure any kind of disease. Which narration is
shrewdly censured by In metho. Hist. cap. 4.
Bodine, as detracting credit from Eusebius in other matters. But be it thus:
that rarely there were done some strange things, for the space of some hundreds
years after Christ's ascension. Yet this was no set, certain, or ordinary
vocation of vvorking miracles, and therefore is very little to be accounted of,
for the purpose here in hand. Hear Gregory on this point; Mor. li. 27. 11.
What marveile is it, if the faith being propagated, miracles be not often done,
since even the very Apostles in many which were already faithful did not do
them? This place being undoubtedly Gregory's, may make the freer exception to
be taken to the books surmised to be his Dialogues* for here he tells us that
miracles are not often done, and there if all should be true, nothing can be
more common. Notwithstanding hence it is apparent, that in his age there was a
discontinuance of the practice of miracles; no man was noted for a common doer
of them; none assumed that power unto him, and therefore since now a thousand
years are passed from his time, what undoubted reckoning can at this time be
made of them? Nay, what argument could be drawn from them, in the days of
Saint Austen? Might that which our adversaries urge, that those who did
miracles had the Catholic faith? How evidently, how copiously, how forcibly
does Saint Austen overthrow all that Reason? There were Donatists and other
heretics, who did urge miracles of their side. Does Saint Austen therefore
yield thereupon that their doctrine was Orthodoxe? No: but thus he says, De
vnitat^ Ecclesie.
Let him show it, and not say, therefore it is true, because D^atus or Pontius,
or any other did those and th^se miracles, or because men at the memories of
our Martyrs do pray and are heard, etc. Away with these either fictions of
lying men, or monstrosities of deceiving spirits. For either those things are
not true which are said, or if there be done some miracles of heretics, we
ought the more to take heed, because when the Lord had said that there
should be some deceivers, who by doing many signs should deceive the very
elect if it were possible, he did add commending it vehemently and said,
Behold I have foretold it unto you. And not long afterward, But they are
heard either of seducing spirits, which yet do nothing unless they be
permitted, God on high and unspeakably judging what is to be attributed to
every one: or else of God himself, either for a pain of their wickedness, or
for the comfort of their misery, or for a warning to seek everlasting
salvation. But no man comes to salvation and everlasting life, but he who
has Christ for the beade. And yet farther in the same treatise, Whatsoever
things of this quality are done in the Catholic Church, therefore they are to
be approoved, because they are done in the Catholic Church, but the Catholic
Church it self is not therefore manifested, because these things are done in
it. So that now the true faith does give countenance to the miracle, and not
the miracle credit the faith; which if our Papists were not possessed with a
spirit of giddiness, they must needs confess. And the same father in another
place, being haunted as it should seem with objections of miracles, and as
surfeted on them, and loathing them faith, Tract. 13. in Johan.
Against these miraclemongers as I may so call them, my God has made me wary
saying, In the last times there shall arise false Prophets doing signs and
wonders. He calls them mirab^os, miracle-mongers, and so he would have done
those who now ground so much on wonders, if he had lived in their times.

14 No reader can be so simple, but in pervsing these places he may perceive,
that the warrant and ground of Saint Augustines words, and the weight of his
Reasons is drawn out of the holy Scriptures, which are plentiful in that
point. For besides that of Deu: 13: 1:
Deutronomy, and the other place of S. Mat: 7: 22:
Matthew before cited, how frequently are we put in mind that seducers and
false Christ's, and Antichrist and the beast shall come with great signs and
wonders? Ca. 24 24:
There shall arise says our Savior false Christ's and false Prophets, and
shall show great signs and wonders, so that if it were possible, they should
deceive the very elect. Behold I have told you before. Here is a watchword
added, to the end that we should not be negligent in discerning this. In like
sort Saint Paul remembers us that the (...): The: 2: 9
coming of that son of perdition, is by the working of Satan with all power
and signs, and lying wonders, And in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness
among them that perish, because they received not the love of the truth, that
they might be saved. So Saint John says of the second beast, Apoc. 13: 13: 14:
He did great wonders, so that he made fire to come down from heaven on the
earth in the sight of men, And deceived them that dwell on the earth by the
signs, which were permitted to him to do in the sight of the beast. Afterward
we hear again, that Ca: 16: 13:
three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and
out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, for
they are the spirits of Devils working miracles. And lastly we find that Ca*
19: 20:
the beast was taken, and with him that false Prophet that wrought miracles
before him, whereby he deceived them that received the beasts mark. From all
which is it not much fitter and surer to conclude, that our Papists do take on
them to be able to do miracles, therefore the beast is their master, they are
cousens to the false Prophet, they are brethren to the frogs, promoted by the
spirits of Devils? If any grace were remaining, they would tremble at this
connection, and have away from Babylon, least they perish there with the harlot.
But to collect from their wonders, that they are the true Church of God, is
most senseless and inconsequent. I have showed before out of Saint Austen,
that the Devil works miracles. And profane stories are full of such reports,
how Satan did abuse men, so to win them to his service, or to continue them
in it. The Live. lib. 29:
men of Loeri having war with the Crotonienses, were desirous to remove into
their city, some store of money which was laid up in Proserpinas temple
standing in their fields. In the night time there was heard a voice out of the
Chapel, that they should let it alone there: the Goddess would defend her
own temples; wher-vpon not daring to stir it, they yet thought good to
compass the Chapel with a wall. But when their building was brought to a
pretty height, it fell all down to the ground. Were it here a good conclusion
to infer, that the religion of Proserpina or the Locrenses was right, for
these strange wonders sake? Yet this is the same which our Romanists do urge,
or else they do nothing. There is an approved Tacit lib: 4: Hustor:
author who witnesses of Vespasian, that when he was to take the Empire upon
him, he did diverse prodigious and miraculous matters, openly and in fight of
all. Yea what can be more wonderful, then that which Philostrat li^ 4: 6: and
16
Apollonius acted, as Philostratus writing his life reported of him? For one of
his deeds was, that he cast out a Devil, and another that he raised to life a
maiden which was dead. And to cast out Devils, and to quicken the dead, are
worthyly reputed amongst the highest miracles. Where, who is so gross as to
infer, that the doctrine of these persons was true, for their wonders sake?
Neither does it serve the turn, to put this difference or disparity, that the
miracles now in question must be done in the name of Christ, which was not in
those of the Gentiles; for eve^ the same which are by Christ rejected, are
there said to be done in Mat: 7. 22
his name; and who is ignorant that in Christian cou^treies, such rare effects
as are brought about, by witches, negromancers, coniurers and the like, who
sometimes do strange exploits, are operated by using the name of all the persons
of the holy Trinity, by sentences of Scripture, and other words in themselves
good but wickedly applied?

15 These reasons as they do weaken and extenuate the maine strength of al
miracles lately done, so the consideration of the qualities of Popish miracles
do utterly overthrow the^. For not the 40 or scant the 100. of the^ was true:
diverse were wrought with legerdemain: very many were most ridiculous, and no
better with wise folks the^ things to make sport, albeit they were admired by
the simple and superstitious. That worthy man Ludovicus Vives saw this well
enough, when he spoke so feelingly of this case. (...) Lib: ^de verita: sidei
They says he are the more execrable, yea like the Devil, who for gain sake
do feign miracles in the Churches of our Saints, for when the vanity of theirs
is laid open, they make me^ doubt of true miracles. Therefore miracles must have
these marks, the truth of the thing it self, the quality of their being, the
manner of the actio^, the cause efficient, the cause moving before hand, the
end. And afterward, The avarice of some persons, has devised false
loger-demaines of miracles, by the which being deprehended and made manifest,
such as are most true, are made uncertain, which is a pestilent matter in
religion, and they are to be execrated who do devise them, and deserve more
punishment, then such as counterfeit money, or do mingle poison among these
things which are made for receites against poison. You may here once again
call to mind the Proclamation of Bruxelles before spoken of. If the miracles so
extolled in the Romish Church, were examined after the notes and marks here
proposed by Vives, how poor, how conte^ptible, how scornful would they be? Let
us see some few examples, and those not tosled up and down with rumors, but
believed and received, as commended unto us by authors of good note. Hoveden
part. 2.
In or near Sicilia, the fire did break out of the mountain Gibel, which is
a matter long agone written concerning the hill Aetna. The people of the
country being frighted at it, do fly to the tomb of S. Agatha, and taking
her veil from thence, do with it so beat back the fire into the sea, that it
dried up the sea almost for the spice of a mile, and did half scorch or burn
the fishes, so that yet such fishes do remain half broiled, and are called S.
Agathas fishes. You must think that it is some commodity to the country, in
saving them fuel, who eat of the fishes, in as much as they are half broiled
to their hands. You must not ask whether if all the water were so gone, that
the fish lying dry was burnte, the people came and tosled them forvvard into
the sea, or else they lay there till the tide came up again, that they lived
so long after. Nor whether there be yet any of the same fish remaining: for
were it not time, that they were spent? And yet as men say, fish is long lived.
But howsoever you must not sift a miracle too far, as it is no good manners too
much to examine a friends tale. Ibidem.
The same Author has another Narration concerning Thomas Becket, that he
never dra^ke any thing but water, and on a time being at boorde with Pope
Alexander, the Pope would needs taste of his cup. There least the sanctity and
abstemiousnes of the holy man should be discovered, God so provided that
Alexander could find nothing but wine: but when Becket came to pledge him in
the same cup, it was turned back again into water. You must believe that
although the Pope found it to be wine, yet Thomas Becket drunk nothing but
water. And because it should be known that he was as miraculous in his meat, as
he was in his drink, Quod. lib. 8: 7.
one of our Secular Priests in great earnest tells us, that on a S. Marks
day in Rome, he had a Capon whereon he was eating turned into a Carpe. Some
have talked of men, that could or would have gone invisible. Perhaps some body
will ignorantly say that it was Friar Bacon. No, it was S. Bartholomew, as Past
3: quaest: 54. a^t: 1.
Thomas of Aquine tells us, to whose body it was give^ as a miracle, that if
he himself would, he might be visible, if he would otherwise, he should not be
beheld: he might go invisible. You will hope that S. Bartholomew was an honest
man, or else now and then he might have done ill feats.

16 That S. Francis the Patriarch of the Franciscanes was a master of
miracles, we are not now to learn: but see whether he brought not up his
scholars unto it also. If we give credit to the book of his Conformities, as
I cannot see who can be a good Catholic and not believe it, Conformit. D.
Fra^cisc.
Friar Frauncis one of the followers of the noble Saint Frauncis, celebrating
Maste, found a spider in the chalice, and did not take him out, but drank him
up together with the blood. Afterward rubbing his shin-bone, and scratching
where it itched, that spider came whole out of his leg, and did him no hurt.
And because such wonders as these be, must never cease in the Church of Rome,
but our age must have her part, our Jesuits who do as much honor the fou^der
of their Society Ignatius Loiola, as the Franciscanes do S. Francis, will
inform you that Ignatius was not without his miracles, for when Petr Maff. in
vita Ignat. lib: 1: 7
he was sometimes at his prayers late in the night, diverse peeping in upon
him, have seen his body hang in the air two yards above the ground, the
spirit lifting up the weight of his body to heave^-ward: And moreover
co^ferring in speech with God (which also is written of Exodus 34. 35.
Moses) al his face would shine in marveilous manner like the beams of the
Sun. But because the fou^der of the Jesuits should not thus bear the bucklers
away from all me^ in our age, there is since his time stepped up another old
gallant, on Philippus Nerius a Florentine, who has erected an order called
Congregatio Oratorij. One Antonius Gallonius a Priest of his Company has
lately put out his life, and so many miracles done on and by him, that a man
had need of a strong faith, which can beleevethe^. Among other, to be quit
with those of Loiola, Vita B. Patr. Philip Nerij. lib. 1* Anno 1556.
he tells that Philip was seen in prayer time, for an hour and a halfes
space to ha^ge in the air five cubits and more, above grou^^, which being two
yardes and a half has put down Ignatius for half a yard and better. Also
his face was seen to be wonderfully full of shining beams. And because we
should think that miracles were no dainties with him, An 1555.
he could by his smell know a whore very e^sily: he could by An. 1559.
looking a ma^in the face tell what he thought, and knew familiarly the secret
cogitatio^s of men's hearts. A man being absent from him and but dreaming of him,
was An 1595.
cured of a vehement fever. All these strange matters, and many more he did,
albeit he told De beati Philip^ virtutib l. 3:
Caesar Baronius then a Priest of his order, and he who was his Confessor,
that he very often had asked of God, that he would do no miracles by him. And
that was because he would not have the people think too well of him. And in as
much as mention is here made of Caesar Baronius, I will add one thing more,
which the said Lib. 1. An. 1550:
Cardinal delivered upon his oath, concerning the same Philip his founder; for
the said Baronius was one of his company and society. In the year 1550, now
more then fifty years agone, Philip who (in the dark of the night, when all
men are even buried in sleep, so that the left hand could not know what
the the right hand did) did use to visit needy persons, went in the night
time to carry bread to a poor gentleman. Here by the Devils means, while
he sought to avoid a carte coming hastily upon him, he fell into a very
deep ditch, but Gods help being at hand, in his falling he was presently
caught of an Angel, by the hear of the head miraculouslye, and being
nothing hurt, he was returned out safe by the Angel. This did Baronius (who
was not there, and could have it but by the report of Nerius) swear
absolutely to be true; whereby we may easily guess, that the same
Cardinal in his writings makes no great conscience, to say things true
or false, when he makes no bones to swear matters so unlikely. He who
list to see more of the venerable miracles in Popery, let him read Henry
Stephanus in his French Cap: 39:
Apology of Herodotus, and there he shall find diverse particulars set
down. Are not our Countrymen, and Country-women blessed, when after so long
light of the Gospel, they choose to feed themselves fat with legions of such
wonders, and hold it a high part of their profession to believe such things as
these are? We read of some whom God does so give over to the spirit of
delusion, that they do 2 These: (...) 11.
beleeuelyes.

17 If any here do ask me, how came it ever about, that such foolish and
ridiculous multitudes of miracles came to be reported, and inserted into their
books, I must first ascribe it to the permission of God, who had fore-tolde
that so it should be. Secondlye to the policy of Satan whose kingdom by
this us by a special means was enlarged. Thirdly to the cunning of the
Clergy in those days, who made themselves great by the keeping up of such
reports, concerning the sanctity of any of their confederacy, or of such
whose relics they pretended to have, and gained infinitely by the offeringes
done in places of these wonders. And fourthly to the credulity of the people,
who would believe any thing once set abroach by some suborned for the purpose,
or by idle companions. Gulielmus Neubringensis was a writer very learned, and
judicious for that time wherein he lived. And in his story he did more then
once relate, the abuse of that age for spreading abroad the fames of miracles.
Neubringens. l 3: 7.
Henry the eldest son of King Henry the second of England, who was in his
fathers life time crowned King, but dyed before his father, was every where by
the people reported to have wrought great miracles after his death: whereas in
truth he was an unadvised and rebellious young Prince. This shows how
apt the people were to intertaine a conceit of any man's doing miracles, yea
so far that if they might have their wills, they should soon have been
shrined for Saints. Afterward Lib: 4* 9:
there was a great robber, who being slain it was given out of many old
women, that he frequentlye did miracles, as if he had been some holy
person, and this rumor grew so strong, and was so generally spredde, that
the Bishop was enforced to come to Hampton, and there display the falsehood of
the whole narration, so that then the superstition was ended. He Lib: 5: 19:
mentions also a third matter of this kind, that a traitorous fellow of
London, called William with the long bearde, was also reputed a Saint, and a
maine do^ of of miracles. Can we have any plainer certificate then this, that
by the superstition and credulousnesse of the vulgar sort, many wonders were
said to be done, when in truth there was no such matter? And if for their
commodities sake any of the Clergy would join and give countenance to the
matter, the party so grown to be a Saint, and the fame of his wonders
should never be extinguished. The reader may by these few take a taste of the
rest of their Saints and miracles, for thousands were done no otherwise
then in this sort, and every man had not the vvitte to see the fraud, nor
that courag^ to report it as Neubringensis had. And what levvdenesse may we
imagine was practiced among simple people in those dark days of Popery,
when in so glorious a sunshine of the Gospel, any Seminarians should dare
in England to attempt such a practice, as Father Weston the lesuite, and
Decl^ration of Popish impostures pract^sed by Edm.
no less then a whole douzen of Priests conspiring with him, did of late
for some years together put themselves into? They persuaded some men and
three maidens, that they were possessed with the Devil, and that they by
their Priest-exorcizing faculties could fetch him in and out, up and down at
their pleasure. They had a holy chair to set their abused Disciples in, and a
holy potion to administer to them; both matters pretended to be formidable to
the foul spirits, but indeed tricks to cast their patients into strange
fits, that so they might seem, as well to themselves as others standing by, to
be possessed in most hideous manner. And this was so artificially carried by
the Jesuit and his fellow Iuglers, that diverse hundreds of unstable and
unadvised people, being cousened and cunny-catched by their impostures were
contented to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, being won there unto by
their stupendous miracles. A book also or two was penned, to be spread
abroad beyond the seas, of the admirable dominering of these Priests over the
possessing spirits, and of the wonders which they had done upon them.
Notwithstanding now by the confessions of three of the females, and one man, al
which then were the pretended possessed persons, and of another the^ a Priest
and a personal actour in this exploit (all these five being sworn and speaking
upon oath) it is manifestly and undoubtedly discovered, to be most egregious,
insignious, illustrious both varletry and vilainy, that among me^ professing
religion and devotio^ was ever heard. A man may well suppose, that the casting
out of Devils, and doing of other wonders in India and far countries, by the
Jesuits and Priests, is a true honest and holy matter, when such
unspeakable, and vndescribable hypocrites, do dare before such multitudes of
themselves conscious of their own fraud before such troops of sta^ders by, some
of the^ being to be presupposed to be ordinarily intelligent, and in England
where a ielousy is justly had of their impostures, to play, act, exploit, so
lewd, fraudulent and wicked a Pageant, and think that they may not only go
current away with it here, but that the fame of this business bruted els-where,
should serve the^ beyond the Seas for Catholic purposes, and be a means to
hold up the reputation of the Antichristian Papacy. If our seduced Romanistes
vvoulde not close their eyes, they might see upon what trashe their religion
is builte, and that their leaders care not how they be abused and led by
the nose, so that their own proiectes and int^ndments be affected.

18 To draw then toward an end of this point, Popish wonders for the most part
we precisely hold to be lies: others of the^ if they be done, to be no better
in respect of their end, but delusions and means to deceive men, by bringing
them into error. And concerning those that are really done, first we maintain,
that they do not prove that the doers of the^ are Gods servants. For eve^ in
Bid himself who was such a magnifier of miracles, I do find that one Eccle.
his^ lib. 3. 25.
Vilfridus could say thus, Concerning your father Colu^ba and his followers,
whose sanctity you say you imitate, and follow his rule and precepts even
confirmed by signs from heaven, I can answer that at the day of judgment many
saying to the Lord, that in his name they have prophesied, and cast out Devils,
and done many wonders, the Lord shall answer I know you not, which
answer of Vilfridus being grounded on the words of CHRIST is of infallible
verity. Secondly we say that miracles done do not confirm, that the
doctrine of those who do them, is verity: since that for the convincing of
the Devil, God has suffered heretics to do wonders: not to ratify their
errors, but to confirm other of his truth. Which may aptly be applied to the
reports of miracles showed by the Jesuits in the Indies, if so be that any of
them be true. For Con. ca. 2
Costerus one of their own companions most appositely informs us thus, They
do say that some of the Novatians in times past did miracles, but it was in
testimonte of the Catholic faith among the Gentiles, not in witness of
their error, as he who did cast out Devils in Christ's name, in the ninth of
Luke. Then the doctrine of wonder-doers may be false, as the persons of
miracle-workers may be reprobates. To Prophecy says Saint De simpli.
praelatoru^.
Cyprian, and to cast out Devils, and to do great wonders on the earth, is a
high and admirable matter. Yet he does not attain the kingdom of heaven,
whosoever is found in all these, unless he do go in the observation of a
tust and right way. Thirdely we teach that it is no argument of falsehoode in
faith, not to be able to do wonders, since the time of them is ceased, and
when they were at the best, they had in them no enforcement to make men
believe the truth. For as (...) Chrysostom says, Among the Jews also,
miracles were showed (...) Inpsa. 45.
neither by them was there any profit brought to their salvation. For as the
beams of the Sun are not sufficient, unless the (...) also be pure and
sound, so neither here also do only miracles suffice. And so Saint ^e
duplici martyrio.
Cyprian, H^vve many incureable diseases death Lord heal with a word, to
how many blind men did he give sight, etc. And yet few beleevedon him, and
he heard, In Beelzebub he casts out Devils. Afterward it was so even with
the same Jews, they in the time of Soct. li. 3. 17.
Julian the Apostata going about to reedifie the temple at Jerusalem, and God
showing three strange wonders against it, but yet they would not come to
Christianitye. Not long after that, Lib: 7: 4:
a Jew coming to be a Christian was miraculously healed of a disease, and yet
the rest of his nation would not receive Christ. Then the end of them now is
to little purpose, the execution of them common to the wicked with the godly,
the practice permitted to Antichrist and his followers, no such perpetual
marke-set on those that be Orthodoxe, and therefore we strive not for them,
but know that God has left a surer way to win men from error, and to
try who are in the truth, and that is his word and the operation of his
sacred spirit. But yet we are not so blind but to see, nor so unthankful
but to acknovvledge, that the Lord has for the advauncement of the Gospel
which we preach, done marveilous things. In which sort we accounte the
large spreading of the truth by the means of Luther; his vvonderfull
preservation all his days, notwithstanding his enemies, so many, so mighty, so
malicious; his dying quietly Sleid. l. 16
in his bed, in such peace of body and mind, and in that honorable account,
as that even then when he dyed, he was chosen an arbitratour to decide
controversies between the noble Countyes of Mansfeld. We think that it was
marveilous, that when such a (...) massacre was made of the Protestants in
France, in the year 1572, there should remain (...) Comme^t: relig. and
reiptn Gal. lib: 10.
so many still, as have propagated so renoumed a Church, as they have at this
day. That such plenty of Lib: 12:
fish should be cast up daily by the sea, at the seege of Rochel, whereby as
by Manna from heaven, the people were for so many months releeved, and the
very day that the enemies camp brake up, the coming of the fish ceased. What
may we think that so small and maligned a City as Geneva is, should be so
long held against the invasions and infinite plots of the Duke of Savoy, and
other who desire the ruin and desolation of it? What of the Netherlanders,
that after so many thousand Spanyardes and Italians buried in their coasts,
so many millions of Indian gold and silver spent in their country, such frawd,
such force, they should stand rich and glorious at land and at sea, in better
case of themselves then ever they were? Lastly what may be imagined of the
life and reign of our late blessed Sovereign, who after so many dangers
coming to the Crown, and that in so many difficulties of subjects at home,
and foreign Princes abroad, yea and of the Devil every where, did profess
to maintain the truth of God, and to deface superstition? And in this
beginning, she with uniformity continued, yielding her land as a Sanctuary to
al in the world groaning for liberty of true religion, flourishing in wealth
honor, estimation, every way admired by all the Monarkes whither the same of her
did come, and leaving matter for such a story as no Prince has left the like.
This Queen after the defeating of the invincible Navy in the year 1588, and
after many other renourned prosperities, notwithstanding the frequent
conspiracies of ungodly persons against her, by the favor of the Highest,
under the shadow of whose wings she was ever safe-garded, dyed in peace, in a
full and glorious age, so beloved, honored and esteemed of her subjects as
never any Prince more. And God to testify his own work, left at her death no
noted calamity or misery in the kingdom, no wars, but even Ireland then
calmed, no famine, no apparent pestilence, no inundation of waters, but plenty
and a boundance, with inexpected tranquillity. Yea to the end that he might
crown her with blessings, he put unity and agreement into the Nobles, Clergy
and Commons of the land, that readily they submitted them selves to the lawful
and royal successor, under whom we doubt not but to enjoy religion and all
earthly happiness. Let our Papists weigh whither these things be not
wonderful. We in the mean time say, They (...) are the Lords doing, and they
are marveilous (...) Ps. 118: 23:
^n our eyes.


THE SEVENTH REASON. Visions, and the gift of Prophecy.
T. HILL. AS true Miracles never were wrought, but by them who were of the true
Church, so heavenly Visions and the gift of Prophecte were never found to be
but in the same. And therefore the holy Apostle among other things which he
uses to commend his doctrine and himself to the Corinthians against
Heretics, and false Apostles he brings in this as one saying, Now will I
come to the Visions 2: Cor: 12:
and Revelations of our Lord, etc. And Saint Peter alleges 2: Pet: 1:
for consfirmation of his preaching the transfiguration of our Lords in the
mount which he savve, and calls it a Uision: he had a Uision of Matthew:
17: Act: 10, and 11
asheete with all kinds of beasts in it, when he was to deal with the
Gentiles, And for the truth of Religion, and confirmation of that which they
did Act. 2 He alleges the Prophecy of Iocl, who says amongst other
things, your young men shall see Visions, and to be Joel: cap 2:
brief of this sport is the whose book of the Apocalypse. So that to see
these kind of heavenlee Uisions, and thereby to foretell things most
certainly, is only amongst them who are of the true Church.


G. ABBOT. WHen I have breefly told you, that almost every word of the
greatest part of this Chapter is taken from the seventh of your Master (...)
Bristowes Motives, perhaps (...) Bristowe Motiv 7:
some friend of yours will ask me, when my purpose is to cease from
remembering you of this matter, since so often I sing the same song. My answer
will be that when you leave to steal out of other men's writings, I shall leave
to tell you of the same: but that I fear will not be till we come to the end
of your little book. Such a gift you have to continue that which you have well
begun. How and by what means miracles to false and evil ends, and yet
themselves things miraculously done, have and may be by Satan, Antichrist,
and their followers brought about I have showed before. And it is as certain
that Visions, which to doting and deceived folks seem heavenly, and so also
supposed or pretended Prophecies, are of the same nature in our days, do
proceed from the same root, and are applied to build up falsehood and untruth
in the self same sort. Neither are these late forgeries or illusions any thing
helped, by those divine Revelations which formerly have been made; since they
and these have no affinitye or coherence the one with the other. That S. 2.
Cor. 12: 1
Paul to stop the mouths of the false Apostles who depressed his
authority, did mention a Vision of his own, is a matter agreed upon; as also,
that S. 2: Pet: 1: 17
Peter to testify that what he preached concerning Christ's glory was true,
mentions the transfiguration of his master in the mount, to the which he was
an eie-witnesse. And this by Jesus himself was teermed a Math: 17: 9
Vision. Neither is it to be doubted, but at the same time when the same
Peter was to be instructed, that Gods pleasure was to give the Gentiles
access into the Church, as well as the Jews, he had from heaven an apparition
of a Act. 10, 11: 13.
sheet full of all beasts clean and unclean, and a voice added thereunto,
Kill and eat. But we would gladly learn what it is that you can conclude out
of these, since the persons, the times, the use is now most different, you
having no affinity, nor keeping any quarter with the Apostles, no not retaining
so much interest in them, as the Saracens have in Abraham, from whom by the
Sozom. 6, 38.
bondwoman they are lineally descended. And yet it would be held but a
ridiculous dispute for one of the^ to say, that Abraham was familiarly
acquainted with God, pleased him, and had many blessings and favors from him
therefore they the Hagarenes and Mahumetanes, are in the same grace with the
Lord, and may plead any favors or privilege from him. Touching that place of
the Prophet Joel. 2: 28:
Joel which you cite, it has relation to the sensible se^ding down of the
gifts of the holy Ghost, which was fulfilled soon after Christ's ascension.
And this was intimated again by our Savior himself in other words, He (...)
that believes in me says the Scripture, out of his body shall flow rivers
of water of life, unto which the Evangelist immediately subioyneth (...) Ioh:
7: 38.
This spoke he of the spirit which they that believed on him should receive, for
the holy Ghost was not ^et give^, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. The
Prophet Joel the^ foretells, that when Christ had appeered, there should be
visible and most admirable tokens of Gods power and love to his Church, in so
much that many of all ages and sexes first among the Jews, and afterward by
some farther communicating of it among the Gentiles, should speak with stra^g
tongues, should see visio^i and prophecy. And that the words of Joel have
reference to this and nothing else, S. Peter himself shall be witness, whose
speech this is, Act. 2. 16:
These are not drunken as you suppose, since it is but the third hour of the
day, but this is that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, And it shall be in
the last days says God, I will power out of my spirit upon all flesh, and your
sons and your daughters shall prophecy, and your young men shall see
visions, and your old men shall dream dreams. And to show that this is
appropriated to that, which the^ and quickly after was showed by the Apostles
(I mean the speaking with strange tongues, and the imparting of that gift to
other, by the^ as the instruments of God) the same Peter has these words
afterward, Since 33.
then that Christ has received of his father the promise of the holy Ghost, he
has shed forth this which ye now see and hear. Look then how long speaking
mitaculously with strange tongs continued in the Church, so long you may plead
out of this text, that visions and Prophecies had their place: but that hence
you should infer that these things have perpetual use in the Church, is
most incongruous and inconsequent: since the gift of speaking strange
languages is long since ceased, which at that time was more eminent and
apparaunt then Visions and Prophcying. Now that the words of Joel, are to be
understood of that time only, witnesses S. Ad Marcellam adversus Montanu^.
Hierome, who being urged out of that very text to allow the visions and
prophecies of Montanus, says plainly that the same Prophecy agrees to the
time of the Apostles wherein Peter spoke, and unto none other. And as this
makes nothing for that which you are to prove, if your meaning be to prove
any thing, so your mentioning of the Apocalypse makes less then nothing: for
that which John there saw is the last Revelation commended to us by the Lords
warrant, and we may not look for any more such, whereupon as on a matter of
certainty, we may build our faith. S. John made Canonical Scripture of his
Visions, which I trust yours cannot be. Which yet nevertheles you might as well
prove, as to make this argument, John did see Revelations and Visio^s which
were from God, and they gave testimony to his doctrine, Ergo you see such, and
yours be of that sort. Your Reason from those ancient ones to these of your
Papacy, is a bacule ad angulum, tied together with points, most unorderly and
vnconcluding. So that to allow you that these kinds of hea^ly Uis^s, and
thereby to f^tell things (...), is (...) ^gst them who are of the tr^ Ch^h, I
may add, and of such as are immediately inspired from God; is nothing at al to
your purpose. When you prove your Vision-seers to have the same warrant,
authority and inspiration which the Apostles had, we will readily harken unto
you. But you must take a long day to make that good, as the thirtith of
February, or ad Gr^ Calend^, and till that time we must look after you.


T. HILL. FOr although there have been Prophecies amongst the Heathens, yet
were they not undoubtedly true, as the Oracles of Apollo, and such like
illusions, except they were for the confirmation of right religion, a^ Eusebius.
li. 5. hist. c. 16. and 18: Cochlaeus in act: Luth.
the Prophecies of the Sybils and of Balaam. And the same may be said of
Heretics (...) of Montanus, of Luther, of Muncer, and of such like, who took
upon them to prophecy, some to their utter shame, and some to their own
destruction.


G. ABBOT. 2 WE will not much strive with you about the Prophecies among the
Heathen, although we doubt not but in ordinary actions of civil affairs, the
Devil oftentimes did speak undoubted truth. Which was, the more to draw on
and allure those who were the children of unbelief, and repaired to him for
counsel, that they might believe him in such other forged matters as were
more for his purpose. Else they would never with such freque^cy have run to
his Oracles. And the means whereby Satan attained to that knowledge, was
partly by revelation from God, who sometimes imparteth his proiects unto the
(...) Devil, and partly by conjecture of precedent (...) Job 2. 6. (...). 22.
2^
necessary signs, which would infer or enforce the effects mentioned in
Satan's answer, unless God by miracle did alter the consequents. But it is of
irrefragable truth, that to confirm divine Religion, the Lord has used the
mouth of the reprobat, (...) Number. 2^. 24. c: 24. 2^ (...). 17^
yea of the Devil himself, in foreshewing things to come. (...) Balaam
prophesied rightly of the Israelites, of the Amalekites, of the Kenites, yea of
the coming of Christ himself, the Savior and victorious conqueror of the
world. (...) Caiphas truly foretold (...) Ioh: 11: 50
that one should die for the people, and not all the nation perish. And yet
both Caiphas and Balaam were the children of perdition. Apollo in his Oracle,
which was nothing else but the voice of Satan, did utter many verities: for he
was overruled by one who was greater then himself. Let that one instaunce
suffice, which is cyted by Lactantius, and falls fitly upon God, and Christ
his son. For Lacta. d^ falls. religion: cap. 7:
Apollo at Colophon being consulted by one to show who or what God was, it
was answered, (...),
(...)
(...).


Borne of himself, untaught, without a mother, stable or individed, his name
is not expressible by speech, dwelling in the fire. This is God, and we Angles
are but a small p^ce of God. And the like may be said of the Sibilles, which
were ten in number as the same Cap: 6:
Lactantius shows, and as it may be gathered out of him there, had many
things touching the unity and power of God, and of his Creating of the world.
And De ira Dei ca: 22: and 23
else where the like are by him mentioned to be delivered from them, as also
of the wrath and vengeance of the Lord against sin. Saint De civit. Dei l.
18. 23
Augustine has in like manner certain verses of Sibilla Erithrea, which are
as a Prophecy foretelling and describing the coming of Christ, and are the
more notable for that Acrostich (...) Christ the S^e of God, the Savior, every
verse beginning with one letter of those words in the Latin, the (...)
Original whereof (...) In annot. in eu^ (...).
is cited by L. Vives in the Greek. Neither does the holy In orat ad sanct
cae^u^. apud Eusebius
Emperor Constantine forget to apply to our Savior, that Ecloge of Virgile
which was borrowed from the Dictates of Sibilla (...) Cumaea. Yea all the
Sibilles have spoken so plainly of Christ, that (...) Vir. Ecl 4^.
some have imagined them to be of the number of Gods elect, and chosen of
purpose out of the Gentiles: but Gregory Nazi^zene is directly of another
judgment, Ad Nemesium.
saying that whereas sometimes they join with the truth, it is not that this
happened unto them from God, but because they looked ^slaunt or squinting-wise
on the books of the Scripture. This may be some reason, but I rather suppose,
that God who enforced (...) Satan to confess Christ to be the son of the
Almighty, and so to give (...) Mar: 1: 24
testimony to him among the Jews, did also urge these to give witness of
Christ's coming among the Gentiles, although the speakers like Caiphas knew not
what they said.

3 Of Montanus and his followers, as also of Priscilla and Maximilla two women,
Eccl. hist: lib: 5: 16: 17
Eusebius out of Miltiades and Apollonius makes mention: that he took on him
to be a Prophet, and they to be Prophetisses, and that when they would utter
any thing, they were not like true Prophets soberly inspired, and gravely
demeaning themselves, but as frantike folks, and persons possessed with an
evil spirit. It is added that their behavior otherwise was full of
covetousness, wantonness and vanity. In brief they and their doctrine came
to naught: which had been the less to be pitied, had not Hier: adv:
Helvidium:
Tertullian, otherwise a worthy man, and a great light in the Church sometimes,
been over-taken by them. (...) Muncer whom you name was a ringleader of the
(...) Sleid: l: 5:
Anabaptists, and he together with one Phiferus his companion, drew together
many thousands of people, persuading them that by visions and dreams they were
warned from God to do as they did. Among otherthings a little before the
joining of a battle, he would have made them believe, that a rainbow which
appeared was a sign from heaven that they should prosper. One of his doctrine^
was, that we were to ask signs from God, and that the Lord did much like that
we should so demand them, yea and eagerly expostulate with him, if he did not
grant them. The end of this man was, that the army which he had assembled of
countrey-people was ruinated, diverse thousands of the^ slain, he was put to
flight, and being taken was executed by the sword. This man could not endure
Luther, but publicly preached and inveighed against him; and Luther on the
other side detesting his vprores and rebellious sedition, did write against him
and his proceedings, whiles he was alive, and in his greatest strength. And as
Luther nothing respected the fained Visions and Prophecies of Muncer, so did
he never assume any such gift unto himself. He would may (...), (...) truth
which he did Contra Rege^ Angl^
teach should ^sper, which h^ uttered a^ grounding i^ on Gods general pro^
that the word like the (...) rain from above should not return in vain, and
upon the experience (...) Isa: 55: 10:
which he had of the daily spreading of it more and more in his own sight: but
t^t (...) mad^ show of any such Revelations as you would fasten upon him, the
very author whom at randon you ig^ntly (...), shall clear him: for he
alle^ging the speech of one whom he calls Paulus Abb^ (...) w^ng against
Luth^ ^ngeth in these words of his: I pray the (...) thy (...), (...) (...):
(...) act. Luther. A^: 1534:
t^gh all the (...) of L^r, The (...) in the, were L^her (...) of (...), (...)
of the spirit of God, ^t all his (...), all his (...) and (...) is (...). The
(...) p^t he adds, perverting Luthers humble and Christ^ ^ssion that he was
tempted by Satan, as all men are, so^ more, some less, to vvickedness^ but
can a man have a more ample and gen^all testimony, the this is out of (...),
that Luther never took on him the show of (...), (...) prophecies? So that
which you being against the (...) makes for the truth, and your ow^ tongue or
pen does cause you to fal^by your own sword you do perish. Luther knew that
those were the iuggling tricks of your Romish Synagogue and therefore he both
wisely and religiously declined them.


T. HILL. BUT the C^ke (...) Church, (...) had (...) in all ages, the which had
tr^ Visions and the gift of true Prop^, as Agabus, Act. 11. Gregory Thaumaturge
so Basil. li. de spiritu sancto. Cap. 29. Saint Anthony the Abb^, John of wh^
s^ Saint Aug. l. 5. de civit. Cap. 26. Saint Monica s^ Aug. lib. 3. Confess.
Cap. 11. Saint Benedict s^ Gregor. (...). (...). (...). cap. 15. S. Bernarde
see in (...) vita, lib. 4 cap. 3. S. Frau^ s^ in eius vita Bo^ventura, with
(...), for (...) vv^ there any vv^ had the gift of (...), (...)(...). A^
(...), (...) s^y P^ is ((...) you (...)) wh^ (...) ^tedly w^erfull (...) you ^y
(...), wi^ (...) and irr^gable t^y.


G. A^T. 4. IT were worth the while that you should exemplify your visio^s
throughout al ages, as you did yo^ miracles before. But to begin, you do ^ost
discreetely s^ Agabus in the fore. ^ont, who by the spirit foretold of a (...)
throughout all Act^ (...).
the world. And what had he to do I pray you with your vn-Catholike Romish
strumpet? what doctrine did he mainetaine which is now in your minte? God
knows, your forge was not yet going when Agabus spike. He^ lived in the time
of Visions and Prophecies, and had signific^tion from the holy Ghost what he
should say; from which your Se^ are most far. And the Scripture advoucheth
this of him. There is nothing his that may touch you, unless you vv^ appl^
(...) co^porall famine fore-tolde by (...), and veri^d vnd^ Claudius Caesar, to
note the spiritual famine, which afterward possessed a great part of the
world, while the Popes debarted Christians of the food of their souls, the
bread of life, the holy and Sacred Scriptures. Of Gregorius Thaumaturgus,
Basile breefely (...) De spiritu Sancto^ cap: 29:
speaks thus, His predictions of future things were such, that he was
nothing inferior to the rest of the Prophets, where observe that h^e names
no particular prediction, no revelation. And Socrat. lib: 4: 22:
Socrates speaking of him, breefely touches his miracles, but not a word of
any Prophecy or Vision. So that this may well be doubted of: (...) that so
much the rather, because Basile sette^h his commendation so high, as that
neither you, nor any other man can justify it, if you will understand the
comparison to be between him, and the Prophets mentioned in Gods book, who
have for the^ such sufficient authority as may not be distrusted, whereas
without impiety this narratio^ may well (...) questioned? Ye^ if this were
allowed, you are still as far to seek as before for how will you pro^ that
this man believed or maintained your now Romish f^h? A^y (...) ^d (...) the
M^ke, and the ^ite, but not other. And of (...) it (...) ^oned, that he saw in
a vision (...) So^ 6: 5:
some ov^ing the holy (...), and sacred table, which was (...) expo^d of the
(...). But ^ke I pray you (...), that he (...), and devoide of all learning,
and Lib. 1. 13.
therefore his (...) are not m^h to be builte upon. Secondly that he had
little, or nothing in him s^ing with Popery: for the monkish life of him and
others in those days was of a most different sort from these our belly gods,
who would never have endured to li^ as those old Heremites; and their
profession and religion is much disagreeing. Thirdly that although it be said
of him, that by the help of so gre^ virtues, he had attained divine
foreknowledge, yet the same Author adds farther that to fore-kn^ things to
come, he himself did not account to be (...) the number of virtues. And
therefore he did gi^ (...) that (...) rashly should bestow hi^ time and labor
in that matter. Bec^ ^a^ which was ignorant of future matters, should suffer ^y
(...), because he was ignorant of them, neither did he th^ke, that he who did
foreknow the^, was therefore blessed, or to be a^red. He then did not make so
much of it, as you do. And so it appears that you ha^ but ill luck with the
examples which you bring.

5 Concerning John, S. De civit. Deil: 5: 26:
Austen says that Theodosius being to fight against Maximus, did not se^d to
inchau^ters but to John, who abode in the wilderness of Egypt; which serva^t
of God he had learned by common report, to be endued with the spirit of
Prophesying, and from him says he, ^e received a most certain message of
victory. All this while, what makes this for the Church of Rome, more th for
the Anabaptists, or any other who wilchale^ge him? Monica Confess: 3: 11.
S. Austens mother much grieving that her son was a Maniche^, did weep and
pray ince^tly for his co^version. At last being in a dream, she imagined that
she stood upon a wooden ruler, and a young man with a merry countenance came to
her, and asked her why she was so sad, She answered that she bewailed her
sons destruction. To which he replied, that she should be of good cheer, for
where (...) was, h^ son was. And looking about she saw her son stand on the
same rulet with her, which impor^ to her, that (...) should in time come to the
Orthodoxe. In this virtuous woman you can have no interest, unless it be that
according to the Lib. 6. (...).
custom in Afrike her country, she brought meat and drink as to make a
ba^ket at the memory of some martyrs, which I take to be their tombs; but
therefore she was rebuked and forbidden by that revere^d Bishop Ambrose,
accou^ting her fact to be but an imitatio^ of the heathen; unto which
inhibition of his, she with quietness did consent. Of Gregor* Dialog. lib.
(...): 15.
Benedict we do find, that he foretold many matters to To^la the King of the
Goths, that he should enter Rome, reign 9. years, and die the 10. And he also
foresignified to a Bishop the desolatio^ of Rome, and in what manner it should
be, of what credit the book is whence this is taken, I have spoken before. That
which is cited of S. Vita nern. lib. 4. 3.
Bernard is this, that he foretold, that albeit a Prince called Theobald had
many troubles from his enemies, yet at 5. mo^ths end he should have peace. Also
he acquainted a certain messe^ger sent unto him, that he the same messe^ger
should become a monk. And such like are the Visio^s and predictio^s reported of
him, which as the writer of his life taking the^ up on heare-saies might fasten
upon him, to make his life and story the more famous (for this or the lik was
the order for all the Sai^ts) so may it not well be questioned, whether God in
this later age would give such an excellent gift as prophecy is, to so small a
purpose, as only to tell such matters of so small moment, belonging to single yea
and some private me^ only. Alois Lippoman, in in vitis Sa^ctorum.
The life of their Francis written by Bonave^tura, is so foolish and yet so
blasphemous a thing, as it is fitter to be exploded then refuted. There he
tells that this hypocrite had a vision of certain cru^mes, which betokened
the increase of his society of Franciscanes: and to ratify this, he had 5.
wounds set on him by God, like the wounds of our Savior, and this was a
confirmation of his order, as if he the Pope had imprinted some seal on it,
and allowed it. He has afterward a Chapter De divinis condescensionibus ad
nutum factis, as if he could have revelations from heaven at the least beck of
his. Yea he says of him that he could understand the secrets of men's hearts.
These reports as among fools they add much to the worship of that Friar: So
among the wisest they appear to detracte much from the peculiar honor of
CHRIST and his Father. These are the examples which you bring unto us, whereof
there are few which so much as in show make ought at all for your Popery: and
there is none of them, but in that particular lies to manifest exception. So
that your miracles and visions may in like sort be rejected, as uncertain,
fradulent, fained, and communicable to the wicked as well as to the godly, and
such mayserue to uphold falshoode as much as truth. In the Scripture they who
had the one gift from God, many times had the other joined with it: but that
always was not so for ought that I find, and whether it were or were not, it
makes not to your pupose. Your Papisticall visions in our days are either
diabolical illusions, or the inventions of couseners, whose sufficient and
irrefragable testimony, is nothing else but the doting fancy of some
melancholic person, or the lewd devise of other who vvoulde make themselves
famous, or else project something for the establishing of plotted purposes. And
if any go about to sift the^ or rifle the^ up, they have no other warrant but
to stre^gthen the^, with such other reports, as vncetaine, and of as feeble a
relation as the first, and so on, on with twenty, eve^ as the liar in Lucian.
in ^hilopseud.
Lucian does: or as it is the manner of figure-casters, to commend their
practice; or as it was wont to be in tales of the walking of the spirits, and
of chambers wherein no man might dare to lie, in all which, the co^firmatio^ of
one tale, was still by telling such another fable, that so one might strengthen
another. We need no better example of the goodness of this stuff, then blind
Motiv. 7:
Bristowes reports in this behalf, who would insinuate that one M. Allington,
a Papist belike had wonderful sights, yet he will not tell us what, but sends
us up and down London, and we may hear of them. So you know diverse and
sundry Papists, who have seen undoubtedly vvonderfull visions, which
perhaps we may see recorded hereafter. You do well to say perhaps, for it
would be a good while first, unless it come out against your will, as somewhat
has done, whereof you shall hear anon: but if you would put it out, it
would be a brave book for vvinter nights in steed of a nevve Legende.
Another of M. Bristowes fabulations is, that one who was a Papist in heart,
being at an English Communion, saw the Devil in the liknes of a foul black
Dog, take the Communion still at the hand of the Minister, as he delivered it
to the co^munica^ts. What luck our Papists have, that they alone can so often
see the Devil? And they alone can have the Devils in them, which find work
for the exorcists? He is simple that sees not, that this was a devise to drive
men from the participation of the Lords supper. A third he has, that a great
many Communion books lying in a sick man's chamber, were caught up by a fire
which seemed to have many hands, and so were thrown into a flame. He who will
so lightly bestow so much of his belief as to credit this, may demurre upon
this actio^, whither it were not the Devils own deed, who cannot away with the
Communion book, and therefore burns it, not because it is bad, but because it
is against him: and so have his disciples do^e. And the like may be expounded
of the black doge before, not enduring that the people should participate of
those holy mysteries. It might also be asked, what so many Communion books did
in one Chamber? Notwithstanding we rather hold al these things to be humane
fictions, or if they were done, to be diabolical illusions.

6 BUT here to come nearer the state of this wise Reason, It is most true that
there was a time when visions and dreams, and Prophecies were of good force,
God using to do by his children as Job speaks, that is, talks to the^ in
Job. 33. 15.
dreams, and visio^s of the night, when sleep falls upon the^, and they
sleep upon their beds. So G^ (...):
Abimilech was warned in a dream to abstain from Sara, and Cap 28 ^2
lacob had his dream of the ladder, and 1: Reg: 3. 5
Salomo^ was willed in a dream to ask what he would. And of this sort we find
very many other, which advertised me^ of the Lords special will in many
particulars. In like manner there is warrant for diverse visio^s, as when God
comforted (...) Jacob in a Vision, and when he appeered to (...) Genesis 46: 3
1 Samuel 3^ 1
Samuel, professing what judgment he would bring upon the house of ^li. So in
the new Testament, Act 1* 3:
Cornelius and Cap. 9. 121
Ananias had their visio^s. And for Prophesying, Moses and all other who were
so inspired from the Lord, do sufficiently speak. And yet even in those days
we find that it was not safe, to trust al things which came in the n^me of
prophecyings and visions and dreams. For there were false Prophets as is
plain by 1. Reg: 22: 11.
Zidkiah and many more. And Jeremy schooleth the people, Ier. 27. 9:
Hear not your Prophets, nor your so^thsayers, nor your dreamers, who say unto
you thus, Ye shall not serve the King of Babel, for they prophecy a lie unto
you. And in another place he says of other, Cap: ^3: 10. and ^5.
They speak the vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the
Lord. And afterward God says, I have heard what the Prophets said, that
prophecy lies in my name, saying I have dreamed, I have dreamed. This is the^ a
dangerous thing for credulous people to be deceived by, unless they change
their judgment and be very wary. God therefore adds farther, Verse. 28.
The Prophet that has a dream, let him tell a dream and he that has my
word, let him speak my word faithfully. It is then Gods word faithfully looked
into, which must be the direction to the speaker and the hearer. Else how soon
might me^ be deceived? That 1: Reg. 13. 9: 18.
Prophet of the Lord may veryfie this, who himself was quickly beguiled
through credulity, at the instance of another Prophet, Nehem. 6^ 10.
persuading him directly against Gods will revealed unto him. Notwithstanding
Nehemiah being wiser, when he might have bin so catched by Shemiah prete^ding a
revelation, did not harken unto him, but looked to that duty which was
commanded him. And that was it wherein men's spirit of discretion did consist in
those days; to look whether they furthered the Lords service or no, when they
spoke, and whether other approved circumstances did concur; for in other
general matters the good and the bad, might externally seem to join. The
place of Deuter. 13. 1:
Deuteronomy is in this behalf worth the considering, where it is said that a
Prophet may come, or a dreamer of dreams, and may give a sign or a wonder,
and that also may come to pass, and yet he may be a deceaver drawing to false
Gods, and is not to be followed. Then eve^ in those times, visions, dreams,
and prophecyings taken in themselves were but tickle things to rest on, neither
had they any sure ground, but from the word, by which they were to be tried.
That without them was forcible, they disagreeing from it were nothing.

7 But now since that Christ is come, we are taught in no sort to depend upon
the^: for the doctrine is general, and concerning al things, Hebr. 1. 1^
At sundry times and in diverse ma^ners God spoke in the old time to our
fathers by the Prophets, In these last days he has spoken unto us by his
son, which Antithesis does intend, that miracles and al means saving the word
of Christ, are now cut off, from resting our undoubted faith thervpo^. But in
special touching visio^s and miracles, when the Luc. 16: 29.
Rich man is brought in, as desiring that Lazarus might stra^gly be sent, or
appear as a ghost, or in some vision, to warn his brethren, our Savior
frames Abraham's answer, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them,
as holding that alone to be sufficient, and cutting of all other points, from
being matters of certainety, where-on to rest our faith and souls. And yet as
it was said of Miracles before, we deny not, but that after the asce^sion of
Christ, and the death of the Apostles, some and seldom times visions might be
showed to some of the elect, for their private instruction, satisfaction or
comfort, as Eus. Eccl. Histor 4. 14
Polycarpus did dream that he should be burnt for Christ, and Lib. 5: 27:
Natalius by stripes give^ him, or seeming to be give^ him by Angels, was
revoked from heresy to an Orthodoxe opinion, and so was Hier: epist 22* ad Eust:
Hierom from overmuch studying Tully and humane learning: and Theo: 516
Theodosius did dream that he should be Emperor. Where observe we two things:
first that these visions were touching private men's ma^ere, and not to teach;
and much less to broch any new or uncertain doctrine to the Church: for which
purpose our Papists do urge their visions, and especially to establish
Purgatory and the appurtenances thereunto. Secondly that albeit in some few God
did this, yet it was not laid down as a fundame^tal matter, that there should
always in the Church be such persons, neither might any man presume to say
that continually there should be such a vocatio^^ neither could any person by
an assured faith promise himself or other, that he should have such sights or
predictions; neither is there any Commandment to test ought in religion
thereupon: but rather there is much more to the contrary. For we hear often of
false Prophets, and Christ bids us Mat 7: 15
beware of them. Before that Jerusalem should be destroyed, which is a figure
of the end of the world, he says that Cap 24: 11
many false Prophets should arise, and should deceive many. And if the rule be
true that where miracles be, there also are visions, the^ it is one of
Antichrists mark, to stand on dreams and apparitions: for we are told that he
shall come 2: The: 2 9
with all power and signs and lying wonders. But to put al out of question it
is added, that his manifestation shall be with all deceiueablenes of
unrighteousness, and therefore we may rightly collect that these visions or
rather fraudulent fictious, and illusions must not be wanting. How shall we then
iudiciously imagine, that this may be a reason to conclude for truth, when it
self is fully out as much communicable to untruth? It were easy to show, that
among heathen men this was a frawde used to set colors upon their actions. The
conference of (...) Numa with Egeria (...) Live. lib: 11
the Nymph about his laws; The daily going of Id. lib: 26:
Scipio into the Capitol, as if he had talked with Jupiter; the dreams of
Alexander and other prodiges expounded by Curt. lib. 4. and 7.
Aristander; the heart or hind which Plut in Sertorio.
Sertorius pretended to come to him as a messenger from the Gods, do come
within this compass, and are directly here appliable, or at the least
equivalent to that which is now handled. As for Mahomet, he is in the belief
of his followers, inferior to no Prophet that ever spoke, his whole Alcorane
being nothing else, but instructions pretended to be delivered by apparitio^s.
And therefore it is Coel. Aug: Curio. Sarac. hist: l. 1^
written of him, that sometimes he would say, that the Angel Gabriel was often
times sent to him: and being much troubled with the falling sickness, he bore
those in hand which were about him, that his fits were trances, he was in
soul wrapped up into heaven, and he was inspired from God to teach diverse
duties unto men. In brief this is it, wherein not only the old Eus. l. 5. 16*
Mo^tanists did take on the^ to excel, and Merline, to who^ as In praefat.
Neubringensis says, G^lfridus Monumethe^sis does attribute no less, the^ we
do to Isaiah, saving that it is not inserted into Merlines prophecy, Thus says
the Lord. But the Anabaptists herein will put down the whole world, for they
with sad countenance, and a little less the^ ravished looks, would protest
that they had Sleid l. 10
illuminations, revelatio^s, apparitio^s for all their lewd co^ceits, their
having wives as many as they list, their oppugning of magistrates, their
murdering of their own brethren, as one did at (...) Sangallum, cutting (...)
Surius. Com: Ann: 1527.
of his brothers head in the presence of his father and mother, and affirming
that God had reveiled unto him that so he must do. And how shall it be in
man's power, to discern these false visions from true ones, but by the word and
spirit of God, and by singular diligence: which since it cannot be in every
one, the allowing of these visions and dreams, is most dangerous for
Christians. First it is possible that a man himself either sleeping or waking
may be deluded by Satan, which as concerning illusions by dreams, Mor: 8: 13:
Gregory notably shows to be true, and gives warning to take heed of the^.
And secondly how easy a thing is it for a cunning co^panio^ who is his
crafts-master, to inve^t such tales, and to swear the^ also, as he did who
affirmed that he Live: lib: 1:
saw the ghost of Romulus at Rome? In Popery there were thousands and ten
thousands of these inventions, thereby to establish their Masses, Dirges, Tran.
substantiation, Purgatory, and such stuff, and by these the simple were
extremely beguiled, their belief corrupted, and their purses picked. They who
could write that Saint NOV. leg: Angl. in vita Dunstan.
Dunstane when he was awake, saw the Devil and talked with him a while, and at
last with a pair of tongues read hot caught him by the face, pulled him toward
him, and made him most pitifully cry, would little blush to report other matters
of men, half or quite a sleep, of which sort are the visions in the Saints
lives. God Almighty has done much for us, who has so far opened our
understanding as to see that this is draffe, and that the Papists are in
miserable case, who rest there faith and religion on such trumpery.

8 That the visions of the Papacy were such fabulous fictions, wise men did
long since discover. Libello contra hypocritas.
Leonardus Aretinus has a treatise against the Clergy of his age, but covered
under the show of impugning of hypocrites. Among other their vsages he
rehearses this: It is worth the while to hear an hypocrite preaching amongst
women, or amongst men so foolish, that they do not much differ from women.
Here are the fit auditors for their fables. He counterfeiteth dreams: as if
he were come from thence, he talks of the houses of heaven, which he has
never seen. With most shameless impudency he doubts not to affirm,
things fained for things done, things never seen for those which have been
seen. The women infatuated with these words, return home, they extol him as
a holy man, and a friends of God, they send him presents, they return unto him
with a greater company. By this means very good cheer is made. His iourneces
puff up his nose, that is as I think fill him with new matter. He in the mean
time like a Poet does devise dreams which he may report. Thus did some of
them invent matter touching themselves, and some that which concerned other
men. And oftentimes the wit of one went not alone, but there were metings and
conspiracies to frame devises for purposes. The matter of (...) Elizabeth
Barton the Nun (...) Acta Parl. sub Hen: 8. An. 25: c: 12
in Kent, was so used in the days of King Henry the 8: when among her
companions, much was spread to commend her sanctity, many things divulgated of
her visions, and all the country was set a gogge upon her words: yea Fisher
himself the Bishop of Rochester, either disloyally and dishonestly as
concealing, or ignorantly and simply as believing, was a partaker in that
forgery. But the matter was nothing but to discountenance the kings divorce
from the Queen Katherine of Spain, formerly his brother Prince Arthures wife,
and to stir the people to rebellion thereupon. And at last all was confessed
by the Nun her self and other her Accomplices, and by Act of Parliament many
therefore were attainted, and accordingly received punishment. If they should be
well examined, the Visions which are fathered on Philippus Nerius of whom I
spoke before, and who not (...) many (...) An: 1595.
years since dyed at Rome, would prove to be of this quality. Diverse of his
friends Eius vitae l: 1 An: 1556
dying are said to appear unto him, and he saw their souls immediately passing
into the kingdom of heaven. Nay An: 1559:
Christ himself was seen of him. And as he saw Visions for other, so other
saw some for him; whence we may learn that false laddes need no other brokers
then themselves. This Philip and his fellows had pretended to go into India to
convert souls, but one An: 1557:
Augustinus Ghettinus a Monk and confederate of his, saw John the Evangelist
in a Vision, who told him that Rome must be Philips Indies, that he was chosen
to dress Gods vineyard there. Thus they packed together, that their credit
might be saved, and yet they might sleep at home in a whole skin also. Since
that time Father Weston alias Edmundes the Jesuit, and his fellows the
Priests have made great use of Visions in England, especially by the means of
one Richard Mainy who since by confession on his A declaration of Popish
Impostures: Confess. of^ Mainy.
oath, has discovered all to be but an impure and most cousening iuggling
devise. It was long believed touching him, that he saw a glistering light come
from the thumbs and fore fingers of the Priests at sundry times; which was
devised to make the world believe, that those thu^bs and fingers were most holy
matters, being anointed with holy oil when they were made Priests. In a
trance of his he said he was in Purgatory, and reported many strange things
thereof, Also he foresawe that from that time till Good-Fryday he should have
Visions every Sunday, and this with like frawde was accomplished, sometimes it
being prophesied that Papists should sustain great persecutions in England:
and sometimes it being related that Christ with great multitudes of Angels, or
the Virgin Marie with trains of blessed, Virgins, were present in the Chamber,
and then down the sta^ders by must on their knees, to worship the^ and pray to
the^. One part of Mainies fore-sightes was that on the Good Friday he should
dye, but when that day came he was warned that it must be otherwise, and so
indeed the dead man is alive yet, and has disclosed the whole devise. Yet the
shameless Jesuit above named wrote a whole quire of paper concerning these
Visions of his, and many a silie Papist both be hither and beyond the seas,
have been bobbed with the strange reports of these counterfeit Revelatio^s, and
perhaps have believed them as they would do their Creed. Many examples more in
this kind might be produced, which may teach men not to be too credulous in
these co^ceits, which evermore originally come upon the report of one person,
for he it is who must tell his own dream or Vision, and easy it is for some
reporters themselves to be deluded by the Devil: as easy for some other to
delude as many as will give credit unto them. Then since both Divinity and
humanity do show this to be a matter most suspecte, let Papists accept this
for a weak reason of their unsound belief: we for our parts will have
nothing to do with it.

9 And yet it is not amiss, before the shutting up of this Chap. to observe,
that they are always beaten with their own rod. For if we may attribute any
thing to those, who^ in the last ages they hold for the greatest Prophets, and
most authe^tical seers of Visio^s, Popery is al naught. For we sca^t find any
who in a general speech is reported to have had that gift, but a great part
of his other talk has bin against the Papacy and Clergy thereof. Catalog.
^estium ve^at. lib: 15:
Hildegardis was by many held to be a Prophetisse, and she did not only tax
the lewd life of the Romish Priests, but their neglect of Ecclesiastical duty,
and their horrible destroying of the Church of God. Among other words she has
these: The^ the meter of the Apostolic honor shall be divided, because no
religion shall be found in the Apostolicalorder, and for that cause shall they
lightly esteem the dignity of that name, and shall set up unto themselves other
me^ and Archbishops: so that the keeper of the sea Apostolik at that time by
the diminishing of his honor shall scant have Rome and a few things adjoining
under his miter. About the same time also which is more the^ 400. years agone,
lived Ibide^.
Mech^hildis reputed al so for a Prophetisse. And she speaking of co^tentio^s
which should be in Germany for religion, adds that the^ the church of Rome,
should wholly apostate openly from the faith of Christ, and that there should
remain in Germany a poor and afflicted company who should serve God
religiously and purely. There was also one Ibidem.
Elizabeth a maiden and attendant on Hildegardis, who is recorded to have such
predictions and invectiues against the Romanists. The Prophecies of Ioachimus
Abbas, and Anselmus termed Episcopus Marsicanus, are lately An. 1589:
put out at Venice by Paschalinus Regiselmus, and there is the Pope still
pictured in his triple crown, and he has part, nay seems to be the chief
in all the iniquity there intended. Brigit who lived about the year 1370. is by
our Papists held for a famous Prophetisse, and by the Pope she is Canonized
for a Saint. In her Catalogs lib. 18.
Revelations, she calls the Pope a killer of souls, the disperser and tearer
of the sheep of Jesus Christ. She says that he is more abominable then the
Jews, more cruel then Judas, more vui^st then Pelate, worse and viler then
Lucifer himself. That the seat of the Pope shall be drowned in the deep like
a heavy stone. That those who sit with him shall be burned in fire of brimstone
which is not to be quenched. Thus did she and many other scowre the Church of
Rome, which as it seems, Doctor Hill knevve well enough, and therefore
suppressed the names of these, least he should be thought to mention those who
flattered the Popedom. Savanorola by the confession of impartial Judges was a
man who fore-prophecied many things. He fore-tolde the coming of Charles the
8. the French King into Italy, and how there he should prevail. Philippus De
bello Neapolita^. lib. 3.
Comineus spoke with him in person, at such time as the Venetians had thought
with their army to have entercepted Charles returning home-ward with no great
forces. And Comineus says of hi that himself co^mi^g new from the he^ch army,
yet was by him informed of many things there do^e, Savanorola knowing the^
better being abse^t, the^ he did who was present And he told Comineus that
albeit Charles his master were hardly laid to by the Venetia^s, yet he should
escape with safety: only his fault was that by the sword he did not reform and
redress the abuses of the Clergy at Rome. In brief, he still preached against
the Romanists and wrote diverse things excellently and learnedly which yet
appear. But being such a scourge unto them, the Pope Gui^iard hist. lib. 3.
excommunicated him, and forbad him to preach: whereunto when he assented not,
they caused a tumult to be raised in the City, apprehended him and imprisoned
him, put him to torture, and gave out such a confession of his as they listed,
but in the end they burnt him, where with singular patience he yielded his
body to the fire, and his soul to God Almighty. From all these and many more I
draw this Conclusion, contrary to that of my adversary before urged, That if
such as have been esteemed for Prophets in this last age, have had any such
gift indeed, and any matter may be built on them, then the Church of Rome is a
strumpet, full of corruptions, pollutions, abominations, as the very den of
Antichrist. And so rest they with their Visions, and sit they with their
Prophecies.


THE EIGHTH REASON. Scriptures.
T. HILL. NEither may here the Protestant reply and say, that the Papists
build upon Miracles, Uisions, Prophecies and upon such like, but not upon the
UUorde; for all that they allege, are most agreeable to the word of God.
Neither do they teach any doctrine but such as is derived out of the holy
Bible.


G. ABBOT. HOw you build upon the Scriptures, and what account you make of the
word of God, we need no better man to declare then your self, who do evidently
show to all the world, in what reverende esteem you have the sacred Oracles
of the Lords book, when you think this to be a fit place to speak of the
Scriptures, after your false imputed name of Catholics, your Uanity and
Cousening, your Perverting of Consciences, your lying Miracles, and other your
not base, but most base and refuse stuff. And as you do place it worthily, so
you insist upon it largely, in this your whole Pamphlet consisting of an 187.
Pages, allowing not full out one leaf unto that, which is the Luke 10: 42
Unum necessarium, the sole anchor of our hope, the foundation of our
confidence, the joy of our hearts. Wherein you do as your graund Captains do
teach you, who use but mean speeches concerning this word of God, yea and your
Conventicle of Session: 4.
Trent wickedly equalling and making of the same authority the traditions of
men with the written Scripture; which sacrilegious impiety and impure
blasphemy, while your auditors do not perceive and decline, they show
themselves not only blinded but bewitched with the cup of the Apoc: 17: 21
whores enchantments. And even with the like reverence you do use it here, as
it were casting it into an odd corner, and naming it no otherwise, but as to
fill up your number, so skirting by it, or skipping over it as the Pli: l. 8.
40 Solin: c: 25
dogs in Egypt do by the river Nilus, where they dare not stand and drink, but
lap as they run, and run as they lap for fear of a Crocodile. So when you
come to the Scripture, you will stand to nothing, but touch and go, for fear
least some thing should here start out, which should devour you and your
Popery. If you had been a man of metal, if there had been ought in the Bible
assuredly making for you, you should from thence have cleared some question, as
the sacrifice of your Mass, the Supremacy of your Pope, the lawfulnes of your
Priesthood, or one thing or another questioned and controversed, and not have
dealt by it, as one would handle thorns, or take a coal of fire in his hand,
being glad when he is first rid of it. Well, we must bear with you for your
brevity in this Chapter: but for the manner of this your placing, I cannot
choose but smile, to think how you were troubled in this your short
consultation, whither you should now be beholding to Campian, or to your old
Master Bristow: for borrow needs you must: that is your profession: and Bristow
you must not leave, no not for a little moment, especially since Motiv: 8^
somewhere he has these very matters: And yet notwithstanding some variety of
stealing would do well: not all out of Bristowe. The resolution then grew that
Campians concisenesse was fitter here for your humor, and his very words you
would use. But to set them as the Came. Rat. (...).
Jesuit did, in the forefront of your book, were to lay your self too open;
for some body might have taken his book, and first read it out of Latin, and
then your first Chapter if it had been your first Chapter, and read it in
English. To satisfy both then, you took this honest course, that the words
should be Campians, and the Method should be Bristowes, you placing the
treatise of the Scripture behind, as worthy Bristow had done before you. This
shows that you have a pretty wit of your own. To come now to the matter, our
reply is in truth as you say, that the sandy foundation of all your rotten
building does rest upon vncertaineties, your miracles are most fained, your
visions are forged, your Prophecies false, all of them out of date, no
inforcement of verity to be gathered from them. And on the otherside, you have
little acquaintance with the word of God, neither by your good wills do you
desire it. That which you do, you are urged unto by us, and then you wrest,
you wring, you strain, you stretch, to make some show for that, which
originally is drawn from your humane inventions. And when it is once set up,
then you labor to have some color to warrant it, or at least to make some
gloss how simple folk may take it for good payment. Your works of
supererogation, whereby a man may do more then deserve heaven for himself,
and have somewhat to spare for other, your dispensatio^ of the treasure of your
Church by the Indulgences of your Pope, your Canonizing of Saints, your
creating of Lumbus, your forging of Purgatory, and a multitude more or rabble
rather of vpstart novelties since the age of the Apostles, are derived from the
tricks of their wit, who have made their purse, their belly, and their worldly
pompous honor to be their God, their summu^ and solum bonu^. As for the sacred
word, from thence they are not taken; unless you mean that they be so derived
out of the holy Bible, as that they were never in it; and so we deny not, but
your superstition may be taken out of it. But were these controversed matters
but probably to be collected out of the sacred Oracles, you would not run to
such beggarly shifts, as in this whole Pamphlet of yours, you are driven unto.
They must make a show with Counters, and carry about the^ a purse full stuffed
with them, who want gold and silver, and yet cannot for bear, but they will be
craking.


T. HILL. ANd for the maintaining thereof, they are not compelled to deny
certain parts of Gods holy Book, as the Protestants and their Prede* Aug.
lib. 28* con faust c: 2. and de vtil. cred. cap. 3.
cessours, heretics, have been enforced to do. The Manichees for that their
heresies were so manifestly confuted by the Gospel of Saint Matthew, and by
the Acts of the Apostles, as they sold coin no answer, nor other shift,
they denied them to be Scripture. The Ebionites because the Epistles of Saint
Paul disproved most plainly Circumcision, which they maintained, denied them
to be Scripture. Luther rejected the Epistle of S. James, because it was so
plain against the doctrine of only faith. His offspring refused the Books of
Tobias, of Ecclesiasticus, of the Machabees and of some others, because in them
is plainly taught the Doctrine of the custody of Angels, of Free Will, of
Prayer for the Faithful Souls departed, and of Prayer to Saints, all which
they deny, and therefore must they needs deny those parts of the holy Bible.


G. ABBOT. 2 YOu charge us with denying of some parts of Gods holy book, as
not making for us: and certainly we should repute our selves men impious and
irreligious, if we took any thing away from that which is so absolute, that
it may well be compared to a Circle, where if any thing be added, it makes a
balke, if any thing be subtracted, it makes a bracke. We do right well know,
that he who takes away ought from the word of the everlasting God, the Lord
shall take away his Apoc. 22. 19.
portion out of the book of life, (for the speech may be applied to the whole
Scripture as well as to S. John's Revelation) But we will you to remember the
other part of the holy Ghosts divisio^, that God shall add the Verse. 18.
plagues written in that book, to him who adds ought to the book of the Lord.
When therefore you labor to establish that for authe^tical, which is not
inspired from the holy Ghost, but a matter seperat and seiunct, you may justly
fear least you incur that peril, which you would post of to us. What heretics
have done against the Divine volume, we dislike and detest as well as you. We
condemn it in the August de vtilit. credend cap. 2: and 3:
Manichees that they accepted not the old Testament; that they questioned the
Gospel of Saint Matthew as not being that which S. Matthew wrote, because it
manifestly showed that Christ was born a man, which they denied; that they
extenuated the authority of the Acts of the Apost. as being much corrupted. For
this their-sacrilegious attempt, we ce^sure the^ as deep ly, and co^de^ne the^
as much as you do. The like mind we do carry of the Euse: Eccl. Hist* l: 3: 21:
Ebionits, whose opinions spru^g up in the time of the Eva^g. S. John, and they
would gladly have retained circu^cisio^ still, as being a necessary duty of the
Law, and that which Christ and his Apostles had received in their own persons.
And because S. Paul's Epistles had so directly oppugned this their conceit, as
also had showed the whole ceremonial law to be exti^guished, they would clean
have expu^ged the^ out of the Cano^. We repute these for evil heretics, and we
accept of all the books of the old Testament, which can be proved to be the
Testament, and we question nothing of the New. Only as you would not like, if
unto the new Testament the Gospel of Nicodemus, or Hermes his Apocriphal
Pastor should be sewed, so we cannot endure that those tracts should be reputed
part of the Hebrews Cano^, which the Jews never knew. These 2. Periods of the
Manichees and Ebionits, as also the 2. next touchi^g Luther and his of-spri^g,
you have translated word for word out of Ca^pia^s first Reason. And if there
had bin in you grace, and an indifferent mi^d, you might also have seen this
sla^der concerning Luther Gul. Wh^taken Resp. ad Ration. Campiani^
answered. But your meaning is to be wilfully blind. There is nothing more
false then thar Luther rejected the Epistle of James. He acknowledged it as
Scripture, and cited it as he did other books. And how sha^fully was Ca^pian
put to his plu^ges, when havi^g Luthers works laid before him, and being bid
turn to that place, where Luther so depressed and vilefied that Epistle, he
could find no such thing, but said it was so in a copy of Luthers works which
was at Prage in the Emperors Library. And if any had sought it there, then the
book had been removed to some other place, as the Munsten Cosmogr: l: 2:
tree which Aeneas Silvius says was sought in diverse countries, and still
missed; that tree I mean whose leaves falli^g into the river, were turned into
Barnacles. You might do well in behalf of Campian to show some one of Luthers
followers in Germany, De^marke or elsewhere, who is so opposite to S. James
his Epistle: for those whom some call the Rigidi Lutherani, do sink nothing
which he held. Since the^ both they and we, and al who profess the reformed
Religion, do account it Canonical, it is but an idle speculation to make that
objection. And why should Luther fly that book as crossing the doctrine of
only faith, since all other who maintain that doctrine, do accept of that Epi.
also. S. James does not thwart that which S. Paul had taught: for the spirit of
God is not contrary to it self, and if there be any difficulty in one Iac: 2:
24:
single text of that Epistle, it is to be explicated out of other places, which
are more clear and open. S. Paul the^ in his Epistles to the Romans and
Galathia^s, has so manifested that point of Justification by faith alone, that
he who without prejudice will read the text, shall never need any Co^mentary. It
is so plain that diverse Papists looking into that, and laying aside false and
perverted glosses, have embraced that doctrine. Sleidan. l: 21:
Vergerius who intended to write against Luther in that Argument, was by
traversing of it, caught himself. Nay Ferus and Albertus Pighius who otherwise
is a gross Papist, have subscribed unto it. And whereas our Papists object,
that S. Paul saying that a man is justified without the works of the law, does
mean nothing else but the ceremonial law; that is long since refuted and
resolved by S. Aug: de spirit. and liter, cap, 14:
Auste^ otherwise. The same father also does notably show, that there is no
contrariety betvveene the two In 83, quaest, c. 76.
Apostles; for that when S. James does say that a man is justified by works, he
does no more cross S. Paul, then the same Apostle does cross himself Romans
2. 13.
saying, The hearers of the Law are not righteous before God: but the doers
of the Law shall be justified. That it is most true which S. Paul has, that
a man is justified by faith without works, because no works done before
believing, help toward justification: but that in believing actually a man is
reputed just before God, and that if he die immediately, having no time to
work, yet he by believing is justified: Notwithstanding that if he live he
ought to bring forth good fruit. His conclusion is that S. Paul does speak of
works going before faith, and S. James speaks of works following that faith
which has justified. And a right belief will not be without them, if it have
time to show it self. I might here add how frequent a thing it is, with
diverse Doctors of the Church, to use the word of only faith in speaking of
our Justification; but of that hereafter. The^ to show that neither Luther nor
we need fear the Epistle of S. James, as crossing our other doctrine, we say
that S. Paul does speak of acceptatio^ to be just, S. James intends a
declaration that we are justified: the one beats on that before God, where
the settled apprehension of faith prevails, which notwithstanding will not be
without his convenient fruit; the other mentions that before men, who know
not the heart, but must judge of that which is external, and therefore it is
rightly said by the Apostle, in their persons, (...), 2. 18.
Show me thr faith out of th^e own works.

3 Whom you mean by the offspring of Luther we cannot telt but if al who
refuse those books be termed his offspring, his children shall be a thousand
years elder then himself; for many of the most ancient fathers did disclaim
the books of Tobias, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees for being Canonical. and
if the rule of Hist, Ecol, lib, 3. 19,
Eusebius he good, (as no wise man will deny it), that the Canonical volumes may
be distiguished from the Apocryphal and suppositious, by the judgment of the
church, by the style, by the matter and purpose of the books, they had great
reason not to acknowledge the^; for the Church uniformly did never admit the^,
and they are not written in the language of the Jews, to who^ Romans 3, 2.
were committed the Oracles of God, and therefore if they were part of Gods
Oracles before the coming of Christ, these Jews should have admitted them and
retained them: which they did not: and the matter of them is but mean and
ignoble in comparion of the undoubted Scripture. What a doubtful narration is
that in Cap. 6. 17
Tobias, that a spirit should smell a perfume, (when spirits have no flesh and
bones, by the testimony of Luc: 24. 39
Christ himself, and co^seque^tly no organes of sc^e) and that the heart and
liver of a fish should drive away the Devil? Which if it were so, S. Peter was
much overseene, when he taught us how to repulse Satan, by 1 Pet. 5: 9.
resisting him being steadfast in the faith. For it had bin an easier way to
have said, get you the heart and liver of such a fish, and make a perfume with
it, and he dares not come nigh you. And this would well have beseemed S. Peter
to set men to catch such fish, in remembrance of his own occupatio^, since
himself was a fisher. But what if young Toby had met with such a spirit, as
those were of whom Christ says, Matthew. 17. 21.
This kind goes not out but by fasting and prayer? The treatise called
Ecclesiasticus, if for any cause it should come into the Canon, it must be for
Salomons sake, whom many would have to be the author of it. But the Preface
it self remains, confessing it to be the work of Jesus Sirachs son, and
of another Jesus his grande-father: and the book me^tioneth Cap: 48. and 46.
Elias, Ezechias, Josias, Jeremy and diverse other, who lived hundreds of
years after Solomon. And how questionable a narration is that in it, that Cap
46. 20:
Samuel should tell of Saules death after his own burial, which as diverse
learned men think, is a report to be believed in Necroma^cy rather the^ in
Divinity. For if the souls of the righteous being departed, be in the hand of
God, which our Romanists must confess out of the book of Cap: 3. 1:
Wisdom, and we do believe out of the saying of David Psalm 31. 5.
Into thine hand I commend my spirit, if those who die in the Lord, Apoc: 14:
13:
do rest from their labors, how shall we suppose that the soul of such an
excellent Prophet as Samuel was, might be at the command of so base and vile a
witch, to be fetched from heaven at her pleasure? Or what rest shall other
faithful men and women be imagined to have after this life, if Necromancers,
Witches and Coniurers have such power over them? Albeit therefore that some of
the ancient speaking according to the 1. Sam: 2^: 15:
letter of the text, do name him who appeared, Samuel, because he came up in
the likeness of Samuel, as Epistol. 80.
Basile when he says that the VVitch raised Samuel from the dead, and some
other not sifting the point do affirm it to be the soul of Samuel
himself, as Antiquit. 6. 15
Josephus the lewe, and Dialog (...) Tryphon:
Justinius Martyr, yet other more exactly looking into it, tell us otherwise, as
S. Austen when he calls that which appeered De doctr. Christ lib. 24 23.
the image of Samuel, and especially Basile who elsewhere more advisedly
pronounces that Basil in (...) cap 8.
they were Devils, which hissing with their voice did transform themselves
into the habit and person of Samuel. Yea Chron l 1:
Genebrard himself makes a great doubt whither it were Samuel or no, and
cites Tertullian and diverse other of the Ancients resolving the contrary. As
for the books of Machabees there be many things in them, that no man can
maintain (and therefore no part of them is so much as read in our Church) as
that 1. Match. 1. 7:
Alexander parted his kingdom among his servants while he was alive, that the
Cap 8 7.
Romans took the great Antiochus alive, that they took from him Cap. 8. 8.
India, and Media, and Lydia, and gave them to King Eumenes: that they had a
Senate consisting of Verse. 15.
three hundred and twenty men who consulted daily: that they yearly committed
their Verse. 16.
government to one man, whom all obeyed; and that there was no hatred or envy
amongst them. Also it will never be made hang together that Judas should be
alive in the 2: Math 1. 10.
hundred fo^escore and eight year, and yet he should be slain in the 1 Mac 9.
3.
hundred fifty and two year. Neither that Antiochus should 1 Mac. 6. 8:
die in his bed for grief and sorrow, and in another place should be slain in
the temple of 2. Match: 1: 13. 16.
Nanea, and there have his head and the heads of his company cut of, and in a
third Cap. 9: 28:
passage should die a miserable death in a strange country among the
mountains, and that should be only by the Dan 8. 25.
hand of God, and without any help of man. Nor that 2. Match 1. 18.
Nehemias should build the Temple and the altar at Jerusalem, when indeed
they were Ezr. 313. and cap 6: 15:
builte before his coming up; nor that it is to be found in the works of
2. Mac: 2: 1:
Jeremy the Prophet, that he commanded the people who were led away
captive, to take fire with the^. Moreover it were worth the knowing, how by
good Divinity the fact of Razias Cap. 14: 42:
murdering himself may any wise be commended. And whether such as were the
pen-me^ of the holy Ghost, do use to crave pardon of their infirmity and
insufficie^ty, in delivering that which is to be named Canonical Scripture,
which the Cap: 15: 39
author of the later book of the Machabees does. Many more such blemishes are
to be found in these tracts, which evidently show that no doctrine of
infallible verity can be grounded upon them: but where they have ought agreeing
with the Canonical Scriptures they may be accepted, because they consent with
the other; where they have ought disagreeing, that same cannot be warranted
because it is in these Apocriphal to be found, but it is to be repudiated as
the error of a man, since a greater, (God himself who speaks in his own
word,) does impugn it.

4 Now for the points of doctrine which you would urge out of these books,
thus we say. That Angels are deputed to safeguard Gods elect we doubt not; for
the Psalm: 34: 7:
Angel of the Lord pitchethrou^d about the^ that fear him, and delivers
the^, and those who^ the 2: Reg: 6. 17:
servant of Elizeus saw, do testify so far, neither do we so much as call it
into question, but that they are Hebr. 1. 14,
ministering spirits, sent and employed in messages, as the Luc, 1, 26,
Angel Gabriel was to the Virgin Mary, and when and where otherwise it pleases
God. But what can our Papists collect hence? That they are to be prayed unto,
or that they are to be worshipped? We find no warrant any where for the former:
and they themselves refuse the latter. I Apoc. 19: 10,
am one of thy fellow servaunts says the Angel to John, Worship God. Or can
they prove that an Angel does so sensibly, and serviceably wait on men, as
this mentioned in Tobias is reported to do? And if they could, what does it
cross any point in our religion, since al must be done by the Lords
appointment, and the glory must be given unto him? As for free will in that
sense which the Church of Rome does teach it, we deny. Neither does the text of
Ecclesiasticus Eccle. 15, 15,
necessarily enforce it, being as fit to be understood only of Adam in his
first creation, as otherwise. And the words of this writer being soberly taken,
may carry no other sense then what is to be found in undoubted books of Deuteronomy:
30, 19,
Scripture; which textes notwithstanding we deny not, but by comparing place
to place give them their right exposition. We acknovvledge the freedom of
ma^s heart to do evil; as also that by the Spirit of God the will of the
regenerate is freed to do good; but this is not so much liberum as liberatum
arbitrium not so much a will free, as freed, nothing being in the power of man
himself, but all bestowed by God. But concerning this we shall speak more
largly hereafter. The place of the 2. Mac: 12 42^
Machabees is too weak, to prove prayer for faithful souls lying in
Purgatory to be lawful. The text it self in the Original is so perplexe,
that an evident and certain sense cannot be made of the words. And who does not
see there, that they were not faithful persons, but rather gross sinners which
were slain, and such as may be thought to have received a just judgment from
God, both on body and foul, for meddling with the Anathema or excommunicate
thing? Judas therefore who was a man so experienced in the law of Moses, could
not be so simple as to send an offering, or to cause prayers to be made for the
souls of them who were thus flaine, (especially when all offerings were
prescribed in the Leviticall law, but there was none immediately concerning the
persons of dead men, but all for the living:) this therefore was the
misse-conceite of the author, writing therein his own fancy, rather then the
fact of Judas. For that worthy man well knew, that the atonement and
reconciliation was to be made, for the rest of the people and army which lived,
who might smart in and for their fellows sin, as their forefathers had done
for the Joshua. 7. 5.
transgression of Achan. The offering then and prayer at Jerusalem was to
prevent this, and not for the souls of them who dyed in their sin, and were
not godly persons as the words of the Author may seem to import. That men
should pray to Saints, I find nothing in these treatises. Only somewhat there
is that Mac. 15: 12 14.
Onias and Jeremy did pray for the whole people of the Jews. And what will you
infer upon these? You might understand, that we deny not, that the Saints in
heaven do pray in general for the good of the Church: but that they in
particular, know our wants, hear our callings, understand our wishes, that
remains for you to prove. Besides you might perceive that this was a Vision,
wherein things are represented otherwise then really they are, as it was with
S. Peter, who conceived that a Act: 10. 11
sheet full of all clean and unclean beasts was let down unto him, which
nevertheless I trust you will not say was so indeed. So that from the words
and circumstances of a Vision, you can concludingly evince no more, then from
the words and circumstances of a P^rable: and that is little: but from the end,
use, and scope of both, you may to good purpose collect somewhat. And yet
farther without impiety it may be doubted whither the General here did not use
a trick of war, which Alexander and other Graund leaders have experimented,
that is to encourage men by a dream artificially fained and reported, the
benefit whereof in worldly men's judgment is such, that Ca: 20: 146
Leo Imperator in his military precepts has this for one, Thou shall cause in
thy soldiers alacrity to the battle, if on the day of fight thou rising in
the morning, shall say that some dream was sent unto thee from God, which does
incite thee to invade thine enemies, and shows thee some kind of help to
fight. Then if you had your will touching the authority of these controversed
books, you could not make one quarter of the gain by them as you suppose, but
since they are not of the right stamp, we may not allow the^ to you. Be the
matter in the^ for us or against us, we may not authorize those for Authentike
Scripture, which God has not so authorized. In the 2. of the Machabees there
is a place against Limbus Patru^, where one of the seven brethren says, Cap 7:
36
My brethren that have suffered a little pain, are now under the divine
covenant of everlasting life, that is to say, at that very time inioying it,
and in possession of it, for if it be understood but of the way thither, the
mother and brother yet remaining alive, were also under that covenant of
assured hope: but we account not of this testimony, neither do we urge it,
because the book whence it is taken, is Apocryphal.


T. HILL. FOr Heretics ever framed the Bible to their opinions, changing,
wresting, paring, and sometimes flatly rejecting al which made over-plainly
against such Doctrine as they devised, and so do most impudently the
Protestants now. Whereas the Catholics ever squared their Doctrine by the line
and the level of the Word of her Spouse, and therefore never had cause to
reject the least jot of the holy Bible, and at one word the Catholics
follow the Bible, but the Protestants force the Bible to follow them.


G. ABBOT. 5 WHat heretics do to the Bible, or how they entreat it, we respect
not, neither does it make ought against us, til you have first proved us to be
heretics. Nay look you well to it, whither you do not seclude us from being
heretics; since we do not change, wrest, and pare the Bible. We allow al
Scripture to be Scripture, we wre^ch nothing, we alter nothing, but avow that
our collections and interpretations, are consonant to other places of Gods
sacred word, and in all points material are to be warranted out of some, or
many of the ancient fathers of the Primitive Church, which when any of you
shall iumpe upon, we never refuse to put in trial with you. Now that you
Pseudo-Catholiks do that indeed, wherewith you wrongfully charge us, how can you
deny, when you admit for Co^c: Triden* Sess: 4^
authentical no copy nor translation of the Scripture, but the vulgar Latin,
which has diverse flawes and gaps in it, much being missing which is in the
Original Hebrew and Greek? When almost in all your Vaux Catechi. Horae
beatissim. Virginis.
Catechismes and other books you leave out the second Commandment touching
Images, as too plainly co^vincing your idolatrous carved and painted stuff in
Churches. So when in the Eucharist you take the Cup from the Co^c: Constat.
Sess 13
people, contrary to Christ's institution, and the relation of the form of that
Sacrament by S. Paul, expou^ding Mat: 26. 27
Drink you all of this, to be meant of the Clergy only, how do you wrest and
pare? As when you say, that your Mass is a daily real sacrifice, whereas the
Heb: 7: 27: cap: 10: 18*
Author to the Hebrews so copiously disputes, that there is no more sacrifice
for fin. Briefly you do little better then take away all the Books of the
Bible, when for so many years together you willingly suffered not the laity to
look into them: And how do you pervert the Scripture to confirm that abuse,
as when In Apolog.
Staphilus directly applies to that purpose the text, Mat: 7: 6:
Give not that which is holy unto dogs, so accounting the laity to be no better
then dogs and swine. Yea your great Rabbis, Peter Lib: 3: Distinct: 25
Lombard the Master of the Sentences, and Thomas of Aquin: 2.
Aquine can find so much in that place of Job, (...): art: 6.
The Oxen were plovving, and the Asses were feeding in their places, taking the
oxen plovving to signify the Priests reading the Scripture, and the Asses
feeding Job* 1. 14.
to be the people not troubling their heads with such matters; but contenting
themselves to believe in gross, as the Church and Clergy do believe, Are not
these sweet men, and do they not from dogs and swine, and Oxen and Asses, prove
their matters handsomely? Thus you square your doctrine by the level of the
Babilonish harlot, and no otherwise: following the Bible verily as many in
London do follow the Law, when they go to Westminster after the Judges who know
much law, but their followers study and understand little of it. So you
sometimes let the Bible stand in your Libraries or studies before you, but you
look little in it, and take very small acquaintance of it; and when any thing
comes to be questioned, you had leifer be tried by any thing then that, and
for traditions you will strive as for your soul, knowing they must do the deed
in upholding your Popery, or else al will to the ground; for in the Scripture it
has no footing. But we contrariwise do teach our people to carry with them
Gods book, to read it and meditate on it, to try our teachi^gs thereby, and not
to force the exposition thereof to their own humor, but to the purpose of the
holy Ghost. And so I leave you, and this your slander.

6 Here to proceed a little farther in the matter of this Motive; we are charged
(as the Reader does see) to offer injury to the scriptures, in denying those to
be Canonical who^ the Romanists do grace with that name. But what is our
fault? Is it that we do not allow all that to be of undoubted authority, which
is within the common volumes of the Bible? Yea that is it, as M. Bristow and
his fellows belike would say. We answer that if this be it, the Church of Rome
it self is gilty of that crime. For are there not 2. books which are commonly
called the 3. and 4. of Esdras, which themselves evermore co^prise within their
Bibles, and yet repute not Canonical? No better trial of this then by the
Session* 4^
Council of Trent, which reckoning up the sacred. Volumes does with those
which are not controversed, yea with those which are past controversy, join
Tobias, ^dith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus and the two books of the Machabees, but
of these of Esdras not a word. Here then by the judgment of that renoumed
Synod, (which curleth as many as join not with it) some tractes in the Bible
are now as good as leaped out of the Bible. This fact of theirs will warrant our
proceedings; since by the same reason wherefore they seclude some, may more be
shut out, if they do deserve it. Gentle Genebrard saw this well, and therefore he
was desirous, although it were but by the head and shoulders, to have pulled in
these two books again. Lib. 2: Chron: An. 3638. and postea:
He therefore more then once is vehement for them, and would make us believe,
that although in the first Synod which long since did canonize the books of
holy writ, they were not admitted, yet in a later Synod the Canon was made
larger. And reasons for this he makes show to give. But it is too late
Genebrard; you come after the fair. The Council which cannot err has shut
them out of doors: the Pope has ratified their Decree, and therefore you lose
your labor; and you are but one man against so many Fathers; therefore best pull
in your horns. For as with your own side you are like to gain nothing, so
otherwise you will pull an old house on your head, when by your example you
teach us, that a private man may question, yea conclude against that which your
Counsels have determined. Where by the way, let not the simple and unlearned
Christian wonder, that in this best book the Bible, there should be any thing
which is not properly a member of it; for we therein as also in reading some
part of them publicly, do but imitate the custom of the most ancient and
purest Zanch. in Observat: in cap. 1^ Confession:
Churches, joining that with Gods most sacred word, which universally has bin
joined among Christians, since almost the eldest times, and is not refused by
the most reformed Churches at this day; but we distinguish these writings from
the divine volumes, and note them by the name or appellation of Apocripha, as
hidden in comparison of the bright light of the other, which may well endure the
light and sunshine. And by a little Preface before those doubted books as
also by the Articles of Religion agreed on in Co^vocation, An. 1562. we teach
what opinion the Church has of them; that they are not received to be
publicly expounded, nor to confirm matters of doctrine, but only as they
consent with the other which are Canonical; or only as the writings of some
godly men, which may serve to give light to the history, or contain some not
unprofitable instructions touching good manners. And these things in our
Sermons and writings we do feque^tly notify. So that this indifferent course
being held, there is no just cause of offense give^ either to the weak
believer, or to the malicious and clamorous adversory; that being done which
anciently in the best Christian Churches was done, and yet the people be taught
but how and in what sense it is done. Nay, our Church has been so careful
for giving any way just occasion of scandale in this matter, that it
permits the Minister to read in steed of any of these Apocriphal Chapters,
other Canonical lessons upon the Sun-daies and Holy Days, and therefore much
more upon the working-daies, as he in his wisdom and judgment shall see fit,
requiring of him prudence and discretion in that behalf. Which appears in
the Second Tome of Homilies, set out by public An. 1563.
authority almost in the beginning of her late Majesty's reign. For there in
the An admonition to al Ministers Ecclesiastical.
Preface this advertisement being given, to all Ministers, For that the LORD
does require of his servant whom be has set over his household, to shevve
both faithfulness and prudence in his office etc. some things are advised unto
him touching his duty, but lastly this is subnected and subioyned, And where
it may so chance some one or other Chapter of the old Testament to fall in
order to be read upon the Sundaies or Holy Days, which were better to be
changed with some other of the New Testament, of more edification, it shall
be well done to spend your time to consider well of such Chapters before
hand, whereby your prudence and diligence in your office may appear, so that
your people may have cause to glorify GOD for you, and be the readier to
embrace your labors, to your better commendation, to the discharge of your
consciences and their own. Which point being well considered, avoideth all
blame from the Church of England, even in the eyes of them that would seem
most quicke-sighted, it being not only permitted to the Minister, but also
commended in him, if vvisely and quietly he do read Canonical Scripture
where the Apocryphal upon good judgment seems not so fit, or any Chapter
of the Canonical may be conceived not to have in it so much edification
before the simple, as some other part of the same Canonical may be thought to
have. For the words will very well carry both these.

7 Well then, if there be reasons why the Church of Rome does shut out from
the Canon these books of Esdras, and yet they are printed and bound up with
all their ordinary Bibles, if the same or such like exceptions may be taken,
against Judith, Tobias, and the rest, is there not as great reason that they
also should be secluded from the Canonical, albeit they remain in the volume
of the Bible? The exceptions against all these controversed writings are many,
but I will reduce them briefly to these three plain heads, which I mean to
touch. First the matter of the books of Esdras is slight and vain, without
majesty, and unworthy the holy and sacred spirit of God. Secondly these tracts
are not to be found in the Canon of the old, that is, the Jewish Church. And
thirdly in the computation of Christians they are also rejected. If we lay
these lines and rules to the rest, we shall find them of very little different
quality. For first the matter of them is not coherent with the rest of the
undoubted scripture. In Cap: 5. 12
Tobias, the Angel vtteteth somewhat of himself, which cannot literally be
avoided: when he says to old Tobias, I am of the kinredos Azarias, and Ananias
the great, and of thy brethren. So, it is a narration worthy at the least to be
pawsed upon, that the Cap: 6: 13:
seven husbands of Sara should be killed by an evil spirit, the first night of
their marriage. Of the heart and liver of the fish I have spoken before? Is it
not a likely matter that Cap: 8. 9^
Raguel would make a grave for him, whom the day before he so advisedly took
for his son in law, now to bury him before he was dead? They are not matters
to be commended by the pen of the holy Ghost, that Judith should Iud: 10: 3:
4
dress and trick her self more then became a matrone, that so she might
allure Holofernes to wantonness; that she Cap. 12: 12 14: 18: c: 13: 1
should make show as not to deny to lie with him: that she should tell such
evident Ca. 10. 12. 13
untruths to his servants at her first taking, and to Ca: 11: 15: 16
himself afterward. That the Jews should have peace so long in her life Ca.
16. 25.
time, and a great while after her death is a matter improbable, since these
wars of Holofernes, are said to be made in the time of King Cap. 2. 1.
Nabuchodonosor, and while the first temple or Ca: 16: 20
Sanctuary stood. Nay the consultation concerning this war, is reported to be
in the Cap. 2: 1^
eighteenth year of Nabuchodonosor, and we find in the book of the (...):
King: 25 (...):
Kings, that in the nineteenth year of his reign, the same king sent
Nabuzaradan his steward to Jerusalem, who burnt the house of the Lord, the
Kings house and all other of worth in the city. Add to this, that whereas
the writers of the books of Kings and Chronicles, are most exact in setting
down all great wars, and victories of the Jews, from the time of Saul to
the ruinating of the first temple, there is not one word of any person or
circumstance belonging to this war in them, nor in any other undoubted book
of holy writ. Yea Josephus who was a Jew, and with much learning and labor
continues the story of his countrymen, from Adam to his own days, has not
the least mention of this Judith, or ought appertaining to her, which he being
so desirous to co^ceale nothing, which might make for the honor of his people,
would never in such deep oblivion have buried. These things may well be
questioned.

8 The book of Wisdom is by some of the Popish Synagoge, not only accounted to
be Canonical Scripture, but also reputed to be Sixth. sent: Bibli. lib: 1. and
8:
Salomons, if not for the compiling, yet at least for the matter. And the
reason thereof is yielded, because there is in it a prayer in the Sap. 9. 1.
name of Solomon. But Vide Sixth. Senens. vbi supra Bellar de verbo Dei li. 1. 13
learned men of our part, rather hold it to be the work of Philo the Jew,
(which also Bellarmine cites out of S. Hierome) and that not the elder Philo,
but even the same who with some other of his countrymen, was sent in embassage
to the Philo de legate. ad caium:
Emperor Caligula, to entreat him that the Jews might not be forced to
accept of, and to erect his image or statue at Jerusalem, which they held to
be contrary to the law of their Moses. He therefore compiled that work
insinuating to Kings and great men moderation in their government, terror of
torments after this life, and the extreme vanity of Idols, matters most fit for
their present purpose to Caligula; and to give never the less credit to all
his words, he was contented that Salomons name should be used in the prayer
before mentioned, because the name of wise king Solomon was famous over all the
world. And that for this purpose, (...)the book of Wisdom was made, the whole
drift of it may very well purport. Now if there were nothing else in this
treatise to check it self, yet that bloody Sap 4. 3^
sentence and censure against all borne in bastardy, would bewray that it was
written with an humane spirit, and not by divine authority. For although God
be pleased sometimes to lay a temporal punishment upon men so borne (as he also
does on other persons) yet he, who, (so that we serve him and fear him) has
professed of himself to be no Act: 10, 34
respecter of persons; he who blessed Phares being in fornication begotten upon
Gen: 38, 18 29.
Th^ar, so that our Savior Christ's petigree according to the flesh, is Matthew.
1, 3
derived from him; he who forgiveth the parents committing adultery or
fornication, so that they do repent, which was 2, Sam: 12 13:
David's case, adding to his adultery, murder also; he will much more pardon the
child that is innocent in that behalf, and not accessory to the crime of his
nocent parents, and will not lay that fearful judgment upon him, that
neither he nor any who descend from him shall long prosper. The examples are
manifold, how God has powered various temporal blessings on the issue of such
as have been borne in fornication, as we need look no farther then to William
the Conqueror, tightly termed Haillan Histo: lib: 6:
Guillaume le Bastard which notwithstanding ought to encourage none to commit
that fleshly sin, but rather they are to fear and tremble at it, since God
may justly destroy both the bodies and souls of such offen ders. But this I
have spoken to show, that the saying of that author cannot be justified in
Divinity; neither may any man go about to advouch it, since albeit all hope
well, yet few are assured that all things are right in their own birth. Nay
Papists themselves among whom be pretty store of bastards, as well as among
other men, saw this well enough, which caused their Hugo cardinal. Lyra Glo.
interl: and ordinar. D^oni Car thusian:
Commentatours upon that place, to fly the literal sense, and to interpret it
of bastards spiritually meant, that is heretics and such like. Of the books
of Ecclesiasticus and the Machabees I have spoken before, and therefore say no
more of them but this, that S. Austen who thought reasonably well of the books
of the Machabees, yet could not tell how to justify the 2. Match: 14. 42:
commendation of Razias killing himself, and therefore is shrewdly Aug. epist
61.
plunged how to salve all, by allowing the book and disallowing the fact. Since
then the matter of these volumes has such imperfections in it, that it cannot
keep coherence with the vn-questioned Oracles of the sacred Scripture, and the
Spirit of the Almighty is ever uniform, and never dissenting from it self, if
the other books do stand, as not a Mat: 5. 18:
title of them shall perish unto the worlds end, these then must needs fall from
that high credit to which Papists would bring them, and we are not to blame,
when we acknowledge not them for divine, who have no such slampe upon them.

9 Secondly we refer our selves to the judgment, of the lewish Church before
Christ, whose the Scriptures then were, and to whom were commended the Romans
3: 2:
Oracles of God. Among them Luk: 24: 27 44:
Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms, by a general name comprised all*
Scripture, but otherwise for order and memory sake, they reduced al their
books to the two Sixth* Sen: Bibli: lib: 1:
and twenty letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, and as in them they comprehended al
and every particle, which they and we do receive, so they shut out also from
thence, al which they and we now do expunge. No better witness of this, the^
that learned Josephus who ex Contr: Apion. lib. 1*
professo ha^dleth this, and shows the dignity and prerogative of the divine
inspired writings, above all other, the credit of whom he holds doubtful and
unsure. Now in the number of those of sacred authority, he has neither Tobias,
nor Judith, nor any one of their companions. Spec. Aug
S. Austen does witness, that the Jews do not accept Ecclesiasticus and
Wisdom into their Canon; and else where more the^ De^civita: D^il: 18. 36.
cont^ epist: Gauden: l. 2
once, he confesses that they also seclude the books of the Ma chabees. In
Synop.
Athanasius also acknewledgeth, that the books of the old Testament are but 22.
answering to the 22. Hebrew letters, and so says Epiphanius in his treatise,
De mensuris and ponderibus, and Hilary in his Prologe on the Psalms has the
same. Where it is to be observed, that the Jewish reckoning of these 22.
books, is some what different from that ordinary enumeration which we do use,
for they diverse times comprehend two books under one; but yet so it is
exactly, that whatsoever we contain within the compass of the Canon, they
receive the same, and what we do reiecte they also refuse. And that there
is such a secluding of some books by the Jews, Thomas Part: (...) qu* 89,
art: 8:
Aquinas may be a witness, who makes doubt vvhither Ecclesiasticus be
of authority or no, saying, The book of Ecclesiasticus, if it have authority,
because among the Hebrews it is not received in the divine writing^. So that if
we follow the Church before Christ, unto whom most properly the Old
Testament did belong, we must repute them as now we do Apocryphal, and hold
their credit to be suspect. Neither may this be helped, by saying that there
was some later Synod which made a larger Canon among the jews, ^s Chronog.
lib. 2.
Genebrard would say, if he could tell what he said, for that is a fable of
his own inventing, and directly crossing the Council of Trent, as formerly I
have shevved.

10 Thirdly among the Christians there is much more against these writings the^
there is for the^. I will briefly cite what I find among some of the Ancient,
which may seem to help the^, Lib. 3. Epist 9. ad (...).
Cyprian cites somewhat out of Ecclesiasticus under the name of Solomon.
Truth: but it is for the likeness of the sentences there, to those in the
Proverbes, which also has caused some other to take it for Salomons, not
looking exactly into the impossibility of the matter. This therefore is but
weak. Lib. 2. de princip^js.
Orige^ brings somewhat out of the story of the Machabees. Well: but so he
does also in the same place ou: of the Liber Pastoris, which nevertheless no
wise Papist will say to be Canonical. Yet elsewhere he Lib: 10. c. 16 ad Romans
says of that Hermes or Pastor, that it seemed to him a very profitable book,
and as he thinks inspired from God. No man therefore will attribute much to
Origens judgment in that behalf. Stromat^
Clemens Alexandrinus does cite the story of Tobias. But even so does he
me^tio^ the Gospel secundu^ Aegypties; but he names neither the one nor the
other Canonical. Yea but De Tobia cap 1.
Ambrose writi^g upon Tobias, names that a Prophetical book: So he does
indeed, and that is of more force the^ any yet mentioned. But his judgment in
this is not to be warranted, since De bono mortis c. 11.
elsewhere he cites the fourth of Esdras as true Scripture. And we are not
ignorant that his skill was little or nothing in the Hebrew, whereby he might
best have been acquainted with the customs of the jews. In S. Austen I find
little concerning Tobias and Judith; only in the enumeration De doctr. Christ.
l: 2: 8
of the Canonical Scripture; he cites them once, and there he has the books
of the M^chabees, as also Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, which for a likelihood
to the books of Salomons, are called as Salomons. So Ser^: 131* de Te^pore.
elsewhere according to the co^on custom near him, he terms
Ecclesiasticus Salomons book. But deliberately he does explicate that point,
where he says De civit. Dei. la 7: 20.
Custom has obtained, that Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus should be said to be
Salomons for some no small likeness of the speech. But the more learned do
not doubt, that they are not his; notwithstanding the Church especially that of
the West, has long agone received them into authority in the one of whom which
is called the Wisdom of Solomon, the passion of Christ is most openly
prophesied. It was written after the passion of Christ, even in the days of
Caligula, if Philo were the author of it. The^ it is clear by S. Austen that
they were not Salomons work^, but yet he would have the^ to be Canonical. And
that he has also in another place, Speculum Augustini.
The Church of our Savior does receive them, yet the words of him immediately
before are, The Jews do reject from the Canon the book of Wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus. The^ by the confession of this renoumed man, the Jews did
repudiat the^. Yea and that he acknowledges els-where: De curo pro mort.
gerend. c: 15.
The book of Ecclesiast. is spoken against out of the Cano^ of the Hebrews,
because it is not in that. And in his Lib. 2: c. 20
Retractatio^s, The Jews do not receive the book of Wisdom into Canonical
authority. Were it not then to be wished here, that S. Auste^ had remembered
his own rule, which is, De doctr. Chr. l. 2. 8.
that such books principally should be esteemed Canonical, which are so
accepted of al churches; but of such as are in doubt, that they are most to be
approved whom most Churches do allow. Then if the Jewish Church refused these,
and the Eastern Church wholly among the Christians, and great ones also in the
Western provinces, upon whom he seems principally to rely, S. Austen by his
own sentence is much opp^gned and refuted. And of these in the East and West
Church you shall hear anon.

11 Touching the books of the Machabees, as it is said before that S. Austen
reckoned the^ among the Canonical volumes, so De morib. Cath Eccl: cap. 23.
elsewhere he calls the second of them Scripture. In his books Lib. ^8. 36.
Decivitate Dei, he expounds it to be so among Christians, not in the lewish
Synagogue Not the Jews, but the Church does account the books of the Machabees
for Canonical, by reason of the vehement and wonderful suffering of some
Martyrs. And yet the same father in another place speaks much more coldly and
faintly for the^, Contra secu^^. Gaudent, Epist* lib. 2.
For the Scripture which is called the Machabees, the Jews do not account as
the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms, to who^ the Lord does give testimony as
to his witnesses, saying, It must needs be that all things are fulfilled,
which are written concerning me in the Law and in the Prophets and in the
Psalms but it is received of the Church not unprofitably, if it soberly be
read^r beard. This even by his own extenuation carries but small comfort with
it. But there is a work under the name of S. Austen entitled Lib: 2: 34:
De mirabilibus sacrae Scripturae, where by the Author the book of Machabees
is secluded from the Canon. Notwithstanding we do not urge that to be his, but
take it for a counterfeit, and rather yield that S. Austen framing his judgment
to some others opinion in the Western Church, did repute these also
Canonical. Yet here that is to be remembered, which briefly before I touched
concerning S. Ambrose, that this mistaking in this worthy Father grew, by his
want of knowledge in that tongue, wherein the old Testa, was originally
written: by which means he was not acquat^ed with many things appertaining to
the Jewish church; unto who^ since al Scripture before Christ's time was
committed, if these had bin Scripture, they also should have bin commended, and
then they should have bin written in the tongue which they understood, that is
to say in the Hebrew, and not in the Greek, which was a language of the
Gentiles: and as Aut l: 30. 9
Josephus testifies, the Jews did not acco^modate themselves to the learning
of any tongue but their own, which is to be interpreted of the ordinary sort of
the^. But all these controversed writings are only in the Greek* and not in
the Hebrew, which is a maine argument against them, and ruinateth the very
foundation of them. Now that S. Auste^ knew nothing of the Hebrew, he in his
own ^pist. 131.
modesty most ingenuously confesses, as also in another place he acknowledges
that he had but little skill in the Greek, I Cont. liter. Petilian* DO not.
lib. (...):
truly have attained unto very little of the Greek tongue, and almost
nothing. And this made the judgment of S. Austen the more defective in that
behalf. Now as this great Doctor might be overtaken, partly by his ignorance
of the Hebrew, and many circumstances belonging to the Jews, and partly by
leaning to the opinion of some other near about him in the Western Churches
of Italy and Afrike, so it is a matter very probable, that the Co^c. cart. 3.
can 471
Counsel of Carthage induced by the same reasons, and most of all by the
authority of S. Austen, might exorbitate in their Censure, when they put all
these Apocriphal books among the writing^ Canonical. For there assembled none
but such Prelates as were about Carthage, which stands toward the West of
Africa, in comparison of the East Churches. The same causes doubtless moved
Decret* Innoc^n Co^c^js.
Innocentius the Bishop of Rome, and therefore of the Western Church, to put
all these books into the Canon, Tobias excepted of who^ he says nothing. An
error once begone, goes plentifully forward, and is not stayed upon the
sudden. Whence it was that Gelas. Epist. in Concilijs.
Gelasius co^ ming after Innoce^tius, did in this case tread the steps of his
Predecessor, when himself together with seve^ty Bishops, does define al these
writings to be sacred Scripture. Notwithstanding he who will look the Decree of
Gelasius, as Part 1 Did. 15. 4:
Gratian cites it about this matter, shall see that the judgment of Gelasius
concerning the Cano^ is very weak, and little to be regarded. And in those
decrees of his which are found among the Councils the same will appear, when he
makes meaner things the^ these co^troversed books to be of irrefragable
authority. For in the very next Decree to that which I formerly mentioned, he
says thus touching an Epistle of Leo one of his Antecessors in the Roman see,
The text of the Epistle of Pope Leo, if any man shall dispute of eve^ to one
jot, and shall not revere^ly receive it in all things, let him be accursed.
This heat does show, that Gelasius was not too too much advised in his
determinations of this nature, but followed the tract of those that went before
him, without farther ventilating or disquisitio^. And this is the most of that
which by mine own reading, I find in Antiquity making for the justification of
these Apocryphal books. And some such shows there be for the story of
Susanna, and of Bell with the Dragon, which also are not in the Hebrew, and
therefore together with the fragme^ts of the book of Esther, and some other of
equal sort, are by us held to be no Scripture. He who would behold what
farther may be said for these things, let him look De verb^ Dci. lib. 1.
Cardinal Bellarmine where he shall find a many weak citatio^s, agreeing in
substance with those whom before I have named. Now if we look what is against
them, we shall easily discover testimony of greater ponderosity to overturne
them, then is any to support and uphold them.

12 What the Jews did or do esteem of them, you have heard before. Only
take this with you, that (...) l. c. 10.
Bellarmine can say out of S. ^n Prolog. gel^at:
Hierome, that all these books together are rejected by the Hebrews. Now let
us see, what witness the Eastern Church gives of them. Eccl. Hist. lib* 4: 2^:
Eusebius has an Epistle of Melito sometimes Bishop of Sardis in Asia the
lesser, where Melito himself says, that of purpose he traveled to Jerusalem
and into Palestina, to know what were the Canonical Scriptures of the Church
before Christ: and there he sets down all those books which we admit, and
none other. This was very soon after the age wherein the Apostles lived. It is
here to be marked concerning this holy man, as also of all the rest whom I
shall name, that they never had in this business reference to ought, but to
the course of the Jews, accepting their judgment for the books of the old
Testament to be that, whereunto Christians also should cleave. Not long after
that time came Clemens Alexandrinus, of whom Lib. 6: 11:
Eusebius writing says that he cited the books of Wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus in his works, which books says Eusebius, all men do not
receive. And he adds, as it may seem to prevent, least any man upon his
example should attribute much to those two, that he cited also the Epistle of
Barnabas and of Clement. By the judgment then of Eusebius, Wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus at the least are books co^troversed. Soon after came Cap: 19:
Orige^ who lived at Alexandria in Egypt. And he reckons up the Cano^ of the
Jews comprised in two and twenty volu^es, accepting all that which we accept,
and not naming the other, saving the Machabees, which he says to be rejected
of the Jews. That work of Orige^ wherein that was contained is now lost, and
yet in those which remain, he says that the book of Wisdom, De principij^.
lib 4. 3^
is not accounted of authority with all. Athanatius after his time lived also at
Alexandria, and he shows what was held for Canonical, and what was refused.
In Synopsi.
There be Canonical of the old Testament two and twenty books, equal in
number to the Hebrew letters. For among the Hebrews the elements of the
letters are so many. But besides these there be yet of the same old Testament
other books not Canonical, which are read only to the Catechumeus. Here is a
most manifest distinction between the Canonical and the Apocryphal, and a
signification that these inferior volumes were only read, to such as were
novices in the faith, but they were not accounted authentical and
unquestionable. Next I join Epiphanius who lived in Cyprus, and he Haetes 8:
rehearses for Canonical Scriptures of the old Testament the Jews books, and
the other not admitted by them he expungeth for Apocryphal. And in a Haeres: 76:
second place, reckoning up all the divine writings, he shuts out these
Apocryphal fellows, only after all the volumes of the old and new Testament
rehearsed, he names also the Wisedoms of Salomo^ and of the son of Sirach.
He names the^ I say, but after all the right ones; and yet least any man should
take adva^tage of the mencioning of those two, hear him elsewhere, De
mensuris and po^deribus:
Among the Hebrews there are two and twenty books. For th^se two books
written in verse, The Wisdom of Solomon which is called Panaretus, of all
kind of virtue, and the Wisdom of Jesus the son of Syrach, and the nephew
of that Jesus who wrote that Wisdom in Hebrew, so that his nephew
interpreting it did write it in Greek, are profitable and comm^dious, but are
not put into the number of those which are received. How corruptly the^ does
De verbo Dei. l. 1: 14:
Bellarmine deal, who cites Epiphanius as an allower of these two books, and
denies that he spoke against them, otherwise then according to the opinion
and judgment of the Jews. But infinite such base shifts are to be found in
that Cardinal. In the mean time we see, that thus Epiphanius who was very well
skilled in the Hebrew, keeps close both with the Jewish Canon, and the
judgment of the Eastern Church.

13 Gregory Nazianzen has a De veris libris Scriptur*
little treatise in verse, of purpose made to show what are the books of the
old and new Testament inspired from God. He in the old reckons up two and
twenty books, after the Jewish fashion so often above mentioned, and no more.
There he puts al these who^ we acknowledge, and vouchsafes not so much as
to name Tobias or Judith, or any one of those who^ we seclude. And so does he
again De recta educatione
ad Selencum. To all these so famous and learned men of the East and Greek
Church, will I add for the conclusion, the Council of Laodicea, which in the
last Canon. 59
Canon recapitulateth all the Canonical books of the old Testament, but has
not one of those whom the Romanists would gladly thrust upon us. Now is it
not a great sin think you, for us to join in judgment with so many
learned and holy men, with all the good and religious Hebrews, who were before
the time of Christ, withal the Eastern Church without impeachment, for ought
that I can truly find? Are not we worthy to be reviled and revelled at, as
renters, tearers and clippers of the sacred Bible? I do marvel why we should
be Heretics for not admitting of these Apocryphals, since so many Fathers and
reverend Doctors of the Primitive Church, did the same that we do, and yet
heretics they are none. Yea but the Romanists do love to be tried by
themselves. And great reason, The Western Churches, they will say, have ever
been of another mind. Well yet here is but one against two, and then by S.
Austens rule before named, the matter should go on our side. But what if we
find in the Latin Church, as much against it, as for it? Are not our popish
people in a pretty case, for railing upon us as if we were manglers and
de^u^catours of the Bible? Hilary was a Bishop of France, and Prolog su per
(...).
he says that there be two and twenty books of the old scripture. See his
own opinion consonant with that of the Greekish and Jewish Church, unto which
number says he some do add Tobias and Judith, and so make four and twenty.
Mark that they be but some who do add more: and these do add but two, so
that the Machabees and the rest are undoubtedly gone in his judgment, nay I
may say in his mind these two also. But if any man be in this cause to be
heard it is Hierome, whom Lodovicus Vives some-where did truly call miraculum
orbis, the miracle of the world. He lived a good while at Rome, and thought
highly of that Church, and therefore would not hastily break from any thing,
which generally, or with good ground was there received. He travailed into
Palestina, and there spent much of his time, and by long conference with a
Jew, and other his extreme labor, attained to the exact knowledge of the
Hebrevve tongue, and there-vpon as some think translated the whole Bible into
Latin, as others suppose reformed and castigated that version, which is called
the Vulgar; and is now only current among the Papists. Also he made those
learned Commentaries on the Prophets, which labor may truly be said to be the
glory and beauty of all his works, which yet otherwise are renoumed
sufficiently. Then if any man be to be heard in this Argument, it is this
Hierome, and that deservedly. He then speaking of Judith, bestows this
ierke on it, Epist 10:
UUee do read in Judith, notvvithstanding of it please any man to receive
that book. But afterward he goes more generally to work, and Epist: ^06.
shows which are the Canonical books, even those whom we hold for
Canonical; and which are Apocryphal, even the very same that we reckon for
Apocryphal. Neither has he yet done, but continuing in the same judgment,
he shows how and in what manner, the Church reads and accepts those
inferior books, Epist: 115.
As therefore the Church indeed does read the books of Judith, of Tobias and
the Machabees, but does not receive them among the Canonical scriptures, so it
may read also these two volumes, that is Ecclesiasticus and the book of
Wisdom, to the edification of the people, not to confirm the authority of
Ecclesiastical doctrines. What would he have said think you, if he had seen
our Papists bring these books, as the chief pillars of prayer for the dead,
and intercession of Saints, and other such like Apocryphal trumpery.

14 And that there were more learned men of the Western Church, in the same
mind with Hierome, we appeal to that treatise on the Creed of the Apostles,
which some suppose to have been written by Cyprian, and for that cause it is
found among his works, but more generally it is thought to be of Ruffiuus his
doing, who very well might speak for the evidency of truth, but is not to be
imagined to say any thing in favor of Hierome, with whom he had hot and great
^nvect co^tra Hieron.
controversies. He there then enumerateth the volumes of Canonical Scripture,
even in the same order as we do, but disclaimeth Tobias, Judith, and their
fellows, and then subioyneth this, ^e symb. Apostolor.
These are they whom the Fathers have concluded within the Canon, out of which
they would have the assertions of our faith to appear. The rest they would
have indeed to be read in the Churches, yet not to be produced to get from
them the authority of faith. And then, These things have we said, that th^se
who do receive the first elements of faith, may know from what fountains
of the word of God, their draughtes are to be drawn. So that in these you
see the sound and substantial judgment of the most learned in the West Church,
eve^ in the most ancient days of it, and this has bin continued ever since,
until our time, by me^ of the greatest knowledge throughout all ages yea such
as were lights in the Church of Rome it self. Nay Greg epi: ad Leandr. and
sup. Job: 5
Gregory himself within 600. years after Christ, accepted of Hieromes
translation or Castigation, using no other, but sticking so close thereunto,
that as a learned man of D Fulk: in pref^ Rhem Testam. 29. Greg in Evang. Hom.
34.
ours has observed, it being falsely in that copy Domu^ evertit for domu^
everrit, he interpreted it after the erroneous putting. And since that time, in
the Roman Churches that edition is ^urrant, where according to In prolog
Galeato.
Hieromes distinction, there be no more to be found Canonical, then those whom
we so read. I might add the testimonies of Prolog: in lib: Ios: and Tobiae:
Hugo, and of In vltim* ^sth and epist ad Clem: y.
Caretane after him, both men of much learning and both Cardinals of the Sea of
Rome; as also of the Ordinary Glosse^, who in the beginning of those books
has thus, Here begins the book of Tobias, which is not of the Cano^, and
Here begins the book of Judith which is not of the Canon, and so of the
rest. Also of De trade^* dis discipl* (...):
Vives who secludeth Tobias, Judith, and some other. In brief I can here
allege the witness of many rare and worthy men, even of the Popish writers,
and such as lived long before Luthers days, but I reserve them til some
Romanist urge me farther unto the^. But out of all this which has bin said, I
conclude first that the Popes vassals in the Co^ve^^cle of Trent, were more
then audacious and incroching upon God Almighty, when they durst to vendicate
that authority, as to put into the Canon that which lies open to so many just
exceptions, and was repudiated by such, so ancient, and so many, as well of
their own as other. And secondly that our Jesuits of late, as Bellarmine and
Ca^pian, and our other more unlearned Papists, as Bristow and the scribler of
this Pamphlet, with whom I have to deal, are very hard fore-headed, when they
exclaim upon us, for doing that, which they ought also to do, and call us
heretics for imitating the judgment so mature and well grounded of such
persons and Churches. But the pity of all pities is, that their blind and
deaf disciples, our countrymen and brethren according to the flesh give
credit to such lies, and accept that as the Gospel, which when it i^ sea^ed
does fly to rags and fitters.


THE NINTH REASON. Councels.
T. HILL. THE Church of God has ever been accustomed, when any heresy did
spring up therein to gather a Council of Bishops, Prelates, and of other
learned men, in which the truth was approved, and the heresy condemned. And
whosoever were condemned by such Councels, confirmed by the Sea Apostolic,
were ever deemed, and in very deed were heretics, and for such at length were
taken of all men, and in the end vanished away. So were the Arrians condemned
in the Nicene Council, the Macedonians in the Council of Constantinople, the
Nestorians in the Ephesine, the Eutychians in the Chalcedonian, and others in
other Councels. All which heretics although they flourished for a time, and
drew many people yea Emperors, Kings, States and Countreies after the^, yet
in time they came to nothing, and the Councels which condemned them were
universally embraced.


G. ABBOT. THere are two things in the two first Periodes of this your Chapter,
which although not simplye in themselves, yet proceeding ^om you do deserve
admiration. For you who were wont to make such large propositio^s as no Papist
durst avouch, filling your mouth and pen with nothing else but All, are grown
in this Reason unreasonably modest, and down below a great many of your
fellows, when first you allow other learned (...) besides Bishops and Prelates
to be of your Councels: and secondly you appoint these general Assemblies not
to be called by your Pope, but it is enough that they be confirmed by the Sea
Apostolic. But the later of these we ascribe to your good Master Bristowes
such like extenuation, who has your very words confirmed by the Sea
Apostolic, and from one of whose Brist. Moti^. 13^
Motives abbreviated, you borrow the most of this your present Reason; and the
former we impute either unto your ignorance, who know not what your fellows
hold in this point, or to the ticklenes of the matter it self, wherein no^e of
you with the safety of Popery, can define ought, but it lies subject to some
exception. Some of your me^ will have none to have voice in Councils but
Bishops, and so In enumeratione Cocilioru^:
Possevinus says A Cou^celis nothing else but a lawful Congregation of
Bishops. And it is scant to be found in any of those whom you cite for Synodes,
that any are named but Bishops, as the Nicene In praesation. Concili Nicen^
Council consisted of three hundred and eighteen Bishops, the In fine Council.
Tridentin:
Tridentine (if we will take their own account) of two hundred and seventy
Bishops; unless perhaps the Legates and Orators of some Princes may be
numbered to be in the Council, who yet have no voices to ratify doctrine,
except they be Bishops. And yet this should seem secretly to go somewhat
hard even in Campians mind, who uses first a general word, Ration: 4.
the Senators of the world, but afterward when he has said the choice of
Bishops he adds the pi^he of Divines. Yea Chronil: 4.
Genebrard himself magnifying the Council of Laterane above all that ever were
for number, says that it had in it for chief Bishop Innocentius the Pope,
then two Patriarchs, him of Constantinople, and the other of Jerusalem,
Archbishops Greek and Latin seventy, Bishops 400. Abbots twelve, Priours of
Covents eight hundred, which in all were Fathers 1285. Now whether ^ese Priours
had voices he does not expressly tell, or whether they were there but to
assist, dispute, search, inform or to ease the Prelates. And yet the manner of
his particular enumeration does seem to give them consent there: which
notvvithstanding* cannot be gathered concerning the In fi^e Con^il. ^ridentin.
Council of Tren^, where albeit the Divines and Canonists which were there of
any reckoning be remembered, yet the Bishops as having voice alone are at last
nu^bred by themselves. In the first Nicene Council it seems by Soz* l: 1. 19
Sozomen that Constantine the Emperor had a suffrage. But it may be doubted
whither Athanasius had any or none, being then no Bishop, yet a right worthy
man, and on whom the burden of disputing with the Arrians there, didly as much
as upon any one man whatsoever. It were good therefore that it were agreed upon
between you Papists, who be the proper and peculiar persons who have consent
of judgment and deciding in Councels, before that you build too much upon such
Convocations. In contro.
Costerus saw that there was no small scruple in this and other circumstances
belonging to Councels, and therefore he would not meddle at all with this
Argument. 2. Bellarmines opinion is that ordinarily only Bishops 1. Bellar. de
(...): c 15
have a right of deciding and determining voices; extraordinarily and by
privilege or custom, Cardinals, Abbots, and Generals of orders, albeit they
be not Bishops may also have voices (but this says he was only in the Councels
of Florence, Lateran and Trent) other Priests or Clergy men may help by
disputing to find out truth, but have no suffrage, And therefore he
condemns the Council of Basil, where such were admitted to a deciding
voice. Princes are called to defend the Council, and to take notice what is
decreed that they afterward may castigate such as stand against it. Other
lay men may be present to perform some necessary services to such Assemblies.
Now you are as it seems, for the extraordinary.

2 For the second point, if the supremacy of your Pope must stand upright, it
will prove to be his alone to call and assemble Councels. For give it to
Princes, and then they shall be supreme governors in causes Ecclesiastical,
which you will not admit, albeit it be, an evident truth: and permit it to the
Cardinals, then you set the members above the head, the coch before the horses.
Your Popes in these later ages have take on the^ to co^vocate al Synods, and
will not endure that any man should meddle with that matter, which they desire
to keep as charily as the apple of their eye. Sleid. l. ^^
Against Pope Julius the 2. there were 9. Cardinals who combined themselves,
and going to M^laine decreed that a Counsel should be held at Pisa to reform*
Julius: but the Pope protested against it, and said that it belonged to him
alone to call such assemblies, and there upon as Lib: 9:
Guicciardine says, the Divines and Canonists were in judgment divided. And
yet we know that all the old Councels were congregated only by the order and
commandment of the Emperors: So was the first Nicene Council gathered by
Constantine the Great, as De vita Co^st^l. ^3: 61
Eulebius who lived in his age witnesses, and after him Hist: Ecc^l 1: 9: Soc:
16.
Theodoret. The Synod at Constantinople is expressly Socr. 5: 8^
said to be called by Theodosius. And the great Council as Chalcedon was
congregated by the commandment of Valentinian and Martian the ^mperors, as
appears in the preface to the same. Leo the Pope was one who upon an
imagination that he sat in a seat Apostolical took somewhat more stomach to
him then any of his predecessors, and also more then any of his successors
til after the time of Gregory the Great; yet there is an Episto: ad Theodos.
Epistle of his extant, which he wrote to Theodosius, wherein he makes request
that his Highness would give him leave to assemble a Synod in Italy. This is
so plain in Histories, that the French Chronicler Du Lib. 5:
Haillan, in the life of Ludovicus Pius uses this speech, By so many examples
cited by me it does appear, that Charles the Great, and Ludovicus Pius did
gather Councels, and that so they ^ight do without the authority and permission
of Popes, and that they were the supreme judges of Ecclesiastical matters in
their kingdoms, and that they could as well dispose and order things
spiritual as te^porall. I would our English Papists would mark this, who make
such scruple of the oath of Supremacy. Nay Chatles the 5. a late Emperor, and
one who much more then mough was devoted to the Roman Bishops, had learned so
far to walk in the ways of his noble Progenitors and Predecessors, that
without the Popes privity or consent he gathered assemblies in matters of
religion: which as In Actis Lu there is. Ann: 1544
Cochleus reports, Pope Paul^s the 3. took ill, and challendged him for it
that in his Rescripts, making mention of celebrating a meeting about businesses
in religion, ^e says nothing of the Pope. The Roman Bishop would have made
the world believe, that therein was some wrong done unto him; but Charles knew
well enough what he himself had to do. Thus it is not yet agreed among our
Romanists whose is the primary authority to command, convent and congregate
Councels, and therefore you in your very extraordinary wisdom and modesty
declining this doubt, tell us only that these Councels must be confirmed by
the Sea Apostolic. He would have a Negative voice to repel them when they
have decreed and done what they meant to do. Now these two observations being
made, we trace your other steps.

3 Your words are liable to many exceptions. For first when heresies sprung up,
there were not evermore Councels gathered as is evident by that time which was
before the Nicene Council held under Constantine; and yet between the days of
the Apostles and that Emperor, there were many heresies stirring as may be
seen by In haeres.
Epiphanius and S. De heresib. ad Quodvult Deum.
Austen. But such fl^wes as these be, with you are nothing. Secondly it would
be expressed what you mean by the Church of God: for sometimes heretics did
make such Convocations, and representing then the visible Church did bear much
away. Such were the Councels at Theo: 217:
Sardi^, at S^c: 1. 21^
Tyrus, at Lib: 2. 7:
Antioch, at (...): ca^ 25:
Sirmium, at Lib: 4: 11.
Ariminum, I mean those meetings which were made by and for the Arrians,
Thirdly in all such assemblies truth was not approved and heresy condemned;
for in these which I have named, it was otherwise; and as the Mat. 26: 3*
Council of Annas and Caiphas with the other Priests was not for Christ but
against Christ, so the meeting of the Arrians in those places was not to
uphold truth, but to destroy it. You should then have said that sometimes
such Councels were assembled, where ^f the Spirit of God did illustrate them
with truth, all matters were well, and especially those of mainest moment, but
if they were directed by faction or humane courses, it fell out otherwise. That
Synod in the Acts, was such an holy Act: 15: 6:
meeting, where about some differences in religion and doctrine, the Apostles
came together, and the ^rit of God was President among them. But in the fourth
place, that it should be of the essence of a lawful Council that it must be
ratified by the Romish Bishop, is a jest Bellar. de conc^l (...): 12
sometimes peradventure mentioned and arrogantly challenged by some of that
See, but never by other in any antiquity assented unto. Lib: 2: 5:
Socrates indeed speaks of a Canon of the Church, that without the sentence,
or advise of the Bishop of Rome, decrees for the Church should not be
established. But this is spoken by him, as taking it up only from some claim
of Julius the stirring Pope then living, and not from any authentical
record. For where was that ever concluded? The Nicene Council indeed taking
order that there might be Patriarchs in several places of the world, who might
compose and direct Ecclesiastical matters in their Provinces, had for the
respect which was then borne to Rome, as being the Imperial city, suffered the
Bishop thereof to take the first Socr. 5. 8.
place in all general Convocations, as it gave the second to the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and afterward to the other Patriarks in their order. Further
prerogative we find none given, howsoever the Bishops of Rome aspiring to an
Ecclesiastical Monarchy did in process of time stand on it, that they had
more. In a Council. carthaginens, 3.
Council at Carthage it was decreed that the Bishop of the first See should
not be called the Prince of Priests, or the highest Priest or any such thing,
but only the Bishop of the first See. And Part: 1: Distinct. 99: 3:
Gratian cites the very same words, out of a Council of Afrike, which
intends that of Carthage, but he adds in the end of the Decree, But let not
even the Bishop of Rome he called Universal. And ^lbid. 4:
farther he cites a Decree of Pelagius the Pope Let none of the Patriarchs
ever use the word of Vniversallity, because if our Patriarch be called
V^iversall, the name of Patriarchs to derogated from other^ but f^r be this
from faithful men, that any one should take that to himself, whence in any
the smallest respect he may seem to d^sh the honor of his brethren. And least
any man should say, that the Pope meant this of other Patriarchs and not of
himself, it follows in the same lbid, 5.
Gratia^, that Pope Gregory was angry with Eulogius, that he had called him
Universal Pope. I confess that in progress of time, the Bishops of Rome
under a color of a Canon in the Nicene Council did claim that appe^ should
be made to them, but when the Fathers of Afrike assem^ed at Con. Carthaginen. 6
Carthage disclaimed it, and would by no means take knowledge of any such
Canon, they sent to Nicea to see the Original of the Nicene Council, and
finding no such matter there, they put the Pope to much shame in as much as it
was but a forged Canon, upon which he had insisted. But to return to Julius
in whose behalf the former challenge was made, when the Eastern Bishops had
received imperious letters from him, they did no less then scorn it in him,
and would not endure any such usurpation of his, as both Lib: at (...)
Socrates and Lib: 3: 7.
Sozomen do relate. Yea we find in Athanasius himself, who had fled to
lulius, and who^ it co^cerned that lulius should have nothing of his true
authority diminished, because he stuck close to Athanasius in his toubles, that
the Athana. in Apolog. 2.
Eastern Bishops assembled in the Counsel at Sardis, do call Julius their
beloved fellow servant and nothing more. Which was the phrase not only of the^
being a company of Catholics and Orthodox Bishops, but Epistol, 3:
Cypria^ before that did use to call Cornelius the Romans Bishop his brother and
no more.

4 Yet if it should be granted that the Patriarchs in the name and behalf of
their Provinces should have a voice of necessary consent, what is that more to
the Romish Bishops then to the other Patriarchical Sees? And besides this, the
place of Socrates te^deth to nothing but political ordinances, ceremonies and
customs for government of the church, which were not to be obtruded on all
without consent of some chief in every Province, and especially that of Rome,
the most emine^t in the empire. And of that nature was the cause of Athanasius
there, who was questioned as depriueable of his Bishoptik, because he had
exercised his fu^ctio^ and jurisdiction, being not restored again after his
suspensio^ by a Synod of some Bish. But if that a general Counsel should with
good grounds out of the word of God co^de^ne heresy, and the Pope would not
join with the^, whether this co^demnatio^ were lawful or no, is rather our
question. Where although your Popes will take on the^ to have a Negative voice
against the Counsel, and your Canonists and Pope-flaterers so dispute it, yet
the Counsel of Co^sta^ce is flat to ye contrary: for there as In Ioh. 24.
Platina says, the Pope is subjected to ye Cou^ cel, yea and deprived by it
also. And the conc^ constant. Sess. 5
Counsel it self says that a general Counsel has power immediately from
Christ, to which every one of what state or dignity so ever he be, yea if it
be Papal, is bound to obey in those things which pertain to faith, and to the
rooting out of schism, and the reformation of the Church in the head and in
the members. Thus the Counsel speaks flatly, and the Popes speak directly
to the contrary, and learned Papists themselves are shrewdly in suspense what
to say or believe herein. Replique a (...) ^e de (...) verit. cap. 5.
One of them, a French man, saying more in the beginning then we accept,
confesses of late farther in this manner. Never did Christian man say or doubt
whither the Pope were above other Bishops, but the question is whither he be
above a Council, and the whole Catholic Church (...) body gathered, This is
(...) undecided, and (...) rather a matter of policy, or government then of
the substaunc^ of faith. Nevertheles it were good that this knot were opened
before that you talk to much of your Councils, and your Popes ratifying of
the^. It were well that your Papists knew what to believe. Now to proceed. Such
as the first and ancient Councel^ condemned for Heretics, were rightly so
accounted; for they were justly censured out of the Scriptures to hold
untruths. But such as your later Conventicles of Lateran, Trent and such like,
condemned, were the good servants of God, and were not, nether are justly to be
reputed heretics, but by the Arch^heretiks of the world, Antichrists men, whose
censure being drawn from their own brain, and the Spirit of Satan, and not
from the holy Ghost, is to be esteemed for nothing. The conde^natio^ of the
Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians, and Eutychians we allow of, because they
taught doctrine against Christ and the word of God, and we are glad of their
ruin. And we find that after our Saviors speech, Mat 15. 13.
Every plant which ^y heavenly father has not planted shall be rooted up,
here^ks commonly are soon blown away, although Kings, States and Countries
for the time do admit the^: as the Arrian infection was widely entertained. Yet
we cannot certainly conclude that al heresies do in time come to nothing,
unless we will understand that time to be the end of time, even the final
dissolution of all things. The schism of the (...). King: 17 34. ^oh: 4: 20.
Samaritanes dissenting from the Jews lasted long. Your Papacy has had a great
continuance, being the confluence of a whole sink of heretical doctrine: You
have long since condemned the Greek and Russian Church, and yet they hold out.
The Iconomachi and Image breakers were condemned in the second Nicene Council,
and yet the defenders of their faith in that point do still remain. Had not the
Arrians sentence against them long agone, in the first Synod at Nice and yet
there be said to be store of the^ in Bellar. lib. 1. and 2 de Christo.
Transylvania. And for the Pelagians, I do not remember that any Council
directly proceeded against the^: yet they deserved to be so met with:
notwithstanding. Papists do much join with them in the matter of free will.
^It is possible then, that as the Devil indureth so may some of his Disciples,
successively, and the Mat. 13 (...)
tares which the envious man has sown, may be let alone to the harvest, that
is to say, heretics to the last day. But let them stand or fall, slowly or
quickly, such as obstinatly maintain false doctrine, are heretik^ and Councels
which by warrant of the Scripture do condemn the^, are to be accepted and well
esteemed by all, so that they mingle not dross with their gold, no water with
their wine.


T. HILL. ANd no doubt the late fa^ Council of Trent, which by the same
authority and order, has c^ned the Protestants and other sectaries for
heretics, will in time b^ every where received, and these new felwes by it
^ized will v^terly v^sh away. For indeed ^f a man consider the matter
thoroughly, he shall plainly perceive that th^se sects have no likelihood of
co^ti^, by reason they have no m^s to gather a Council, and much less to
(...) matters therein if (...) were gathered, being without an head as they
(...), and every one ^leaving ^ly to his own priv^ opi^, and therefore ^an ^er
all (...) together, or if by any power they were compelled ther^, they have
(...) agree in one, for that they will not yield (...) any judgment, but what
is framed of their (...) br^, and therefore it ^st needs (...) amongst them, as
we see it to be Quot homines, tot sente^tiae, So many men, so many opinions.


G. ABBOT. 5 THe famousnes of your Conventicle at Trent i^ famously to be
laughed at. It was eighteen year in acting, from 1545. to the year 1563.
now a peec^ and then a patch, interrupted and to it again. Three Popes one
after another, that is Paulus the 3. Julius the 3. and Pius the 4. did beat all
their wits and used their best imploiments to make somewhat of it, and yet most
base and beggarly it prooved. The most of the nations of Christendom had
nothing to do with it, neither did they send thither. The Protestants
universally refused, and some gave out the reason of it in Sleid, l. 16.
printed tracts. First because it was assembled by the Pope, whose authority
they should have ratified, if they had come at his call. Secondly the Legates of
the Pope were Presidents there; therefore nothing was to be concluded or
disputed against their master. Thirdly no man could come there but he must
condescend to many things against his conscience, there being first and
principally required obedience to the Papacy, and presence at many Idolatrous
Acts. Fourthly there was no freedom ^o speak truth, but that any man might
have bin served as Cochl in Hist Hussit. l: 2:
John Hus was at the Council of Constance, who had a safe conduct from
Sigismund then king of the Romans, and afterward Emperor and yet by a trick,
that faith given to heretics is not to be kept, or as our M. Ration. 4:
Capian said, Caesar sealed it, but the Christian world unsealed it, being
greater the^ Caesar the good man there lost his life. Fifthly their Princes for
reasons of state did not think fit to employ the^ thither. Nay Popish Realms
did not ioin with that Counsel, as Q. Mary in all her time sent not thither,
which may appear by this, that in the Cataloge of Bishops there is named but
only one of England, and that was Th. Goldwel Bishop of S. Asaph, who departed
the Realm in Q. Elizabeth's time, and was at Tre^t at a snatch of that assembly,
coming before the final breaking up of all: but he was the^ only a titulary
Bish. without any Bishoprik. Of which sort there were also diverse other, to
help make up a simple show. As Pope Gentill. in exam Council. ^riden Sell. 1.
Sle^dan. lib. 17:
Paulus the 3. made that Olaus which is called Magnus Archb of Vpsala (a place
said to be in Gothia) and one Robertus Vena^tius Archbishop of Armath in
Ireland. He bestowed those titles on those two poor men while they lived at
Rome, and had nothing in the world to do with the places of their pretended
Bishopriks, but were without Church, or Clergy, or Diocese, or any revenue at
all. He might as well have created the^ Bishops of Antioch and Alexandria, if
he had pleased. These two poor hungrye souls the Pope for a while
mainetained barely at Rome: at last as men coming out of far parts of the
world he sent the^ to Trent, allowing Olaus 15. crowns a month, which as the
Author says was but a simple pittaunce for an Archbishop, and especially
for him who was called Magnus, but to Venantius that pretended Armachanus he
allowed less. Was not this think you to go a begging for Bishops, to furnish
up this high and famous Council, when such simple shifts were made? He who
put out the Council, of likelihood was sore ashamed of it, and therefore in his
commemoration of the Bishops there assembled, he mencioneth no such men, but
leaves them both out as counterfeits.

6 I return to speak of Popish Princes. Among all of that part in Germany,
much of the Country yet to this day standing Romishly affected, there came
Bishops but Cat. prael: in fine Co^c
two, if we should afford the^ their own reckoning. But almost no place was
nearer to Trent then France was. And yet L. Antiguizart.
Francis the Great, who lived at the first meeting of that co^ciliable, had his
Orator or Ambassador there, that was the Abbot of Bellozan, who in the name of
his master protested, that neither the King nor any of his Realm could be bound
by the decrees of that Counsel. The Author writing this adds farther, that
the king knew that the asse^bly was provided for the particular profit of some
few, and not for the co^mo^wealth of Christe^do^e. The like was afterward done
by Henry the 2. K. of France stre^gthned by the authority of al his Parliame^ts,
who have still opposed themselves against the execution of the Tre^tish decrees,
as being abusiue and full of Nullities. Yet the same Henry obtained of the Gent:
1: 3:
Swicers, Papists and al, that they should not consent to that Counsel. Truth
it is that Declar. du Roy deNavar. premier Recutil.
Charles the 9. did send to the Pope to prolong the Synod, and having obtained
so much, did send his Legates and Bishops to Trent, with large Instructions for
the reformation of the Clergy, wherein when they had labored for the space of
18. months, and could get nothing yielded unto, the K. informed thereof, caused
the to protest against that Counsel, and to come their ways: which they did
immediately, notwithsta^di^g great means made by the Pope, and the Cardinal of
Lorraine who bore the^ grand sway in France, to return again. So they signed
not the Decrees of the Counsel, and yet cu^ni^gly they are put in the Cataloge,
26. French Prelates, as if there among others had confirmed all. Such frauds be
in the papacy. And as there in presence it was rejected by the French, so it
stood, afterward in so Ibidem.
much that in the year 1572. when after the horrible Massacre was committed,
time seemed much to favor it, it was propounded in the Parliament at Paris, all
the Chambers being assembled, that this Counsel might be admitted in France,
but it was then also repudiated. Much in like manner was done to that purpose,
in the Gent. l: (...)
year 1585. in the time of King Henry the third, but it took no success: and
for ought that I could ever hear, it stands upon those terms till this
present time, the Papists in France rejecting it. So that well you may take on
you to be a foolish Prophet, and say that hereafter it will be thus and thus
received, but for ought that any man else can see, this good Council is as
like to go backward as forward. To return here to the famousnesse of this
Conventicle, Greek Prelates there in the Catalogue are said to be six, which
I conceive to be such as in the name of the Venetians had Bishoprics on the
farther side of the Adriatike sea, called in times past by the general name of
Greece, or else in some of the Islands near the bottom of Greece, but subject
to the Venerians. For of any who truly were of the Greek Church, I do not find
any mention. Of other nations of Christendom (the Italians and Spaniards being
excepted) there is no country which had more then three, some two, diverse but
one, and yet we must allow their own account, and take Bishops for tales
quales, at Goldwell was, to say nothing of Olaus: and any man who in that
eighteen year peeped into Trent shall be nu^bred for one. For Spaniards it is
said of them that they were 31. And the less to be wondered at, since many
things were there brued in behalf of their master, and if we will believe De
Rep. lib: (...): 6:
Bodine, the King and people of Spain are great servants of the Pope. For when
he had mentioned that the Popes in many ages had attempted to bestow at their
pleasure benefices in diverse Kings Countries, but that still Princes have
rejected those ambitious Rescripts of the Popes, he adds, I do except the
kings of Spain, the most obsequious servants of the Popes of Rome, who not
without a great reward did obtain by a grant of Sixtus the Romans Bishop,
that then benefices should not be given to strangers, It is then no marveile,
if the Spanyardes so confederated with the Pope did bustle to Trent: but most
of all their king then Charles the 5. urging them thither, who meant to make no
small use of the countenance of that Council against his Protestants in
Germany, and therefore was so (...) A^. 547:
exceedingly angry when a stay was like to be of that Synod, a while after the
beginning of it; some of the Fathers for fear of the plague creeping in at
Trent, withdrawing themselves to Bonony in Italy, and the rest remaining at
Trent, and so the congregation being divided.

7 But that which much commends this Tridentine Convocation, was the
excellent number of Italian Prelates got thither: who being under the Popes
nose; and fit to help at a pinch, are said there to have bin to the number of
187. Where a man of common sense may very well smile, that out of Italy which
for quantity of ground contains no more then the two Realms of England and
Ireland, there may come more then ninescore Bishops. Wherein we must do well
to give a favorable interpretation, that peradventure some one pretty
Bishopric might yield toward the reckoning two men or more, one being at
Trent in the beginning of the Conventicle, another in the middle, and a third
might be there in the end. But otherwise the truth is, that Italy has many
base and pety Bishopriks, of little circuit of ground and of small commodity,
which was long since observed, when the In remedijs Grava. German.
Germans in their complaints against the Papacy, could say that diverse
ordinary benefices in Germany, were of more yearly worth and commodity then
many Bishopriks in Italy. Of these little hungry minims, at a beck of the Popes
came up so many at the end of the Counsel, as they alone being a mayor part of
voices, were able by far to overbeare all the rest of Christendom, which
were there present. Before that time, what a goodly general Council was there
at Trent, that Campian should use such admiration in speaking of it, Ration: 4^
Good God, what variety of nations, what choice of Bishops of the whole world,
what glory of Kings and Commonwealths, what pith or marrow of Divines, what
holiness, what tears, what fastings, what flowers of Universities, what
tongues, what subtilitie, how great labor, what infinite reading, what riches
of virtues and studies, did fill that maiesticall sacred place? The true vanity
and Rhetorical flourish of his speech may well be seen, by that poor
confluence which was there, when some Acts and those of the greatest moment
passed there, as by name that concerning the (...) Canonical Scripture, the
equalling of traditions Session: 4^
to the written word of God, the allowing only of the Vulgar Latin edition for
authentical. For the^ and after that, as appears by the calculatio^ of the
time, there were in the Sleid. l. 17
meeting, besides the Cardinals which were the Popes Legates there, and the
Cardinal of Trent and Pachecus the Spanyard, four Archbishops whereof the poor
and sterneling titulary Olaus and Venantius before named were two, Bishops 33.
whereof two were French, five. Spaniards, one of Illyricu^, and the rest were
Italia^s. Doctors of Divinity which were Monks, 35. other which were not Monks,
12. and all these almost Spaniards. This was your late famous Counsel of
Trent, so much craked of by all you Papists, who intend to make that seem a
mountain which was meaner then a mole hill, that so you may feed fat your
simple and credulous followers, with big words uttered in general, and
spoken as in the clouds. Now if we should sift also what manner of men, and
what noble Clerks many of those were who met there, the grace of this brag
would be so much the more stained. Calvin lived in that time, and saw what
excellent rare lads they were, which went voluntarily out of France thither:
for as before you heard, the kings sent none. I will cite his words as In
praefat. ad Hist^r: Hu^it. ex praef. Cal^. cont Council. ^riden.
Cochleus sets them down, Let the Patrones of Councels answer me bona fide,
if a man should reckon them all in order unto them, what man of them would they
not contemn? Nay when those Reverend Fathers do look one upon another, it
cannot be but they are ash^med of themselves. For they are known to
themselves, and what other men's judgment is of them, they are not ignorant.
Therefore if you will take away the name of a Council, the whole Papacy must
confess, that all the Bishops which were there, was nothing but raffe. But I
think good to leave to other na^ions their ornaments untouched. I will only
entreat my countrymen of France, that they will value at a just price that
portion which they co^ferred. Amongst the principal members of the Church,
they do reckon the kingdom of France* From thence there were two Bishops
present, the one of Nene^um, the other of Clarement. Both alike unlearned and
stupidious. The Archbishop Aquensis I do scant number amongst French men. And
he of Agatha as curious men use to do, was there but as an idle looker ^n. I
beseech you French men, who of you ca^ persuade himself, that these things do
come from the holy Ghost, which even an innumerable multitude of such men shall
babble out? For these imperfections and blemishes every way we upon sound
consideration think the Trent assembly to be worthy of no better titles, then
the co chl in Histor. Hus sit: lib: 1:
Hussites gave the Council at Rome, which was called by John the 23. or rather
24. as we account him. For when the Pope had in that meeting condemned Wiclef,
the Hussites laughed at him, and his sily mean Conventicle, saying that it was
done not in Generali Con^ilio in a General Council, but in Angulari Concilio,
in a Council in a corner. And for Pralati de regnis orbis, the Prelates of the
kingdoms of the world, they said there were pauci monachi and Simoniaci vrbis,
a few monks and simoniacal persons of that city Rome. This is most true of your
Trentish concurrence. Unto all these maimes in it, we might add, that for
matters importa^t, nothing was so co^sulted there, as that is was to be
concluded among the fathers there assembled, but from Rome was sent still what
should be determined* so that not unworthily the scoff was used, that the holy
Ghost which should have directed at Trent, was sent from Rome in a box. This be
said touching the form and circumstances of that assembly so unmoderatly and
vndeservedly magnified, to the which I might join many other Nullities set
down by In ex^mine council. Trident.
Ge^tille^tus a French man; and for the matter as it concerns Popish
divinity, it has bin pretty well coursed by Calvin and Che^nicius. So that
being rightly balanced every way, there is little or nothing of authority to
befound in it.

8 Your hope that the Council of Trent will by some grace arise to a higher
degree is borrowed from Ration: 4
Campian, who ^ide that while Che^nicius, unless he did take heed should be
buried with Arius, the Tridentine Synod, the elder it gr^w, so much the more
daily, and so much the more continually it should flourish. Well, the Prophet
himself first came to naught, and the Conciliable now more then twenty years
after, is in the same case as before or worse. And it is to be hoped that
higher it shall not rise, unless it be with the children of unbelief. As
for us that pro^esse against it, we doubt not, but by the protection of
almightye God, our religion shall stand unto the day of indge^nte, maugre all
the treasons and conspiracies which the Romish whore can have against it. It
is her Apoc. 18. 2
Babylon that for a great part is fallen already, and must fall a fair deal
more. Those whom you call new fellows are able to prove every part of their
profession to be more ancient then your vn-Catholike superstition. Your reasons
why we cannot continue, do halt on every foot. We cannot call a Council, Ergo
we cannot continue. A simple Antecedent, and a childish Consequent. And why I
pray you may not the Princes and governors of the Reformed kingdoms and States
of Europe, as well assemble a Council as the Popish Princes may? Yea and so
much the better a Synod, because disputation and conference may be free, as
being out of the word of God, and not restained within the limits of your
Popes pleasure. Then how can you prove that it is of the necessity of religion,
that General Councels should be called? May not Provincial assemblies serve
the turn, for settling several lands and countries, as they have done before?
It is de been esse of religion, that there should be great meetings if there be
cause, and they be lawfully called, and orderly proceeded in, but it is not de
esse. Else if there had arose no Act. 15. 6.
variance in the time of the Apostles, which was the cause of their meeting,
their religion might have sunk. Your next proposition is as weak, that we can
decide nothing without a head. We have a head and that is Christ: and his
Spirit is his Vicegerent to supply his place, and this Spirit will not be
wanting to those who rightly and earnestly pray for him. And we have also
asquire to direct all by, that is the written word: we remember Christ's speech,
Ioh. (...). 39.
search the Scriptures. And for disagreement and stifnes to yield, if any be or
have bin of that mind, it is, vitium pers^na non rei, that party is to be
blamed, and not his religion^. In all differences men are too much wedded to
their opinions. Yet we doubt not but when Christian Princes shall be pleased to
call a General Council, in such sort and to such end as it should be
convocated, God who moves the minds of the superiors like good Constantines
and Theodosians, to do their parts, will also move the hearts of inferiors to
humility and conformity, laying a side private spirits, which is much to be
entreated of the Almighty. Remember I pray you that there may be c^rtaine
rules set down, which may bridle refractary persons, as it was In colloquio
Ratispon. ^601.
lately at Ratispone. Remember also that the Council of Constance could
proceed not only without a Pope to be their head, but also against three
Popes, removing them and deposing them. Farthermore you much deceive your
selves in your opinion of our discord, for we do not so jar as you imagine.
For certainly we al agree well enough to lay your Pope on the ground; and the
Churches of England and Scotland, and France, and Switzerland, and the low
Countries, and (calling none of the Lutherans) a good part of Germany with
others iumping expreslie in the same faith, are able enough to make a most
renoumed and Christian Council. Do not think therefore that we are so far
from that as you speak of, for if you lean too much on that conceit, it will
prove unto you but a broken reed, which will both fail you, and the splints
of it also will run into your hands. Gods word shall be the line after the which
we all will walk.


T. HILL. LAstly I would have you here to mark the dealing of beretikes who
play by General Councels even as they play by the Scriptures: for Conc. Flor.
Sess. 5. and 6. Magdebur. Cent. 8. c. 9 and Cent. 9. cap. ^9.
they take and leave as they lust and as best serves their turn. There have
been in all General Councels eighteen. All gathered, allowed, and confirmed
by one and the selfsame authority, of which the Greeks receive only seven. The
Lutheranes the first fix. The Eutyehians which are in Asia only the first
three. The Nestorians which are yet in the East only the first two. The
Trinitaries which are in Hungary and Poleland receive n^ne at all: behold the
liberty of your Gospel.


G. ABBOT. 9 What heretics do in refusing of Scripture we list not now to
examine: our judgment and the reasons whereupon it is grounded, you have heard
in the last Chapter. Neither are we unwilling to acquaint the Christian world,
what it is that we do hold concerning Councels: to wit that such as are
rightly gathered together, and take the direction of their conclusions from the
Angel of the great counsel, from him who is called (...). 9. 6.
Counsailer, such are to be much reverenced and esteemed, but yet still as the
words of men, and not immediately of God. For it is one thing to be the word of
God; and another to be guided by it. The former great Councels did take the
sacred Oracle for the load star of their direction, the later Mat. 26. 3.
Annas-like assemblies, and Cayphas-like Councels did least think of such
matters. And therefore it may rightly be said that not the holy Ghost, but
Satan in the likeness of such a Nicol. de Clem super materia Concilior.
filthy bird as appeared at Rome in the Council called by John the four and
twe^tith, was President there. Yet we hold it worth the while, to look a
little into your doctrine concerning Councels. You make them of mighty
authority as anon I shall show, and yet the chief Patriarchs among you who
boast so much of your Unity and Consent, cannot agree which be the Councels
whom you plead for to be authentical. It is no marvel if your scholars cannot
ye eld account of their faith, when you their Masters cannot. You for your part
allow us eighteen General Councels, but you do not make us so much beholding
to you, as to tell us which they be. In initio Platinae.
Ounphrius who was held for a great Clerk among you, reckons but sixteen,
the four first of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon; then two other
at Constantinople, then the second at Nice, then a fourth at Constantinople,
then one at Laterane, the next at Lions, then at Vienna one, afterward those
of Constance, Basile and Florence, then another Laterane, and the last at
Trent. In indice Concilioru^
Possevinus keeps your number of eighteen, but the Councels of Constance and
Basile he secludeth. But whereas by this reckoning if he joined with Ounphrius
otherwise, he should now have ^but fourteen, he makes five in all at
Laterane, and two at Lions, and so they rise to be eighteen. In this account
his 'fellow Jesuit (...) Bellarmine (...) council lib: 1: cap. 5:
precisely joins with him. And yet in substance they be but thirteen, for
he acquainteth us that the first and second at Laterane, both those at Lions,
and that of Vienna be lost, which by a consequent diminishes five of the
number. In Chronograph.
Genebrarde who at length grew to be Archbishop of Aix thought himself as
good a man as either of those, or any who would defend th, and therefore he
will not take it after their tale. For he reckons to us twenty General
Councils, whereof as the five which are missing are a part, so he solemnly
takes in those of Constance and Basile for as good as the best. Thus the
greatest Rabbis cannot agree among themselves. All the stir is about those
of Constance and Basile, who indeed do touch the Popes freehold, and therefore
himself, and all the Parasites who stand for him, are not hastily to admit
the^. The Counsel of Co^stance did dosse three Popes which were up at once in a
schism, and subjected the Bish. of Rome to a Counsel, which goes hard, and
especially when the Synod may be called without him, as that was: and
therefore he will none of that. The Counsel of Basil would not be at the lure of
Eugenius the 4. but set up Ae^ Silvius deCo^cil. Bafil.
Amedeus the Duke of Savoy against him, and made him an Antipape; and this I
tell you is dangerous doctrine. This does touch the triple crown, and therefore it
is good looking before these things be ratified. What shall we the think that
the Pope did in this case? Vbi supra
Onuphrius he goes briefly to work, and says that the Counsel of Basil was
confirmed by Eugenius the 4. and that of Co^stance by Martin the 5. So the if
he say truth, they have al their co^pleme^ts, and must go for current money.
Concerning the Counsel of Co^sta^ce Vt supra.
Genebrard ^u^peth with him, and saiththat by Martin the 5. it was ratified.
But he extenuateth that of Basil and says that by Nicolas the 5. it was
approved in those things, which belong ad ci^sur as and causas boneficiales.
Vt. supra: Sic Bellar. de Council: lib: (...) cap: 7
Possevinus like a Jesuit who must stick close to the Pope, says that indeed
that of Censures and of Benefices was allowed by Nicolas the 5. but the rest
was al refused in the Counsel at Laterane by Leo the 10. And there he tells
us that such part of the Counsel of Co^sta^ce as did set the Counsel above the
Pope was caslated and cashiered: but that which was done against Wiclef and Hus
was ratified before by Pope Martin. Is not your provorb here true. So many me^,
so many minds? that faith give^ to I. Hus may be broken, as being to an
heretik, shall stand for good doctrine: but the allowa^ce of the Coch^. in Hist
Hussit. l. 7.
Eucharist in both kinds, made to the Hussits by ye deputies of the counsel of
Basil, and the yielding to the other 3. articles is frustrated. And it will go
hard with the Vir. Mary also, who there was quit of being conc: Basil. Sess: 36.
co^ceived in Original sin, whereupon depends the feast of the co^cep^ of our
Lady as you call it, whereof what the Fra^ciscane Friars will think, I lean to
your consideration. By this, men may see how wise the Pope is, who will surely
live without his damme, if we will let him alone, when albeit all the Prelates
of Christendom come together and determine that which is good for the regiment
of the Church, yet if it touch the Pope he will stand to nothing. Nay if
Martin say yea, and confirm it, Leo coming after will say No, and undo it.
So that let the Council pray and talk what they will of the holy Ghost being
among them, if the Popes holy spirit do not agree with theirs, their holy Ghost
is nothing. Somewhat it was that Pope Platin ain Faschal. 2:
Paschall did put on a girdle whence 7. keys and 7. seals did hang, that he
might advertise men that according to the seven fold graces of the holy Spirit,
he had power to close and seal, and open and shut the holy Churches over whom
by Gods appointment he was ruler. That you must think to be all the world, and
by a consequent the generallest Council. Open your eyes Papists, and see
whither that these doctrines be not the mockery of all religion. You were as
good take a compendious course, and say plainly that the Pope may do what he
list, as talk of a Council and trouble a great many me^ about nothing, and
then the resolution must be with Centu. 16 in An. 1518
Silvester Prierias, that the Popes authority is far before the Councils, yea
that the force of the sacred Scripture does depend upon the authority of the
Pope, or with Ibidem.
Caietane the Cardinal who in a Conference with Luther at Auspurge did
directly prefer the power of the Pope before al Scriptures and Councels,
which Luther good man would not believe. I pray you gentle Doctor suffer your
self to be coniured so far as on your honesty to tell me, whither you or we
do attribute most to a Council, when we teach that many coming together in the
fear of God, and sincerely using the best means that they possibly can, and
being directed by Gods spirit and word, may conclude that which must stand
good: and you say that be they never so many, so learned, so holy, and do they
what they will, yet if the Pope like not of it, (and he will not like any thing
that shall bind him to any goodness) it is not al worth a straw.

10 I cannot here omit, that the milk which you gave in the beginning of this
Chapter, is now cast down by your own heel. I commended you too soon. A
black More cannot change his skin, and you will to your own biace. Here the
Councels were not only allowed and confirmed by one and the self same
authority, and this you mean to be your Popes, but they are gathered also. The
impudency of this Proposition, which in a word you think to steal away
with, I have showed before. The Bishop of Rome durst neither for his head,
nor soul have said such a word, in the time of the Primitive Church. He
should have been most arrogant before God, and a rank traitor to the Emperor
his best master, if he had assumed that unto him. I helped you even now with a
place out of Socrates: let me now quit that with another. Thus then he says,
Soc in pro aemio lib. 5.
I have everywhere in my story made mention of the Emperors, becacause since
that time that they began to be Christians, the business of the Church did
seem to depend upon the ^cke, y^ and the greatest Councels were by their
sentence or order called together, and yet are so called. Alas, there was no
token of the pretty Popes supreme authority in co^vocating such Occumenicall
assemblies, till almost a thousand years after Christ. Afterward when the
Pope had got the head, he began to be a little bold: but his Dictates were
only attended in such places of the West, as over which he had usurped a
spiritual dominion. But the Greek and Eastern Church took no notice of
those assemblies more then of factious and partial Conventicles; which is the
true cause that at the Council of Florence (which was cunningly got together
by Eugenius the 4. to top that of Coch hist. Huss. lib. 9.
Basile held at the same time, and which was assembled before by his own
authority, but afterward thwatted some of his designs) the Greeks did take no
notice of any of the Synodes at Laterane, Lions or Vienna, where their
ancestors before had not been: but only they took knowledge of such as
whither the Greeks their predecessors had freely gone. And therefore as Li.
4. Chr.
Genebrarde says, they who came to the meeting at Florence, count that the
eighth Synod, which is to be understood, if they hold it for a Synod at all.
And in the Scss. 5. and 6.
Council of Florence it self, the second held before at Nice was then
called by the Greeks the last General Council, and special exception was
taken to that which is commonly called the eighth General Counsel, albeit it
was held at Co^sta^tinople, they saying first that it never was at all
received, and secondly that afterward it was formerly abrogated. For in as much
as it had condemned Pho^ius Patriarch of Constantinople, his successor John
called another Synod and antiquated the former. Mark here that the Patriarch
of the Greek Church thinks that he has power to assemble Councels, directly
opposite to the proceedings of the Romish Bishop, and that he challenges to
himself authority, to dissolve and annullate that which he supposes the
Western Patriarch with others his consorts to have done either usurpingly or
unjustly. So that very true it is, that the Greeks do not allow the eighth
Synod, not the other which followed and were held in the west, by the means
of the Roman Bishop, and with out their indifferent concurrence.

11 What you cite in the name of the Lutheranes, out of the Magdeburgenses is
acknowledged, and consented unto by us. In the eighth (...) cent: 8. 9:
Century, they among other Provincial meetings speaking of the confluence at
Nice, which is commonly called the second Nicene Council, in the setting down
thereof do not dissemble their opinion, that is their dislike unto it. And
what Christian man is there rightly advised, which has read the Exodus 20.
second commandment concerning Images, who does not both dislike and detest
that Conventicle, for decreeing both erection and adoration of Images in
Churches? In the like sort in the ninth cent: 9. 9:
Century, the compilers of it do show themselves not well affected to that which
you call the eighth General Council, and they have no small reason for it. For
besides the allegations of the Greeks against it, which even now is specified,
and besides the matter of it, which I will not stand to discuss, there was a
foul attempt at the very entrance into it. The Pope of Rome had so far
prevailed, that he had there his Agents who stood at the Council door with
writing tables, profering them to all who would enter there, and requiring that
they first should subscribe to the Iutisdiction and transcendent authority of
the Roman Bishop. To which Such as yielded did enter in: and those who refused
were not only repelled, but it was done with much reproach and disgrace unto
them. A fit course to make a free Synod. And of this sort either directly or
indirectly have all the Popes Councels bin. You tell us that some Eutychians be
in Asia, and Nestorians be in the East, whereas indeed Asia is in the East: but
country in particular you name us none, nor author you cite us none. I have
heard indeed of Marchantes who have travailed in those parts, that at this day
there is at Aleppo a Congregation of Nestorians, and likely it is that in the
country therabout, or farther of in Armenia, there may be more. Neither is it
unlikely, but that some also may embrace the old heresy of Eutyches in those
parts. In as much then as Nestorius was condemned in the third General Socn 7.
33 Evagr. 1. 4.
Counsel at Ephesus, it is probable that his folowers will refuse that Synod,
and consequently all coming after and ratifying that, and so they must only
accept the 2. foremost. And since Eutyches and Dioscorus were condemned in the
4. Evagr. 2. 4
Counsel at Chalcedo^, it is most credible that if there now be any who have
continued or revived their damnable heresies, they will not approve that of
Chalcedon, but only such as went before it. What such in Polonia and Hungary
do, as speak against the Trinity, and therefore are rather to be called
Antitrinitarij then Trinitaries, ^it mattereth not to us. We disclaim the^, we
abominate the^, we execrate the^, as we do the Eutychians and Nestorians, and
al other heretics. Neither do we join with the Greeks in all things as you
know, although some of their doctrins we prefer before those of the Church of
Rome. And therefore most ridiculously and vnfittingly do you close up your
Chapter, Behold the liberty of your Gospel, when here are none named, the
Lutheranes excepted, with whom we have ought to do. And for our liberty in the
Gospel, of rejecting such vnwarra^table stuff, as Image-worshipping,
Tra^substantiatio^ and the like, maintained by your heretical meetings, we
learn it of Gal: ^8: 9:
S. Paul, who has taught us not only that if a man, but if an Angel from
heaven bring any other doctrine, the^ is in gods word, let him be accursed. And
we being sufficiently informed by Gods word, that we are not to be inthralled
to the beggarly Colos: 2: 20
traditions of me^, do purpose by the assistance of the Lords heavenly grace to
Galat. 5: 1.
stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. We accept
therefore of this Christian freedom, but Libertine-like licentiousness we
leave unto you. And so for a little while I dismiss you, with this remembrance,
that what you say of the Councils accepted or excepted against, by the Greeks,
the Lutheranes, the Eutychians, the Nestorians, and the Trinitarians, both for
the matter and quotations you borrow from Cardinal Coacil: l. 1. cap: 5.
Bellarmine.

12 TO notify then the judgment of our Church concerning Councils; certainly
we do hold them being rightly and lawfully assembled and proceeded in, to be
great blessings from God, and notable means to remove schisms and to
extirpate heresies. Thus we are taught by the example of the Apostles (...)
co^gregating (...) Act. 15: 6.
themselves together, and by the fruit which some such meetings had in the
Primitive Church. Yea we do like of that sentence of blessed Constantine after
the Nicene Council, who (...) said that the decree of keeping Easter by all
uniformly, and not (...) Eusebius de vita Constable lib: 3: 18:
by some after the fashion of the Jews, was to be embraced at the gift of God,
and as if it had bin a commandment sent down from heaven, For says he
whatsoever is decreed in the holy Councels of Bishops, that all ought to be
attributed to the will of God. Mark he says not generally in the Councels of
Bishops, nor in the Councils of holy Bishops, for even such may err: but in
the holy Councels of Bishops, that is in such as wherein men do holily conform
themselves unto the Scripture of truth, and go no farther the^ God is their
guide. Such as come without humane prejudice, are zealous of truth, earnest in
prayer for it, diligent in searching it out, and humble to yield and conform
themselves to it. Such were the first general Councils where men did look to
the load-star of the word, and therefore they are accepted of us. Yet so, that
we do not esteem the^ as the sacred Oracles of God, equivalent to the
Scripture, or of equal authentical force; but as the definitions of Godly men
out of the word; and so that they give no virtue to the old and new Test. but
take all that which Councils have, from them, and therefore as takers and not
givers, are inferior to them. We do therefore hold that speech of Gregory to be
hyperbolically uttered, and not literally justifiable, I Greg: li: 1: Epistol:
24.
confess that I do receive and reverence, as the four books of the Gospel,
so the four Councels. And again. And Li: 2: Epist 49.
we do so receive the four Synodes of the holy Universal Church, as the
four books of the holy Gospel. If it be flatly and directly taken, it is a
hard and unfit saying, and it is well, that it is but one Doctors opinion, since
the words of men, yea of all the world put together cannot be balanced in
equal weight, with the immediate word of God, which is so directly inspired by
the holy Ghost. A sweet child the while was our Campian, Ration: 4:
who would take on him to prove, that the rest of the Synods, and namely that
of Trent was of the same authority with those four first, and so consequently
all as powerful as the Gospels. By which reconing we should not only have a
fifth Gospel of Nicodemus, or some such counterfeit, but eighteen Gospels
more besides the four Eva^gelists, and so our Bibles now will grow so big,
that one volume will not hold the^. What a wrong did that proud and arrogant
Jesuit to the Scripture, when he durst write on that fashion? we dare not so
far dignifie or rather magnify the best Councels (after that in the Apostles
time) for fear of blasphemy. But if we shall compare the better with the
worser, the weaker with the stronger, we shall see that we are not to far to
lean on such assemblies, least by attributing over much to such confluences,
we sometimes take error for verity. For have there not bin meetings which have
concluded against the truth, and yet have carried a goodly show too? I will not
insist on Provincial Councels, as that of Inter opera Cyptia^.
A frike, where Cyprian and the rest concluded for rebaptising of those which
were baptized by heretics, or that of Soc. 1: 21.
Tyrus which proceeded against Athanasius being innocent, or that of Lib: 2: 7.
Antioch, as also of cap. 25.
Sirmiu^ both which decreed for the Arrians, against the faith of
Consubstantiality in Christ with his Father. I will rather stand on those who
go for general, as that of Sardis in part rejected by In Indice concilioru^.
Possevinus, that of Milaine where were 300. Bishops joining for Arrianisme,
that of Sele^tia being gathered to the same purpose. Here may you find more
general Synods making for the Arrians while they were in any strength, then
making against them.

13 Lay to these the Great Council of Ariminum, where were six hundred
Bishops mainetaining and decreeing for the opinion of Arius, and the
authority whereof seemed to be so great, and was so far urged, that
Saint Augustine himself had been everborne with it, had he not been forced
to fly to the Scriptures, which were and are the touchstone to try Councels
by. The place which he has to that purpose is famous, Aug contra Maxim. Arrian
Episcop. l. 3:
But now neither should I produce the Nicene Council, nor thou that of
Ariminum as meaning to extol it. Neither am I held with the authority of
the one, nor thou with the other. With authorities of Scriptures, which are
vvitnesses not proper to either, but common to both, let matter contend with
matter, cause with cause, reason with reason. Both of us do read, That we
may be in his true son Jesus Christ, He is very God and life eternal, Let
both of us yield to weight of so great moment. These are the words of the same
S. Auste^, who els-where had said, Epist: 118:
The authority of Plenary Councils is most wholesome in the Church. Very whole
some while they keep right with the verity of Christ, but when they fall from
that, they are otherwise. But S. Auste^ was never of opinion to atrribute too
much to Councils: for he was not so simple but that he saw there were or might
be many imperfectio^s in the^, yea in the best of the^. It is a worthy
testimony which he gives in this behalf, when he was pressed with the authority
of Cypria^ and the Africane Counsel. De Bap^ismo co^tr: Donaust: lib. 2. 3.
The sacred Scripture says he is not at alto be doubted or desputed of. The
letters of Bishops written since the Scripture if there be any error in the^
may be reprehe^ded by the wiser speech of any one who is more skilful in that
matter, and by the graver authority of other Bishops, and by the wisdom of
the more learned, and by Councels. And who knows not that Provincial Councels
without any sticking do yield to the authority of plenary Councels, which are
gathered out of the whole Christian world, yea and that oftentimes the former
Plenary Councils are amended by the later, when by any experience of things,
that is opened which was shut, and known which did lie hid, without any vanity
of sacrilegious pride, without any puffed neck of arroga^cy, without any
contention of malicious envy, with holy humility, with Catholic peace, with
Christian charity. And some part of this he confirms again afterward, Among
after-co^mers, the later Councils are preferred Cap. 9.
before the former, and the whole evermore by very good right is esteemed
before the parts. Well the^ by Austens sentence, eve^ General councils may be
amended and altered: therefore they may err, or come to short. Which will the
better appear if we remember that sometimes one Council is directly contrary
to another, as that of Ariminum to the former of Nice, that of Franckforde
touching Images, to the later at Nice, those of Constance and Basile in the
subiecting of the Pope to the Council, to those of Florence and Trent, the 2.
at Ephesus approving Eutyches, to that of Chalcedo^ which condemned him. Yea
the Socrat. 2. 16.
Counsel of Sardis against it self, when the Eastern Bishops were for
Arrianisme, the Western against it, whereupon they divided themselves in place
as well as in opinion. It were the^ a hard matter in an unavoidable co^trariety
or rather co^tradictio^, to have both sorts of Councils allowed, the affirmer
and the denier: and therefore simply, absolutely and of themselves they are not
to be held for sufficient co^firmers of that which we must believe. It may be
added as another singular exception against Councils, that most of the^ are
handled with such irregularities, that it is not only probable that they may
swarve, but likely that they will, since even the best men, and to the best
Councils do come so laden with passions, affections, humors and partialities,
that they will not or cannot see the truth. One of the most moderate of all the
Popish Councels was that of Basile, and yet what turbule^tnes does De Council.
Basilcens.
Aeneas Sylvius witness there to have bin? He therefore in that argument is
rather to be read, the^ that which commonly goes for the Counsel of Basile,
as In Indice falcic: rerum expet. and fugiend.
Orthuinus Gratius well observes, for in Aeneas who was present at that
meeting, and saw and recorded all the manner of it, a man may find the order or
disorder of it so described, that he may imagine himself to behold the Fathers
there assembled sitting in their Po^tificalibus. If we would have an example of
this in an old Synod, let it be the Counsel of Socrat. 7. 33.
Ephesus, which is one of the four Ecumenical great ones. For there was not
only a clamourous division for a good space between Cyril Bishop of
Alexandria, and the other Orthodoxe Bishops on the one side, and Nestorius with
his heretical Prelates on the other side, each maintaining their faction, and
proceeding to deprive each other of their Bishoprikes, but John Bishop of
Antioch although Catholikein opinion, grows out with Cyril also, that he had
fell to sentencing Nestorius before John's coming, whereupon Cyril joining with
him Iuvenal the Bishop of Jerusalem, proceeds to deprive John also of his
Bishoprike. But afterward John returning to Antioch, and calli^g to him many
Bish. falls to the deprivatio of Cyril who was now returned to Alexandria.
And that these and the like tumultuous fashions were not rarely but commonly
used in other Councels, we need no better witness then Gregory Epist: 55:
Nazianzen, whose words touching this matter are these, I am of this ^nde, of
I must write that which is truth, that I do fly all Councels of Bishops,
because no man yet could ever see end of Synod to any profit, and whereby
things which were ill were not more exacerbated then cured. For there is in
them such a desire of contention, and such an ambition of dominering (do not
think me to write these things odiously and unreasonably in this manner) and
they are so impossible to be overcome in disputation, that if one will deal
iudiciously with them, he shall sooner be held guilty of some other evil
then convince and clear that which is theirs. This is the sentence of him who
was very wise and learned, and in whose time diverse Synodes were aslembled, so
that he might speak upon sound experience. Thus men are, and ever have been
men, and where such faction, contention, emulation, ambition, malice, bitterness
is, may it not be well presumed, that the sacred Spirit of God in respect of
any immediate and extraordinary influence of truth, may as well be absent as
present? What then can certainly and warrantably be grounded hereupon?

14 If this yet do not satisfy, will you hear the reasons of one, whom by his
own words you may think to be a Calvinist, and yet he was what he was, long
before Luther was borne. This party whom I produce is the Archdeacon Nicolaus
de Clemangijs, who takes on him to dispute whether in matters of fact a
general Council may^rre or no? For that it cannot err in matters of faith or
rather that it cannot finally fail we are says he, to believe. But let the
Readeriudge, whether he do not point shrewdly at that erring also, and
whether his reasons beat not as fully to that, as to the other. I must draw
into a narower room, that which he utters more at large, but yet so as to
keep his own words, Disputat. super materia Concilior general^n.
Be all General Councels of equal authority? If they be, why does Gregory
so honor the four first, (...) the four Gospels? For by singling out those
four, he leaves in men's minds a doubtful suspicion of the rest If a Council
cannot err, how may that rule of the Lawyers be understood, that the Militant
Church oftentimes does deceive and is deceived? And how does the Militant
Church and triumphant in this point differ, if both of them be in all points
infallible^ is not the Church assembled in the Council, a passenger and a
pilgrime^ if it be, then it is in the state of deserving ill or well, and may
do right or otherwise. That the Church cannot fail in faith, we have a
testimony from Christ, Peter I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not,
but for other things I remem ber no such lesson. For that out of the Gospel
convinces little, where two or three are gathered together in my name, there
am I in the middle of them. For they may be deceived among whom Christ is.
John the Baptist said of him to the Pharisees, He was among you, and yet they
were deceived, and he was among the Jews when he was crucified and spit upon.
And what mad man will say, that they could not be deceived? Again of what
assistance of Christ is that to be understood, if of his assistance by the
presence of his divinity, that is every where, and is nothing to this matter.
If of the assistance by his grace, how will it follow that where two or three
come together to confer about the peace of the Church or any other good, Gods
grace should presently br infused in them, when before they have perhaps
committed many sins where of they have nether had compunction nor made
confession. For thus some do come together, and either so presently with the
coming their sins are blotted out, or else it is not necessary that they
should have grace infused. But suppose they have grace, will that make them
that they cannot sin, that they cannot go awry by ignorance, or by some
passion blinding them? Grace moves to do well, but does not enforce or put in
an inevitable necessity. If you understand it of assistance by direction
inwardly, that is given only to holy men who are filled with the spirit.
Again, Councels many times are gathered to alay schisms between Popes, and to
make peace in the Church vvhieh perhaps God has so interrupted, that he may
do good to the Church, to purge it from pride, covetonsues, vanity, simony.
Now it comes not from Christ, that men should desire only the external peace
of the Church, for so do many carnal men at this day, that themselves living
in idleness and rest, they may freely serve their own wills. And who will say
that these are gathered in the name of Christ, who for this end seek the
unity of the Church? Yet of these there are so many as are scant to be numbered;
carnal children of the Church, who care for nothing that is spiritual, may
persecute those who are after the spirit, Such as for te^peral things come to
the Church, hypocrites, eaters up of Christ crucified, and of these is the
Church so full, that in Chapters or Colleges you can hardly find other. And
of these as being the wisest fellows are those who are sent to Rome and
Princes Courts, to general Councels, and these upon hope of greater promotion
do labor that they may be sent. And are these such who will come to reform
the Church, who only desire that freely the^ selves may do what they list. But
before peace and justice can be there must be such are formation in the Church.
He that seeks outward peace before spiritual peace, does as if he should
build a house without a foundation. They who were assembled at the Council of
Pisa, said they had brought peace to the Church, and gave it out to the world,
when there was no such matter. Do you think then whither they were deceived or
not? and so a Council may be deceivid. The holy Ghost directs the^ who have
fitted themselves as aledging to intertaine him by good works. But how should
he visit them who thwarte the spirit, and seek to extinguish him in other
men? which in steed of the fire of charity are inflamed with the heat of
ambition? These will hear nothing which is contrary to their own lust, and
taste nothing of spiritual gifts, and come with a false heart to handle Gods
businesses, seeking those things which are their evvne and not Gods, which if
Paul could say of his time, we may much more say of the dregs of our days.
With such the holy Ghost is not: and such stubborn ones would not yield to
the motions thereof. Now if the Spirit be not with such, and the greatest part
of Councels consist of such, and there the Decrees are made by the maiour part
of voices, may not Councels err? I speak not this of the present Council at
Basile, for there I hear mante good things are handled: but yet I hear there
be many things there which shoulds not be, contentions, emulations,
heart-burnings, clamours which the Spirit does not desire. There had need be
good men sent to Councels, that God may be among them. The ancient Fathers
did use with praying, fasting and weeping to beg at Gods hand, that his
Spirit might be present at Councels among them, to direct them, which they
needed not to have done, if they ware sure that he could not be absent. UUee
read in the Scripture that for one man's sin, an army of Gods freindes has
been overthrown. One sick sheep infecteth a whole flock. And since on one
man's sentence or voice, the whole assembly depends, may not he both be
deceived and deceive a whole Council? To do all things well and never to
erra is only the part of GOD; but the world knovveth that men are not
Gods, not Angels, but such as of whom it is said. All men are liars. They
are subject to passions and ignoraunces, which overtake men the more, when by
vain pride they vvoulde put them from them. If you say that it rests not on
humane infirmity, but it is of the power of the holy Ghost, that the
Council cannot be deceived, who is certain that with the maiour part of
the Council which must preponderate, the holy Ghost is present? If you sa^e
it is likelye the spirit is in some sevve, and they may work the rest to the
right, what if the multitude have deserved to be deceived? So Micheas could do
no good on all Achabs Prophets. And who knows whither the maiour part of the
Council be vvorthie to be deceived or no? God in Jeremy did for sake the
temple wherein the jews did trust, and he badde the Prophet that he
should not pray for them, for he would not hear him. Therefore good men's
prayers do not alvvaies obtain for the wicked. Yea but he has promised to
be with his Church to the end of the world. But he alone knovveth who
they are that have grace in his Church. The Lord knovveth who, are his. The
Church by grace may remain in one only woman, as in the time of the passion
it did only in the Uirgin Marie. Shall a Council now be of greater
authority then all the Apostles were? And yet they all declined at Christ's
death, and were afraid. Shall is be greater then all the militant Church, of
which Augustine said that here it cannot be without spotte or vvrinckle,
but in the new Jerusalem it must be. What should be the reason that the four
first Councils specially be in such estimation with all, but that there were
better men, then sinca have bin, and they framed themselves to ask what the
spirit was willing unto? These late ones are Councils of blend, and assemble
about such things as flesh and blood only would have them. Then he tells the
tale how at Rome in a Council a little before gathered by John the 24. an Owl
appeared looking directly upon the Pope, to the amaseme^t of some to the great
scorn of other. Then he proceeds, By the unworthiness of the head or the
mayor part, the Counsel may miss of a good end other such causes there may be,
as too much listening to temporal peace, or too much presu^ptre^ of their own
grace and wisdom, or negligence of looking into the word of God. It is good
therefore that they who meet in such assemblies be not too bold. In another
Tract. priore de materia Conc. Generalis.
treatise of this same argument, he had warned before, that men should not say
as of likelihood some did, We are a General Council, let us go to it
boldelye, vv^ cannot err. What Papist will not think that this man in the
matter of Councils is more a Calvinist the^ Calvin himself. Let these reasons
be well waighed, and then judge whither too much be to be attributed to
Councels, besides those flawa and cracks which I formerly mentioned, as who are
to call Councels, who are to have voices in Councels, whither the Pope be to be
subjected to a Council or no, which the Pope and all his flatterers cannot
endure.

15 He who list to know more of the Popes challenge touching his own calling
and overbalancing Councels, let him look the censure of Hist. Hussit l. 9:
Cochleus upon the Synod at Basile. There he affirms that assembly to be
but a Conciliable or Conventicle, after that Pope Eugenius had given out his
summons, that he would have that meeting to be removed to Ferrara first, but
afterward to Florence, else there had been at one time two general Councels,
and consequently two Churches. Also, that the fathers at Basile with their
Antipape Felix, were for eight years in a schism against Eugenius, and yet
they gave out that they had the holy Ghost among them. That to call a Council,
by ancient right belongs to the Bishop of Rome. That it pertayneth not to
sheep to judge their shepherd. But Eugenius himself with more majesty and
Pope-like state could say, Ibidem.
To that robbery at Basil, all the Devils of the world do seem to have come
together. To these bracks about Councels, this one farther may be joined, that
they say a Council is not good, unless the Pope confirm it. For now how
shall we know whether a Synod be confirmed or no, unless there be some Bull
or Decree published concerning that particular, since In Iudice Concilio^
Possevinus the Jesuit in rekoning up the Councels, names four at A^les, one
at Laodicea, five at Orleans, and diverse other, which he says are of great
authority, for although an open confirmation of them be not found, yet they
are allowed of by a secret consent of the Church, and the Popes and Doctors
citing them. This is a point which may breed great difficulty, whither that be
enough to ratify a Synod or no. Also it were good that before we make
Councils a matter of belief, we were assured that we have none, but those
which are right in the whole, and in the parts. For Acts of Councels have bin
much falsified, as it is alleged in the sixth General Council holden at
Constantinople, Action. 14
that some had falsified the Acts of the fifth General Council holden in the
same place, as was apparently deprehended. How those in Afrike did complain of
the Popes forsting in somewhat to the first Nicene Synod, I have showed
before; and how the Council sent to Nice it self to see the Original. But in
the same manner has the Pope complained, that other have also falsified the
Acts of the same Council. For Felix Bishop of Rome himself has made this
Decree, In Decretis felicis Papae. In Concilijs.
Let the persons of the accusers be without all suspicion, because by reason of
the molestations offered by evil men, this was defined in the Nicene Council
by all, although by the falshoode of lewd persons, these and many other things
are blotted out. We then had need to take heed, that we do: not believe
those things as certain, which of themselves are so uncertain. Let Papists
do it if they will. Lastly before I shut up this Chapter it is not amiss to
know, that it is not for the ancient Synods that the Romanists do strive, but
for those which lately were held, wherein their Pope bore much sway, and their
Popery was established by fragments. For out of the old Councels both
Provincial and Universal, there are many matters contrary to their
definitions. As in the third Council at Carthage there is much spoken
concerning the children of Priests, which shows that Priests then were
ordinarily married. And there it is that the Pope should not be called the
Prince of Priests or chief Priest. In the Elibertine Council is a flat decree
against Images in Churches, It Canon 36
pleases us that pictures should not be in the Churches, least that which is
worshipped or adored, should be painted on walls. In the fifth In epistol.
felicis.
Council at Constantinople, by an Epistle of Pope Felix to Zeno, it is showed
that the Church is built on the confession of Peter, not on his person or
place. In the ninth Council of Canon. 1.
Toledo, if a Metropolitan defraude the Church, complaint thereof is to be
made to the king, which shows that Princes then had to do with persons and
causes Ecclesiastical. Very many more such instances may be brought, how the
old Councels knew nothing of that heart of Popery, which since has grown up,
by the connivence of some Princes, the weakness of other, and the notable
cunning of Antichrist. And for times now long agone the extravagancie and
transcendencie of the Roman Bishops power is no where known. For in the Nicene
Canon. 6
Council, the Bishop of Alexandria in his Province, and the Patriarch of
Antioch in his, have as much jurisdiction as the Pope has in his. In the
Isidor in praefat. Council. Ephesin.
Ephesine Synod Cyrill of Alexandria was president, and not the Bishop of
Rome, and there it is said that In epistol. ad Nestoriu^
Peter and John were each to other of equal dignity, because they were
Apostles and holy disciples, which overthrows the Primacie of the Roman
Bishop deriving his prerogative only from Peter's preeminence. And in the
Council of Canon. 1.
Chalcedon all is confirmed which was decreed before in other Synodes. Thus the
Pope and Papists should gain much by sending us to look into the most ancient
Councels.


THE TENTH REASON. Fathers.
T. HILL. THE Catholic Roman religion is most plainly taught by all the
ancient Fathers of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth hundred
years after Christ, and has been ever (without all controversy) taught of
the Fathers of every age since until this day. That religion did Diony sius
Areopagita, S. Paul his scholar so manifestly teach as Causaeus a French
Protestant called him for his labor a doting old Causaeus Dial. 5. and 11. In
capt: Babilonica.
man, much like as his father Luther had said before him that Areopagita his
works were like to dreams and most pernicious. The same faith was taught of
Saint Ignatius, Clemens, Justinius, Tertullian, Cyprian, Irenaeus, and in one
word all the anncient Fathers not one excepted.


G. ABBOT. WHen Thomas Pilcher sometimes an unworthy fellow of a College in
Oxford, but afterward an unlearned Priest of the Seminary, after pardon once
given him for his life, and being exiled from his Country, returned again
into England to pervert the subjects of her late Majesty, he was by arrest
of law to be brought to execution, where, as I have heard, being remembered by
an intelligent person that he should be well advised what the right or wrong
of the cause was, for which he did suffer, his reply was, that if he were in
an error, then Irenaeus and Iustine Martyr, Tertullian and Origene,
Lactantius, Hilary, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Hierome, Austen, Gregory, Bearnarde,
and all other the old Fathers of the Primitive Church, were mightily
deceived: for what he held they taught. The silye man had much ado to learn
the names of all these, but for reading any of them, or for knowing what they
vvrote, there be many yet living, who dare safely give their word, that he
good man was never troubled with it. This is the very case of the greatest part
of you Papists: you will speak without the book, and make good little of that
which you say: but yet for lack of chalenging and facing it out, you will
loose nothing of antiquity. And among al your copes-mates, as one that knows
least, and therefore dares to say most, you lay about you here for all and al
again. You are now come to your self, revested with your old spirit, and
therefore we will look for a legion of Vniversals at your hands. The
vn-Catholike Roman Religion, it is Papistry which you mean, is not only
taught, or plainly taught, but most plainly taught, not by some, but by all
the ancient Fathers of the first six ages after Christ, and has been not
sometimes but ever, not doubtingly but without all controversy taught of the
Fathers of each age until this day. If you had a fore-heade left, and knevve
what you did say, which I think you do not, but only take up this speech
on the word of other men, you would blush a whole year together at this your
own absurdity, and by that time would this rubour be so settled in your face,
that it would never out. For, that I may pluck you a little back by the
sleeue, does Saint Augustine, and, Orosius, and Fulgentius, and Bernard, where
they of purpose handle the argument, teach as you do teach concerning the
freeness of Gods grace every way, and touching free will? In pref. 1. 5 Bibli.
Sa^ct
Sixtus Senensis shall condemn you, who rejects Saint Augustines doctrine in
that behalf. Do Lactantius and Ephiphanius say as you say concerning Images?
Do Clemens Alexandrinus, and Basile, and Gregory Nazianzen, and Chrysostom
join with you in prohibiting the marriage of the Clergy? Is Theodoret your in
the matter of Transubstantiation, when he who in the end of his Post Epiphan
The. Dialog.
Dialogues writes the Admonition to the Reader, is enforced though he be a
Papist, to confess, that he has many things against it. Are Tertullian and
Saint Augustine of your mind when they expound This is my body, to mean but
the sign or figure of his body? Is Saint Ambrose yours about praying to
Saints? Is Cyprian, yea Gregory himself of your judgment, about the
supremacy of Peter and of the Pope? Amongst a hundred examples I do but touch
these things, as having occasion elsewhere more largely to handle every one of
these points. So little account do you make of truth, being either spurred to it
by ignorance, or blinded with maliciousnes, both which in you are wonderfully
desirous to uphold your drowping cause.

2 That Causaeus or Luther do brande your Dionysius Areopagita for a
counterfeit, and speak of him accordingly, we do not marveile. There was one
of that name indeed, an Act. 17. 34.
auditor of S. Paul, but these books fastened on him, are not worthy of his
person. What is there in them all which savoureth of a man taught by an
Apostolical spirit? S. Paul was facile in his vvriting, that the multitude
might understand his maine drift every where: this is so obscure that nothing
can be darker. S. Paul's words were for edification: this is full of vain
curiosity, taking on him to describe every angle and office in heaven. Saint
Col. 2. 18
Paul rebuked those who meddling with the worshipping of Angels, did advance
themselves in those things which they never saw: this fellow speaks of the
Angels as if he had been set to take the muster and view of them single from
one end of heaven to the other. But his book De divinis Nominibies does much
display him for a counter feit. For as it may be well questioned in him, how
he could cite the Epistle of Ignatius to the Romans, which was Eve Eccl. hist.
li. 3. 30.
written but a little before the death of Ignatius; and he was martyred in the
time of Traiane^ whereas Dionysius was a man of that age, that long before
Saint Paul's death under Nero he was a Senator of Act 17 34:
Athens, or one of their judges in the street of Mars: so it cannot be excused
that he De divinis nominibus.
cites Clement the Philosopher, which being Clemens Alexandrinus did live
almost two hundred years after Christ, and therefore this Dionysius citing him
was not like to be the hearer of the Apostle Paul. Now in the eight book of
his Stromata, Clemens indeed does show himself a Philosopher, yea if you will
a Logician, talking of the Predicaments, and naming Relatiues, which is the
point for the which this forged Dionysius cites him. Again, this book is
dedicated to Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, who being so long a scholar and fellow
traveiler with S. Paul, needed not so mean a man, and in so barbarous a
fashion to instruct him in those things which this sweet Author pretends.
Besides this, if there had been such an Author of any worth or name, some of
the ancient writers would have given him some credit, and sometimes have
mentioned him. Eusebius lets not any man escape who was ought, or left any
monument to the church. Notwithstanding he has not any word of this
Dionysius. S. Hierome came after him, and wrote a Catalog. scripto.
Ecclesiastico.
treatise purposely of such as before his days, left any books to posterity,
where nevertheless the hame of this Dionysius is not to be found. And so much
does Lib. 6. Bib. Annot 229.
Sixtus Senensis himself observe, who also Lib. 2.
elsewhere tells us, that Cardinal Caietane in his Commentaries on the Acts
as also on the third of Kings excepteth against this Dionysius, as unworthy of
all credit. There is another treatise in the name of De caelesti Hierarchia.
Dionysius which records to us in particular 9. several orders of Angels. If
such a tract had bin known among the ancient, or had been of any reputation
with them, some or other of the old Fathers speaking of Angels, upon just
occasion would have named either it, or the author, or the matter of it.
Haeres. 64
Epiphanius says that there are more degrees of Angels then one, but how many
he names not. To the same purpose speaks In Ps. 118.
Hilary; but he has no fixed number. Dialog: 1.
Caesarius the brother of Gregory Nazianzen says that there be seven orders
of Angels. Saint Eucharid. ad Lauren. ca. 58.
Austen as wise and learned a man as he was, yet professes that he knows
not, what Seeds, and Dominationes, et principatus (word^ by some expounded to
be several sorts of Angels) do mean. If he had seen that work of
Dionysius, he might have helped his ignorance; for he describes the^ to an
inch, if we will believe him. In another place the same Ad Orosium contr.
Priscillia^ and origenistas
Austen writes thus of himself; That th^re be these Seats, or Thrones,
Dominions, Principalities, Powers in the heavenly furnitures, I do most
firmly believe, and with an undoubted faith I do held that they do somewhat
differ between themselves. But to the end that you may think meanly of me
whom you repute to be a great Doctor, what these ^ee and how they differ
among themselves I know not. But perhaps it may be objected that In
Questionibus.
Athanasius, yea and out of Dionysius, says that there be nine orders of
Angels. I answer, first that indeed he names one Dionysius, and attributes
to him the title of a Divine, but he calls him, not Areopagita, and therefore
he may mean some other later fellow. Secondly, the treatise containing this,
is expunged out of the works of Athanasius, and put among those that are held
to be forged; so that here but one liar does speak for another, and then their
reward is that neither of them ought to be believed. Thirdly it agrees not
with an undoubted place of De co^muni essent. patris. filij and spi. sanct.
Athanasius, for there he rather seems to make five sorts of Angels, and that
with offices differing from those of Dionysius, as, those that teach, those
that permit things to be done, those that punish, those that gratify souls,
and those who remain with men. Afterward indeed he mencioneth Thrones, and
Cherubins and Seraphins. So that the first who being himself of any
estimation mencioneth Denis, is Gregory the Great, who in Moral: lib: 32. 18:
one place says that there be nine orders of Angels, but not a word has he
of Dionysius. And in a In 1. King 14.
second place, so much he does and no more. But in a Homil 34 in quadra^ (...).
third he not only has these distinctio^s of Angels, but he alleges for it
Dionysius also, and that by the name of Areopagita, calli^g him an ancient and
venerable Father. But this is a single testimony, and al other of more
antiquity make against him; and he may be supposed to do it doubtfully, since
naming the matter thrice he speaks of Denis but once. And moreover Gregory
lived 600. years after Christ, by which time this bastard might be a hundred
or two hundred year old, and with some might be esteemed authentical, which
Gregory might take up from the^ without farther examination. He who list to see
this Denis farther discovered, and quite discarded, let him look that noble
Lib. (...):
Mo^ney, writi^g touching the Mass, and if he be not impude^tly refractary, he
shall be sile^ced in this point for ever. Thus you are like to make good work
with your Fathers, when the first of your tale is fil^ populi, a bastard seed
which cannot inherit. What you say of Ignatius, Cleme^s, Iust^, Tertullia^,
Cypr^, Ir^us, and all the Fathers is a vain, Popish, and Pilcher-like brag,
which is ordinary with such crakers as you are, and till you cite some
particular, deserves no answer but to be denied. If you meant truly to your
Readers, you would cite them somewhat for their money.


T. HILL. THis is very plain in that the Cath^ are put, and compelled by the
Protestants to defend, (...) and vp^la the ^dit and authority of the said
Fathers: for the Protestants rail as them, the Catholics defend them; the
Protestants refuse their authority, the Catholics hold i^ for (...) the
Protestants will not be ^yed by them: the Catholics appeal^ to their
judgment; and to be b^fe, the Protestants make no more ac^te of them, longer
then they can wrest them to serve their (...) the they d^ of Bevis of
Southampton, or of Adam Bell. And in (...) the Protestants, I include all the
Puri^es; for I am not ignor^ how the s^ Protestants are driven by the said
Puritan^ to defend the Fathers, and also are called Papists for their labor.
And ^re by i^ i^ ^fest that the Fathers are with the Catholics, and ^her (...)
the Protests ^r (...). And vvhither all the (...), being men of exce^ wits, of
(...), of ^rfull l^ing, servent in prayer, holy in conversation, greatly in
Gods favor, mighty in working of miracles, and adorned with many such like
gifts were more like to understands the Scriptures freshlie delivered unto
them from the Apostles themselves (who also no doubt taught their scholors the
true sense thereof, and they theirs from one age to another) or these late
foolish, vnstudied, unlearned, profane and arregant fellows, be judges your
selves.


G. ABBOT. 3 TILL you came to this Period you spoke something of your own
peradventure, but now you are apparently become but eve^ a plain tru^ke to
carry along what your M. Motiv: 14:
Bristow puts into you: fro^stealing out of whose book, you cannot
co^taine, if your hands were bound behind you. If he then lash and lie, you
think you may do so also, as lying safe under his shilde. But his target is no
thick one, as that ^vid Me^amorph Lib: 13:
seve^-folde buckler of A^ax was, but made of thin brown paper, and therefore
will not bear out one blow. I pray you, where are you forced to uphold the
Fathers credit against the Protestants railing at the^? or who of the
Protestants be they, that give them not the same right, which God would have to
be give^ unto the^, or which they themselves desired should be allotted unto
their writi^gs? We hold them and their labors to be great instruments of the
setting forth of Gods glory, and we esteem it as a good blessing from above,
that the Lord has left their labors as monuments to his church, wherein we not
only know what was done and taught in the first ages of the christian world,
but may be helped also many ways in the understanding of Scriptures, and
beating down of diverse heresies. And our men do study the^, and are as copious
and frequent in the^ as Papists be, which if you will, you may see, in the
books of Bishop Jewel, D. Hu^fry, D. Folk, Peter Martyr, Che^nicius, yea M.
Calvin's Institutio^s, to say nothing of diverse now livi^g. Truth it is, that
when our men made the true touch-sto^e, and only absolute Judge of
controversies to be the Scripture, Harding and his companions in effect flying
from that, would needs bear the world in hand, that if the trial might be by
the Fathers, the victory was certainly theirs. Whereupon in England, (as also in
other places before) they who stood for reformation, refusing the^ at no weapon
joined with them there, and now as persons of desperate and deplorate misery
you have nothing to help you, but by foisting and iugling in chaungelings,
vpstarts and counterfeits in steed of undoubted ones, and by razing and
curtolling and clipping the works of those reverend me^, as anon I shall show
you. It is therefore a gross slander that we do rail at them, or that we do
wrest them. Where there is just cause, we as men Horat. l. 11 Apistol. 1:
Nullius ad^icti iurare, in verba magistri, bound to stand to the opinion of
none but of the holy Ghost, we declining-wise do leave the^: but where they
subscribe to the authority of God, there we subscribe to them, defend them, and
refuse not to be tried by them, so far as we may by any holy and learned men,
of which sort we hold them, but yet still know them to be men. As for Bevis of
Southampton, and Adam bell we hold to be but fictions, such as were devised in
the time of Popery, and thought fit then together with other Legends to be
imparted to the people, that when they should rather have looked into the word
of God if they might have bin suffered, they being busied with such toies,
might not grow to be of such Christian understanding, as to espy the idolatries
and collusions of the Clergy. When a man who speaks untruth comes to
examination, his tongue faltereth in his mouth, and his tale crosses it self.
So does yours, who attempting both to soupe and blow at once, make no bones to
speak as good as flat co^tradictions, Simul forbere and flare Era^m: in Adage
In the one sentence, the Protestante rail at the^, refuse their authority,
make no more account of the^ then of Adam Bell, in the next the Protestants are
driven by the Puritanes, to defend the Fathers, and they are called Papists for
their labor. So they do defend them, and not defend them. They rail on them,
and yet speak for them. This is one of the riddles fit for Terent. in Andrias
Oedipus. And yet the Fathers are against both the Protestants and the
Puritanes. And why then I request you do the Protestants so maintain them? For
such dissolute dawbing of paper, you are worthy to be rewarded at least with
nothing. It may be said of you, and your master Bristow, Virgils. Eclog. 3:
Et vitula tu dignus and hic. It cannot be denied that some men of learning
have disliked the overmuch heaping up of Sentences out of the Fathers, to no
purpose or needlessely, and especially if it have bin done in Latin or Greek,
when Sermons are made to the ordinary people in the vulgar tongue. But the
judgment of the most judicious and such as respect the edificatio^ of the
heaters, will warrant this their opinion, while it disl^keth not the use, but
the abuse. But that any man of learning in our church, or of true account in
our state, have simply co^dc^ned the using of the^, you cannot show. Some
weaker men in a little hum^ur have seemed to be no great favourets of the^,
pa^tly because they know them not, as (...) in Ad^gijs.
Knowledge has none more eger enemy the^ (...) person, and partly because they
have not learning to understand the^. Also because they will not be at cost to
buy the^, or if these imped^e^ts were remooved, because they will not take the
pains to read the^. But even such do daily more and more reform their
judgment, and we doubt not but God who has put the spirit of moderation and
tempera^te into the greatest, wisest, and most learned of such as in times past
were otherwise minded, will loine us al in one against you and the common
enemies of the truth, who in an Italionated and outlandish faction little care
what you do. And so I trust every English man defiring to keep himself in
spiritual purity, and Iacob^. 27 Motiv. 14.
unspotted of the world, and Poperty, the odious names of Puritans and
Precisias whereat you have so triu^phed shall to the grief of your hearts be
extirpated, and al who love the Gospel ioining in one as Christians and
brethren shall be dutiful subjects to God and our King. Your conclusion is
ridiculous and worthy to be hissed at, The Protestants defend the Fathers
against the Puritanes, Ergo the Fathers be against both the Protestants and the
Puritanes. This is Logic of the Popish Seminary.

4 The titles which you here bestow on the ancient Fathers, Bristow sets
down thus, (...) 14.
excellent wits, continual study, wonderful learning, servent prayer, holy
co^versation, favor in Gods sight, mighty working of infinite miracles, from
whence and from the rest, the Reader may judge, whether you had not Bristowes
book lying before you, when you skuffled together this Rhap^ody. As for these
praises, we neither envy the^ nor deny the^ to those great la^pes of the first
Church, unless it be that of working of miracles, whereof we make a doubt. And
by these helps we say that they were well furnished to understand and expound
many things in the Scripture, as also somewhat by their neerenesse to the time
of the Apostles, in those places especially where truth was kept without
mingling. And yet we will you here to remember that few or scant any one of
the Fathers had the Scriptures freshly delivered unto him from the Apostles
themselves; you are pitifully out, for diverse hundreds of years came between
Christ's disciples and the most of the old Doctors: And again to call to
mind, that soon after the Apostles, yea as Eccl. Hist. Lib 3. 26.
Eusebius says, immediately after their death, heretakes came plentifully in,
who labored what they could to corrupt the fountains, whence all pure water
was to flow. Remember also that for three hundred years by the extremity of
persecution, the Pastors were few, and they had little liberty to come
together to confer about things questioned, or to follow their studies so
much as they would. And yet farther remember, that some of the^ came late from
the Gentiles as Cyprian, some from heretics as Eusebius from the Arria^s, and
Auste^ the Manichees, somefro^ mere secular callings as Ambrose, and of al
these without Gods special grace they might a little participate. Then he is
bli^d who sees not, that they had not al those helps, as these have, who^ you
call late and folish and vnstudied, and unlearned, profane and arroga^t
fellows. These words you use, when you Doctor Hill are not worthy to be
sorted, with the meanest of a thousand among them, which speech without
amplification or any diminution may be justified only in the present Church of
England. For first we have the writings of all those Fathers themselves, like
to which every private man of them had not, no nor all the world neither before
their times. Secondly since their days there be infinite books written which
give light to matters in controversy. Thirdly our age by means of printing
has better facility to come by all books the^ those ancient times had.
Fourthly progres of days has made many things plainer to later ages, because
they have bin already fulfilled, the^ they could be to former tims, wherein me^
did but guess at the^. Fifthly God has made the scriptures of such sort, as
that men's wits are to be exercised in the^ until ye day of judgment, and it
belongs to that industry which God requires in his servants, ye they should
not satisfy themselves with the labors of others, and so growidle, bue they
should search farther, and inventis add^re. Sixthly the help of the tongues is
more rife now, then it was among the ordinary sort of them, as may be seen by
Athanasius, who was so stu^bled in the Prove. 8. 22
8. Chap. of the Proverbs; the Athanas. in decret. Nicen. Synod.
Arria^s to prove Christ a creature, urging thence by the tra^slatio^ of the
Septuagint, that it is in the text, (...). Septuag:
The Lord made me, or created me, the beginning of his ways, to which without
difficulties, he might easily have answered, if he had looked into the (...)
Hebrew, where it is rather as Hierome reads it the Lord possessed me, or as
Arias Montanus has it, the Lord got or obtained me. Also Austen had no Hebrew,
and both he and Gregory very little Greek, as els-where I have showed. Now
although it be likely that nearest to the fountains, the waters run most
clearly, and the farther of, that we are, they are the more likly to be
polluted, yet in spiritual things that is not to be understood of place or
time but of keeping close to the original of the written word, and not varying
from it. And so a man furnished by God as Exodus 31: (...).
Beseleel was to the framing of the Tabernacle, may be by the means above
named, and by prayer, conference and study nothing inferior to those first
lights; even as S. Austen was more excellent in some of his expositions on the
Scripture then Origene, and some other more ancient then himself were, Which
as both for him and S. Hierome especially in his Co^me^taries on the Prophets
you cannot deny, so it overturneth your reason that those who were nearest to
the Apostles should do best, by taking it fresh from the^, and so from hand to
hand. For some of the later did not only equal, but far exceed those who
were their forerunners, as Chrysostom in the Greek Church may show. Yet
understand all this, that we have no matter of moment in any point of religion,
nor scant any interpretation of Scripture, but we undertake to advouch it,
from some or more of the Fathers, in one place or other of their writings,
where they handle those things. It is Popery which lately crept in, that has
with the Glosses thereof, declined both the se^ce of the holy Ghost, and of the
old Fathers; while the pleasures of Popes and the quiddities of the barbarous
schoolme^ have perverted almost the whole face of Divinity, and brought it to
curious speculatio^s, and unprofitable questions. When you put it to trial, you
shall see that we are not so destitute of the Fathers, for the proof of our
religion, and the exposition of texts, nor so altogether vnstudied, and
illiterate as you in your weak understanding imagine us. Touching the
imputation of profaneness, you shall hear of me hereafter. Luther, in capt.
Bap. Causaeus vbi supra. Centuriat. centur: 2: c: 10. Calvin: instit cap: 13*
number. 29. Centur: 2: cop: 5: Causaeus dialog. 8: and 11 and 6: Bez^ in Act
Apost. cap: 23.



T. HILL. BUT indeed it is no marveile though the Protestants do conte^ne yea
revile the Fathers, in saying they taught things most like to dreams, they
were doting old men: they had foul blemishes and told trifling tales: they
had weeds and dregs, blaspemies and monsters: they were childish, dull and
destitute of God, and babbled they knew not what: they were bewitched of the
Devil, as damned as the Devil, blasphemers, naughty, wicked.


G. ABBOT. 5 Here you bring a pretty beade-roll of such fragme^ts, as you have
scraped to gither out of some of our side, who as you think have perstringed
diverse of the Fathers, or at least by your perverting or distorting of their
words, you would have the world to think that they have shrewdly galled the^.
Wherein you are much to be co^me^ded, that to make the better show both in your
text and marge^t, you bring us the same things and quotatio^s again, out of
Causaeus and Luther, which in this very Chap. and but one leaf before you
delivered unto us. This is no rare matter in your writers; for your In Matthew.
16: 18:
Rhemists play a pretier part then that, when meaning to spare for no cost, to
prove Peter to be such a rock, ason who^ the Church is principal built, they
thwacke authority upon authority to as good purpose as they can. And therefore
they have in the marge^t, S. Austen Sermon. 26. de Sanctis, and in the text, S.
Ambrose, Sermon. 68. which are both but one Sermon, put in the works of both
those Fathers, but in truth belonging to neither of the^. Which must needs show
that Papists in their greatest matters do either proceed idly, or else of
purpose they do bodge with their folowers, citi^g one for two, as if a man
should say that in Pompeyes time Luc: lib: 3^ Plut. in Caesar.
Julius broke up the treasury at Rome, and took out much money, and one Caesar
about the same time broke open the same treasury, and thereupon should
conclude, that therefore the Treasury was twice forcibly entered into, when
lulius Caesar was al but one man. What Luther spoke, was not against a Father
but a counterfeit, not against Dionysius Areopagita, but against some mean
fellow shrowding himself under his name. In K. Henry the 7. time, a man might
well have taunted Holinshed in Henri. 7.
Perkin Warbeck, and yet not have offended against the roial blood in the
children of K. Edward the 4. And the same is to be said for Causaeus, who is
to be imagined not to say ought against true Dionysius, but against that doater
who usurps that name. Now how shameful a matter is it for you to bring in
these as railing against the Doctors, when by distinguishing this false one
from those who be right, they do cou^tena^ce the true as much as they
discou^tena^ce the fained. He who says that false money is but brass or
copper, does not speak evil of the kings lawful and wartantable coin. Your
first fault against the Magdeburgenses, is taken out of the second Cap. 10.
Century, where being ex instituto, to give their censure on the writers of
that age, they yield unto the^ al their due commendation, of zeal in Gods
cause, of diligence in preaching and writing, of fortitude in oppugning
heresies, of enduring martyrdom. They show also to what points of religion
they do speak, and taking on the^ to show what is amiss in diverse of the^,
they use these words, As that the Epistles of Ignatius have in the^ some things
which do seem to incline to deformed blemishes. You might have marked that
before that speech they have doubted of the credit and authority of some of
those Epistles, whither they properly belong to Ignatius or no. So in Papias
they say there was naevus, a blemish, also that Clemens Alexandrinus, and
Athenagoras had their blemishes. And so of Justinius Martyr. What word can be
more gently spoken then to say they had their blemishes, the truth being so,
and in such sort as no Papist can excuse it. For that I may say nothing of
diverse things found in the^, which with you ca^ be no less the^ disputable;
but with us are reputed no sound doctrine; neither of some other plain
errors, it is apparent that diverse of the^, as Papias, and Justinius Martyr,
did hold the Millinary heresy, and for the same are taxed by the Century
writers. That which you me^tio^ of trofling tales, if you apply it to the^, is
worthy to be laughed at: for they have no word of any such matter in all that
Chapter, unless you take it out of their narration concerning Phocas, of who^
they say, that they pass oversome things reported by Lib: 10:
Vincentius inspeculo, because they seem to be fables. And what does this
detract from the Fathers, among who^ I trust, you put not Vincentius: and
Phocas did write nothing for ought that we find. And it is not impossible
that such a Legendary fellow as Vincentius is, may tell a tale of S. Hierom, S.
Ambros, or S. Auste^, and yet the reputation of these Doctors be among learned
men never the worse. Of Ireneus the Magdeburgenses say most mildly that he has
certain inconvenient opinions as stubble, and they cite this for one, which I
believe no sober Papist will hastily mainetaine, that Christ was baptized at
thirty years of age, preached at fortye, and was crucified at fiftye. And
that he held the error of the Chiliasts or Millenaries.

6 The second place which you cite out of the Cent: 2: 5:
Centuries deserves a whoop for there is not one word against any Father, but
to commend the^, for writing against the Vale^tinians, Gnostiks, Matcionites,
Montanists and such like other heretics. And to the opinions of these
heretical sects they give ye titles of mo^sters, porte^ts, doatings, and such
other, as they well merited. NOW if you of your goodness will take these heretics
for Fathers, the Centuriatours speak indeed hardly of such Fathers, for the
which, wise men will not blame the^: but if you apply their ce^sure concerning
heretics to be a railing on the Fathers who^ they rather extol, this is such
egregi ous ignotance or blindness or malice, as can scant be co^ceived by me,
and can never be excused by you. Like to this is your quoting of Calvin's
Institutions, where you name not the book, which intends that you never saw
him nor read him. In his four books there is not any thirteenth Chapter,
which has Paragraphes or Numbers 29. but only the first book. And there is
nothing touching this matter, this excepted, Call. Instit: Lib: 1: c. 13: numer:
29:
That nothing is more vnsaverye then those fond trifles, which are put out
under the name of Ignatius. He yields his reason for his words. And this is
not to revile Ignatius, but to reiecte leaden and copper stuff, which would
gladly be shrouded under his winge. And if this be to revile the Fathers,
almost all both Protestants and Papists, who have taken any pains to revise
and publish the Doctors, or to make any Annotations on their writings, do
revile them, for they show that many things are crept in among their true
works, which are not worthy to go under their names. As for Causaeus, I
cannot yet by any search get sight of the book, but we may judge by that
formerly objected against him concerning Dionysius, that if we had the book,
your cavil did contain no great matter in truth. And by Calvine and the
Century writers before named, we plentifully find, that you make no conscience
to abuse and mis-report any man's words, so that thereby you may make some show
with your credulous followers. But if it were so that Causaeus a private man,
and of no great reckoning for ought that I have heard, had said something
which could not be justified, the single conceit of this one man is not to be
held for the judgment of all the reformed Churches. That which you allege from
Master (...) Beza is a manifest depravation of yours; Beza in Act. cap. 23
for you make that to be directly and absolutely spoken which is uttered
conditionally. If that should be true in Hierome says he, which Erasmus upon
this place has set down, he should not only wrong Saint Paul, but should be
blasphemous against Christ. He assigns this for his reason, because he did
search for some take of imperfect piety in Christ. Now who does doubt but to
labor to find a hole in our Saviors behavior, and to witness of him that
any part of sanctity in him was imperfect, is nothing less then blasphemy:
(...) Blasphemy yet being taken (...) Mat. 12. 31
not for the sin against the holy Ghost, but for that kind of evil speaking
or detracting which by the mercy of God may be forgiven. The matter then is,
that the collection which Erasmus made upon the words of Hierome, is too hard,
and not the illation which Beza, brings in ther-vpon. If Erasmus mistook
Hierome or strained him too far, Beza has nothing to say against Hierome.
Thus some of your accusations are for ought that I can find merely forged and
fained, by you; some other things are aggravated and made worse then they be;
some just censures upon counterfeits are urged by you as if they were
invectiues against their true works, some speeches against one apparently
erroneous doctrine is construed of you, as if it were uttered against all that
the Doctors have wrote; the taxing of one treatise or of some one sentence
therein, is traduced as if it were the rejecting of all. Yet when all is done,
he is a simple Reader that cannot see, that as your suggestions are partial
and slanderous, so our usage to the Fathers of the Church is such, as to give
them their full right. In token whereof it were easy to show in the writings
of our men, many high praises and commendations given by them, to Hierom, to
Chrysostom, to Augustine and the rest.


T. HILL. FOr they who cannot endure certain set times to fast in, no marveile
though they revile Saint Basile, Saint Gregory Nazianzen, S. Leo, S.
Chrysostom which wrote such notable Sermons of Lent, and of other fasting
days the^ used, as they are now in the Catholic Church.


G. ABBOT. 7 YOU have given us the rule before; that we revile the Fathers:
now we shall have the reason annexed to the rule. The Fathers write notable
Sermons concerning Lent and other fasting days as they are now used; and we
cannot endure such fastes, therefore we hate the Fathers writing of that
argument. I vvoulde you could learn to hate untruth, and then your eyes would
be so opened, that you should see little of this which you write to be true.
How prove you that the Doctors speak of Lent and fasting days as you now
use them? You name us first Saint Basile, in whom I find only two Sermons
concerning fasting. The Sermon. de Ieiunio.
former of them is in commendation of abstinence, how good it is for the
soul, how healthful to the body. And there is not one word in it, to which
we do not assent, giving due commendation thereunto. His second Sermon does
bear a title which seems more to make for you, Deieiunio pridie diei Cinerum.
Of the fast the day before the day of Ashes, which implies that then they
kept a day of ashes, as now you keep Ashewednesday. I will not here discuss
whether the solemn use of ashes was so ancient or no: the contrary whereof
directly appears out of Polydore Virgil, (...) saying that Gregory who came
two hundred years after, first appointed Lent to begin on the (...) De
inventorib. reru^, Lib. 6. 3.
Wednesday, and added diverse solemnities unto it, as by name the taking of
ashes, where-withall this is said, Remember man that thou art ashes, and ^to
ashes thou shall return again. Hence first the title of the Sermon may very
well be supposed to be crept in by some later means. Secondly if you will allow
it, then your Shrove-Tuesday must be a fasting day, which the Romanists
Carnevall may not admit. Thirdly if you had looked into that Sermon it self,
you might have found that more then once, Basile speaks of a fast only for
five days, and no more; which being to be kept no longer, utterly overthrows
your positio^, that in those times Lent and fasting days were observed as now
they be. You have hard hap Doctor Hill to trippe up your own heels. In
Gregory Nazianzen there is so little concerning fasting, as that sca^t any
point in Divinity is less touched by him then that. In all his works I find
nothing purposely of that argument, but that a once he does excuse himself,
that for a whole Lent he had bin withdrawn De quadrage^. ^eiunij silentio.
to his private Meditations, and not preached publicly to his congregation.
Out of which there is nothing to be won but this, that a Lent in one sort or
other was kept in his time, which you need not trouble your self to prove;
for we do yield it. As for Chrysostom, he has three or four Sermons where he
speaks of fasting, how requisite it is, and that above all matters men in
their abstinence should fast from sin, which doctrine we also publish. Only
Ad Sermon. 72: and 73.
Populum Antiochenum he has two Sermons which mention Lent kept among them,
but particularly in what manner of abstine^ce, he speaks not. And what makes
this against us, whom you wrongfully charge to endure no set times of
abstaining? Leo has many Sermons concerning fasting, whereof De ieiunio d^imi
mesin,
eight are made touching a fast kept in the 10. month in winter when all
fruits were quite brought in: at which time then they used to give God thanks
for the same. In these I find much commendation of fasting and alms, with
exhortation thereunto. Also frequent mention of fasting on the Wednesdaies and
Fridaies, and remembering them to watch on the Saterdotes Lastly that there were
Sermon. (...):
4. times of abstinence in the year celebrated, Lent in the Spring, one for
Somer at Whitsontide, another for Autumn in the seventh month, a fourth for
Winter in the tenth month. He has De quadragesima
12. Sermons concerning Lent, wherein he often mentions how that time
consisted of 4^. days, that it was a time of preparation against the feast of
Easter: and that therein men ought as well to abstain from sin, as to fast from
food. And De ieiunio pe^costes.
4. Sermons I find in him touching a fast after Whitsons, that if any error by
intemperance be committed in the feast, it may be expelled by the sobriety of a
fast. Last of all he has De ieiunio septim^ mensis.
9. Sermons touching a fast yearly celebrated in the seventh month, where it
appears that their abstine^ce was on the Wednesdaies and F^daies, as also it
was in that other after Pe^^ ost; the remebra^ce of which 4. t^es by him
mentioned our Church does yet keep. But in all these his Sermons, there is not
so much as one word of distinction or diere^ce of meats, that flwh was to be
refused, and fish to be fed on; but that there should be an abstinence in
general. In one place I observe that thus he says, De ieiunio Pentecost.
Ser^. 14.
Every creature of God is good, and there is nothing to be ^fused which is
received with giving of thanks. But we are not created to this and, that with
foul and shameless greediness we should desire all the plenties of the
world, as if that which is lawful to be taken, might not be lawful to be
omitted. Here is no difference, of any of Gods creatures which are sit for
food, but one as well as another may be lavvfully used of him who minds
at all to eat. So that in a word amongst all these Fathers whom you bring
as crossing our courses, here is nothing which touches us, but rather makes
against you.

8. But to the end that you and as many as will, may be satisfied what we
do in this behalf, first we do teach that fasting and abstinence not for
or with superstition, but with faith and knowledge is necessary for
Christian men. 2. Sam. 12. 16.
David fasting prayed for the life of the child which was borne in
adultery. When the enemies invaded his Kingdom, 2. Chron. 20. 3
Iosaphat commanded a public fast to be proclaimed. What should I speak
of Ezr: 8. 21.
Ezra upon occasion doing the like, and the king of Ion. 3. 7:
Ninive at the preaching of Jonas, Joel. 1: 14: cap. 2. 15.
Joel prescribes this to be the means to appease the Lord in the midst of
his indignation. And in the new Testament we hear of it as practiced by Mat.
4. 2.
Christ, and there are by Cap: 6. 16.
him also rules prescribed in what sort it should be done. For frequenting
of it, Luk: 2: 37.
Anna the old virtuous widow is commended, and so is Act. 10: 30
Cornelius. It is one of the weapons wherewith S. 2. Cor: 6: 5
Paul did fight against his spiritual enemies. Briefly, in casting out of
Devils Christ ioineth fasting with prayers, and says that there is one kind of
(...) Mat. 17: 21
spirits, which cannot be eiected without those two. We add to these
Scriptures the testimonies of ancient writers, as that of (...) De ieinnio
Christi.
Cyprian, By fastings the sink of vices is dried up, wentonnessa is abated,
concupiscences do wax faint, pleasures go away as fugitives. And that of
(...) Chrysostom, That as lighter ships do pass the Sea more swiftly, but
those (...) Hom. 1. in Genesim.
which are over-burdened with great weight are drowned, so fasting making the
mind the lighter does cause that it the more easily does passethe sea of this
life, and looks into heaven and these things which are in heaven. As also
that of (...) In psalm. 42
Austen, Will thou have thy prayer to fly up unto God? make it two wings,
fasting and alms. Secondly we do think that such as live in these Northren
parts, as Germany, England, Scotland, Denmark and other toward the Pole
Artike, cannot without overthrow of their bodies so long endure to abstain from
food as those may who dwell in a warmer climate. By the Antiperistafis of the
cold air about them, their inward heat is the greater, and their stomaks are
the better, whereby more meat is digested, yea and more speedily concocted.
Hence it is as (...) one observes, that those of Afrike hold the Spaniards to
be great eaters, the Spaniards (...). li^ 10. (...). Scotic.
think so of the French, the French object that fault to the English and
Scots. Yet when they come to abide where we live, these in their feeding are
nothing inferior to us, Italia^s and French men while they have a while
remained in England, giving scope liberally enough unto their stomaks. Heat
the^ by nature being in us, if we should not have co^petent food, it would so
much the more be kindled, and so work upon the body it self to co^su^e it and
destroy it; that of seneca being verified, De Ira lib: ^9.
Want of food enforces heat, and burteth the blood, and staieth the course of
it in the veins being ill affected. It is not therefore for men of these
Northren parts to emulate or vie with other of hot countries, who in this
behalf are able to endure that which is right strange to us. When S. Paul and
his companions were in fear of suffering (...) ship-wracke, it is said that for
14. days (...) Act: 27: 35
they continued fasting, receiving nothing. Understand this nakedly as the
words do ly, and then, as much must be attributed to the fear of death which
amated the^, so not the least part thereof is to be imputed to the Climat, they
then being in the mediterra^ Sea, as low as the South of Sicely. Yet it may be
taken also, that they did eat nothing, that is so little as if it had bin
nothing, no set meal or refreshing. Ad Hellenium.
Greg. Nazianzen goes beyond this, making mention of some, who for 20. whole
days and nights abstained from meat, the truth whereof I leave to the Readers
consideration. Other examples of extraordinary abstinence may be brought, which
cannot in any sort be equalled by the Northren nations, whose necessity
requires more frequent food. And this is one reason why Christians of these
parts are not urged to watch all night before great feasts, as in some places
they did in the Primitive Church, which even now I mentioned out of Leo, since
the greater and fuller is their feed, the more apt men are to sleep: from the
which if they should be broken and staid in the time of preparation to the
solemnity, they would be the more propense to it, at the solemnest acts
themselves, as of hearing the word or receiving the Sacrament, in which case
Act. 20: 9^
Eurychus was at the preaching of Paul, and three Mat: 26: 4^
of the Apostles then when they should have bin very vigila^t, even at the time
of Christ's apprehension.

9 Thirdly since there is such a difference between Countries, as also it is
manifest that there is between the co^plexions and co^stitutio^s of me^, some
being stronger, some weaker, some laboring more, other by their calling sitting
within door and stirring less, some apt by fasting to fall into sickness, there
is that discretion and moderation to be used in abstinence, that our bodies may
be farthered in Gods service, and not so quelled, as that by sickness wilfully
but unadvisedly procured, we be not able to glorify God, and follow our
vocation so as otherwise we should. Thomas Aquin: 2: 2 qu^ 47: (...), 1:
Aquinas gives the reasons and ends wherefore men should fast. One he says
is to make satisfaction for sins, which is but a Popish conceit of the
Angelical Doctor, in as much as the only blood of Christ has that force with
the Father. Another is to repress the concupiscence of the flesh: which
indeed has his use, for as Tertullian tells us, (...) Tentations which are
^ned to fullness and (...) Baptis.
^deratenesse of the belly, are by abstinence crushed. The third is, that the
mind may be lifted more freelye to contemplate those things which are above.
For the pulling down of the body is the h^ysing up of the soul, as Basile
(...) says, even as in a (...) In Isai 1^
balance the lower that one scale does go, the higher does the other mount
up. All abstinence then which is to elevate the mind and to abate
concupiscence is good: but that is not allowable, which destroys the
substance in steed of the accident, and in steed of setting up the soul,
ladeth and cloggeth it with the incumbraunce of a wearyish and crased body,
which leans rests and lies (...) heavy on the soul the inhabitante (...)
Seneca de ^ra lib. 3. 9.
thereof, as a rotten old cottage, which is ready to fall upon the owner, if
he do not supporte it. And how plentifully have many of the Fathers given
their auditors warning of this (...) If the enemy the Devel De virgin.
says Athanasius do suggest into thy minds great exercises of devation that
thou may make thy body vveake and unprofitable, do thou contrary wise
look that thy fasting have measure in it. Here Athanasius holds those
motions to come from the Devil. Ad proba^ Epistol. 3.
Fulgentius prescribes what we should do, (...) our fasting there is such a
temper to be used, that neither fullness do set up the body, nor ^oderate
abstinence do weaken it. Saint Augustine ^tch, that wise men in the (...)
Church do brotherly (...) De mori (...) Eccles Cathol. li. 1 c. 33.
water such as foolishlie shlie refuse to drink wine, that they should not
by their vain superstition be sonner weak in their bodies, then holy (...)
their souls. The same reason is for all ^ndiscreete abstinence, from any other
kind of food, so that we be hurt by it. But in this matter none go farther
then Saint Basile, and Saint Bernarde. The one of who^ says thus, (...) I dot
not so beat my body, that I wear (...) ^fil de ve (...) virginit.
it out with immoderate wounds, and make it (...) v^profitable to service, but
this is the only course of chastising the body that I subject it to service
and do rightly compel it to abo^ the master. But he who by (...) of (...)
does so subdue his servant, that he is not only made unprofitable to the
service of his master, but that he is not able to (...) himself, what has he
(...) ^lse but made himself the (...) of his serva^t? For it must needs be
that the body being now made unable to serve, and by weakness growing sick,
his master on the other side must serve him, while (...) one amated he is ever
busy about the curing of the others infirmitte. The other thus, Bernard. ad
fratres de monte Dei.
Watching, fasting and such like, do not binder but help, if they be done
with the order of discretion. Which if they be so done with the fault of
indescretion, that either by the spirit fainting or the body growing sick
spiritual things be hindered, he who is so, has taken away from his body the
effecting of a good work from his spirit affection to it, from his neighbor
an example, from God honor: he is sacrilegious and gilty of all these things
toward God. Not that according to the meaning of the Apostle, even this does
not seem the duty of a man, and it be not decent and just, that the head
should once ache in the service of God, which formerly has oftentimes even to
aching labored in the vanity of the world: or that the belly should be hungry
even to croping, which has often times been filled even to vomiting, but a
measure in all things is to be had: the body is sometimes tobe afflicted, but
not to be worn out. I shut up this point with that of Hierome, Epistol: (...):
Impose upon thy self such a measure of fasting as thou art able to bear. And
again, Epistol. 10
Small store of meat, and a belly which is ever hungry is preferred before
fasts of three days together.

10 Fourthly to put a religious difference between meats, as that Christians
some times may feed on fish and not on flesh, is Antichristian and
unjustifiable superstition. Those who teach this difference are within the
compass of S. Paul's prophecy calling it a doctrine of Devils, when 1. Tim. 4. 3
men forbid to mary and to abstain from meats, which God has created to be
received with thanksgiving. The Ibidem.
Rhemists would shift this place by applying it to the Manichees, and some
other old heretics, and by telling us that the Church of Rome holds all
meats clean by Gods creation: but these are simple evasions, for does the
example of those ancient heretics any way preiudicate, but that there may be
such again now in the world, as at this time there be Arrians, and as you
embrace Pelagianisme a fresh; and is it not more likely to be understood of you
then of them, since they were more the^ twelve hundred years agone, and the
prophecy is that such should come in the latter times: and in those we now do
live. And whereas it is confessed that you hold them not unclean by Gods
creation; that makes against you, since you by your constitutions dare to
repute that polluted, which God has sanctified and made clean. Tit. 1: 15:
Unto the pure all things are pure. It is your inhibitio^ which presumes to
make that unlawful, which the creator did not so make, and this is injurious
to Gods creation. And yet I must tell you that there is one of yours who
writing of this argument, does yield thereason of your prohibition of flesh
and not of fish, on fasting days, to be from the creatures themselves made
by the Almighty, even Durandus who teaches it to be, because God did not at
the first curse the waters, Lib. 6^ cup. detalijs ie. ^ijs.
In as much as remission of sins should be by the water of Baptism for this
element is most worthy, which washes away filthiness, and upon which the
Lords spirit was moved before the making of the world. But he cursed the
earth in the works of man, and hence it is that in fasting it is not lawful
to eat ante kind of flesh which lives on the earth as foure-footed beasts
and birds etc. Neither can any Papist yield a better reason then this, why in
their fastes fish should be eaten of, and that with greediness, as they
permit leave to themselves to do. Where I appeal to the consciences'not
only of all other who do know them, but even of our Romanistes themselves,
whether the ordinary keeping of fishe-dayes among such of them as be of
ability, be according to the true nature of a fast, to pull down the flesh,
or rather to inflame it. For is it not most certain which one Gentilet: in
exam: Co^c: T^d cap: 5:
says, that howsoever the prayers of Papists be lean, yet their fasts be fat.
May not a man more delicately fast with one of the^, the^ feast with another
person? Is there any creature belonging to diet, wherein more luxury may be then
in fish, the old Athen. lib. (...): 3: and l 8. 6:
Philoxenus, Apitius, Lucullus, and all the renou^ed bellygodded gluttons
hasting to such refections, and fish of all other provisions being bought at
inestimable prices, as were easy to show out of Pliny, Atheneus, and other both
old and new writers. Fie therefore upon such odious hypocrisy, which thinks to
honor God with such a mockery, as that their abstinence may be the largest
feeding, and their fasting with a belly full of the most sumptuous fish,
besides wine and a thousand sorts of iunkets, which superfluity and wanton
curiosity do yield, to make up Romanishe mortification. UUhat does it profire
says Saint (...) Hierome not to eat oil, and yet to seek out certain
curious and (...) Epistol: 2:
hardlye gotten meats, as figs, pepper, nuttes, dates, fine cakes, honye,
pestakes. And such abstinence as this does Saint De moribus Manich. lib. 2: 13:
Austen condemn in the Manichees, who would touch no flesh, and yet did feed
on all the dainties that art or wit could affoorde. His judgment is that
the moderate eating of a piece of bacon, or some other plain flesh, is not so
luxurious as that their abstinence. Our doctrine in this behalf is, that
Matthew: 15: 11.
it which goes into the mouth defiles not a man, but that which comes out
of the mouth defiles a man. And Rom: 14. 17:
The kingdom of GOD is not meat and drink, And (...) it is good that the
heart be stablished with grace, and not with meats, which have not
profited them, that Hebr: 13 9
have been occupied therein. To these things the ancient Fathers do agree,
as Tertullian, De cibis ludaicis:
GOD takes pleasure only in our faith, only in our innoceney, only in our
truth, only in our virtues, which dwell not in the belly but in the mind, and
which the fear of God and awe to heaven do get unto us, not earthly meat. And
to this agrees S. Austen, De civit: Dei: l 16. 37:
We learn in eating that no man is to be blamed, for the kind of meat; but
for the immodest greediness. Yet withal we add, that for civil order and the
common wealths sake, for the sparing of the provision at Land, for spe^ding of
that which comes from the Sea, for the incouragme^t of fisher^me^, and for
farther maintenance and imploiment of navigation, on such days as by positive
laws be appointed, we make and ought to make a difference of our diet,
keeping such times as fish-daies, by which name they are more properly called,
the^ to be termed fasting days: This we do for civil order and obedience, and
not for that which may be termed directly an immediate act of religion; for we
condemn the Romish Church for embracing that opinion. Although indeed the
wiser sort of that pack do hold this to be but a small matter of religion,
and rather in their own minds repute it a devise politickely to keep people
in awe, or a trick if need be to get good store of money when they lift to
dispense, as may be seen by that of Genebrard. l. 4: chronogr:
Clement the 6 who proclaiming a Croisado against the Turks (in truth to
enrich himself after the fashion of the Popes) gave every one who would pay
for it, a free liberty to eat eggs and white meat, on the Fridaies and every
fasting day, Lent excepted. This did the Archbishops of Triers and Colein
obtain for their Dioceses for ever; but the Archbishop of Mentz refusing to
contribute so much money as was required, itlyeth on his Diocese to this day,
that they may not eat eggs or other white meats on the fasting days, as in
the other two Bishops lurisdictions it is permitted. How much happier did the
coin make the one of these, then the other? But when his Holiness list, he
can go farther then this, as Pope Leo the 10. did, when Ioh: Fox. in Eccles:
Histor:
Cromwell went to renew the Pardons of Boston. For there among many other
favors one was, that it should be lawful for the brethren of the Fraternity at
Boston, to eat milk, eggs, butter on forbidden days, yea in Lent it self;
yea flesh also by the advice of a ghostly father and a Physician, and all this
without scruple of conscience. So that if the gentle Pope list, (who will know
upon what terms he parts with his dispensation) the thing is no sin; which
some of the wiser Pseudo-Catholikes have smelled out as we may imagine, when so
freely in Rome it self and in Paris, some of that Balaamitical congregation
make no conscience so that it be secretly done, to feed some or the greatest
part of Lent on flesh, as diverse of our traveilers do constantly report. And
we have no small store of these in England too, which in their heart love his
Holiness well, but yet will not part with their flesh on fish days for his
sake. Some be vviser then some.

11 Fifthly we do not find that any set days of fasting were appointed by
Christ or his Apostles, and the Popish days differ somewhat at this time from
those of the Primitive Church, so that they have neither warrant from GODS
word, nor yet from the ancient. Diverse of those whom they call their
Ladies Eves, were not so much as heard of long agone. Fridaie and Saturday are
now the ordinary days of abstinence, and Wednesday is almost quite
discontinewed saving in some few places, and on some few set times. Some of
the old Church heard of Friday, and VVednesday^, and that not only four
times in the year as you heard before out of Leo, but otherwise also: yet of
Saturday no word. We have says Homil: 10: in ^tic.
Origene the fourth and sixth days of the vveeeke, wherein we do solemnly
fast, This was the Wednesday and Friday; the first in computation being our
Sabbath or Sunday. Here Is: 75.
Epiphanius has as much, who is he in all the world, which assenteth not that
on the fourth day, and the day before the Sabbath (he means the Jews Sabbath
which was Saturday) a fast is decreed in the Church? And if we must also bring
forth the Constitution of the Apostles, how they did there decree, that on the
fourth day and that before the Sabbath, there should be fasting everis where,
the Pe^tecost excepted etc. And in another In conclusion. liber co^tt. here is.
place he has, That the fasts were so delivered by the Apostles of Christ.
Thus some of the most ancient kept them in a form differing from that of
these modern times. Where also you may observe that it was the fashion of
those times, to attribute to the Apostles all things for which themselves were
earnest, if they had been so derived to them from their predecessors, that
they well knevve not the first erecter or inventer of them, which before the
end of this Chapter will be more manifested. But for this present, Saint
Augustine who lived after Epiphanius, and for his judicious labors was
inferior to none of the worthiest Fathers of the Church, upon good advise
speaks thus, Epist: 8^
If you ask my opinion in this matter, I revolving it in my mind do see that
in the writings of the Evangelistes and Apostles, and in all, that which is
called the Nevve Testamente fasting is commanded. But upon vvhaat days we
ought not to fast, and on what dates we should, I do not see it defined by
the precept of the Lord or his Apostles. If Saint Augustine had ever heard of
any authentical Constitution from the Apostles, here had been a good time to
have mentioned it. And so it had been for Saint Chrysostom, when he teaches
his hearers, that God had left virginity and fasting not as matters imposed on
men by necessity, but arbitrary and at their own choice. His words are these,
In 1^ ad Corint: Homil. 9:
Thou can not fast, nor exercise virginity. But thou may of thou wilts,
and those who can, do accuse us. Yet notwithstanding God has not been so
severe and rough to us, neither has he commanded these things nor appointed
them by l^vve, but has lest them in the free will and choice of the
auditors. These Fathers then could not find that any set days of fasting
were imposed by GOD, by the Apostles, or any other of sufficient power, else
they vvoulde not have spoken as they did. And among the Canons fathered on the
Apostles as In concilijs.
Isidore cites them, there is no such matter to be found, which makes us bold
upon the warrant of all these, to think the speech of Epiphanius to be too
large: and that so much the rather, because Vt supra.
Origene who went long before him mentions the days, but has not one word,
that they were so ordered by the Apostles. These are therefore co^stitutio^s but
of men, and they who came after the^ especially in the Western Church, have
varied from them, as appears by rather accepting of Saturday then Wednesday,
or by adding some where this last to the other, which shows that they
themselves imagined the ordinance not to be Apostolical. We then finding the^
so at first erected and then varied by me^, do hold the^ but to be humane
co^stitutio^s, and for order and comelines sake we retain them, as having
received them from our Auncesters, concerning whom we are of that judgment
whereof every mild and sober man should be, that is to say, for the reverence
which he bears his predecessors, to profess that he willingly receives
from them, al things, which he does not find either directly or by a consequent
contrary to the word of God. This rule directs us in these set days for
fish, and we keep them, but yet teaching our people in what sort, for order
and decency not for religion and superstition. For we dare not go so far as
Papists do, but we rather abominate their doctrine, when they make the
keeping of fasting days one of the Horae beatisi virginis. Vaux in Catechis:
commandments of their Church, and annexe unto them that the Vaux Ibi.
charitable keeping of these commandments brings everlasting life: but the
contemning of these precepts and such like of holy Church, brings
everlasting damnation, and do so hardly pursue those who have eaten forbidden
meats on their fish days, as that nothing but life will make satisfaction
for the same. According whereunto a Centur: 16: in An. 1538.
young gentleman of Tholose was served in France, being burnt to ashes at
Paris for eating flesh, when it was not permitted by the Roman Synagogue.
The like examples I might produce of men so served in Scotland for the same
cause, and England has had some mightily molested there-about.

12 I might add some other circumstances appertaining to fasting, as that
there ought to be no opinion of merit in it, since our best works are in
themselves defective, and our very Isai: 64. 6.
righteousness is but like to a menstruous cloth: but our request must be
that GOD will accept the work for his CHRIST'S sake. Also that it be not
in hypocrisy, as theirs was whom CHRIST Mat: 6: 161
reprooved for making a show before men; or as that of the Pharisee was, who
toulde the Luc: 18. 12.
Lord that he fasted twice in the week. Of such abstinence as this is,
Saint Cyprian does speak, De ieiunio christl.
Fasting does oftentimes puff up a man, and does drive him to pride and
hypocrisy. Lastly there must be as great a care to abstain from sin as
from meat. The Prophet Cap 58: 6:
Esaias does most significantly express this, Is not this the fasting which I
have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to take of the heavy
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?
And the Fathers of the Church do frequently ingeminate it, as Origene, Homil.
^ot in Levitic:
Fast from all sin, take no meat of malice, eat no dainties of pleasure. So
Basile, In Isai^:
Not by and by in the forbearing of meat is that force of the mind,
vvhere-with we contend to perfection, sufficient of it self, unless the
soul do steadfastly settle it self in all kind of abstinence from those
things which do maintain naughtiness. For as a man consists of a body
and a soul, so there are tvvo-folde meats etc. Saint Ambrose speaks yet
more plainly, Sermon: 33:
This is the will of the LORD, that we should fast from meats and also
from sins. That we should enjoin our body abstinence, that we may the
more with dravve our souls from vices: for a body which is drawn dry is
a bridle to a luxurious soul. I will shut this up with the speech of
Gregory, Homil. 16: in 40: Homilijs:
To sanctify a fast, is (joining other good things) to shevve an abstinence
of the flesh vvorthie of GOD. Let anger cease, let chiding be allayed. For
the flesh is pulled down in vain, if the mind be not refrained from her
evil pleasures. Thus you see what our Church holds concerning fasting: we
allow, and commend it, and teach it as well as you; but we iumpe not with you
in your Iewishe superstitions: we attribute no sa^ctity to the difference of
meats, neither in religion do we hold our selves tied to days of true fasting,
although by civil laws which are to be obeyed for conscience sake, we are
tied to fish days. God accepts not the one food before the other. True
fasting is to receive no sustena^ce or very little, as may be seen by the
Jonas 3: 7:
Ninivits who did eat no food and drink no water, and so will good Christians
deal by themselves when others do not know it, and on such days as in their
own heart they appropriate to that use: for we have a liberty so to do as Origin
tells us, A Homil: 10 in Levitic.
Christian has liberty to fast at any time, not with superstition of
observation, but with the virtue of containing. And thus far have I followed
you concerning fasting days. Now some thing also touching Lent.

13 Your proposition is that Lent and fasting days were kept in the time of
the old Fathers as you keep them now. I have in part showed the vanity of that
assertion for the one already. Now let us see for the other. When the first
keeping of a Lent began it is hard to say. S. Hierome ascribes the or daining
thereof to the Apostles. For Episto. 54:
he showing the difference between the Orthodoxe and the Montanistes, among
other matters says that the Montanists yearly kept three Lents, but we do
fast one Lent in the whole year according to the tradition of the. Apostles.
And this place does De inventorib. Rer. lib. 6. 3.
Polydore Virgil cite out of Hierome, as referring the institution of Lent to
the Apostles of Christ. But we are of opinion that in this matter Hierome is
favorably to be understood, at calling that which was ancient, and the set
beginning whereof was not distinctly known, by the name of an Apostolical
tradition: but no way being able to prove, that by them it was ordained. The
reasons of this our assertion are, first that we think it cannot be found
in any of the writers of the first three hundred years, who lived nearest to
the days of the Apostles, that they decreed it. Origene speaks of Lent, but
goes not so far. We have the days of Lent consecrated unto fastings.
Secondlye if the Apostles had ordained it, they would have set Homil. 10 in,
Levitic.
down some order and manner of it, in one uniformity to all the Church; but of
that we find no step or mark among those of the Primitive times, but
exceeding great disagreement many ways, as forth-vvith I shall declare.
Thirdly we find somewhat expressly to the contrary, and that not where this
matter is touched obiter and slightlye as by Hierome, but where the whole
state of Lent is of purpose rifled and discussed, as shall presently be
touched. Eusebius Eccl hist: lib: 5. 24:
speaking of the heat of Victor the Roman Bishop in excommunicating the
Eastern Churches, for not iumping with the Western in the circumstaunces of
observing Easter, signifies vvithal that the Bishops of the West did much
dislike the attempt of Victor. Amongst other Ireneus who lived in France,
writes to Victor about it, whose words Eusebius cites thus: This
controversio is not only of the date of Easter, but also of the order and
manner of the Fast. For some do think that they ought to fast one day,
others two, diverse more, ma^te forty, and they do measure and make up the
day, reckoning all the hours of the dait and night. And such varietye and
difference of those who observed these fastes did not beginn^ in our age, but
long before among our anncesters, who (as a man may guess) did not strictly
observe the custom of them, who tither by a certain simplicitis or by a
private authority had determined some thing against future time. Thus the case
of Lent stood most vncertainelye, about two hundred years or less after
Christ's birth, and Ireneus says that this difference had been also among
their predecessors much before, so that hitherto we may well collecte, that
in the first Church there was no determinate uniform certainety in the
keeping of Lent; which doubtless had not been vvanting, if the Apostles had
been the erecters or founders thereof. (...) Socrates has a long tract, Eccl.
Hist. lib: 5: 21:
first concerning the keeping of Easter, which he plainly says grew to be
diversely observed among men, by custom and not by any law from the Apostles,
although, says he, they of Asia say that they have their tradition from Saint
John the Evangelist, and they of Rome say they have theirs from Saint Peter.
But he rejects both their sayings, because they could bring no written
testimony of either of these, which is a good course for us also to examine
traditions called Apostolical by. From Easter he comes to Lent, and therein
shows, that even in his days which was late, the manner of keeping of it was
very different. Those says he who are at Rome do fast three weeks together
before Easter, the Saterdaie and the Sundaie being excepted. But they who
dvvell in Illyria and all Greece; and they who dvvell at. Alexandria do six
weeks before begin those fastes which are kept before Easter, and that
time they call Lent. Some contrary to the custom of these, making seven
weeks before that feast the beginning of their fasting, although they do fast
only fifteen days, and that with some distaunce being put between, yet
notwithstanding they call this Quadragesima or Lent. Whereupon I do not a
little wonder how these though they differ in the number of the days, yet all
call it by one name Quadragesima. Diverse do give diverse reasons of this name,
devised of their own head. Moreover they do not only differ in the number of
the days, but in their abstinence from meat they follow diverse courses. For
some do altogether abstain from all kind of living creatures: some among
living creatures do eat only fishes, some together with fish do eat also
birds, and do say that they are bredde of the water, (as it is in Moises.)
Some do forbear from fruits covered with hard shells, and from eggs: others
do eat dry bread only, others not so much as that. There be who when they
have fasted to the ninth hour do use various kinds of meats. In several
nations they fast severally, whereof there are almost infinite causes. And
because no man can show any precepts concerning it set down in writing, it is
manifest that the Apostles therein did give free power to every man, mind and
will, that each man should do that which is good, being induced unto it
neither by fear nor necessity. This several sort of fasting we do know to
be in the Churches.

14 Hence then judge whither it came from the Apostles or no, and confer
these things with the place of Saint Augustine before mentioned, where he
speaks in general of fasting days. And here Doctor Hill appears your
great skill in antiquity, when contrary to so direct records, you avouch that
your Lent and fasting days are now kept as they were in the days of the old
Fathers, which is as false as any thing possibly can be, yea taking it of the
very Church of Rome it self, which so late as Socrates lived, (that is at
least till Theodosius the younger) kept it but three weeks, and that with some
days interrupted. And least that you should think that only Socrates
reports this, hear Sozom. l. 7 19.
Sozomen in the same argument, who entreating of the several customs of
diverse Churches in many circumstaunces, says thus of Lent, That Lent wherein
the people fasteth, some do reckon for six weeks of days, as the Illyrians
and those who are toward the West, as also all Lybia and Egypt with them of
Palestina: some for seven as they of Constantinople, and the nations lying
about even to the Phaenicians; some seatteringly or interruptedly do fast three
weeks in these six or seven: other do continuately keep the three weeks
which immediately go before Easter: some two weeks, as the followers of
Monta^. Such varietye of opinions was there in the Primitive Church. It is now
the resolution of our Romanists that Lent is no Lent unless it be for forty
days, since it is an imitation of Christ who fasted Mat: 4: 2:
fortye days and forty nights. But besides that there are other reasons
assigned, why it should be for that space. Aq^: 2: 2* q. 147. art. 5
Aquinas out of Gregory as he says, yields us these, First because the
virtue of the ten commandments is fulfilled by the four books of the holy
Gospel. And the number of ten being multiplied by four, arises to forty. Or
because in this mortal body we consist of the four elements, by the
pleasures of which body we go against the commandments of the Lord, which
are received by the ten commandments. Whereupon it is fit that we should
afflict that flesh forty times. Or because so we strive to offer to God the
tith of our days. For since the year is continued for 365. days, and we are
afflicted for thirty six days, which are to be fasted in the six weeks of
the Lent, we do as it were yield to God the ^the or tenth of our year.
Here a man may know some reasons more then he knew before, why Lent
consists of forty days. But what ado there was to hammer it to this set
number, it is marveilous to behold. There are certain decrees which are put
out in the names of some of the most ancient Bishops of Rome. Among these,
Decretal. Epist Teles phori. Anastas. in vita Telesp.
Telesphorus is made to write thus, We do decree that seven full weeks before
the holy Easter, all Clergy men, that is such as are called into the lot of
the Lord shall fast from flesh, because as the life of Clergy men should
be different from the conversation of lay men, so also in their fasting there
should be a difference. Here then the Clergy did fast fifty days rather then
forty, keeping no Shrouetide, but beginning Lent at Quinquagesima, and fasting
the Sundaies as well as the rest. For so Polydore Lib. 6. 3.
Virgill collecteth upon the place, for fifty days they were to fast every
day, not one being omitted. And the words of the Decree do carry so much,
seven full weeks. But see what an inconvenience did arise hereupon. A supposed
Constitution of the Apostles was broken by this. For some hold that on the
Lords day or Sundaye no Christian might fast. Where once again we find
that matters which may most justly be doubted of, are called Constitutions or
traditions Apostolical. For how came it about that the most ancient Fathers
and the writer of the Epistle fathered on Telesphorus knevve not that there
was such an ordinance? Well, Haeres. 70:
Epiphanius speaking of fasting and mourning, says it is an ordinance of the
Apostles, He who afflicts his soul on the LORDS day, is accursed to GOD
And in In Conclus libri contra haereses.
another place speaking as plainly, he says that there were no fastes upon
the LORDS days, and that therefore the Communion was celebrated in the
morning, that afterward they might eat that day. How may that of
Telesphorus and this supposed Apostolical custom or Constitution stand
together? And yet Part: 1: Decret. Distinct. 4. 5.
Gratian as late as he vvrote, which is about four hundred years since was
contented to cite that Decree of Telesphorus, as if it might have his use in
our days, either to know it or to keep it.

15 Now did those who came after, like of this supposed ordinance of that
Roman Arch-bishoppe? No such matter: For concerning the length of time the
Council of Orleans did take order by an express Canon, Council. Aurelian:
Canon: 20:
This is decreed for all Priests, that before the solemnity of Easter, not
Quinquagesima, but Quadragesima shall be held. Thus the time of the Clergyes
Lent was abridged. That the time of fiftye days was in use before it may
appear by Saint Sermon de Eb^tate.
Basile mentioning that the fast of Lent was for seven weeks. Where by the
way this may be noted that these words cross that other speech cited by
me before touching the fast only of five days, and therefore one of the two
Sermons may go for a counterfeite. Touching fasting on the Sundaye, another
Pope not long after is brought in to correct that. And this is Decret: Me^chad
Melchiades, who in his Decretal Epistle is thus set down to write, The fast
then of the Lords day and of Thursdaye no man must celebrate, that there may
be a true and unfeigned difference, betvveene the fast of the Christians and
the Gentiles: of these who do believe truly, and of Infidels and Heretics.
Thus the Sundaye is leapte out of Lent: But here is another trouble vvithall:
for by this Decree it has taken away the Thursday also, and so the days of
Lent are shrewdely shrunk. In this distraction was the old Church about this
fast, no man almost being able distinctly to tell what to make of it for the
number of the days. They who harkened to Telesphorus had a Quinquagesima for
a Quadragesima, fiftye or at least forty and nine days for fortye. They who
began at Quadragesima Sunday and kept all till Easter, had fortye and two
days to their Lent, and so as Vbi supra.
Polidore has, for a good while it was kept. They who began at Quadragesima,
and slipte out the Sundays had but thirty and six days to which Aquinas
alludeth as before is signified: And if after Melchiades they vvoulde cull out
Thursdaies too, the fortye vvoulde be but thirtye. Here then at last to mende
all, and to strike the final stroke, comes Gregory the Great about six
hundred years after CHRIST, and because he will have forty days, and yet
the Sundays too put out of question to be no fasting days, he added Poli.
Virg: vt supra:
four days more to Lent, that is to say those which are before the Sunday
termed Quadragesima, beginning Lent on that Wednesday which for the
solemnity of ashes the^ appointed by him to be used, is called Ashe-vvednesdey,
from which time until Easter Day, if the Sundaies be quite exempted from the
number, there may be reckoned fortye days. And that in Gregory's time the
Sundays were so shut out, appears partly by that of himself testifying
that Homil. 16: in 40: Homil:
they did not celebrate fast on the LORDS day in the Lent. So that we may
say of this Lent, as it was said of Rome. Virgil: Aeneid:^:
Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem,


And yet there be in England persons Popishly affected, who if they be
questioned vvithall, are not quite resolved in the point, whether the first
four days after Shrovetide be properly of Lent or no: whether that be but
a preparing and clensing week, and whether good-Fridaye as it is called, and
Easter Even be to be solemnized as a part of a Lenten fast, or for some
other reason, and so consequentlye whether the Sundaies be not to be fasted
as natural members and a true portion of the forty days or no, and if they
be not to be so fasted, then by what rule a man may not eat flesh upon them?
Thus is Popery tied together with points. When therefore you right learned M.
Doctor do so clerke-like tell us that in the days of Saint Basile, Saint
Gregory Nazianzene, Saint Leo, S. Chrysostom, Lent and other fasting days
were used as they are now in the Catholic Church, are you not ashamed of your
self, and do you not condemn either your own ignorance for writing you know
not what, or audaciousnesse for assevering so earnestly that which is so
grossly false? But you do well to uphold Popery by that means; the doctrine
of Antichrist and Satan by all kind of lies. If you cannot blush for your
self, yet all modest Papists may blush for you, to find in what sort such
companions as you are, make no conscience to say ought in that, which they hold
to be their religion. I have taken a little pains to instruct you concerning
the first, ancient and most different observation of Lent: and I let you
farther know, that for uniformity with other Christian Churches, and conformity
to that which we received from those who so long agone went before us, we
keep Lent, not superstitiously as you and yours do, but according to the laws
of our most Christian Magistrates, who co^mande an abstinence from flesh, not
for any sanctity which is in such forbearing, but for other wise and civil
reasons. And as herein our law allows a toleration to such as by necessity of
sickness or otherwise are enforced to feed on flesh, so it convinces all such
as wilfully or carelessely do transgress without any other reason saving
their own greedy appetite. So that we accounte such men offenders before
God, albeit not simply and immediately for the eating of Gods creatures, yet
consequentlye for dis-obeying the Edicts of godly Princes, to whom they are to
yield obsequiousnes, and that for Rom: 13: 5
conscience sake. In this therefore you very discreetly accuse us of you cannot
tell what, as you do in that also which now follows.


T. HILL. AND they who be given to Lust, to Gluttony, to Ambition, to
Covetousness and do teach such doctrine as necessarily brings forth such
fruits, must needs contemn S. Basile, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome and S.
Austen, who have written so excellently of the Order, Rule, and Virtues of
Monks.


G. ABBOT. 16 HEre now follows a rabble of wicked slanders, to which you are
so inured, that you be not your self, unless almost in every leaf you
plentifully power them out. You charge us here with many sins: and truth it
is that in our Realm there are too many, as there will ever be in the
militant Church. But yet it is easy to be justified, that the Gospel has so
far imprinted the fear of God in some, and the good laws established the
fear of man in other, that no Popish Realm nor Country may for moral civil
behavior be compared to England. Those brutish and beastly sensual sins
which are commonly winked at in Italy and in your Popes court, are scant
known among us, and here lesser sorts of luxury and wantonness lie subject
to both Ecclesiastical and temporal punishment. The filthy lubricity of many
Papists is grown to a Proverb long since amongst us, and yet they would
persuade men that they live under the cross and in persecution. Yea what may
be supposed is done at liberty, (whereof I leave the testification to a
marginall note of M. Quodli. 2 Articul: 2:
Watsons in his Quodlibets) when your Priests and Prisoners restrained at
Wisbich are publicly in print questioned one by another, as about other
disorders, so namely for Manifest. ca. 1.
whoredom. But of this more largely hereafter. For gluttony who ever exceeded
your Pseudo-Catholikes on their fish days, and double feasts, or your monks
the belly-gods of the world, the knights of Bacchus and Ceres, the sty-fed
swine of Europe? This byword was not for naught, O monachi, vestri stomachi
sunt amphora Bacchi,
Vos estis, Deus est testis, turpissima pestis,
As for ambition, all the earth cannot put down the Cardinals of Rome, and the
inferior Prelates under them. What tumultes were there wont to be about every
Bishopric or rich Abbay, two or three striving for it, and running or sending
to Rome, to see whither could out-bribe other. No man is more plentiful in this
argument then In Hen: 3:
Matthew Paris. What endless ambition is there and has there been in aspiring
to the Papacy, Kings and Princes being set one against another for Popes
causes, and in the time of Antipapes a great part of Christendom being up in
arms, some on the one side, and some on another. It is not forgotten how in
England the Archbishops of Canterbury and York have striven for priority,
their crosses which rather should have taught them humility iutting each with
other, and the bearers of them being ready to iustle each other from the wall,
in the presence of the Clergy and Nobility of the Realm. Nay if there were
nothing else to shevve the ambition of the Romanists, yet let us not now be
blind at home, where in Quodl. 2: 7
printed books, there has been question made between the Jesuits and
secular Priests concerning precedence in going, and between Priests and
other of their religion for places at table, so unfitly and immodestly, as
would rather beseem vain and weake-witted women, then men who profess
themselves to be of learning and gravitye, besides the greatest tie of their
Ecclesiastical function. But every Papist does well to imitate the Pope his
holy Father, who sets himself above all Kings and Emperors, and therefore
they may do sutably to go before as many as they can, not in Romans 12: 10
giving but in taking honor. Yet Christ the best Master has taught another
lesson, Mat: 11: 29
Take my yoke on you, and learn of me, that I am humble and meek. Lastly for
covetousness, who ever on earth exceeded the Romish Synagoge, who by the
manours and large possessions given them had almost devoured whole Europe; and
by their Bulls sent abroad, as also by their dispensations at home did show
themselves the most cunning Alchimistes in the world to turn in many places a
little lead into a great deal of gold, which was fitly Premier Recucil fol
767.
likened to the change of Diomedes and Glaucus in Homere. Add to this the
infinite riches which they had by continual Legacies, Vows, Offerings and
Gifts, whereof monuments may yet be seen in Rome, Paris, Colein and other
places, in their crosses, Images, shrines, and many other things of pure massy
gold with plenty of precious stones; and as once might have appeared in the
treasures belonging to Thomas Becket at Canterbury, which as Peregrin: Relig.
ergo
Erasmus who saw them describes them, did far surpass the riches of many a
king. To contract this matter, the story is well known how King Io Fox. in
Richard. 1.
Richard the first bestowed the three daughters in marriage whom one Fulco put
him in mind of, I mean those dangerous daughters Pride, Covetousness and
Luxury. He placed Pride with the Templars, Avarice with the Cistertian Monks,
and Luxurye with the pompous Prelates of the Church. Such good opinion was in
those days to be carried concerning the mortified persons of the Romish
Cleargye.

17 In this place I find that you exceed your self, if possibly that might
be. You set up here to your self a ladder of untruths, whereon you may by
every round or step come higher and higher to the father of lies. We are
given to lust, gluttony, ambition, covetousness; that is your lowest step.
Then, we teach doctrine which must necessaryly bring soorth such fruits. After
this, we contemn Saint Basile, Saint Chrysostom, Saint Hierome, Saint
Augustine. Then to the end that you may bear the garlande from all your
fellows, generallye the doctrine of the aunient Fathers, is clean contrary
to the doctrine of Protestants. ^ul secu^do de Ova^ore
Hanniball saw many doting old men, but never such a one as Phormio. But I
turn back unto you. Staphyl. in Apolog.
You have long muttered that we teach a doctrine of liberty, and we set open the
gate to all profanenes. Notwithstanding this is a slander of your own
inve^tion, neither are you able to name one learned and approved Protestant,
who ever in his preaching or writi^g could justly be charged with any such
matter. Only your spleen is against that point of faith in Christ, which while
you labor to oppugn, you do wrong to us, but more to God, and to his Son our
Savior, the power of whose redemption you extenuat at your pleasure, to set up
your own merits. Whereas we do teach that the same faith when occasion is
offered, does Galat: 5. 6
work by love, is seen in his fruits, and can no more be without a Christian
co^versatio^, the^ fire without heat, or water without moisture. This we hold:
whereas co^trarywise I appeal to the conscience of your self, as also to the
conscience of every indifferently minded man, whither Popery be not the open
gap to a gulf of al ungodliness, when the absolution of a Priest shall be said
to free a man from hell; the Indulge^ce of a Pope, the same person from
Purgatory; the pardon of such a one as cannot forgive his own sins (for the
Rhemens. These. 2: 4:
Pope himself confesses to another Priest and is absolved by him) shall
clear a man from poisoning, murdering, whoring and all uncleanness; when
satisfactio^s to Godward may be wrought and made for men's tra^sgressions. The
infectio^ of this and the like leprosies makes Papists audacious to do any
thing, and then let the^ go barefoote about the Ascensio^ week, or whip
themselves on Good Friday, let the^ go to Rome at a lubiley, or on Pilgrimage
at other times, but especially let the^ come to confession and have absolutio^,
and they are as clean from the gilt, as if they had never committed any such
facts. This confidence makes the life of many of your false named Catholics
to be a co^tagious sink of execrable lewdenes, no pen being able to paint out
their filthiness, which as elsewhere it may be exemplified, so principally in
Rome that singular cage of foul and unclean birds. I was once in Oxford
present with two prisoners co^victed of a murder, the one was named Parrhy, a
kinsman of the great traitor Doctor Parrhy; the other was called Richardson.
When this Parrhy after many villainies in England and beyond the seas, had
finally as a robber murdered upon the way a drover carrying with him good store
of money, and it much grieved his fellow Richardson the^ being in company, that
Parrhy had slain the man, and Richardsons conscience, as himself reported to
me and other, could in no sort be appeased about the fright and remorse
thereof, Parrhy bad him not dismay himself, but prepare as soon as he could to
fly after him into Ireland (for thither indeed the principal murderer was
hastening) and from thence they would to Rome, where he had been with his uncle
Doctor Parrhy before, and knew the fashions of the place, and there he
undertook to get a pardon of his Holiness, and all should be as well as if it
had never been. This Parrhy told me that he had been a Page to a Cardinal
in Rome, an attendant on the Duke of Guize slain by the commandment of Henry
the third of France, and of guard to the Duke of Parma, and therefore may be
well supposed to have known Popish fashions. And of certainty he lived a^
Romanist and so professed himself at the time of his execution. I could add
more examples of this nature shevving that Papists want no incouragementes to
sin.

18 On the contrary part we simply and absolutely dehorte our people from all
crimes, laying the judgments of God before such as transgress in the same. We
lay unto them the text of the Apostle that the Gal. 5: 19:
works of the flesh are adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness,
Idolatry, vvitchcraft^, hatred debate, emulations, wrath, contentions,
seditions, heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness, gluttony, and they who do
such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And that Hebr: 13* 4.
Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. That, as De ieiunio christi.
Cyprian tells us, Fornicatours and adulterers have thee Satan for their
suggestour: they shall have thee for their tormentour: revenging flames shall
burn both thee and them. Concerning gluttony we put them in mind of Christ's
speech, Luc: 21:
Take heed unto your selves least at any time your heart be oppressed with
surfeiting and drunkenness and cares of this life, and that day came on you
vn-avvares. And of that in Saint Paul, Rom: 13: 13:
Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in gluttony and drunkenness, neither
in chambering nor wantonness. To which may be joined that of S. Ambrose, De
Noe and Arca c: 9.
What is more unseemly then evermore to be attending to the belly, which when
it is filled is to be emptied, and when it is emptied, is to be filled again?
Touching ambition, we stir me^ up, that they should imitate the modesty of
Johan: 1: 20:
John the Baptist, who took no honor to himself, but resigned it al to his
master Christ. And the humility of S. Paul who avouched of himself and his
fellows, r1: These: 2: 6:
Neither sought we praise of me^, neither of you, nor of others. But especially
the meekness of Christ our blessed Lord, who being urged by his kinsme^ to
show some Ioh: 7: 3:
miraculous works so to make himself famous, refused, and would not co^desce^d
to their humourous motion. And for the repressing of this sin, we cite that of
S. Bernard, De considerat: ad Eugen: lib. 3: 1:
O ambition the very cross of those who be ambitious, how do thou torturing
al, please al? Nothing does vex more bitterly: nothing does disquiet more
troublesomly, and yet among wretched me^ there is nothing more ordinary the^
the exercises thereof. Lastly for Covetousnes, we say with Christ, Luc: 12:
(...).
Take heed and beware of covetousness, for though a man have abundance, yet
his life stands not in his riches. And with Saint Paul, 1. Tim: 6: 10.
The love of money is the root of all evil, which while some lusted after,
they erred from the faith^ and perced themselves through with many sorrows.
And we think it not amiss to remember the covetous person of that in Saint
Augustine, A^g. in Psalm. 123:
Take with thee to hell that which thou have gotten. What vvilt thou does
Thou have gotten gold, thou have lost thy faith. After a fevve days thou
departest out of this life. The gold which thou have gotten with the losing
of thy faith, thou can not take with thee. Thy heart which is void of faith
goes forth to pains, which if it had b^n full of faith, should have gone out
to a crown. These and the like doctrines out of the holy Scriptures and
Fathers we do daily lay open to our hearers against these sins. Our Sermons and
books are full of them: and on the other side we stir them up to chastity,
to sobriety, to temperance, to humility, to bounty toward the poor, and
therefore your report in this behalf is a matter very ordinary with you
and yours: but in the presence of God and men, a most malicious slander.

19 You have bin bold with us already, making small spare and less conscience
to lay upon us any unjust imputation, and the fowler, the more pleasing to
you, and now forward you go in the same, that is in your own vain. We must
needs contemn S. Basile, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome, and S. Augustine. How
far are we from despising them, the excellent lights of the Primitive Church,
the noble instruments of Gods glory in their time, may be gathered from that
which I have said before, from our reading and studying of them, from the
manifold printing and revising of them by men of our side, and that in diverse
places, from our using of them in disputations, and our citing of them in the
pulpit. Nevertheless it is not to be expected that your malice should ever
say well. S. Basile we reckon a famous Bishop of the East, Gregor. Naz.
orat. 30:
brought up at Athens, and so co^pleted with humane literature, the equal,
love, and dear companion of that Gregory Nazianzen, who for his high and
mystical knowledge in Divinity was thought worthy to be called with an
excellency Theologus: whose work touching the Basil: Hex^mero^.
6. days of the creation, seemed so admirable, that S. Ambrose was contented
to imitate it, yea almost to make himself only a tra^slatour of it. The
golden streams of S. Chrysostomes eloquence we hold well near incomparable,
and his frequent similitudes and comparisons to be so familiar, and yet so
significant and lively, that we account him scant worthy the name of an
eminent preacher to the people, who has not bin conversant in his works. We
think S. Hierome for his learning not unworthy to be called a wonder of the
world: his universal knowledge, and especially in the sacred tongues, together
with his ponderous style are honorable among all who know good letters.
Saint Augustine for his judgment goes beyond them all: his reading was great
as most of al appears in De civitate Dei,
one tract of his, being the most noble of all his vvritings: his diligence,
his zeal, and acuteness against heretics, have vvonne him everlasting
praise: and so do we esteem of his works, that we hold him much
dis-furnished in the study of Divinity, especially for schoole-learning and
grapling with an adversary, who is not well acquainted with him. Such is the
contempt that we carry to these reverend persons: nay if it were not for
avoiding unnecessary tediousness, we should much farther extol their
due-deserved commendation, Why then do we basely regard them? Because we
be given to lust and gluttony, and they have written so excellently of the
Order, Rule, and Virtues of Monks. This hangs wonderful well together. Do
all who are given to covetousness, ambition, gluttony, and lust, hate monks
and monkery, and al who have prescribed good rules unto them? Then your Pope
and cardinals, and all the whole sinful Court of Rome must stand arraigned for
that crime: for each man of any understanding knows how they abound in those
vices. And besides if precepts for Monkery be so contrary to these sins,
must not the practice of them in a Monkish life be much more remote from them?
And was it never heard that Nunryes or Monasteries of women, have had many
young bones of little children found in them, which came not thither without
lust: or that many Monks were little better the^ misshapen gorbellied monstrous
Epicures, which arose not without gluttony: or that in the elections of their
Priours, Abbots and Bishops, there was infinite competition, with all kind
of striving, banding and canvasing, which was not without ambition: or that
some of their vowed men (especially that famous fellow mentioned by De moribus
Germane.
Aeneas Sylvius) have left great sums of money in secret behind them, which
were neither gotten nor kept without avarice? Thus nothing can be more
certain, then that men who love the sins which you name, may be favorers of
Monks, and the Monastical creatures have and do commonly bath themselves in
such noted crimes.

20 Well, S. Basile has written many things concerning Monks. It may be
questioned whether he has or no for there is great doubt whether those be
his books wherein most is contained touching that argument. But if we should
allow you your desire, he has no where said more of that matter, then in a
Sermon: Quomodo ornaretur Monach:
Sermon where he describes the qualities of right monks, from which qualities
these late ones are very far distant. And Saint In 1: Tim: Homil: 14.
Chrysostom shows how holy and religious the Monasteries in his time were,
to the which if these later Cloister-me^ had kept the^ we should have found
less to be disco^mended in the^. Howbeit Chrysostom did not so much admire
the^, that he thought their life to be the only means of perfection, or that
sanctity and the true service of God, was scant any where to be found but in
them, which some doting ones in these ages not long since past, have labored
to insinuate into the minds of men. But he spoke thus freely to the contrary:
In Genesis Homil 43:
where are they who sae that it is not possible, that a man living in the midst
of a city should keep virtue: but he had need of retyrednesse, and a
certain conversation amongst the mountains, and that he who is over-seer of
his own house, and has a wife and takes care of children and servaunts
cannot be endued with virtue? Thus he supposed that men in a monastery might
do well, and so might other also. S. Hierome who upon some more then ordinary
occasion with-drewe himself from Rome, and lived more privately in Palestina,
grew to be a Invita ^ilarionis and saepe.
hyperbolical commender of Heremites, monks, and cloystered Virgins, which
life he blazoneth so with his Rhetorical colors, that every man must confess
that his words go too far if they be literally taken. And yet when diverse
other were greedy to come from Rome to Jerusalem, that they might live there
sequestered as he did, he disliked it, and said that Epist: 13:
heaven gate did stand open as well to a man in Britain as at Jerusalem. Then
were there in England few or no Monasteries at all. As for S. Austen he
describes the piety and exercises of ancient De mo^ib. Eccle Cathol. lib: 1:
31:
Monks and Caenobites of both sexes, and writing upon the Psalms he says,
In Ps. 99:
In that common life of brethren which is in a Monastery, great holy men being
daily in hymns, in prayers, in the praises of God, do live thereupon. They
meddle much with reading. They labor with their own hands: thence
theymaintaine themselves: they ask not any thing covetously. Whatsoever is
brought in unto them by godly brethren, they use it with sufficiency and with
charity. Noma^ does usurp to himself any thing, which anothermay not have.
All love themselves: all sustain one another. And yet the same S. Austen was
not so simple, but that he spied under this habit of holiness much
woolvishnes in his time, as cannot be co^cealed when he said thus, Epist. 137.
I do plainly confess unto your charity, before our Lord God who is a
witness upon my soul, since I began to serve God, as I hardly have found
better men then those which have profited in monasteries, so I have not had
trial of worse then those who have fallen in monasteries. And in his book
written purposely concerning Monks, he describes many monks of his time to
be De opere Monachorum c: 28:
naught, idle, wandering up and down, setting at sale the relikes of martyrs,
if they were the relikes of martyrs. Notwithstanding our late Votaries do lay
closer hold on S. Austen then on any one of the Fathers: for they give it out
that he was the founder of the Augustine Friars, and that rabble would derive
their petigree from him, as some of the both old and late Cloisterers would
draw their descent from Elias and John the Baptist, which Sozom: 1: 12:
Sozomen mencioneth to have been talked of in his time. For this purpose they
give out that Saint Austen went in his monkishe cool and attire, clean
contrary to that which is reported in his life by Possidonius who lived with
him. His Possidons in vita Aug, cap: 22:
apparel and shoes and bedde-stuffe, were of a moderate and competent
quality, neither to neat nor too very abject, because in these for the most
part men do either use insoleutlie to boast themselves, or to abiecte
themselves by both, not seeking those things which are Jesus CHRIST'S but
their own. But this blessed man as I say kept the mean, neither declining
to the right hand nor to the lefts. Thus says Possidonius, whereupon Erasmus
fitly asks this question, Observat. in margin
UUhere was thou the letherne girdle and the black coule? But besides this,
they have forged certain Ad fratres in eremo.
books in the name of S. Augustine, as if he the Bishop of Hippon, had given
orders and instructions to his Friars under him. But this is as like the work
of S. Austen, as an Owl is like an Eagle, or a Cuckoo to a Nightingale, as the
improbability of many things which are in it, the baseness of the matter, the
barbarousnesse of the style, the foolish and shameless narrations, and many
other things may demonstrate to every one who has but half an eye, or one
grain of salt in him. Yet so must Popery be peeced together, with a fair
title at the least although the stuff be rotten.

21 Here look we back a little to the ancient Monks: and not any way
curiously to trace their original, were there not even almost in the very time
of their first institution many absurdities and incongruous superstitions which
did creep in, every one by a voluntary will worship adding what he thought
good? Was not the great Sozo. 1: 13
Anthony who had so many followers, a man utterly unlearned, and did not he
think even the least knowledge a hinderance to his speculatiue devotion? Did
not the Heremits show great presumption, when being but simple persons diverse
of them, they wilfully refused the society of men, and the fellowship of
communion of Saints, by their solitariness putting themselves more freely upon
Satan's temptations, by debarring their souls of the word preached, the
Sacrament of the Lords supper received, and the comfort of the Minister or any
other Christian brother? Did not the too exquisite severity of Lib: 3: 13:
Eustathius the Monk (who is supposed to be the true author of the book
entitled (...), and commonly reported to be S. Basiles, where so much is of
the life and discipline of Monks) grow to absurd observations, and such as were
quite disagreeing from the laws Ecclesiastical? There are reckoned up many
opinions of him and his scholars, which were condemned in a Council at Gangrae,
as that he disliked marriage, would not pray in their houses who were wedded,
despised married Priests, thought rich men to be shut out from heaven, detested
those who eat flesh, and other such like monkish imaginations. Some women
persuaded by him or his, lest their husbands, put on men's apparel, and fell
to adultery. These persons lived about the time of the forenamed Fathers, who
in their books commended the good parts which were then exercised, and
doubtless gave those precepts which they did give, to reform the abuses. And as
succeeding generations came on, did not the superstitious devises of Monks
increase, as is to be seen in Evagrius? Some did shut themselves into little
houses, Evagr: hist Eccl. l: 1: 21:
which were so low and narrow, as that they could neither stand upright in
the^, nor ly otherwise then double. Some both men and women living in the
wilderness did only cover their privities, and for the rest went naked both in
the hottest and coldest wether. Some refusing all food of men, did eat only
the grass of the ground, and would not endure the presence of any persons, but
would run away and hide them in the rocks. Other counterfeyting themselves
fools labored to be without all passion. These would not refuse to go into
tavernes or brothel-houses: they would be in bathes with women, and as among
men they lived as men, so among women they were as women. Yet did those ages so
doat upon monkery, that even these were commended, and held for holy men.
Thus if we take these old lads in their best times, they had imperfections
enough, but of the good qualities which were in any of them those who came
after embraced but a few. Only the ignorance of Anthony went almost current
through all: that was as good as hereditary to them. But the old devoute
service of God was of late turned into hypocrisy, fasting into perpetual
belly-cheere, scarcity and penury into abundance and lordly possessions of
lands, charity was converted into hart-burning and envy, humility into pride,
sobriety into Venereous and Sodomitish lust: their piety was but formality,
their idolatry was infinite. Thus it grew forward by little and little, till
it came to the height of ungodliness. How soon this began may be
gathered by him who vvrote the treatise commonly called Cyprians, De duplici
martyrio, There we thus read, Cypr. de dupl. mart.
Not any deserte place, sacke-cloath for a garment, pulse for meat, neither
fasting nor lying on the bare ground do make a perfect monk: Under these
covers lies hid sometimes a mind very worldly, which is so discovered if
they be called to any Ecclesiastical office. There you shall see some of them
most easily to be overcome with delights, more impatient of injuries, more
desirous of vengance then any other of the ordinary people. What is the cause?
Because they have more exercised the body then the mind. This began betimes:
but as they grew in years, so many of them grew in horrible wickedness. It is a
long while since Eccl. Hist. Ang: l: 4: 25
Beda lived: yet in his Ecclesiastical story he mencioneth that a Monastery
called Colindiurbem was consumed with fire, for the lasciviousnes and wantonness
which was there found in both men and women. So did God punish them. But in S.
Bernards time a carnal kind of behavior had over-growne almost all, which
caused him earnestly and passionatly to complain, Bernard. in cena Domini cap:
3.
How many monks be there in S. Benedicts monastery, who do laugh when other
men do mourn; who rejoice when other are sad. In their body they are
cloistered, in their minds wanderers and never standing still. Slow to their
reading, tardy to their praying, in the Church sleeping, in the refectory
waking. For their long watchings grieving, but for their long bankets
reioicing. This was the mortified life of many monks in that holy man's days.
And how this was afterward amended in England, may be testified by the
survey, which by Visitation of the Kings Commissioners was taken under King
Henry the eight of famous memory, when by oaths of the religious persons
themselves, much Sodomitry and other uncleanness was detected, and afterward
was published to the world by a printed book, some notes whereof are to be
seen in the French Apology of Cap. 21:
Henry Stephanus made in defense of Herodotus. Such small affinity had and have
your late monks, with those of whom we read among the old writers. But for
absurdities of doctrine, especially in commending themselves, they go beyond all
those of ancient times, as I will instaunce in the Franciscanes, who maintain
these points which yet are disliked by some other Papists, and by some other
excused or defended. I will cite them out of a great Papist and a Capuchine,
Friar Gregory of Naples. (...) That the rule of S. Francis, is that life of
Jesus Christ which himself observed in this world, and imposed on his In
libris corrige^dis.
Apostles to keep, and caused to be written in the Gospels, and that whosoever
do contradict this rule of S. Francis, do contradict or impugn the Gospel of
Christ, and if they persevere in it, are heretics* That S. Frauncis is the
Angel of whom it is said in the Apocalypse, I saw another Angel having the
seal of the living God. That no man can be damned who wears the habit of
S. Francis (that is to say, says this favorable interpreter, who together
with the habit bears works appertaining to salvation) That once a year S.
Francis descends to Purgatory, and draws out from thence their souls who
living were of his order, and leads them to Paradise (that is says the
interpreter Capuchine, he goes not actually in his own person, but by his
virtue, in as much as he entreats the Majesty of God for his brethren, and
Gods clemency gives him pardon for some souls.) That the order of S. Francis
shall endure for ever. Thus they teach their Novices, bring up their Friars and
preach unto the people. There must needs be much virtue, goodness, and
mortification, where they speak so hypocritically for themselves, and so
basely or blasphemously for Christ our Savior.


T. HILL. AND generally whereas the Doctrine of the ancient Fathers, is
clean contrary to the Doctrine of Protestants, no marveile though they be
rejected by them as they ever have been of Heretics. And although Jewel in
his Sermon at Paul's Cross most impudently challenged the Catholics to bring
any thing for certain points of their Religion out of the Doctors of the
first six hundred years, yet Laurence Humfrey Humfridus in vita lew* ^lli.
his pu^ fellow confessed that he gave, and granted to the Papists more then
was meet and was to himself injurious etc. and so he confessed against his
companion, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church were on the Papists side,
and consequently not on theirs.


G. ABBOT. 22 THis may be put in the Catalogue of your Transcende^t untruths,
which keep within no compass: in which behalf you are inferior to no Papist
that has wrote without a vizarde. Your generally here stands in steed of
your old and ancient All so much frequented by you. Then the Doctrine of the
ancient Fathers is not only contrary but clean contrary to the doctrine of
Protestants. Or else you cannot tell. For if you were well opposed, I fear
that scholer-like you have read over but a few of those Fathers, and that
causes you to give both so bold and so blind a sentence. But it is enough for
men no deeper in Popery then you are, to know the names of some of the Fathers,
but for their judgment concerning the^, to take that up by tradition from their
Superiors or Readers, who upon ignorance or malice speak what they list. You
cite sometimes the Magdeburge^ses. And cannot you in those Centuries of years
wherein the old Doctors lived, find the Magdeburgenses citing some of the
Fathers, who in all questioned points of religion speak for us and oppugn
your Papistry. Neither can you find this in any other Protestant, that we want
not the ancients to take our part? Has Peter Martyr no such thing in all his
works, nor Chemnitius, nor Calvin, or Bishop Jewel who^ ano^e you name, or that
D: Hu^frey:
worthy man who wrote his life, or Bucer, or M. Nowel? Is S. Cyprian yours in
the matter of the Primacy, when he does not only call Epistol: 3:
Cornelius the Roman Bishop by the appellatio^ of brother, not of Lord nor
superior, but in direct terms cutteth the cable whereunto the anchor of
supremacy is tied. Thus he has: De simplicitat. praelatoru^.
Although after his resurrection, he gives equal power to al his Apostles, and
says, As my father sent me etc. yet that he might manifest an unity, he
disposed by his own authority the original of unity beginning of one. That in
sooth were the rest of the Apostles which Peter was, endued with the like
fellowship both of honor and power: but the beginning comes from an unity that
the Church may be showed to be one. Yea does your own Roman Bishop Gregory
herein join with you? That I may not stand any longer on particulars, but
refer questions to their places, where you give occasion to handle the^, I
say but this in brief, is there any ancient Father Greek or Latin, who ever
taught as you teach concerning the admissio^ Divinar: Instit. lib. 2: 19:
and adoration of images, which Lactantius so oppugneth, as ye be says, that
(...) there is no doubt but there is no religion, whersoever is simulachru^
animage, which is to be understood* if it be retained to a religious use. In
Epist: ad Joan. Episcop: Hierosolomita^*
Epiphanius going through a Church where was a veil hanging which had in it
the picture of Christ, or of some Saint, tore it as being in the church
contrary to the Scriptures, and when he had done, of his own charge sent
thither another veil. Nay Lib: 7: Epist 109.
Gregory himself although he could like that images should be in churches, to be
as books to the ignorant, yet he would not endure that they should be adored.
For this point the^ I could wish you ye after your presu^ptuous definition, as
Claud: the Emperor of who^ De morte Claud^*
Seneca merrily could say, that he was such a Judge as could determine a cause,
hearing but one party speak, and sometimes neither, you would do that which
it may be feared you have not done before, that is, fall to reading of the
Fathers, and many times you shall meet with that which cannot choose but gawle
you, and drive you to Bellarmines sophisticatio^s, not to yield to a truth, but
to see how you ca^ cavil against it. What you say here against Bishop Jewel
that revere^d man, and one of the hartbreakers of your Popery, Ration. 5
Ca^pia^ had before you, where by D. Whitaker it received his answer. And
before him, Motiv. 14^:
Bristow had it, who was also answered by D. Fulke: yet so often as you still cite
it, so often must we refute it. Truth the it is that the excellent servant of God
M. Laur: Hum^d. in vita Iuel
Jewel not impude^tly, but Christia^ly, and upon great deliberatio^ and advise
did challenge any English Papist to show out of the Fathers of the first six
hundred years diverse points of Popery, as their private Mass, or that the
communion was administered but in one kind, or that public prayers were said
in a language not understood, or that the Pope was called the universal Bishop,
or the head of the church, or that me^ were taught this faith, that the body of
Christ was contained in the Sacrament substantially, really, corporally,
carnally, or that Christ's body was at once in a thousand places, or that there
was elevatio^ and adoration of the Eucharist, and diverse such other matters,
which the Bishop did constantly deny, not to be known or taught in those times
of the first Church. The substance of this An. 1560:
Sermon made at Paul's Cross did D. Humfrey rehearse, writing the life of the
said M. Jewel, and afterward interserting his own judgment concerning many
matters in difference, he grows to this head that the only exact way of
reformation of abuses and of determination of truth, is the word of GOD; that
it alone is to be made the judge. Upon which insisting, he infers that
therefore Master Jewel gave too much, and yielded to the Papists more then
equity, and was too injurious to himself, when he took not the surer, easier
and shorter course of trial by the Scriptures alone, but gave larger scope of
expatiating into the Councels and Fathers. But most absurdly is your Popish
conclusion gathered out of this, that therefore D. Humfrey knew or confessed
that the Fathers of the Primitive Church were against us and him. You should
rather have inferred thus much, that D. Humfrey thought that M. Jewel had a
sure matter in hand, when needing to refer all but to the Scriptures, he
appealed also to the Fathers; that both by the witness of God and man he might
avouch his assertions. In case of trial for land, we know that authentical
writings and evidences are the best and most absolute means of deciding right:
but if he who owes and possesses the writings, knowing the integrity of his
cause, shall not refuse also to have his quarrel tried by the testimonies of
indifferent me^ in the country, he has departed so much from his own right,
and done more then he need to do. If then his friend should say, that therein
he has yielded to more then meet, and did himself a wrong by it, by
yielding his adversary many exceptions, whereas he might have tied him only to
one, should not a stander by make an absurd collectio^, if he should gather
upon this, that the litigants friend savv well that the witness of the
Country would go against him? And especially when he whom it most concerns,
shall by the testimony of those to whom he appealed, make good all his
asseverations? This was the Bishops case, and no otherwise then thus was it
reported by the Venerable Doctor. And albeit this may appear to be thus to
every one who will read the narration, yet because Bristow, Campian and you
take it all one from another, and other may yet take it farther, and your
people be still abused, as if so learned a man as D. Humfrey, had both disliked
M. Jewels words, and given sentence touching the Fathers against us; for the
farther satisfaction of the Reader, I desire these things to be marked. First
that Doctor Humfrey in that book concerning M. Jewel, as also in his Secund:
pars Iesuitis
other against Campian, does frequently cite the old Fathers for us, in all
questions of difference that occur, Ergo he does not think that the Doctors
are all on the Papists side, and not on the Protestants. Secondly that in'all
his Lectures, Disputations and Sermons he was most copious in citing and
alleging the ol^ Fathers, to confirm our doctrine and to enervate Papistry,
as not only we may remember who often heard him, but diverse of our Fugitives
now beyond the Seas, who were of his time in this University. Thirdly to this
particular, that in the very Fol. 124:
place where he speaks of the Bishops challenge, he puts these words
before; And here is necessarily to be repeated that Protestation or
denunciation, which was heard out of this place of Paul's Cross, which our
adversaries do calumniate to be vain and frivolow: which notwithstanding
they will not deny to be true who are of the better sort of wit, and of more
excellent learning. Can a man speak plainer then the Doctor does here,
justifying that to be true which the Bishop said, and calling the adversaries
exception to the Challenge, a calumniation? Fourthly that in the Fol. 212:
place where he says that M. Jewel yielded too much, when he went to farther
trial then the Bible, he subioineth this, Which he did not willingly, but yet
he did it not besides the purpose, that he might s^ay you with the testimony
of your Fathers as with your own sword. He calls the Fathers yours, not
because he thought them so to be, but as Ironically, because you brag of them
as if they were yours. Thus does the vanity of this slanderous cavil
appear to every one who will not wilfully close his eyes against truth: and
then for all this forged objection, the Fathers shall as well be ours as yours.


T. HILL. ANdyet because they have found by experience, that to teach Doctrine
contrary to the anciant Fathers, sounds but badly in the peoples ears, in
their Sermons they gladly now and then allege the authority of some Doctor
or Father, when they can by any means wringe or wrest any p^ece of a sentence
so, as it may seem to make for them. And indeed he who alleges the Doctors
most, is most praised of the audience, as you well know, which is a pitiful
thing in them and ridiculous in the Preacher, who cannot but know, (if he have
read any of them himself) that the Fathers detest utterly that Doctrine which
he wresteth them to confirm, and in the mean time the poor audience thinks
that they were of this new Religion, whose simplicity is therein most pitifully
abused by the Preacher.


G. ABBOT. 23 YOur hatred to the Gospel makes you easily give sinister
interpretations to our actions. We mention the Fathers in our Sermons, to show
that our expositions of Scripture are not singular and 2. Pet. 1. 20
private interpretations, but such as were received in the Primitive Church;
and to convince the Antichristian enemy, who like Jack Bragger boasts of
antiquity, when in comparison of Gods book, his belief is nothing else but
noveltie. It is not because we would blind the eyes of the people, or stop
their ears, since as you say to teach doctrine contrary to those Ancients
sounds ill: for if there be just cause, we plainly and evidently show where
we dissent from them. Which we do being warranted by the word of God, which
Galat: 1: 8
teaches us that if an Angel come from heaven, and preach otherwise then the
Apostles have preached, we should hold him accursed: And incited there unto by
some of the Fathers themselves in open words, by other in their Orthodoxe
meaning. For what Father would dare to think, that his speeches should
overruled the Scripture? As for wringing and wresting and straining, we detest
it. Gods truth needs not to be vpheld by untruths. We leave that to the
masons of the Popes part, who had need use such supporters to vnder-proppe the
rotten and daily falling ruins of their Antichristian kingdom. Now whereas
you tell us that he is most praised of the Auditory, who most alleges the
Doctors, you had need to help your self with more then one distinction. For
among sober and wise hearers, it is well accepted when the Fathers are cited to
good purpose and orderly: but some other there be who think themselves no
mean folks, which on a humorousnesse and because their Preachers are ignorant
that way, and they, I mean those ignorant Pastors have taught them so, like
not to hear them quoted in the Pulpit. Again the wisest congregation does not
approve of the preposterous using of them, as when they are cited frequently
and yet only in Latin or Greek, and not Englished to the edification of the
people, which Saint 1. Cor. 14. 26.
Paul vvoulde ever have aimed at: Or when they are hudled one upon another
neck without cause; Or when they are multiplied rather for ambition, then
upon desire of fruit or vtility. You might have considered upon these
things, but you with the Crocodile or Hyena fall rather to a counterfeite
commiseration, that it is a pityfull thing, that the people should be made
believe, that the Doctors were of the same opinion that we are in religion.
You may do well to tax those men, who in their Sermons have abused or
perverted the sentences of those grave and learned personages. Of the two you
should rather pity your Papisticall Congregations, which are little troubled
with Scriptures or Doctors, but with such miracles and fabulous Legendes, as
your Friars do lay before them, and nothing else. So are they turned to puddle
waters, in steed of the clear streaming fountain of the water of life. That
our Preachers who have read any of the Fathers themselves, do know that they
make against that which they preach, is an idle suspicious surmise of your
own, and nothing else but a falling back by a Nugatio to that which you
formerly have spoken. It is one of the highest breaches of conscience, for a
man standing in the place of God to speak to the people, there to urge that
which in his own heart he knows contrary to truth. This is enough for
Bellarmine and such desperate wretches, who for a Cardinals hat or some other
expectation, have sold themselves and their souls to their LORD God the Pope,
and his LORD God the Devil.

24 I have all this time traced the steps of a bold and malicious adversary:
but now I rather apply my pen to give satisfaction to the doubtful Reader
concerning this maine question. Our Popish writers speak in gross of the
Fathers, but what themselves in special determine of them, they dare not open.
So much pains therefore ^s is expedient I purpose to take for them, First then
I ask them, will they have us accept of all things, which these learned
Doctors have taught? Grant this, and then many be the heresies which we
must maintain. how many were there of them, which imagined that the godly
after the resurrection should reign on the earth, and that but for the space
of a thousand years, in all worldly felicity, which is the error of the
Chiliasts or Millenary heretics? So dreamed Irenaeus, and is taxed for it by
Eccl. Hist. lib: 3: 33:
Eusebius. In this conceit also was Tertullian drenched as appears by his
disputation against Lib. 3.
Marcion. With the same also was Justinius Martyr tainted, as is evident by
his Dialoge with Tryphon the Jew. Yea this opinion descended so low, that
Lactantius who lived in the days of Constantine the Great, was not Divin:
Iustit: l. 7: 14^
free from it. Does not Eusebius Eccl. Hist: lib: 6. 11.
note it concerning Clemens Alexandrinus, that he does much comment upon
Apocryphal matters, as if they were Scripture? How many were the heresies of
Tertullian, while in all his later works, he raveth upon the Paraclete of
Montanus, to the which fantastical opinion he was most grossly vvedded? One
while he thinks that Tertul. de Monogamia.
second marriages are altogether unlawful in the Church. Another while he
frames a De ^uga in persecutione.
book, that it is not lawful for any Christian to fly at all in the heat of
persecution. Saint Epist 157:
Austen observes truly of him, that he contended that the souls of men were
not spirits but bodies, and that they have their original of bodily seeds. Yea
so far he went awry, that Contr. Helvidium.
Hierome says of him plainly, Of Tertullian I say nothing more, but that he
was not a man of the Church. With him I join Origene, who continually almost
in his commentaries on the old Testament, does not only by Allegories pervert
the literal sense of the stories, but sometimes in express terms says, that
In Exodus Hom. 1: 2 6:
in the literal meaning the narration cannot be true, which is an exceeding
injury to the Spirit of God. Another while he will have the De Principij. l. 3.
6.
Devil and all the Reprobates, albeit they suffer hell torments for a space,
yet at the last to be saved, which doctrine In ^on. 3
Hierome does most justly perstringe; howsoever in another treatise he give him
his due comme^dation for some matters, saying, Libr: N^min Hebraicor:
No man but he who is ignorant does deny, that Origene after the Apostles
was a master of the Church. But for that opinion Lib 2: Ex pol. in 1: Regum.
Gregory did not suffer him to go without his censure. Origene says he,
while he would see without the word of the Lord, the Lord appeering, he
savve the cloud inordinately, because he was afraid at the appeering of the
fire. For while denying the very least justice of God, he did proclaim his
clemency to be more then needed, he affirmed that he would not only spare
condemned men, but also one day he would deliver the reprobate Angels from
everlasting punishment. Another of Comme^t: super lohannem:
Origens fancyes was that Christ did dye not to redeem men only but the
stars of heaven. He who would see more of his errors may read In Ancorat^
Epiphanius, where he passes not without his tax: but especially let him
look Lib: 1:
Theophilus Alexandrinus, where his heresies are cited out of his own works,
and there he has the severest sentence that may be pronounced upon him, which
is only in Gods hand to give. Caesarius the brother of Gregory Nazianzen has
little better opinion of him, when he first terms him Diolog. 3:
a vain trifler, but afterward impious and an idle talker. Breefely the famous
sentence of Contr. Haeres. cap: 23. and 24:
Vincentius Lytinensis concerning him and Tertullian biteth deep, as the
Reader may see if he please to look into that Author.

25 I come now to some other of these worthy men, but yet still men, and
therefore may trippe in their paths. Cyprian was a good Bishop, and a Martyr
for the truth of CHRIST: yet Council: Carthag: in Cypria^^ Eusebius: Eccle: Hist
lib 7^3:
he and diverse Africane Bishops swarved from the truth, in the question of
rebaptizing those who were baptized by Heretics. Of him Saint Augustine
vvriteth thus, Lib: 1: de Baptism. (...) contra Donatistas.
UUhereas that holy man Cyprian thinking otherwise of Baptism then the matter
was (which afterward was handled and by most diligent consideration
established) did continue in the Catholic Unity, it was both recompensed by
the plentifulnesse of his charity, and was purged by: be cutting book of his
suffering. What a strange imagination was that of Lib: 10: de Trinitat.
Hilary, when he supposed that all the hurtes and wounds, did no more touch
or affect Christ on the Cross or elsewhere, the^ blows do the air or the
water, or pricki^g the fire. He thought that there was a violence offered on
the adversaries part, but no smart or pain of Christ's part. This strange
supposal does Part: 3: quaest: 15: art. 5:
Thomas Aquinas labor to excuse in Hilary; but the blemishe is so plain, as
that by no means it can be covered. What Lactantius thought of the holy
Ghost I had leifer set down in Hieromes words then in mine own. Epist:
65^
Lactantius in his books, but especially in his Epistles ad Demetrianum, does
altogether deny the substance of the holy Ghost, and by a levvishe error
does say, that it is either referred to the Father or to the Son, and that
the sanctification of either person is intended under the name of it, that is,
the holy Ghost. And had not Hierome himself those things in him, which
cannot be defended? As his Contr. lovinian.
immoderate preferring of single life before marriage, and his Aug: Epist. 19:
pertinacious advouching that Saint Peter did not deserve to be reprehended by
Saint Paul for Gal: 2: 12:
halting with the Jews. Chrysostom besides his too forward testimonies for
freewill, which Papists themselves dislike, is of mind and Hom: 3: in Epist:
ad Philip. and Hom 11. in 1. ad Cor.
teaches it, that although men dye in sin, be condemned and in hell, yet
alms and ostrings and other helps of prayers done by them who are alive, may
ease them and diminishe some measure of their torments. Neither does Saint
Augustine want his imperfections, as when he determines that all children
dying without Epist 28.
Baptism go to the flames of hell, which the Romanistes now will not admit:
And when he likes their judgment, who thought that upon hazard of their
salvation the Epist. 106. and 107.
Eucharist was to be administered to Infantes. Many more such examples might be
added of undoubted errors, in these learned me^, wherein I trust no Papist is
so absurd, as to prescribe unto us that we should join with them, least of
good Christians we should become lovers of errors, and in some things
embracers of heresies. Besides these unquestionable over-sightes, it falls
out often, that the Fathers do some of them differ, nay are contrary or
co^tradictory in judgment, some to other, and some to themselves. What shall we
do in this case, or whom shall we follow, if the bare authority of these
writers be of it self so strong, as they would make it? I will not instaunce
in those heretical or erroneous opinions before named, where some of them
affirm and some Orthodoxely deny, and a Christian man without the Scripture
can give no decision whether is in the right: Cull out that only for example
sake, where Hierome and Augustine do so differ, about Saint Peter and Saint
Paul, whether of them did amiss; how should we know but by the Apostles
writing? But to whether of them in this contradictorie case should we give
credit, if they were considered in themselves? Neither will I instaunce
matters of mean respect, as how Saint Quaest. 123 sup Exodus and qu. 81.
sup. Levitie.
Austen crosses himself in this question, whither the Cydaris were an attire
for the head or no: Or whether Plato spoke personally with the Prophet
Jeremy in Aegypte and learned of him many things, or no, to the which being
the judgment of Ambrose in one De doctr. Christ: lib: 2: 28
place he assenteth, but in De civit: Dei l. 8: 11:
another he speaks against it. But I rather refer men to their differences
about the Canonical Scripture, which Responsad Ration. 8.
before I have showed; and which is a matter of great momente. Or to those
things which Saint Augustine himself In libr: Retract:
retracted in his own works. Or to those different judgments in capital
causes, which Bellarmine cites in infinite places, and Sixtus In Bibliothe
casa^cta.
Senensis in very many. Or to such like as that of Gregory, where one while
he says that Cornelius by those Homil: 9: in Ezechi.
works which went before his faith did merit that he afterward might have
faith, and another Homil: 19.
while he expressly denies that, and says that by faith he came to his
works. Now if there be such doubts as these in the Fathers, or other like,
and we cannot be resolved out of these Doctors; or if question be of the
verity of their doctrine, whither must we have recourse? The Papists will say
to the Church of Rome, that is to themselves, but the Fathers will tell us to
the word of God, as forthwith I shall show: which every way discovers the
base weakness of the vnCatholike Church, since the Doctors are not the
touchstone of truth, but are themselves to be tried by some thing else: they
are not selfesufficient, but all their words are to be weighed in the ballaunce
of the Sanctuary, where if they bear weight, they are to be accepted, if they
be found too light, they are to be rejected. Our ground then and foundation is
not in these men, although never so worthy men, but the book of God must make
the final and irrefragable decision.

26 For the better establishing of this, let us hear the Fathers themselves
speak. I put Saint Augustine in the foremost rank, as one who had most
occasion to deal in this argument. In the controversy between him and
Hierome, he is Epist. 19:
pressed with the authority of other writers. He answers, I do confess
unto your charity, I have learned to give this reverence and honor to those
only books of Scriptures which are called Canonical, that I do most firmly
believe, that no author of them did err in writing any thing. To other then
he takes exception. He speaks elsewhere plainer: Epist. 48.
The Fathers are not so read, as if a testimony might be so drawn out of
them, that it were not lawful to think contrariwise, if they have otherwise
suppo^ed then the truth did require. And again, Epist. 113.
I have put the opinions of so great men etc. not that I do think them to be
followed as the Canonical Scripture. And when he was hard pressed in the
Controversy of Baptism with the authority of Cyprian, he answers
Cresconius, Contr. Crescen. Gra^matic: lib: 2^.
I esteem the letters of Cyprian not as Canonical, but I consider them out of
the Canonical, and look what agrees in them to the authority of the Divine
Scriptures, with praise to him I receive, what does not agree, with his good
leave I refuse. And afterward, Because that is not Canonical, which thou
r^est, with that liberty to which GOD has called us, I do not receive that
which savoured amiss of that man whose praise I cannot attain unto, to
whose many letters I do not compare my writings, whose vvitte I lone,
with whose speech I am delighted. whose charity I do admire, whose
martyrdom I hold venerable. Can ought be delivered more significantly, and to
our purpose then this is? And least that any man should suspect that he was
more strictly laced toward other men, the^ he would have other toward him, he
frequently writes as modestly of himself, as he does wisely of those who went
before him. As to Epistol: 7:
Marcellinus, I therefore do confess my self to be of the number of them,
vvhe in profiting do write, and in vvriting do profit. Whereupon if any
thing be set down by me, either vnvvarily or unlearnedly, which not only
by other men who can see that, may be vvorthily reprehended, but also of my
self, because even I at least afterward ought to see it, if I do profit, it
is neither to be wondered at, nor to be grieved at, but rather it is to be
pardonned, and to be rejoiced at, not because there has been an error, but
because it has been disliked. For that man does too perversely love himself,
who will have other men also to err, that his error may lie hid. And to
Fortunatianus, Epist. 111.
Neither are we to account the disputations, of any men, though Catholics and
commendable persons, as the Canonical Scriptures: that saving the honor which
is due unto those men, it is not lawful for us to dislike and reict some thing
in their writings, if perhaps we shall find that they have otherwise thought,
then that truth has, which by the help of God, has either bin understood by
others, or by us. Such a one am I in the writings of other men's and such would
I have the vndersta^ders of mine to be. And handling the high mysteries of the
Trinity, he says, De Trinit at: l. 1. 3:
Whosoever reads these things, where he is alike sure, let him go on with me,
where alike he doubts let him seek with me, where he knovveth his
error let him return to me, where he spieth mine, let him recall me. And
in the same book elsewhere, Lib. (...). in p^aefation:
Let the one not love me more then the Catholic faith, let the other not love
himself more then the Catholic truth, As I say to the one, do not attend on
my writings as on the Canonical Scriptures etc. This is the mind of Saint
Augustine.

27 Neither does this renoumed servant of God herein go alone, but he has
sufficient of others, who in this be half do second him. The great Dionysius,
not the supposed Areopagite, but another worthy man since his time, did long
ago inform us in this doubt: Eusebius brings him in speaking thus: Eccles.
Hist l 7: 19:
I do very much reverence Nepos, yet truth is the nearest friend of all, and
ought deservedly to be preferred before all. And if any thing be rightly
spoken, that is to be commended without envy, but if any thing be committed to
writing not sincerely and soundly, this with diligence is to be sought out,
and to be reprooved. To this effect also are the words of S, Hierome: I Epist:
62:
do know that I my self do esteem of the Apostles in one sort, and of other
writers in another sort: that the first do always speak the truth, and the
latter as men do in some things err. Add to these that of Theodoret, who
says that, Dialog. 3.
the Fathers of the Church by a vehe^ent contention against their adversaries
do many times exceed measure. Thus they use to do who plant trees. For when
they see a tree grown crooked, they do not only set him up upright, but they
do bend him to the other side, that by too much inclining to the contrary
part, they may cause it to be straight. This is the judgment of the ancient
vvriters themselves, concerning the works of one another, that they go too
far, that they do and may err, that they are not to be joined in equal
estimation with the Canonical Scriptures: And therefore what reason have we not
to use our Christian liberty in examinig of the^ by the rule of truth, so to
embrace that which is right, and to repudiate that which is of another nature?
I do marveile then what advauntage our Papists do think they can get, by
craking upon the names of these, since their authority even in their own
judgment is not absolute and Dictatourlike, but with a reference, and merely
dependent upon a higher commander: In which case if they stoop to the
scepter of the LORD, we willingly and readily admit of them with due honor
and reverence; otherwise we leave them. But the tryer of them we hold to be
the Canonical Scripture of the old and new Testament.

28 On the other side how the Synagogue of Rome (speak they of these Doctors
never so fair) do deal with them, it is good that every vveake Christian
should know. For howsoever they in their words pretend great honor to
them. yet in truth they are the only men in the world, who offer notorious
wrong to them. For first, how are they debased, when such lights of the
Eastern and Western Church, men so fraughted with knowledge, and adorned
with eloquence, shall not only be set in comparison with, but set after
the Popes barbarous champion Thomas of Aquine? Noble Hierome thou have well
studied, and renoumed Augustine thou have well labored, to come to such a
preferment in thine old age. For one of the Popes Aug: Hu^naeus in praefat,
Su^mm. Aquinat. ad, Pium 5. Pontific.
Innocents, did so much esteem the learning of Aquinas, that he doubted not to
give unto him the first place after the Canonical Scripture. Which albeit
originally it be but the censure of one man, yet know that he was Bishop of
Rome, and when it is prefixed before the Sum of Aquinas, and dedicated to
another Pope, it is intended to be of credit, and that more must be of that
mind if they themselves will. And Icon. and vite Papar. in Pio: 5:
since that time Pius the 5. has placed the same Aquinas fifte among the
Doctou^ of the Church, to the great prejudice and dishonor of all the rest.
Secondly what dishonor do they, to the renoumed company of those admirable
men, when they rank with them, and as it were thrust upon them, base
companions, a bastardlye brood, which have no learning, judgment or any
other eminente part to commend them? Of their counterfeit Dionysius Areopagite
I have spoken before. But Master Harding vvriting against Bishop lewel
cites in his greatest matters, L. Humfry. in vita luelli.
Amphilochius, Abdias, Leontius, Martialis Simon Metaphrastes, Hippolitus,
Vincentius, Clemens, Cletus, Anacletus, counterfeit Athanasius and Basile, and
other authors of Decretall Epistles in steed of true Fathers. And Bellarmine
in his disputes being many times near driven, is glad to fly to such, as for
a stake to a hedge. This is to extenuate the reputation of those great
stars, and to make them to be meanly thought of, because those with
vvhomethey are sorted, deserve no better. It is the disgrace of the best, when
those of vvorst qualitye are coupled with them as their fellows. In the time
of Bodin: de Rep: l: 5: 4:
Pope Julius the third the Cardinals of Rome knevve this; when seeing the
Pope to create Montanus Cardinal, one whom for his pleasures sake he had
taken out of a most beggarly estate, and brought him up at home, they joined in
a request and motion in behalf of the College of Cardinals, that he would
not suffer that honorable degree to be stained by the presence of so
contemtible a man, who had neither wealth, nor wisdom, nor virtue, nor
parentage, nor learning, nor any thing to commend him. Indeed the Pope there
had the^ at the adva^tage, for he was able to beat them with their own rod,
and therefore replied upon them, What virtues I pray you, what learning, what
parentage, what good qualities was I famous for, when you made me Pope? His
personal reproof to them was just; otherwise their suit had been
reasonable: for such a consort could no way honest their College; as these
silye Popish authors do no way add estimation, but manifold dis-reputation
to the Fathers. Thirdly how shamefully did the predecessors of these late
Papists, in the time of dark ignorance foist in parts of tracts, and whole
treatises into the volumes of the Fathers, so laboring that new writings might
run current for old, vpstarts for natural, and very draffe and chafe for
good corn. There is sea^t any one of the Fathers which has escaped free
herein, not Cyprian, not Austen, not Hierome, out of whose works many books
and pieces may be pulled, which for the matter or style do no more refe^ble
those authors, the^ Aesops Ass did a Lio^, when he had got that Roial beasts
skin on his back. The Popish Censurers in their editio^s do confess so
much, but Erasmus a man who had the gift of 1: Cor: 12: 10.
discerning of spirits did go beyond them al, and in his prefaces, arguments,
or Censures upon books, does yield the reasons of his opinion. It is
incredible to think how absurd things are fathered on these Doctors, as by
name that Adfratres in eremo before said to be entitled to Saint Austen, where
the absurd fellow sometimes plainly takes upon him the name of Auste^ Bishop
of Hippon, but to procure admiration says Sermon: 37.
that he traveiled into Aethiopia, and saw there men without heads, with their
eyes set in their breast, and others he beheld which had only one eye in the
middle of their forehead. I wish that either Sir John M Hac^its ving.
Maundevile had been with him, or he with Sir John Maundevile. This trick of
iugling in such tractes, is a dangerous matter to any who will rest himself
too far upon the Fathers writings: and our Popish people have in their
fraud great advauntage, when out of such as they are, they will confirm
their Paradoxes. But there is another point more tickle then this, when their
Monks and Cloister men would intersert into the true and proper works of the
best writers, whole leafes, or pages or sentences, more or less to serve for
their purpose. Erasmus who labored exceedingly in repairing and restoring
antiquity, and to whose pains al learned men do owe much, co^plaineth bitterly
of this; as in one of his Lib: de spirit. sa^ct.
prefaces to a book of S. Basile, he with grief says, that the same measure
was affoorded to Basile, which he had otherwise experimented in Athanasius,
Chrysostom, Hierome, and that was, that in the middle of treatises, many
things were stuffed and forced in by other, in the name of the Fathers. Hence
the Romish generation might build even what pleased themselves. But besides all
this, as in other arts so in Divinity and in the writings of the Doctors, by
the ignorance of the Novices, in Monasteries set to write out Copies of
books, yea of their Vives de canis corrupr: art: lib: 1.
Nuns so employed, diverse arguments of books were put into the books
themselves, and Annotations in the Marge ^t were erepte into the text.
Concerning this depravation of learned men's works in all kinds. Lodovicus
Vives has written diverse books entitled, Of the causes how or why the
arts were corrupted, and has there many observations and complaints, that
some ignorauntly, some maliciously, all audaciously did such things. I think
it not amisle to cite one sentence of his, which shows how diverse
counterfeite books had the names of noble Authors put upon them. Among such
as did write out volumes, Libr: 1:
there were some who to procure authority to a book, did in writing put to
it the name of some great author: other, that when in times past many books
were put out without names, being moved with some very light conjecture,
did adiudge it to one or to another: other if they did not know the name of
the title, did not doubt to change it, and to transfer it to whom they
thought good: there were such as vvrote out books, who look what name came
first in their mind, that they did set before for the title. There be many
examples of all these things, in those authors whom even now I named,
Aristotle, Plato, Origin, Cyprian, Hierome, Augustine, Boethius, Cicero, Seneca,
and all these have been received without difference, and no less authority
and credit given to them, then to those which were true and natural. This is
a noble testimony of a very learned man, who spent much traveile purposely in
this argument, and shows by what sinister means such came to be reputed
Fathers, who were more fit to be taken for children.

29 Fourthly I name that which is most horrible of all other, even a manifest
evidence of a desperate cause, and that which is rotten at the root. Wherein
the impudency and shameless forehead of the whore of Babylon and her Peers,
can never sufficientlye be exclaimed upon, albeit heaven and earth, and all
the creatures therein be called to witness. For has this Antichristian
brood so long fled from the Scriptures to the Fathers, and have they and
do they so crake of these every where, and are they now forced to raze them,
and pare them, and blurre them, else they cannot hold up their irreligion?
This is the case of which I desire all my weak and abused countrymen to take
notice. In the Conventicle of Trent there were certain Index Expurgar. Belgic.
in Regul. Council: Tridentini.
rules made, which openly did pretend the purging and clensing of books from
heretical matters, but secretly intend more, even to raze out what they
think fit out of old or new, as their practice in this behalf does
testify, which is warranted by the covert orders there concluded. For this
business, in diverse places of the Papacy, were secretly appointed some of
their own stamp, men conscience-lesse and fit for any vile act, to revise
as well the Fathers, as later books of all sorts, and whatsoever made
against Popery and could not handsomely be glosed, should upon the new
printing of the books by Printers in Popish places, be cunningly altered or
quite left out. This must be done, notwithstanding that all the copies even
formerly printed by themselves, and many written ones in their libraries, and
as many in ours, did plainly shevve the contrary. Yea though marveilous store
of copyes, written hundreds of years before, when as neither Luther, nor
Hus, nor Wiclefe were yet borne, did concur in that for which we plead.
Heere-vppon closely was drawn first An: 1571.
one Index Expurgatorius, by the vvarrant of Philippe the second King of
Spain, and of the Duke of Alva Governor of the Low Countries for him. There
in the Kings letters patentes prefixed before the book, charge is given that
in every city where booke-sellers dvvell, there should be some Prelates
appointed to supervise all noted books, and that Diploma Regis Catholici
Belgic.
they should have with them privatelye, and no other men knovving of it, one
Index Expurgatorius, which they should neither communicate unto others, nor
grant a copy of it to any man, but only shall most diligently take care of
that, that they inquire upon, expunge, and restore the places before spoken
of. According to this, were all the new printed books proceeded withal by
them, and our men not knowing the mystery wondered at those things which were
left out and altered, but could not guess at the true cause, till about
fifteen An: 1587:
years after, Franciscus Iunius by Gods special providence light upon one of
them, and published it to the world. Suitable to this was there by the
commandment of Pope An. 1572.
Pius the 5. a Censure upon the Glosses of the Canon Law closely framed by
Friar Thomas Manriq. Master of the holy and Apostolic Palace, and the same by
the An: 1580:
mandate of Pope Gregory the 13. was afterward reviewed by Sixtus Faber also
Master of the same Palace Apostolic, and according thereunto were the Glosses
of the Canon Law printed, all things being blotted out which made against the
Romish faith. This also was concealed, as the Index Expurgatorius had been
before, till that An: 1599:
latelye Doctor John Pappus met with it, and published it to the view of
all who will read it. I find also F. Gregor. Capuch: in libris Corrig: fol:
166:
mention of a Censure concerning certain Authors, which was put out in
Spain in the year 1562. but the book it self is not yet come (for ought
that I know) to any of our hands. But after that, by the means of Gaspar
Quiroga Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo, being also chief Inquisitour in
Spain, An: 1584: Madriti apud Alphons. Gomezium Regiu^ Typograph.
there was printed another Index Librorum Expurgatorum, which was not without
the advice of the high Sonate of the holy General Inquisition. This book
also was unknovvne to any Protestant, until that her late Majesty's forces
taking the town of An. 1596:
Calez in Spain, there was one of these Indices found there, which being
brought into England, was by a M. Tho. James.
man careful to lay open such frauds, sent to the L. of Plessis into
France, who keeping the original in his own Library, An: 1601:
printed it at Saumure, and made it known to the body of Christendom. In the
beginning of this edition it is shevved, that they thrust out diverse things
of their own vvriters, as out of the works of Osorius, Ferus, a book
called Edit: Venetijs An: 1576.
Ordo Baptizandi cum modo visitandi. Yea out of the Gloss on Epiphanius, and
from the Tables in the ends of the works of Chrysostom, Hilary, Hierome,
Cyril of Alexandria, when notvvithstanding the matters to be put out and
razed, are either literally or in sense apparently, and not to be spoken
against, in the Text of those Fathers. Nay in the Index of the Bibles put out
by Robert Stephanus, these propositions must be blotted out as suspect, Ioh:
11. 26:
He who believes in CHRIST shall not dye everlastingly. Act. 15. 9.
By faith the hearts are purified, Gal. 2. 16:
UUee are justified by faith in Christ, Christ is 1. Con 1: 30.
our righteousness, No Ps: 143. 2:
man is righteous before God, 1: Cor: 7^ 2.
Every man may have his wife, whereas yet notwithstanding they are the very
word of GOD, as may be seen in the places quoted.

30. Last of all, (for ought that is yet come to our knowledge) there was a
treatise Venetijs An: 1597: apud lo: Baptistam, and lo: Bernardum Sessam.
Concerning books to be corrected, put out by F^ter Gregory a Capuchine
Neopolitane intituling himself Purger of the books at Naples. This fellow
does frequently make mention of the Censure put out in Spain Anno 1562. and
1584. and is much more peremptory then it, or any other whom I have seen. I
will breefely lay down some things that I find in him. Speaking then of
Litera. F. fol. 153:
Frauncis Petrarcha, thus he says, Let there be put out the four expositions
with the text, to wit, Dell' impia Babilonia, (...) Avara Babilonia, Fontana
de dolori, fiamma del Cielo, which matters how near they touch Rome, every one
acquainted with Petrarkes works do well know. Mentioning the Bibles of the Fol.
166.
Vulgar edition, thus he speaks, Bibles which are defective in the Text,
according to the Tridentine Council, Sess. 4. in the Decree de vsu sa^r. libr.
I do ever burn. And I make an experiment in the 3. Chapter of Genesis, where I
find, In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread, until thou return
unto the earth, and he does not say, In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat
thy bread, until etc. I without remission as a text suspect, do not pass to
it, censuring it; but setting it on fire. Now if it be a defect to put it bread
and not thy bread, it is such a defect as is in the Hebrew, and our books
read it commonly in Latin and other languages without thy, and so do most of
the Vulgar Popish editions for ought that I can find. And if it be a fault to
put thy to the text, it should rather be chastised for a superfluity then for
a defect. Talking of his Correction of a book of Iacobus Spieglius, he has
these words, Fol. 199 and Idem fere. fol. 217:
Which correction I do put, not that it is to be accounted for a perfect
correction, that it should need no farther amending: but only satisfying my
duty, that it may be known that it is to be corrected, and that at least it
should be corrected as follows, till there come a better correction put out
with greater consideration: since I find by experience that too day I see a
book or aleafe, and by various businesses of my mind I do not judge him to be
worthy greater correction, and on the morrow upon a new consideration, I do
judge him to be worthy of correction. And therefore I do notify thus much that
as well the book following as these before are worthy of correction: and if
they be corrected after the manner mentioned, easily according to the Trent
Index, there may by the most Reverend Bishops leave be given to read them,
till some farther correction do appear. This is a good plain fellow, and
therefore tells us that once amending of a book will not suffice, but they
will to it again and again. Fol: 215:
Elsewhere he says that among them the Revisers, there is a note of three
hundred and fifty Authors which are suspected, and are to be over-vewed. Fol:
218:
Finally he deeply finds fault with the Index Librorum Expurgandorum (for so
he calls it) printed at Madrill by Alphonsus Gomezius in the year 1584.
saying that it contains things erroneous and heretical, as by name, that it
does not sufficiently expunge and purge the works of Carolus Molineus, whom
he terms an heretic of the first or highest form. Thus we may justly
fear that there will never be an end of their clipping and curtolling, when
themselves cannot agree what is to be pulled out, but when they have fleeced
and plumed the works of any the most learned man, either of our side or of
their own, some other of these purgers may and must, again and again fall
upon the same.

31 But if here it be replied as some Papists amongst us do already mutter,
and as it is probable that Gretzerus will urge more at large, if he put forth a
defense of the Indices Expurgatorij, as I hear that he intends, That this
clipping and blotting out, is not in the texts of the Fathers, but only in
Prefaces, Marginall notes, Collections out of them, or observations upon them,
or else if it be very textes, it is but out of the works of later writers, I
answer that these purgings and razings toward the Fathers themselves indeed
do not so directly appear as the other, for in this they use a singular
cunning, obliquely to do what they possibly may. But I desire to be informed
to what end these things do bend. First they confess in their (...) Belg^ke
Index Expurgatorius thus much concerning the old writers, In other ancient In
Beitramo.
Catholics meaning the Fathers, we bear many errors, and extenuate them,
excuse them, excogitating some devise we many times deny them, and do feign
unto them a convenient sense, while they are opposed in disputations, or
inconflictes with the adversaries. Here is a distorting and turning away of
the sense of the Fathers, even against their own consciences. Secondly I find
it reported by Praefat. ad Lector. in Belg. Indic. Ex. purg:
Iunius, as a matter which himself saw, that now about forty years since,
the works of S. Ambrose being printed at Lions by Frelonius, there came in two
Franciscanes which razed out much of diverse printed sheets, which enforced
Frelonius to new print the same again, not after the old Copies, but as the
Friars would have them, to the great charge and trouble of the Printer, as
Ludovicus Savarius the correctour of the press did complain, professing that
he would buy any copy of Ambrose rather then that. It were a good labor for
some man who had leisure, to confer the elder books with that edition, and
to notify the differences to the world. Thirdly I houlde it the same fraud
to add which it is to diminishe, neither is there any sentence but by
interlacing words enough, a cunning worke-man may turn it clean contrary to
the sense of the Author himself: And this may be as good an Index
Correctorius or Additorius as the other Expurgatorius. Pamelius a Cano^ of
Bruges takes on him to revise S. Cyprian, and finding that pregnant place,
before by me mentioned, De vnitate Ecclesiae Alias de simplicitate praelatorum:
The rest of the Apostles were the same which Peter was, endewed with like
fellowshippe both of honor and of power, and other things both before and
after it to that purpose, he foisteth into the middle of sentences, for super
vnum aedificat Ecclesiam, upon one he builds the Church, thus much, super
illum vnum aedificat Ecclesiam suam, and illi Pascendas mandat oves suas: he
builds his Church upon that one meaning Peter and commits his sheep to
him to be fed. And again vnam cathedram constituit, he erected one chair,
And afterward Qui cathedram Petri super quam fu^da est Ecclesia deserit, he who
for saketh the chair of Peter upon which the Church is founded, does he hope
that he is in the Church? Observat. in Pamelij Annotat.
Simon Goulartius who has displayed the wicked falsehood of this forger,
besides other evidences against this vilainy, does cite the words of Gratian
out of the new editio^ of Gregory's Decree, which brings in the place of
Cyprian as we and all other (before Pamelius) did read it. But a Th Bilsonus
Epis cop. Winton. lib. 1. contra Po^tificios.
learned man of our Church handling that last place, he who far saketh the
chair of Peter upon which the Church is built, does show that this addition is
contrary to all the printed Copies which were before, as by name of Alopecius
at Coleine, Hervagius at Basile, Langelier at Paris, Crinitus at Antwerpe,
Griphius at Lions, Manutius at Rome. Yea that besides Erasmus diverse Papists
as Rembolius, Canchius, Costerius, Gravius, Manutius, Morelius, had set forth
Cyprian, searching for written copies of the best both far and near, and yet
no man of all these, in all their editions thinking of any such matter. Lastly
that In indiculo c^um excusor: and manuscr. in initio Cypr.
Pamelius himself saying that he had the help of eight more manuscript copies
besides printed ones, could gather no such thing in any of all them, but only
out of one Cambron copy, which must check all the books of Christendom.
Which shows that doubtless this Cambron brood was forged in former time by
some one, who was desirous to magnify the Primacy of the Pope. Fourthly our
makers of the Indices do go very near the Fathers, when they blotte out of
the Tables of their books those things which were in the Authors themselves,
either word for word or in apparent meaning as before I have manifested.
Fifthly it is not to be doubted, but that as there be many things more altered
in Cyprian by Pamelius, which Goulartius has refuted, and may be read by any
man that will, And many matters razed in Ambrose, so if any man had leisure to
confer them, he should find the like done in Chrysostom and other of the
Fathers (as Vide Th. Bilson. lib. 4
Basile is notably forged to make for Images) some things being added, some
diminished, other changed, the trial whereof it were good some of our men did
undertake in the Gregory lately put out at Rome, or some other such book.
Sixthly who knows whether there be any such Index gathered already, or in
gathering, for the writings of all the Fathers, by the which the new editions
must be trimmed. We see that daily they add their other Indices, therefore
they may add one of this nature also; And long it was before those could be
found, which now are discovered, and so the times of the descrying of this may
not be yet come. Or who knows whether they who began with the marginal notes,
Contents, Arguments, Tables and other Observations upon the Doctors, and
therein did make trial by this gentle sounding at first, how well they could
carry it, or how the world would take it, now grow resolute to proceed farther.
Since they are over shoes, best plunge higher even over the shoulders: they
see their good will is known, and therefore best now be impudent, the ice is
broken in Ambrose and Cyprian, and they are no better then their fellows, who
therefore worthily shall all be served with the same sauce. Seventhly, which is
not least to be observed, and sits best with my former conjectures, a late
countryman of ours from Rome has give^ some pretty light to this matter: I
mean the Author of the The warnwoord to S F^Ha. stings wast-word.
VVarnewoord. Whether I should say this to be Father Parsons, or Father
Warford, I know not well: since Warford as I am certainly informed, has
perpetually free access to the others study, and digesteth that matter which
Parsons is not at leisure to put into form, and sometimes putting Epistles and
Prefaces to the works of the elder Fox, they two play handy-dandy so each
with other, that they think by a Iesuitish conveiance, they jointly or
severally according to the co^veniency of their the^ present purposes may
affirm or deny any book to be or not be the work of Father Parsons. But
whether soever of the two it be, he being charged by his adversary with the
clipping of the Fathers according to the rules of the Index Expurgatorius,
labors to avoid from his side the imputation of those frauds. And for that
purpose Encount. 2: cap 9:
cites diverse rules prefixed by the Council of Trent, before the Index, all
which rules do touch the works of later writers; but touching those which are
ancient, he says that thus they decree, In libris autem Catholicorum veterum,
nihil mutari fa^ sit nisi vbi aut fraud haereticorum, aut typographi incuria
manifestus error irrepserit. Which he Englisheth thus, It may not be lawful
(for them that correct books) to change any thing at all in the books of the
ancient Catholics, except where any manifest error should appear to have
crept in, either by the fraud of heretics, or negligence of the Printer.
Here then are two cases, in which even the works of the old Fathers may be
altered: And according to this he affirms of the Spanishe Index
Expurgatorius: that it is most certain that in all they put out of any author
before our age, they follow one of two reasons before mentioned, to wit, that
either they find it thrust in by heretics, or by error of the Printer, and
that other more ancient and corrected copies had it not. Now under this
shameless color, they in their impude^cy may do what they list: for since
Papists and Popish Correctours must be the Judges, there shall be nothing
which crosses their Antichristian doctrine, but it by and by shall be said
(even contrary to all antiquity) to be thrust in by heretics. And what
conscience they make in practicing their own rule, and keeping themselves
within compass thereof, may be seen by that of Cyprian so handled by
Pamelius as is before mentioned, where it cannot be denied but that they have
altered the words from those which formerly were, And shall it now be said to
be the Printers fault, that the words are as we read them. Why their own
Prints, and all the old written copies have them so. Or shall it be said to be
foisted in by heretics, when so many and so great Papists as Costerius,
Manutius, Morelius and the other above named were, yea Gratian himself does
put it as we do? The truth then is, they will put in and put out, add,
diminish, choppe, change and alter what they list, and if any show can that
way be made it shall be pretended to be the error of the Printer, or the
falsehood of an Heretic: but if there be not so much as any color for that
pretense, yet if it be for their purpose, it shall be done, with hope that it
shall not be espied, or that some secret probable reason shall be imagined
wherefore justly they might do so. In which respect I may say, that the rule is
wicked and the practice is worse, the one sl^y permits falsehood, the other
more audaciously does execute it, and so even the works of the most Ancient
are daily depraved by this sinful and deceitful Romish brood. So that if
ever there were a fraudulent and false generation of vipers on the earth; if
men that have sold themselves to falsehood; if such as to serve the turn of
their vn-holy Father, care not what they do which may carry any pretense, it is
this ungracious and ungodly company. The Lord discover their wickedness to
the simple people, that every one may see and detest their damnable abuses. By
these plain and evident matters, it may appear whether the Romanists or we
do truly make more reckoning of the Fathers, since we yield them so much
authority as belongs to ancient, godly, and learned men, noble lamps in the
Primitive Church, and great illustratours of the truth; they in substance
overthrow all this; since we conserving them, they corrupt them, and either
raze or add to, or pervert such sentences and sayings of the Doctors, as any
way impeach their Romish Hierarchy whereby as usurpers they reign and dominere
in the consciences of men and women.


FINIS.
To the Christian Reader.
IT is now about one year and a half agone, that being entreated to answer
this Pamphlet, which is more fraught with malice and bitter speaking then with
truth or learning, in behalf of my poor contrymen abused by these
Seminarians, I undertook it. And albeit for the whole year following I was
sufficiently burdened with my ordinary business, and therein for the space of
9. or 10. weeks, sick and much weakened with a sharp and vehement fever: yet
my desire to dispell these foggy mists of Popery was such, that within the
compass of that time, I drew up the first Copy of an Answer to 16. of these
Romish Reasons. Wherein rather desiring to give to the Reader a substantial
then a flight satisfaction, I found by probable conjecture that even so much
would grow to a reasonable volume: and the like course heere-after being taken
with the latter part of D. Hills book, there also might arise a work of like
proportion. Upon this conceit I fell to revising and writing out to the Press
that which formerly I had done, and therein by Gods blessing I went so far,
that now 6. months since I finished so much as here is published, some few
interlacings only excepted. But when I should have proceeded to the perfecting
up of the other six, a burden was by my honorable Patron imposed upon me,
which together with my necessary imploime^ts at Winchester since that time,
has so put me from co^te^platio^ and kept me in continual actio^, that I scant
have bin able to sustain the weight of the daily co^tingent, and perpetually
incu^bent business, as is apparent to every man acquainted with mine estate. And
in as much as yet for a time I Am not like to be freed from that charge, I am
put to this difficulty, that either till I have more leisure; I must stay the
Answer to these ten Chapters, being now completed by the Printer, or I must
send these forth without their fellows, which is much contrary to my former
purpose.

Notwithstanding at the last I have resolved upon the latter of these two
courses, being the rather inclined thereunto, because a learned man of the other
Vnivetsity has lately vn-quartered the whole Quartron of D. Hills Reasons,
which peradventure in the judgment of many men may seem so good a
satisfaction to that which the adversary has objected, that my future labors
in this Argument may very well be spared. For this cause my purpose is, (giving
way to my present necessary services) to attend and expect for a while, the
judgment and Censure of men wise and learned in our Church, and afterward to
proceed or not proceed as occasion hall require. In the mean time I may say,
that the mainest and principallest bulwarks of the Romish religion are these,
which I have already assaulted: and it is as easy a matter to go forward with
the rest, as it has been to deal with these. Before persons which are
wilfully ignorant, or perverse together with their learning, Popery may bear
some show; but with such as have the skill to displaye it, or the grace to
endure the dismasking of it, it is but a painted Iesabell. Only herein the
unsearchable judgment of God is to be admired, and his ways which are past
finding out are to be wondered at, and that with amasement and astonishment,
that there should yet be so many, who have eyes and see not, and ears and
hear not, yea hearts and understand not, but still go forward to make up the
number of the servitors of the beast, and of the train of Antichrist, who must
have some to adore him till the dissolution of the world. But to the end that
such among our Popish Contrymen as are ordained to salvation, may be plucked
out of the fire, it behooves us who are the Ministers of the Gospel to be
diligent in preaching the Gospel to such as will hear, and in writing, for
such as will read, that they may know and believe and be saved. For the better
accomplishing whereof, and for the instruction of the ignorant, who most
readylie are seduced, I have taken these pains, endeavoring to deliver
plainly and without obscurity that which I have to say: And for the clearing
of all my Doctors both general and particular suggestions, tracing him step by
step, and besides discussing the maine drifte of his Reasons, together with the
validity of those Arguments, which others for the strengthening of the Roman
perfidiousnesse, do or may rest thereupon. And yet in fitting my self to the
capacity of the unlearned, I have not been altogether forgetful to give some
co^tentment to men of more knowledge, wherein how far I have gone, it is not
for me, but for others to judge.

But whereas I have once made mention, of the expelling of the Jesuits out of
France, and the sharp Edict which was there against the^; and now the report
is strong, that upon some conditions they are restored thither again, (to the
truth whereof in particular, I must ingenuously confess, that I cannot yet
attain) the difference of time being waighed will easily answer for that
matter, it being certainly here-tofore one way, and now peradventure
another. In respect whereof it is not amiss to know, that as it was longer
agone that the Copy written for the Press was finished, so it is five months
since that the Printer began with this book, howsoever sometimes this work
has been interrupted, one while with the danger of the Pestilence, which of
late has been so generally spread, and another while with the publishing of
diverse other linal tracts, which the present occasion did offer. And this also
may serve for Answer to another point, wherein my charity presumed more quietness
in some men amongst us, the^ themselves are willing to yield correspo^dence
unto. Nevertheles I trust that this is but a fit, and that time and experience
will give rest to the most unquiet and restless soirits.

Lastly I earnestly entreat al Romishly affected English men and women, that
they be not so ready to harken to Jesuits and Seminary men, as here-tofore they
have bin, and to follow their lures either in spiritual or temporal matters.
What they can say for their Idolatry and superstition is long since known,
neither have they yet brought ought of moment, but has received answer. And
for their other behavior, whither it be co^me^dable and Christian, or no, let
their own books between the united and dis-vnited Priests show, wherein of late
so copiously and so lively they have disciphered each other. But if this will
not serve the turn, let the practices of two Priests lately displayed and
co^fested by themselves at Winchester, make all men take heed of them. It is
hard to say whether their attempts were more traitorous against their
Sovereign, or treacherous against their friends and men of their own Religion.
I take no pleasure to speak ill of those which are dead, and whose bodies have
endured the stroke of Justice according to their deserts. But since these
things were not done in a corner, but as matters exe^plary to all the land, and
they ca^ no way be concealed, let. me make the use of the^, for which ^od
ordained the^, that is to warn other me^ of that which was disclosed there.
Under a color of doing service to our most gracious Sovereign, Watson drew
on his friends to horrible attemptes of treason against their Lord and King.
Some of the^ tells, that his Maty, must be assisted against the Puritans,
some other, that it must be against the lesuits: when indeed it was nothing
else, but to set the whole kingdom into co^bustio^, to the alteration of the
state and the effusio^ of much blood, that himself (a base and mean
co^panio^) might be possessed with the greatest office of England, and other
his accomplices with the next. It was no marveil that with shame and co^fusio^ of
face he did ha^ge down his head, when his own folowers too prope^se before to
sedition and tumults; did personally but most deservedly reproach him for so
intrapping the^. Now how were Papists in that actio^ lead blindfold, when
leaving their own vocatio^s, their houses, wives and children, they could be
persuaded to dau^ce after the pipe of Preests putting them into facts of so
high^ nature, and that in such troops they would adve^ture upon the^? I say in
such t^oupes, because the two Priests being returned from those countries where
their acquaintance lay, made it known to a special person of the co^spiracy,
that they had 500. men ready to act that which they had formerly plotted, and
instantly moved him, that it might expeditely be done. And that this was not
altogether unlikely, is plain by the open speech of Clarke at the bar, who
professed that he could bring two hundred me^, viz. to act such their
pretended devises for their Catholic cause: and yet Clarke was the less active
Priest of the two If these fellows in a matter of that high quality spoke false
(which some will imagine) what trust may their favorites give them, in other
their relations? If they spoke true, how fearful is the case of such as listen
unto them, who so soon, and under such fair colors may be circumvented? But
how merciful in the mean time, is the proceeding of his blessed Majesty, who
questioneth not with severity of justice al those who were entangled in some
circumstances of that attempt (it being no hard matter to have them discovered)
but affoordeth much more clemency then other Princes in like cases have done.
Let them magnify the mercy of the Lord, and his Anointed, and let them think
and speak honorably of the Ienity of the State, which rather spareth' men
apparently ill deserving then questioneth any who are tolerably innocent. And
for the restlet them seriously take heed of such as have been nouzeled under
Cardinal Allen, Persons, Barret, Worthington and their adherents, least they
temporally bring ruin on their houses and bodies, and eternally on their
souls. God will not evermore bear those, who shut their eyes and stop their
ears against the truth. The Lord direct us in his own ways, and call home
such as wilfully or by ignorance have gone astray, that at length they may be
reduced to the sheepe-folde of Christ Jesus, to whom with his Father, and their
blessed spirit be praise for evermore,

Amen.

