VIRGINALIA OR SPIRITVALL SONNETS in praise of the most Glorious VIRGIN MARIE,
upon every several Title of her Litanies of Loreto: All or most part of the
principal passages therein confirmed by the evident testimonies of the ancient
Fathers, to prevent the objections of such, as usually detract from her
deserved praises.

By I. B.

What is more noble then the Mother of God; what more glorious then she, whom
Glory has chosen? S. Ambr. lib. 2. de Virg.

Printed with License. 1632.

A Catalogue of such Fathers, as hereafter are alleged; together with the
age, they lived in.
Justinius Martyr, lived Anno Domini 150. Origenes. 130. Gregorius
Neocaesariensis Thaumaturgus. 260. Methodius Tyri Episcopus. 260. Athanasius.
340. Ambrosius. 370. Ephrem Syrus. 370. Gregorius Nazianzenus. 380. Epiphanius.
380. Gregorius Nyssenus. 380. Hieronymus. 390. Ruffinus. 390. Augustinus. 400.
Chrysostomus. 400. Sophronius Hierosolymitanus senior. 400. Proclus
Constantinopolitanus. 430. Cyrillus Alexandrinus. 430. Petrus Chrysologus. 440.
Leo Magnus. 450. Theodoretus. 450. Concilium Calcedonense. 453. Titus
Bostrensis Episcopus. 460. Basilius Seleucius. 460. Crysippus Hierosolymitanus
Presbyter. 500. Fulgentius. 500. Euthymius Eremita. 540. Andreas Cretensis
Episcopus. 560. Hesychius Hierosolymitanus. 580. Gregorius Magnus. 590.
Eutychianus. 600. Isidorus Hispalensis. 620. Sergius Hierapolita. 640. Beda.
700. Ioannes Damascenus. 730. Alcuinus Anglus. 750. Elias Cretensis. 780.
Idiota. 800. Anselmus Cantuariensis. 1080. Bernardus. 1130.
Virginalia, or, Spiritual Sonnets, in praise of the most glorious Virgin
MARIE upon every several Title of her Litanies of Loreto.
SONNET 1. SANCTA MARIA.
MARIA, Maria is interpreted Star of the sea: and she as a remarkable star
shines brightly by the grace of a special privilege among the waves of this
wavering world. etc. S. Bed. ad Euangel. in festo Annunc. Maria.
glorious sea-starre; thy clear sight
Guides us upon the world's tempestuous waves;
And through the dreadful shades of sinn's dark night
In the port of bliss our crasie vessel saues.
Thy sacred name most aptly does infer
A bitter sea, to express thy seas of greef,
when thou beheldst thy Son, who could not err,
As faulty dye, judged worser then a thief.
Well art thou Maria, which is interpreted Lady or one that gives light etc.
Isidorus Hispal. de vita vel obitu Sanct. c. 48.
Lady styled, since by that Son
Thou Power is given to her both in heaven and earth, which power is, to be
able to help us. S. Bernard, sermon. 1. in Salve Regina.
both in heaven and earth art powerful made
To ease their pains, who shall require thy aid.
Help me o then sinn's dangerous shelues to shun,
Give me a feeling of my Sauiour's pains,
And let me be of those, whom thou retains.
SONNET 2. SANCTA DEI GENITRIX.
MOTHER OF GOD: o rare prerogative!
O glorious title! what more special grace
Could unto thee thy dear son dread God give
To show how far thou do Marie by the dignity of her election transcends
all hight of a chosen creature. Greg. c. 1. l. 1. reg. (...) Mary excelled all
women in virtue. Justin. quest. 156.
all creatures pass?
That Who has seen? Who has heard the like? God, who cannot be contained in
a place, dwells in a womb: whom the heavens do not receave, a Virgin's womb
comprehends. Proclus Constantinop. de nas. Christi, the was truly blessed, who
was greater then heaven, stronger then the earth, wider then the world. For she
alone comprehended God, whom the world contains not. etc. Petrus Chrysol.
ser. 143.
mighty Power with in the narrow fold
Did of thy never polluted womb remain,
Whom, whiles he does the all ruling scepter hold,
Nor earth nor yet the heavens can contain.
Thou in the spring-tyde of thy age brought forth
Him, (d) who before all Matter, Time, and Place,
Begotten of the eternal Father was.
O be thou then, while we admire thy worth,
A means unto that Son not to proceed
In rigor with us for each sinful deed.
Holy Marie (...) (the mother of God) who holds not so, is an heretic.
Concii. Calced. Act. 5.
SONNET 3. SANCTA VIRGO VIRGINVM.
VIRGIN OF VIRGINS, thou the It was by a divine gift given to our Lady, that
she the first amongst women should offer up to God the glorious present of
Virginity Bed. ad Euangel. in Annunc. Marie The same is confirmed by S. Ildef.
ser. 5. de Assumptione Marie Beda. l. 1. in Luc. c. 3. Hono. l. de eternis
gaud. Rust. 3. in Cant.
first did make
The sacred vow of spottles chastity,
Through which example many now forsake
The vain world's frail delights to follow thee.
In the whole course of thy lives blessed race,
All the perfections of Let the Virginity and life of Marie be as in a picture
described to you, from whom as in a looking glass the beauty of Chastity
and form of virtue do yield a glorious reflection. Ambr. l. 2. de Virg.
virginity,
As in a fair vnblemish'd looking-glass,
In their true colors well reflected be.
Yet, though a Virgin, thou a Mother wast,
Whose fruitful maiden womb sent forth a ray
Of heavenly beams, which all Hell's errors chased.
Daigne, Virgin Mother, to thy Son to pray,
That he would grant, thy great Integrity
May be a salve for our Impuritie.
SONNET 4. MATTER CHRISTI.
MOTHER OF CHRIST; thy virtuous life deserved
That light through thee should to us all appear,
And that thou should before all others bear,
Him, who by death from death our souls preserved.
CHRIST is the oil powered out, whereby we live,
Which yields us light our grievous faults to see,
Which cures our sinful souls, and setts us free
From Hell's dread pains, and does new forces give.
In thee, Chaste Mother, this most sacred, pure,
And sovereign oil, this precious salve, did grow,
And from thee to all sinne-sicke mortals flow.
Request of him our spiritual wounds to cure,
To feed our hungry souls, and footsteps guide,
That from his blessed ways, we never may slide.
SONNET 5. MATTER DIVINAE GRATIAE.
MOTHER OF DIVINE GRACE we justly may
Style thee, most gracious Lady, since within
Thy heauen-like womb free from all guilt of sin
The great Dispenser of all Graces In that Virgin the treasure of all Grace was
laid. etc. Greg. Neocesar.
lay.
Graces chief treasure rested in thy heart,
What s'ere thou did, was Whatsoever was done in her, was all purity and
simplicity, all grace and truth, all mercy and justice, which looked down
from heaven. Sophronius. ser. de Assumpt. Maria apud Hieronymum.
wholly Purity,
Truth, Mercy, Justice: Grace is given to others but by (certain) portions,
but in Marie the whole plenitude of Grace infused itself all at once. ibid.
only unto thee
Full grace was given, to others but in part.
From thy dear Son, by thee unto us all,
When for such gifts we do our souls prepare,
All graces daily distributed are.
Then let us still, when s'ere we humbly call,
Be by thee heard; n'ere let us pray in vain,
But, when we ask for Grace, still Grace obtain.
SONNET 6. MATTER PVRISSIMA.
MOTHER MOST PVRE: thou pure from any show
Did ever live of any sinful stain;
Against all the assaults of our accursed foe
Thy very The mother of God was not so much as defiled at any time with
filthy thoughts. Elias Creten. in orat 4. Nazianz.
thoughts did victorious still remain.
From actual sins and from Original,
Thy soul alone, except thy Sonne's, was free;
Yea the profoundest Doctors, when they fall
To speak of sin, refuse to mention thee.
Thy soul and body now reioyn'd do When we speak of sins, we will not, for
the honor of our Lord have any question of Mary etc. Aug. de natura and Gr. c.
66.
shine,
Next to thy greater Son, and much more pure
Then Cherubins or other powers divine.
Endeavor, purest Mother, to procure,
That, when our souls with sins we tainte, we may
With floods of tears wash all such spots away.
All Christendom knows that Marie is exalted above all the heavens, and
assuredly believes, that she is placed above the Quires of Angels. Ansel. de
excel. Mari and Virg. c. 4.
SONNET 7. MATTER CASTISSIMA.
MOTHER MOST CHASTE thou art; for thou alone
Of all thy sex a virgin She conceived a Virgin, she brought forth (her child)
a Virgin. Leo magn. ser. de Not. Domini. c. 2.
did conceive,
A pure chaste Virgin broughtest forth thy son,
A Virgin also this frail world did leave.
Thou After that Mary once conceived and brought forth her child, she never
bore any more, neither knew she man, though some doting fellows are not
afraid to say, that the Virgin hirself conceived an other child etc. Athan.
ser. in descriptione S. Mar. and Joseph. item. Cyrill. Alexand. l. 2. de recta
fide ad reginas. Ambr. de virginitate institut. c. 5. Hiero. ad c. 44. Ezech.
with many more etc.
never did (let Hell storm, shift, and lie)
After thy firstborn child a second bear;
Thou still were The Virgin Mother of God, purer then the beams and brightness
of the sun. Ephr. orat. de laud. sant. Dei matris.
clearer then the world's bright eye,
Or all the lights which turn on every sphere.
Thy chastitie's strong bands no strength could cut;
Thou art the gate through which but Israel's God
Does come and go, yet still remains shutt.
Vouchsafe, chaste Mother, to divert the rod
Of god's just judgments from us, when we be
S^outhfull to imitate thy chastity.
This is the closed Oriental gate, through which the Bishop alone comes in and
goes out, yet it still remains shutt. Hiero. ad c. 44. Ezech.
SONNET 8. MATTER INVIOLATA.
MOTHER INVIOLATED; Origin writes in this sort in his Homily 1. in diuersos.
who can be
A perfect mother, and yet vndefil'd?
Did ever any aged woman see
A maid at once and mother of a child?
None but thy self, great Mother, thou alone
Of all thy sex this title can receive;
Thou only free from all What is more chaste then she, who has brought forth a
body without pollution of body? Ambr. l. 2. de Virginibus,
contagion
Of body's touch, a body did conceive.
Thy spotles The same is both a Mother and a Virgin, neither did her Virginity
take away the childbirth, nor the childbirth dissolve her Virginity. Greg.
Nyssen. 2. in not. Christi.
chastity did not impeach
Thy wondrous childbirth, nor that birth again
Make in thy Virgin's fortress any breach.
Pray, we beseech thee, that we may refrain
From each lascivious, fond, impure desire,
And to thy purity in part aspire.
SONNET 9. MATTER INTEMERATA.
MOTHER UNSPOTTED, thou art Moyse's As in time past the bush etc. and as the 3.
Children etc. or as to Daniel etc. So did this Virgin also bring forth God, yet
remained untouched etc. Origin. Hom. in diuersos. Exodus 3.
bush
Which flamed indeed, but was not burned at all;
Thou art that woman, whose blessed seed should By thee, o more then blessed
Virgin Marie, the devil is overcome and trodden down, because it is written of
thee; she shall bruise thy head. Idiot. contempl. de B. Mar. c. 4. item Genesis.
3.
crush
The serpent's head, for to repair our fall.
As in hot furnace Israel's three Daniel. 3.
yong-men
The Almighties praises did untouched sing;
And as Daniel. 14.
to Daniel in the lyon's den,
The door shutt Abacuc did victuals bring:
So to redeem the forfait of the tree,
Thy virgin-wombe true God true Man did bear
Without all touch unto thy chastity.
Grant that we may, o spotles Mother, fear
To come before thee with a spotted, foul,
A sinne-infected, unprepared soul.
SONNET 10. MATTER AMABILIS.
AMIABLE MOTHER, Lovely, chaste, and Thou art all fair, o my friend, and no
spot is in thee. Cant. 4.7.
fair
Fair through the beauty of that special grace,
And those rare virtues, which without compare
Thy bounteous Son in thy blessed soul did place.
Fair through thy spotles pure Thou art all fair in thy Conception made only
to this end, that thou might be the temple of the highest God. Idiot.
contempl. de B. V. c. 2.
Conception,
Made for the temple of Heavens sovereign Lord,
Fair through the wondrous Generation
Of the Father's glory, the Eternal Word.
These and thy other graces do inflame
Each virtuous heart so with thy sacred love,
As all praise honor, and respect thy name.
Let us not then, sweet Mother, backward prove,
While in this wretched vale of tears we live,
To yeald thee that, which all the world does give.
SONNET 11. MATTER ADMIRABILIS.
ADMIRABLE MOTHER, This Virgin is truly the great wonder of the world. Chrysostom.
hom. in Hypopauten Domini.
wonder of the earth,
Wondrous in thy admired Conception,
Wondrous alike in thy most blessed Birth,
Thy course of life, death, and Assumption.
What is more wondrous then that thou a maid
Did bear a child, and yet a maid remain'dst?
Is ought more strange then that it may be said:
Thou him, Thou art the circumscription (that I may so say) of him, who cannot
be circumscribed etc. Thou art the comprehension (or conteyner) of him, who
contains and comprehends all things. Methodius Tyri Episcop. orat. in Hypag.
Domini.
whom naught could circumscribe, contain'dst?
All thy discourses, nay each very thought,
Much more thy deeds, most rare and wondrous were,
And far above our common merits wrought.
Grant that thy wondrous virtues may appear
So lively to our minds, that when we need,
We, how to live, in them may patterns read.
SONNET 12. MATTER CREATORIS.
MOTHER OF OUR CREATOVR; he, who first
Did build the house, himself was borne therein;
Thy purest Only Christ did open the closed gate of the Virginal womb; which
notwithstanding always remained shutt etc. Hier. l. ^. aduers. Pelagianos c.
2. item Ruffin. in expl. Symb. and alij.
womb without a breach he pearc't,
By whom thou had before created been.
He, who fills all things, to whose powerful might
All creatures bow, thy help oftimes He who fills heaven and earth, is become
needy of thee. Method. or. in Hypag. Domini.
received:
Thou that GREAT-ONE, great Mother, broughtst to light,
Who Thou in the end of times broughtest forth him, who was conceived before
all ages. ibid.
long before all ages was conceau'd.
At thy most chaste Annunciation,
Thou, what he had not, unto him did give,
Who nothing wants: his Incarnation.
Grant that we may, not only while we live,
But also at our death, partakers be
Of the blessed fruit of this great mystery.
Thou did lend to God his admirable Incarnation, which sometime he had not.
ibid.
SONNET 13. MATTER SALVATORIS.
MOTHER OF OUR SAVIOVR; thou before all others
Wast chosen to bear the ransom of us all;
For which all Nations far above all Thou art truly blessed who alone amongst
all Mothers, wast chosen to be Mother to thy Creator. Andr. Cret. orat. in
Ann. B. Virg.
Mothers
That ever were, thee ever blessed call.
The Thou did disclose to the world the Son of the invisible Father, by
whom all peace is restored to us: a hidden surety, and an ineffable mystery.
Method. Episc. Tyri. or. in Hyp.
eternal Fathers Son, by whom we see
Our ancient foe's malicious spleen represt,
That hidden, sacred, wondrous mystery,
To wretched mortals thou did manifest.
Thou art that glorious O blessed virgin thou art a bright clowd, which brought
from heaven that most clear lightning, Christ to illuminate the world etc.
Epiph. sermon. de Laud. B. V.
clowd, from whence did fly
That radiant lightning, whose resplendent rays
Cleared all the world, which did in darkness lie.
Be thou a means, blessed Mother, when we praise
Thy heavenly virtues, we may vices hate,
And thy perfections truly imitate.
SONNET 14. VIRGO PRVDENTISSIMA.
VIRGIN MOST WISE thou rightly may be styled,
Since thy rare wisdom did anticipate
So far thy years, as yet a tender child,
Thy self to God thou did consecrate.
Thou, to thy wisdome's never dying praise
T'reach the Conception Is not Mary a high mountain, who to the end she might
reach the Conception of the Eternal Word, raised up the topp of her merits
above all quyers of Angels, even to the throne of the Deity. Greg. mag. l. 1.
Reg. c. 1.
of the Eternal's Son
Did the high mountain of thy merits raise
Above all Saints, even to the Almighties throne.
Where like Esther. c. 5.
a prudent Hester without cease,
Thou do before thy sweet Son humbly pray
For our poor sinn-enthralled soul's release.
Obtain, most prudent Virgin, that we may
Prepare our selves a right, to taste the fruit
Of this thy, till the world end, nere ended suite.
libr. de ortu Virg. apud Hieronymum.
SONNET 15. VIRGO VENERANDA.
VIRGIN MOST VENERABLE, thy Royal race,
Thy virtuous life, and now immortal rays,
Deserve far better, then all humane race,
Civil, Religious, and Celestial praise.
Thou art the This alone is the bridge, by which God descended to man, Prod.
Constantinop. hom. de Not. Christi.
bridge, by which God came to man;
Thou art the second Adam's This is the spiritual paradise of the second Adam.
ibid.
paradise;
To thee (so high a place thy merits wann)
Next For, God only excepted, thou art above all. Epiph. sermon. de laud. B. V.
unto God, chief honor does arise.
Who but an Atheist will refuse to serve
So great a Mistress? who does every way
Such supreme honor worthily deserve.
O let us then, great Virgin, while we stay
In this frail world, thy humble agents be,
To move thy greatest foes to honor thee.
SONNET 16. VIRGO PRAEDICANDA.
VIRGIN MOST WORTHY PRAISE, by much more great
Then A heavenly and earthly tongue, no nor the tongue of Angels, can suffice
to rehearse thy praises. Epiph. Sermon. de laud. B. V.
men, then Saints, or Angels can explain:
For in thy blessed womb he fixed his seat
Whom all the earth's huge mast cannot sustain.
Thou the Mediatrix For she is the Mediatrix of heaven and earth, who naturally
accomplished the union. ibid.
art twixt God and man;
By thee whole Nations Through Marie Nations are brought to penance. Cyrill.
Alex. hom. Ephesians. in Nestor. habita.
are to penance brought;
The All-creatour first with thee began,
When he the world's desired Salvation wrought.
Thou the interposed Hayle thou who passing as Mediatrix betwixt God and Man,
procurest that the interposed wall of enmitus may at length be overthrown, and
earthly things joined to Celestial. Basil. Selutius, or. in Annun. Dei.
wall of hate did raise
Twixt God and man; thou heaven ioyn'dst to earth;
What can be greater? what more worthy praise?
Ask thy dear Son, we may even from our birth
(Through these and all thy merits) ere we dye
For all our sinful courses satisfye.
SONNET 17. VIRGO POTENS.
VIRGIN MOST POTENT: from that powerful Lord,
Whom dwelling She upon earth conceived God dwelling in heaven. Epiph. sermon. de
laudibus. B. V.
high in heaven thou did conceive
Low upon earth, thou still do power Vid. Sancta Maria. at By whom Devils
are put to flight, by whom the Devil tempter fell from heaven, and by whom
all creatures possessed with the rage of Idols, are brought to the knowledge
of the truth, etc. Cyr. Alex. hom. Ephesians in Hest.

receive*
To all, that crave thy aid, thy aid to afford.
Through thee The Infernal By whom Devils are put to flight, by whom the Devil
tempter fell from heaven, and by whom all creatures possessed with the rage of
Idols, are brought to the knowledge of the truth, etc. Cyr. Alex. hom. Ephesians
in Hest.
troops are put to flight;
Through thee cursed Satan did from heaven fall;
Through thee all those, who naught adored at all
But senseles Idols, now believe a right.
By thee thy Servants well rewarded are,
And also diverse, who thy power Daureltius tom. 21. Exemplerum tit. 68.
deride,
Receive by thee due payment for their pride.
Grant we may have, great Virgin, still a care
To fear and reverence thy most powerful name,
And strive in others to effect the same.
SONNET 18. VIRGO CLEMENS.
VIRGIN MOST MERCIFVLL, most mild, and meek;
The joy of every well-affected mind
What sinner e're to thee did humbly Thou art the help of those, who sin and
who are destitute of aid: thou art the haven of them who are troubled with a
storm, the comfort of the world, and the hope of such as live in the world.
Cos. Ephr. orat. de laud. B. V.
seek
Who thy assistance did not ready find?
Thou Thou art the help of those, who sin and who are destitute of aid: thou
art the haven of them who are troubled with a storm, the comfort of the world,
and the hope of such as live in the world. Cos. Ephr. orat. de laud. B. V.
art the hope and comfort of us all;
Thou art a quiet haven shut to none;
To such, as penitent for mercy call,
Thou Rejoice o divine refuge of reconciliation betwixt God and men. And. Cret.
orat. in Annunt. B. V.
by thy prayers do reconcile thy Son.
Thee The world has made thee the pledge of their faith with God. Ces. August.
de SS. sermon. 18.
the whole world with uniform consent,
The pledge with God of their true faith has made;
Nor does thy favor frustrate their intent.
Merciful Virgin, let it not be said,
That only we miss that, which all men have,
But Repress, O B. Virgin, my temptations, order my life after a pious and
holy manner, and cause that by thy directions, I may attain to heavenly
beatitude. Io. Damasc. or. 1. de Not. Mari.
guide our stepps, and fowls vouchsafe to save.
SONNET 19. VIRGO FIDELIS.
VIRGIN MOST FAITHFVLL: in that virtue none
Could ever near be paralelled with thee.
Faithful thou were in that from perils free
Thou still preseru'dst thine, and the Almightie's Son.
When at his passion he was left alone,
Thou faithful follow'dst to the erected tree;
Who askt' thee ere his Patroness who has, o Lady, hoped in thee, and was
after ashamed? or what man has faithfully implored thy almighty help and was
ever forsaken. Surely never any. Eutychianus in vita S. Theophili.
to be,
Whose wishes thou did frustrate? surely none.
Thou still art true, still faithful unto all,
Who faithful ask thy aid; and often preuents
The foe's deceipts, which may our souls enthrall.
Second then our good and just intents.
Direct our actions all, and do not fail.
To Defend me, and from the eternal fire and darkness free me. Greg. Naz. in
Tragedia.
guarde us, least against us Hell prevail.
SONNET 20. SPECVLVM IVSTITIAE.
Looking-glass OF JUSTICE: he who would
Forsaking vice a virtuous course embrace,
May in thy Such an one was Marie, that the life of her alone is the
instruction of all men. Ambr. de Virgin. vide etiam de hacre S. Virgo Virg.
life, as in a spotles glass,
The perfect shape of virtues all behold.
Thou art the Rejoice o mirror, through which they, who were in the thick
shades of sin, receiving the sun of Justice coming from heaven, were
enlightened, And. Cret. or. in Annunc. B. V.
glass, through whose pure crystal came
The glorious Sun of Justice from the Sky,
TO enlighten those who in sinne's shades did lie,
And with his rays their frozen hearts inflame.
No pale infernal spleen, though it repine
To see thy luster, can impose one stain
On thy pure splendor, but thy beams will shine.
O let us still before this glass remain;
That, when we rise from sinn's dull sleep, we may
Learn our naked souls with virtues to array.
SONNET 21. SEEDS SAPIENTIAE.
O SEAT OF WISDOM: heauen's supreme Lord,
The eternall's Wisdom, he who did beget
All things of nothing, only by his word,
Esteemed thee Marie is a glorified Seat and worthy of God, which can by only
the eyes of the mind be seen. Meth. in Threnis.
worthy to be his sacred seat.
That heavenly In whom be all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hid.
Coloss 2.3.
treasure, where all treasures lie
Of God's high wisdom, in thee seated was;
In thee he did our frail humanity
Espouse, Rejoice, o bed chamber, in which Christ espoused humanity. And.
Cret. or. Ann. B. V.
not pressed through Marie excelled every one so much that she received God
himself the Word (very willing to be received) whom she comprehended citra
vllam loci angustiam. Without any straitness of place. Hesychius Hierosol. or.
1. de Sancta Maria Deipara.
straitnes of the place.
Besides thou may be called Wisedome's seat,
In that great wisdoms ever flowing Well,
In streams of grace, into thy Soul still fell.
O do thy Son (Wisedome's great throne) entreat
That he would please sometimes to be our guest,
And sometimes in our crasie Souls to rest.
SONNET 22. CAVSA NOSTRAE LAETITIAE.
CAUSE OF OUR JOY: the Serpent The Serpent seduced Eve, Marie consented to
Gabriel, but the seducing of Eve brought death, the consent of Mary brought
life. Ioannes Chrysostom. ser. de Gen and interdict. arbor. ad Adam. item: Life was
restored by Mary, which had been slain by Eve. 16.
did Eve seduce;
Thou unto Gabriel humbly gave consent;
But Eue's seducing, death and discord, sent;
Thy prompt obedience, life, and settled truce.
She made us The mother of our kind brought pain into the world, the Mother of
our Lord brought to the world health. Eve the author of sin, Mary the author
of merit. Aug. de Sanctif. sermon. 18.
sick; thou brought us present health;
She sin, thou merit, to the world did bring.
She made us weep, thou gave us cause to sing:
Our souls she robbed but thou increased our wealth
In brief, thou art that instrument Rejoice, o instrument of joy, by which the
sad Sentence of execration is changed into the pleasant judgment of joy. And.
Cret. or. in Annun. B. V.
of joy,
Which Eue's sad curses did to blessings turn,
And make us (if we will) we never need mourn.
Help us, we may our talents so employ,
That, when we do this house of cares forsake,
We may with thee of heavenly joys partake.
SONNET 23. VAS SPIRITVALE,
SPIRITVALL VESSEL; thou did so contain
All spiritual riches of celestial grace,
That to the height of thy most glorious place
None of thy sex ere could, e're can, attain.
Thy vessell's beauty thou did n'ere deface
With any sinful death-importing stain;
But still thy heavenly luster did retain
And all foul soule-deforming vices chase.
Which to effect thou did more grace obtain,
In that thou wa'st to bear so long a space
The sole procurer of our spiritual gain.
Grant we may still (o spiritual vessel) trace
Thy spotles paths and never strive in vain
From the impure stench of loathsome sin to refrain.
No woman ever did, not ever shall obtain so much grace as the Mother of our
Lord. Tit. Bostreusis ad c. 1. Luc.
There was never any filth, vice, or sin in thy glorious soul.
Marie received more grace utterly to overthrow Sin, who deserved to conceive
and bring forth him, who it is evident had no sin. Aug. de not. and great. c.
36.
SONNET 24. VAS HONORABILE.
HONORABLE VESSEL which the eternal word
Did for his own, best service only frame,
And unto thee on every side afforde
The glittering Hayle o clear and beautiful vessel of God. Ephraem orat. de
laud. Deiparae.
luster of a heavenly flame.
Thou art that precious vessel which to man
Did from the sky life-giuing MANNA bear,
In thee the Allmighty's mighty son began
A health to all, who do his dread name fear.
Thou art that honored vessel which Hayle thou who art a pit of ever living
water. Chrysip. presb. de laud. v. Maria.
contained
The water of life; in thee that powerful One,
Which all things fills, whole and intyre remained.
Help us to be (most honored vessel) prone
To virtue ever unto vices slow,
And perfectly our imperfections know.
Hayle full of grace which art a goulden vessel containing heavenly Manna.
Epipha. Ser. de laud. Deip.
SONNET 25. VAS INSIGNE DEVOTIONIS.
RENOWNED VESSEL OF DEVOTION
Fountain Thou art truly the most copious well of all Sanctity etc. Method.
orat in Hyp. din.
of Sanctity which evermore
With never decreasing Springes of grace do run
Weak souls to wonted vigor to restore.
Thy great CREATOR by That most gracious Creator did throw into the flames of
most fervent Charity like certain thick heapd beams of the sun 16.
abundant streams
With out restraint infused into thee
Like to the glorious Sunn's cleare-shining beams,
Deuoutest flames of fervent Charity.
Whose neuer-quenched heat, dispersed still
Among'st us, does our frosen hearts inflame,
And our cold breast with true devotion fill.
Our daily actions (sacred vessel) frame
So that we may deservedly aspire,
To gain but one spark of so great a fire.
SONNET 26. ROSA MYSTICA.
MYSTICAL ROSE, divinely white and red,
White through the Candor of virginity
Red through the heat of burning charity
White in thy spotless flesh, in mind still red.
In following virtue's pure directiones, white;
Red by thy trampling upon vices head;
Through the care thou have of our good courses, red;
And by thy love to thy Creator, white.
Thou from the Jews, as from sharp thorns, did rise
And through the word all banefull fumes expel,
By thy rare virtues ever fragrant smell.
Drive from our souls the infectious stench of vice
That we before thy son may without fear
Perfumed good perfume of Christ in every place.
with virtues at our death appear.
Mary was a Rose white by virginity, red by charity white in flech, red in
mind; white through her following of virtue, red through her trampling on
vices, white in purifying her affections, red in mortifying the carnal. White
in loving God, red in having compassion of her neighbor. Bernard ser. de S.
Maria.
Rose, which art sprung from thorns, that is, from the Jews, and have filled
all things with divine sweet odours. Io Damasc. orat. 1. de not. B. V. We are
the
SONNET 27. TVRRIS DAVIDICA.
TOWER Thy neck is as the tower of David, which is built with bulwarks: a
thousand targats hang one it, all the armor of the valiant. Cant. 4.
OF DAVID, as that pious king
Did, for his cities strength, this tower erect,
So spiritual DAVID thee to the world did bring
The holy Church (his city) to protect.
This tower provision through the town did spread;
By thee, according unto Natures law
In humane bodies, we, from Christ the head,
As by the neck, all spiritual victuals draw.
In DAVID'S tower all warlike arms were laid;
Thou still art ready, as the Church'es sheed,
Our souls against all Hell's assaults to aid.
Help then o least we vnprotected yield,
Succor the weak, and those who humbly weep,
And fly to thee, in thy tuitions keep.
Holy Mary succor the wretched, help the faint hearted, comfort those who
weep, pray for the people. etc. Aug. ser. 18. de Sanctis.
SONNET 28. TVRRIS EBVRNEA.
IVORIE Thy neck as a tower of Iuory. Cantic. c. 7.
TOWER, the Thou therefore the nose of the Church art like to a tower, to wit,
high in dignity and firm in gravity. Bern. sup. fall. Reg.
place's dignity
Which thy dear Son did for sole thee reserve,
Which thy grave mind's never moved constancy,
This worthy title justly does deserve,
Thou art compared to purest Iuory
In that from His Mother an immaculate Mother, an incorrupt Mother, an
untouched Mother etc. Orig. hom. 1. Diuersos. vid. Matter purissima at (a) (b)
(c) etc. Regina confessorum at (6.)
all, even from the least foul stain
Of every sort of sin, thou ever free
Even from thy first given being did remain
Infinite valyes of Infernal shot
Hell's cursed feenes discharged against thy breast,
Yet never hope of least advantage got.
Permit us ever when we are oppressed
With fierce assaults of our never resting foe,
That unto thee we may for succor go.
SONNET 29. DOMVS AVREA.
O HOUSE OF GOVLD, as wisest SOLOMON
The Allmighty's temple did with great respect
Adorn with gould, so thy far wiser son
With gould of virtue, thee, his Rejoice o most beautiful temple of divine
glory. Andr. Cret. Or. in Annunc.
temple, decked.
Thou art that rare, then gould far brighter, house,
Where the two This is the shopp where the natures were united. Proclus Constable.
hom. de Natiuit. Christi. and Serg. Hierap. Or. in not. B. V.
natures both united were,
Where our This is the bedchamber in which the word espoused humane flesh.
Procl. Constable. hom. de Not. Christi. and Andr. Cret. Or. in Ann. B. V.
humanity Christ did espouse,
And first began our miseries to bear.
Thou art the mansion both of heaven and earth,
Thou art Hayle o living temple of God: Hayle o mansion both of heaven and
earth. Io. Chrysostom. Or. in Annuc. B. V.
Gods living temple, he who was
Before ought was, of thee received his birth.
Inuit my soul unto this glorious place,
That there she may with fruitful wonder gaze
Upon thy merits gould-surpassing rays.
SONNET 30. FAEDERIS ARCA.
ARC OF THE COVENANT in that (a) arc did rest
The tables of God's holy testament,
In thee, a far more blessed, far richer chest
The Testament's great heir was willing pent;
Within that costly arc the laws reposed,
In thee thy sonn's heauen-giuing Gospel lay,
In that was still the Aeternall voice enclosed,
In thee the eternal word it self did stay.
That wood was Bern. ser. de Maria.
incorruptible, so thou;
Earthly decaying gould did that adorn,
Thou did all gould, which was not heavenly. scorn,
Suffer Rejoice o new ark of God, in which the spirit of God rests. Arc
wherein Christ our Not kept his humanity: Andr. Cret. orat. in Annunc. B. M.
me then, most sacred arc, to bow
Before thee still, and with submissiue fear
Thy sonn's will thence in all my actions hear.
What other thing shall we say the arc to be but S. Marie? For the arc
carried within the tables of the testament, but Mary did bear the heir of the
testament it self, that held within it the law this the Gospel: that had the
voice of God, this the word but the arc both within and without: did glitter
with the brightness of gold, but holy Mary shined both within and without:
with the glory of virginity: that was adorned with earthly gould, this with
heavenly. Ambr. tom. 3. ser. 80.
SONNET 31. IANVA CAELI.
O GATE OF HEAVEN open unto all,
Who with the hammer of repentance knock;
Noe bar of malice, noe reuengfull lock
Exclude Vide; Virgo fidelis at (b)
such souls as with submission call.
Thou art Rejoice o heaven, in which the sun of glory shines. Andr. Cret.
orat. in Ann. B. V.
heaven it self, in thee's heauen's glorious Mary is made the window of heaven,
because through her god sent true light to (all) ages. Fulgent. ser. de laud.
B. V.
gate,
Through which that powerful all revealing eye
Gods only son past, when he came to buy
Our captive souls at so extreme a rate.
Eve Whence death had the beginning of her entrance thence life makes herself a
passage. Chr. orat. in Annunc. B. V.
was the door of death, through which to hell
Diverse have passed, thou art the This woman the Mother of God is the gate of
life, the fountain of light, and dissolues the fault of women. Damasc. orat.
1. de Not. B. V.
gate of life,
By which in heaven millions now do dwell.
Help me, blessed gate to cause a pious strif
Here in the world, who first amongst us shall
At this most sacred gate for entrance call.
SONNET 32. STELLA MATVTINA.
O MORNING STAR, when we this star behold
We are forewarned of the approaching Son,
Thy glorious rising to the world foretold
The coming of a brighter Sun, thy Son.
The sky's most glorious star cannot compare
In glittering clearnes with the morning star;
Al What is more holy then she? not the Prophets, not the Apostles not
Martyrs, not Patriarchs, not Fathers, not Angels, not Thrones, not
Dominations, not Cherubins, not Seraphins to conclude not any other thing
amongst visible or invisible creatures can be found more great or excellent
then only she. Io. Chrysostom. Hom. in Hye. dom.
Angels thou and greatest Saints that are
In glory, worth, and place surpassest far.
This star, though great, seems to our eyes but small
So thou with thy profound Behold the handmaid of our Lord, be it done to me
according to thy word. Luc. 1.38.
humility
Did cover still thy glorious Sanctity.
Rest in our souls bright star, and thither call
The Sun of Justice, that his heavenly light
May thence expel darkesin's Infernal night.
SONNET. 33. SALVS INFIRMORVM.
HEALTH OF THE SICK, the impotent, and lame
Thou often have healed, thou Iustus Lipsius in dina Sichamiensi, sieve Aspricoli
impr. Antwerpia 1603.
cured the deaf and blind:
What infirm person ever humbly came
To thee for help, who did not succor find?
In thy chaste womb the worlds al preserving King?
The eternal health did of our souls begin:
Thou did to all the great By this (Virgin) o beloved, the phisician comes
to those who are sick. Io. Chrisoft. pr. in Annun B. V.
physician bring,
Who cures the world from leprosies of sin.
Thou by the virtue of that sovereign fruit
Which thou brought forth She (Eve) gave the blow, this (Marie) healed it.
Aug. de Sanctis ser. 18.
heald'st up the rankling soar.
Which by Eues fruit empoison'd was before.
Hear o celestial baulme, thy patients suite,
That when we sinn-sick are, thou would be sure
TO entreat thy son to take in hand our cure.
SONNET 34. REFVGIVM PECCATORVM.
REFVGE OF SINNERS, we when e're we have
In curre'd the just displeasure of thy Son,
To thy protection, there our selves to save,
As to a Sacred Sanctuary run.
Thou pardon beggst, If a man call upon the name of the mother though the merits
of him that calls do not deserve that he be heard, yet the merits of the Mother
make intercession that he may be heard. Ans. Cant, de excel. B. V. c. 6.
and where our merits are
Wholly defective, to entreat for grace,
Thou with thy own supplies thy only care
Is how from us thou may al perils chase.
Thou art the port, where we may safely lie,
The speedy repayrer of our wrecht estate,
To thee for aid, and saueguard all do fly.
Open, blessed refuge, thy compassion's gate,
That when we are with Hell's assaults oppressed,
We safe in thee may lie, and take our rest.
Thou art my port, o undefiled virgin, and present helper, lastly, I am wholly
under thy custody ^ and protection, Ephram. orat. de land. B. V.
SONNET 35. CONSOLATRIX AFFLICTORVM.
O CONFORTRESSE OF AFFLICTED, thou
Send's spiritual Who is the comfort of them who are afflicted: who is the
revenge of them, who are troubled who is the clothing of them which are naked
Entychi de poenis. S. Theophili.
comfort in our miseries,
Thou do revenge our greatest miseries,
And still thy help on al our dangers show.
What greater comfort can we ever have,
Then to think that when we most afflicted are,
We have a patroness, whose only care
Is how she may us from all perils save.
Our souls All hayle, o peace joy: and health of the world hayle the joy of
mankind, etc. Hayle the calm port and freer of them who are tossed with waves
etc. Ephr. orat. de landibus B. V.
craysd bark thou do in tempests guide,
Thou the disperser of our sadst annoye,
Thou art the sickly worlds health, peace, and joy,
When the most dangerous troubles we abide
Do not, o do not thy best help deny,
And we will all Hell's most powerful power defye.
SONNET 36. AVXILIVM CHRISTIANORVM.
Marye, always cherishes Christians in her arms. Eutich. de panit. Sancti.
Theph.
SVCCOVR OF CHRISTIANS, who can e're express
The infinite Of all these see flores exempl. Ant. Dauroultij c. 2. tit.
38.39.40.41.42. and 43.
helps we all receive from thee?
From perils often, of war thou set's us free,
And do the fury of our foes repress.
If e're we be in spiritual distress,
We by thee Thou art the aid of sinners, and of those who are destitute of
help. Ephrem. or, de land. B. V.
helped, by thee protected be,
Thou reconcilest friends by thee we see
Despair expelled, thou do our wrongs redress.
At the hour of death, when our most dangerous state
Requires most succor, thou still ready art
To cross our, then most busy, hellish foe.
Guide now our steps, and Be to me in this life, o merciful meek, and benign
virgin a fervent protectrisse, and helper, repelling hostile attempts, and
bringing me to salvation, and preserving in the last moment of my life my
miserable soul, and driving for from it the ghastly sights of devils, but in
the terrible day of judgment freing me, from eternal damnation, and lastly
making me heir to the inaccessible glory of thy son, and gods 16.
when at deaths pale gate
We quaking stand, force thou our foe't depart,
That we to heaven with thee may joyful go.
O hope of them who despair 16.
SONNET 37. REGINA ANGELORVM.
O QVEENE OF ANGELS, since thy blessed child,
Whose death, true life did to our dead souls bring
Is (al do know it) a most powerful thing
Thou well, and justly may a Since he who was borne of the virgin is a king, a
Lord, and God, therefore the mother which brought him forth is properly, and
truly esteemed a queen, a lady, and mother of God, etc. Atha. m. Euang. de B.
V.
queen be styled.
The highest, and most glorious Hierarchy
Of Angels cannot with thy height compare;
The greatest Angels, and the purest that are,
Thou do by much surpass in purity.
O how they al, in thee, thy son admire
Who gave thee such a place, to whose great height
The great'st of them never could, nor can aspire.
Ask thy sweet son, that when with Hell we fight,
He would vouchsafe his blessed Angels send
T'helpe us, our souls against our foes defend.
O Mary higher, then the blessed of heaven, purer then the beams, and glory of
the Sun, more honorable then the Cherubins, and polyomatis. i, many eyed
spirits, holyer then the Seraphins, without comparison more glorious then all
the other hosts of heaven, etc. Ephrem. orat. de laud. B. V. the same says
Epiphanius sermon. de land. B. V.
SONNET 38. REGINA PATRIARCHARVM.
O QVEENE OF PATRIARCKS, how this blessed troop
Of fathers wished to see thee whose chaste womb
O blessed virgin, pure dove, and heavenly spouse Mary, heaven, Temple, and
throne of the Divinity, who have for son Christ shining gloriously in heaven
and earth etc. Epiph. ser. de laud. B. V.
The Temple, throne, and heaven should become
Of the great power, to which all powers stoop.
On thee their hopes, and expectations lay,
All hayle o honor of all prophets, and Patriarchs etc. Andr. Cret. in An. B.
V.
Thou art the honor, grace, and ornament
Of all their name, thou Thou did not want the purity of Angels, not the
faith of Patriarchs, not the zeal of Apostles, not the patience of Martyrs,
not the sobriety of Confessors, not the innocence or humility of Virgins.
Idiota. contemp. de Beata V. c. 2.
not less eminent
In the perfection of true faith then they.
Thou in the whole course of thy lif's pure race
Them in their own rar'st virtues did excel
And now in glory do them all surpass.
Help that we may, great Queen, such thoughts expel
As may against us move thy sons dread wrath,
And show us how to imitate thy Faith.
SONNET 39. REGINA PROPHETARVM.
O QVEENE OF PROPHETS, the art that pure white
At which the words of these great Saints did aim,
How often have they, taught by th'alteaching spirit
To thee o virgin, the Prophets give praise, etc. Hezych. Hier. orat. de S.
Maria Deipara.
Extold the glory of thy sacred name?
How often have they that virgin wished to see
Which the Hayle armory of life, etc. hayle example of a gemme exceeding all
price, hayle vine producing fair graps, etc. Chrisos. presb. de land. B. V.
rare gemme, the fayrgrape bearing vine
The armorie of life, the radiant Hayle most bright star forth of which Christ
came etc. Ephrem. orat. de land. B. V.
starr should be
From whence to us Christ's heavenly beams should shine.
Noe virtue they nor privilege enjoyed,
Which on thee (as on far above them all)
In far more great abundance did not fall.
Grant, gracious queen, our time may be employed
So that with these blessed Saints we ever may
To all the world thy matchles worth displaye.
SONNET 40. REGINA APOSTOLORVM.
QVEENE OF THE APOSTLES, the dread King thy son
Being by them, he most affected, slain
Thou, then the great'st on earth (thy son being gone)
Did Queen and Mistress to these saints remain.
When thou this world chang'dst for a heavenly croune,
We have received by ancient and most true tradition, that at the time of her
glorious departure, all the holy Apostles who travailed the world for the
salvation of nations lifted up on high in a moment met together at
Jerusalem. etc. Euthymius Eremita Hist. Eccle. l. 3. c. 40.
All, as at fun'ralls of their sou'rayne Queen,
Though they before to fortaine lands are gone,
Present at thy blessed sepulcher were seen.
Although their zeal, as by their acts appear,
Their love of God and sanctity was great,
Yet they in all, by thee surpassed were.
Thy powerful son, most gracious Queen, entreat^
That at our death we perfectly may see
How they all joy, to be surpas't by thee.
SONNET 41. REGINA MARTYRVM.
O Queen of Martyrs who can e're express
The wondrous grief, which when thy dearest son
To give his servants life gave up his own,
Did all the powers of thy soul oppress?
The sword of sorrow which then pearc't thy heart,
Causd' thee such pains as thou may well compare
With greatest Martyrs: Her glory is amongst martyrs. etc. Epiph. Hoer. 78.
nay the great'st that are
Be far surpast by thee, in every part.
Their glory may If the Apostle Paul do, truly affirm of other saints whom
the world was not worthy of, what is it fitting we should think of the virgin
mother of God, who as far exceed all martyrs in brightness, as does the son
the other stars? Basil seleucius on in Annuntiat. deipar.
be equalled to thine
As may the stars unto the irradiant rays
Of sol, when as he does most clearly shine.
If ever Hell death-threatning storms do raise
Against our constancy, thou for us pray
And the subtle force of all such tempests stay.
Give me the effect of my petition and my desire (o lord) the glorious virgin
thy mother Marie my Lady entreating, praying, and prevailing for me with all
thy saints. Amen. Aug. in medit. c. 35.
SONNET 42. REGINA CONFESSORVM.
QVEENE OF CONFESSORS, thy diuine-wrought mind
Was with Thou did not want any kind of virtue, o most glorious virgin, not
in part but in whole etc. Idiota conte^pl. de B. V. c 2.
all virtues so exactly dec't,
So free from sin, so void of all defect,
As sins, to thee the world could no equal find.
Who had a more firm lively faith then thou?
Who was more glad, more ready for that faith
To suffer pains? the cruell'st tyrant's wrath
Could n'ere have force thy constancy to bow.
The great'st Confessor never did excel
In any virtue In thee all virtues as well active, as contemplative met
together, and make then more admirable thee all creatures. 16.
which we do not see
To Have shined more truly, and more full in thee.
Obtain we may our souls adorn so well
With these thy virtues that when as we dye
We may through thee the deuill's force defye.
There neither is, nor ever was, nor will be any sport of sin in thee either
Original, or actual, or mortal or venial: but thou have all grace of
Natural benefitts, spiritual graces, and celestial guiftes, ibidem.
SONNET 43 REGINA VIRGINVM.
O QVEENE OF VIRGINS, thou the glorius Thou art the ornament, crown, and joy
of virgins. Ephraem. our. de laud. B. V.
croune
And chief'st grace art of that spottles state;
Thy Certain men affirm that Marie married after the birth (of our savior)
but they have not any means to prove it, for those sonns who wear said to be
of Joseph, were not borne of Marie, neither is there any scripture which makes
mention of it. Orig. in Luc. homil. 7.
sacred womb to man was never known!
Yet he is thy child, who does Hell's pride abate:
Thou though a mother, yet without compare
Then purest virgins wast by far more pure
From the deceits of each intrapping snare:
Thy thoughts, words, deeds were ever all secure:
None but thy greatest son whose wondrous birth
Did not at all thy virgin-bands Vide matter Castissima at (a).
untie,
Deserved Marie was most clear wool, and most renouned for virginity, and
(vithous comparison) purer then all the virgins which were under heaven and the
was such an one, and of so great excellency that she alone deserved this noe
other should be closed with her, but he who was of Royal dignity. Aleuimus de
Trinitate. l. 3. c. 14.
in thy virgin womb to lie.
Vouchsafe (chaste queen) while yet we live on Earth,
With all blessed Virgins which still wait on thee,
Before thy son our advocate to be.
SONNET 44. REGINA SANCTORVM OMNIVM.
QVeene of all Saints, o supreme gouernesse
Next to thy son, of all thy son has made:
But only he noe other can be said
So powerful as thy self, Hell's force to repress.
Thou not all women only did She is holy and holyer then all Saynes: etc.
Damasc. or. 2. de g^rmine meo etc.
excel
In virtue, but the great'st saints, yea She is holy and holyer then all
Saynes: etc. Damasc. or. 2. de g^rmine meo etc.
all that are:
The AEternall thee, his mountain, did prepare
On topp of mountains, there him self to dwell.
In fine there is 'twix't other saints and thee,
As great a difference, as betwixt the taste
And smell of the most delicious fruits that be.
Make intercession that we may be placed
Great Queen, among these saints with them to sing.
The immortal praises of thy son, our King.
God did not choose any of the ordinary sex of women to be his mother but her,
who should surpass all women in virtue. Iustinut quest. 136.
Is not Marie a high Mountain etc. for Isayas prophesying of the most
excellent dignity of this mountain, says: The mountain of our Lord shall in
the latter day: be prepared in the topp of mountains. Suerly there was a
mountain in the top of mountains, because the height of Marie shined
gloriously above all Saynes. Greg. mag. l. 1. Reg. c. 2.
FINIS.

