CONCEYTED LETTERS, NEWLY LAID OPEN: OR A MOST EXCELLENT BVNDLE OF NEW WIT,
WHEREIN IS KNIT UP TOGETHER ALL the perfections or art of Episteling, by which
the most ignorant may with much modesty talk and argue with the best Learned.

A WORK VARYING FROM THE nature of former Presidents.

LONDON, Printed by B. Alsop, for Samuel Rand, and are to be sold at his Shop
near Holborne bridge. 1618.

To the iuditious Reader.
THree things (Iuditiall Reader) make Books, and the puplication of Books
above good; excellent, to wit, Necessity, Vtility, and Implicity, and where
any one of these are figured, no doubt but the Image is most comely, then how
much more where all are contained, not Helens thirty perfections can challenge
more admiration, and though it may savor of Ostentation, to say this Pamphlet
has all, yet it shall not be against truth to approve the subject, more then a
Master, yea even the sovereign of all: for if writings be the very souls and
eternal substances of Time, what writings are so excellent as those which pass
from man to man, Religion, Advice, Familiarity, Courtship, and all necessary
commercements (by which even the whole state of the world is sustained) being
in them (as it were) bound up to outli^e all time, all computation, then what
more necessary, for the profit how shall Kings know and communicate their great
actions, enlarge their bounds* redress their peoples injuries, how shall the
noble, know intelligence to serve his Country, the Merchant trade, or to his
own bring the wealth of many Kingdoms, or any or all sorts of people speak
at a far distance, but by the help of Letters only, then what to mankind
more rich and beneficial, which Tully better to express, made it the crown
of all his labors. Lastly, in these written Heralds, are those employments and
brave implications, that whatsoever is excellent or good in man, is to be seen
in them, as in a myrror, and so to be employed either exemplarily or iudicially,
according to the virtues and vices in them contained. If then these virtues
shadowed in these Presidents shall give thee that benefit which thine
expectation, hopes, or the Authors aim made his level unto, I doubt not but
thou will love it, read it, and imitate i^ so far as to thy private benefit:
Farewell.

Thine, I. M.

CONCEYTED LETTERS, NEWLY LAID OPEN.
A LETTER TO A FRIEND, to Borowe Money.
IF borowing of Money be not a breach of Friend-ship, let me entreat your
pa^tience to open your Purse, a present occasion puts me to the adventure of
your kindness, the matter is not much, yet will at this time pleasure me as
much as so much may do: the sum five pounds, the time three months, my credit
the Assurance, and heartie^ thanks the Interest. Thus without troubling the
Broker, or charging of the Scriuener, hoping my Letter shall be of sufficient
power to prevail with your love; I^ treating your present answer, in the
affection of an honest heart, I commit you to the Almighty. Yours, or not his
own

D. M.

His Answer.
IF your Friendship were a follower of Fortune, Love would have but little life
in this world, the contents of your Letter has put me to a strict account
with my estate, how I may help you, and not hurt myself. I could make
sufficient Excuses, but that they taste of sm^ll comfort: and therefore knowing
Time to be precious, and to void delays, let this suffice you, your Request I
have satisfied, and the Money I have sent you: and not doubting your Credit,
will take your word for a Bond. Now for the Use without abuse, I wish but
Requital, upon the like occasion. And so (glad that in this, or any thing in
my power,) I may make proof of my love: I Rest in the same.

Yours, or not my own. N. R.

A Letter to a Kinsman, for News.
I Would be glad to hear how you do, how the world goes with you, what news
are stirring, what wherligigges are in the brains of mad men, and what rekes
Raskals keep among better men, what their opinions are that study the stars
of the man in the Moon, and whether honest men among the multitude be not
taxed for their wisdom: How far a man's tongue will go beyond his teeth,
and do no hurt to his lips, and whether Dalyla be dead that betrayed Sampson
to the Philistines, How Pride and Patience agree together in ungracious
Spirits, How the Devil bestirs him about his villainy in the world: and whether
love be not laughed at for a m^trie jest of wit, especially where the weaker
sort want the strength of understanding, many such notes may light in the way
of thy observation: of which what thou have in memory, I pray thee put down in
a few lines, which shall not be lost in my love, and the sooner the better, for
by thy long silence, I doubt of thy welfare, how ever it be keep it not from
thy friend, who regards not fortune but virtue: upon which my affection
grounded can never be removed: Fa^ewel.

Thine or not his own, W. T.

GGod C^^zine, you write unto me to know how I do: in a word never worse,
both weak^ in body, and sick in mind, in brief as near death as may be to
live: if you knew my crosses, you would pity my discomforts, the varieti^
whereof is so great, that I think there was never Carte so laden with Wares,
as my heart is with heaviness and woes!

Oh this iron Ag^ smells of nothing but Rust, whiles the bags of metal
eats up the hearts of man: where is kindness, but only among Children for
Apples and Nuts? Friendship (I think) is flowen away for fear of abuse, and
love is among the Saints which are only in Heaven: and if the world be at
this pass, in what case are the people: wh^re Men in shape are Monsters in
Nature; and where Women (since the Creation,) are become strange Creatures?
Whiles howling with sin, and weeping with shame, makes such black ghost
amongst tormented souls, as if the Devil had license to make a Hell upon
Earth? Some are all for the Church, and nothing for GOD: other all for CHRIST,
and nothing for Charity: and ^est men for themselves, and leave their
Neighbors to the wide world. Children are weary of their Parents, before they
be parence of Children, and Parents so covetous and unkind, that nature has
forgotten her course. To conclude, the misery of Time is such, as puts Patience
to the utmost trial of her strength, and by the course of the Elements, the
Almanack^ makers knows not what will become of this world: now for my self, I
would I were with him that madeit: but his Will be done, who can mende it at
his pleasure: unto whose heavenly tuition, until I see you, I leave you,

Yours, or not his own. R. B.

A Letter of Challenge.
IF I thought that you durst answer me, I would challenge you, yet where the
sick of a Fever may burue after a shaking, I kn^we not how shame may make a
Cowarde more desperate, the^ valiant: yet once my wrongs I can put up, whiles
looking on the object of my Revenge, I become an a^iect to my self, to think
what metal I am to temper with. But in brie^e to lose no more time with you,
to Morrow is my day, the h^wer eight in the morning, the pl^co, the Padock^
within the Thicket: where the determination of business I hope will be briefer
then discourse, and so I end: endless.

Yours: as you have made me. T. N.

His Answer.
IDle humors shows add^^ Brayues, where lack of judgment, proves
imperfection indiscretion: To challenge a Coward is no balour, but if your
Sword were as nimble as your Pen, I should not know how to put by the
point: but I think that your fury is but a flash, which between heats and
cold, has made a little thunder, that will go away in a Cloud: to temper
with Mettalls is fittest for Artistes, but in the rules of honor scorn has no
place. But touching your agony, take heed of an Ag^e, left shame fellows
shifte, in putting off a Quarrel, with excuse: in brief, there shall nothing
fail but your self; who as you deserve at my hands, shall find me from my
heart,

Yours, as you mine. R. D.

A Loue-Letter, to a worthy Gentlewoman.
Fair Mistress, if I had no eyes, I should not like you, and it no wit I should
not love you, for the brightness of your Beauty is for no blind sight to gaz^
upon, nor the worthiness of your virtue for no weak brains to beat upon. If
you say I flatter you, look into your self, and do me n^ wrong, and if I do
you Right, chyde not Affection, for a discovery, where truth is honorable,
pardon my presumption if it exceed your pleasure, and commend his service, who
will make an honor or your favor: So entreating your patience, for answer to
my poor Letter, until I hear from you, and always I rest.

Your devoted, to be commanded. N. R.

Her Answer.
Sir; if your wits goes with your eyes, your brains may be on the outside of
your head: and th^n if you deceive your seife, I hope I shall not be blamed,
Colors are but shadows, and may b^full of illusions, and the worthynesse of
virtue may be a reach above the Worlds reason, yet the discovery of affection
may be mor^in words then matter, especially where discretion sounds the depth
of desert, though the honor as truth be worth regard. Where there is no faults
there needs no pardon, and therefore without trouble of Patience, finding no
cause of displeasure, I thus conclude: Love has a privilege to be at the
command of kindness, in which I rest, to wish you much happiness.

Your wel-willing Friend. E. S.

A Conceyted Letter of News.
GOod Unckl^, I know you look for news, from this plot of our Earthly
Paradise, which when you left, it was a place of great pleasure: but since your
departure, some wicked Blasts have withered some of our principal Plants, but
God be thanked, we have at this time so good a Gardener, that so plucks up
the Weeds by the roots, that (I hope) this Spring we shall have a
flourishin^ piece of ground.

Hobgoblin and the Fayries, has brought their Believers to the Gallows: where
(had not Mercy given grace) they had been almost a^ O man in Desperation; But
it is an ill wind, that blows no man to good: for Halter-men and
Ballet-makers were not better set a work this many a day. Our Sun shows
his beams in great brightness, whiles the man in the Moon is fall^n quite
thorough the Clouds: wild Birds put in Cadges, become tame in little time:
but our Iacke-Dawes will be chattering, whiles they have a tongu^ in their
heads.

Our Turtle-Doues are the prettyest fools in the world: but when a Cuckoo
counterfaits the Nightingale, there is an ill Closse in the Music: Our
Peacocke was so proud, that he could not leave spreading his tail, but since
moulting-time he has lost many of his Feathers. Our Poast-horses have galled
their Riders, and our Asses are kept but only for their milk: in sum, for
Men and Women, the best (God be thanked are well, and for the worst God will
take order for their amendment, and so with my most hearty commendation, I rest

Your euer-louing Nephew. T. M.

The Uncles Answer.
MY kind Nephewe, I thank thee heartily for thy merry Letter, in which I
like well of thy judgment in writing of News, to meddle with no matters of
state: for he that looks too high may have a sudden downe-fall, and old
Countrey-Prouerbe, may prove a good part of speech;

I remember I have heard my Gr^und. Father tell of one that was taught him in
his T^^uell: Let the Horse neigh, know thou thy course and god thy way: and so
much for this. Now for your Earthly Paradise, I thought it (when I came from
it) a goodly poece of ground, and it was pity that any Blaste should per^h the
least Plant in it: But as it is I am very glad to hear so well of it, GOD
bless the owner of it, and the Gardener, that so well weedeth it.

Now for the Birds, he that knows not a Cuckowe from a Nightingale, is like
unto a Lark-catcher, that having caught an Owl, took her for a fine Hawke,
till looking on her face, and fearing she had been aspirite, he let her fly to
the Devil. As for Peacocks, they will be proud, till they look on their
legs, and Iackdawes will prate, it is their nature: and therefore be not
angry with a Milke-wenche, if she make not a curtsi^ like Mistrisse C^nstable,
for there may be difference in their breeding, and so forth.

Now for our Countrey-newes, I will tell you what is come to my hands: our
Coultes are so lusty, that we cannot keep a Filly in quiet for them, and our
Geese are so fat that they wallowe as they go: our Sowes are so forward,
that we shall have a world of ^at Pigges: and our Ewes so suckle our Lambs,
that they leave almost no flesh on their backs: our Mill horse has broken his
halter, and laid his load at the Mill door: and our town Bull is so fat, that
he shall be bayted for the Butcher: our Town is so full of Marriages, that
there is scarce Cakes enough for the Bridales.

Tom Piper and the blind Harper are hired for these Hollidayes with my young
Landlord, who has sworn by his Fathers soul, that he will whoord up none of
his Silver: Other such h^mely stuff there is store about us, but because you
have better Wares nearer hand, I care not much if I trouble you no longer with
such Trifles. I pray you let me hear from you, of such occurrents as comes in
your way: In the mean time always I rest.

The most loving Uncle. F. L.

A Conceyted Loue-Letter.
Sweet Creature, to tell you I love you, were a Phrase of too plain a
fashion: and yet when truth is indeed the best ^^oquence, affection needs no
invention to express the care of her content; which being in three Letters,
makes a word soon to be read, which being Y: O: V: nothing doubting you^
spelling, I hope you will so kindly put together, that a Conjunction of Lo^^
shall have no separation daring life: And thus b^see^hing you to learn this
lesson by heart, without a cross in conceyte, to hinder the course of loves
comfort: Till I hear from you in that nature, that may make me a happy
creature, I rest.

Yours wholly, and only if you will. M. D.

Her Answer.
KInd^ Sir, to tell you I love you, were too cross an Answer with a
comfortable request: and yet when dissimulation is the worst fruit^ of
invention, descretion may be pardoned in concealing of love. Touching your
letter, they are sooner read then understood, while Imaginatiue hopes may be
deceived in their happiness, and yet to avoid all touch of Ingratitude, in
that nature of kindness, that may give honor content, as a simple scholar in
the art of love, ^^sath^ to have that by heart, that may trouble more then my
head, when separation of Conjunctions may endanger the death of Comfort,
wishing nothing, nothing amiss, to them that mean all well, I rest.

Yours, as I may be mine own. E. B.

A Letter from ^ Lady to a Gentleman, whom she called her Servant, for the
preferring of a Gentlewoman unto her.
Servant I have often spoken to you for that you must needs do for me: I am
going to the Court, and shall have great use of a Gentlewoman to attend me,
I know you have many Kins-men and acquaintance, among whom you may find ^ne to
fit me: I will take her at your hand, and regard her for your sake, and if
her deserts answers my desires, she shall lose no love in my favor, and
therefore leaving this trusty charge to the care of your discreet kindness,
as you will expect a greater courtesse at my hands: I rest,

Your loving Mistrisse. F. T.

His Answer.
GOod Madame; you spoke unto me, to help you (...) a Gentlewoman, which with
my letter I have here sent you: a Woman and gentle, who I hope will not be
altogether unworthy of your entertainment: for her Person, she is not
deformed, nor her face of the worst feature, she is neither b^ea^-eyed, nor
tongue-tyed, and for her qualities I hope she can do more then make curtsey
and blush: her Parentage is not bare, nor her breeding idle, and for her
disposition, I hope it will be nothing vispleasing: to praise her in any
perfection, I dare not, but in all will leave har to the trial of your
patience: So wishing my dutiful service in this, or what else may lie in my
power, so Fortunate as to deserve your savor, and this Gentlewoman so
gracious as to gain the continuance of your g^^d opinion, in Prayer for your
health, and hearts most wished happiness, I take my leave for thie time, but
rest at all times,

Your Ladyships most humble Servant. R. G.

A Letter from a kind of Diogines, to a Courtyer.
Sir, I hear by some of my acquaintance that you go on apace with the World:
I pray GOD you go as fast toward Heaven; but by the way let me tell you, what
I think fittest for you, now and then to have mind of, least you forgette the
main, while the byeway deceive you: for what is Honor without virtue? King
David tells you, it is but a blast: meaning a proud man: and what is Wealth
without Wisdom, but Covetousness? and that is the tool of all evil: and
what is Life without Grace, the very highway to Hell?

Let therefore Virtue be your Honor: Wisdom your Wealth: and Grace your Life:
so that GOD bless^yon, the devil can never hurt you: Let not a little wealth
beget a great deal of pride in you, lest a great deal of pride beget you but
little wit. Know whence you are: who you are: and where you are: You are from
the ^lim^ of the Earth, but a Creature on Earth: Be merry with measure, but be
not mad in any case: For Patience is the guide, of Experience, where haste
makes more waste then good work: To conclude, be loyal to Soueraignti^:
faithful in Friendship: constant in Love: and honest in all: Farewell.

Thine as thou know. B. B.

A Letter of zealous love, written from a Gentleman to his Brother.
BRother, since I last heard from you, I am sorry to hear that I do of you:
that you are wound so far into the World, as if that you never meant to get
out of it; you know I have traveled far, seen much, and have some
understanding: by all the observation of time, in the courses of Nature, I
find Salomons truth in the trial of the World, that there is little of it,
but is little worth in it, (when all being but Uanitie) there is little Virtue
to be found in it: Believe me Brother, we are never in one nature, but differ
in another: in the Flesh, but not in the Spiritie; For whiles I contemplate the
substance of the Souls comfort, thou art puzzelled in the World, among the
puddles of the Earth, yea, I fear the nature of thy affect to be as far
from the rule of Religion, as the most sen^lesse Creature is from the use of
Reason:

Oh brother, I know thou have wronged many, and thy self most, I would thou
were a Zacheu^ to write all: but better betimes then to late, look home to the
maine chance, have a care of thy soul, and thy body will be the better;
believe it, there is no rust eats so fast into any metal, as the venom of
Au^^ice into the heart of a wicked man: Prodigality is the way to penury, but
Couet^usnesse is the root of all evil, betwixt both there is a mean, that to
hit on, is a kind of happiness, and if thou have no ears but of Midas, that
can hear of nothing but gold, take a heart of Simion, to joy in nothing but
Christ Jesus. Turn a new leaf, serve God for whom thou were created, and let
not the earth triumph over thee, for whom it was made to tread upon, lift up
thine eyes toward heaven, where one joy of the Elect is worth all the
Kingdoms of the world: leave the world ere it leaves thee, and love him ever,
that will never leave thee: let thy li^e be a Pilgrimage, and the earth but a
passage, and the heaven only the home of thy souls eternal happiness, once a
day read these few lines for my sake, which if they do that good to thee,
which I heartily pray for in thee, till when and ever my hearts love.

Thy loving Brother, N. P.

His answer
MY good Brother, I thank you for your careful and kind Letter, yet let me
tell you, that zeal without discretion proves not the best part of Religion:
Reports may be idle, and then belee^e may be erroneous, when mistakings by
misconstruings may breed abuse of good vs^s: I know that Riches are Witches to
them that make their heaven of this world, but he that has a leaden wit, will
^euer worship a golden Calfe: But since I know Abraham and Lazarus were alike
in election, give me leave while I am in this world, by Christ rather th^n
Auarise, rather to be a Husbandman, then tobe a labourer for hire: if I have
wronged any, it is unwillingly, whom if I know, I will satisfy most willingly,
and for the wound of conscience, I hope to be so far from Hypocrisy, that I
shall be free from that fear, and therefore though travel has taught you much
experience in the world, and having sufficient maintenance to pass through the
world, you make the less account of the world, yet when careful thrist
breeds no covetous thraldom, be not jealous of my love, with all the
pleasures of the world to make comparison with the least of heavens comfort, I
know the highest mountain is but earth, and the lowest valley is no other, and
therefore when I carry my footstool on my head, let me walk like a fool or
monster. In brief, I know the world and how to use it, and keep account with
my cares, how I may most contentedly leave it, but for my love to him that make
it, let me live no longer in it, then I love and honor him above it, and so
entreating you to blow off^ll breaths that may abuse my disposition, and to be
persuaded so far of my souls health, that my joy is ever and only in Christ
Jesus, to his preservation, leaving the happy issue of your hopes in the nature
of the best love, till I see you, and always I rest:

Your most loving Brother, T. W.

A Letter of Love, to an Honorable Lady.
Honorable Madame: if Love were not above reason, it would not be so high in
regard: who dwelling only in the spirits of the best understandings, feeds
the heart only with the frui^ts of an infallible resolution: What it is in it
^wne nature has been diue^sly described, but I think never known but unto
them that inwardly know it. Some hold it a Riddle, that none can interpret,
but he that made it: and others a Miracle, that amazeth all that believe it:
but if it be as I have read of it, a Child and Beauty begotte it: I hope
Nature will be her self, and not unkind unto her own breed: How to prove
truth, the Honor in your Eyes, that have wrought my heart to your service,
shall ^ake known to your favor, in the happiness of your Employment. So
craving pardon for my presumption, in my devoted duty, to the honor of your
command, I humbly take my leave.

Your Ladyships, in all humbleness. R. M.

Her Answer.
Worthy Knight, if Love be above Reason, it must be either Divine or Devilish,
and so regarded accordingly: what it is I think is best known by the effect of
it, howsoever idle brains have beaten about the description of it: Riddles are
but Ieasts of wit, and Miracles are ceased for being seen in our Age, but if
it be a Child (though of a strange Parentag^,) surely Nature will not suffer
the Mother to be cruel to her own breed, but if it fall out to be an
ungracious Father, what then will be thought of the Children? yet least in
misconstruing a conceit, I may mistake a content, since in the secret of Nature
may be a sense of strange understanding, I will suspend my judgment, till I
have made proof of my opinion: when Eyes and Hearts meet together in
discourse, I hope the business will be soon ^nded, (that is) referred to
indifferent judgment: So till occasion be offered of the performance of
Employment, hoping that Virtue and Honor will soon agree upon sure grounds,
till I see you, I rest,

Your loving Friend. M. W.

A Letter from a Knight to a Nobleman, for the entertaining of a Secretary.
NOBLE LORD, I hear that your Secretary has lately taken his leave of this
world, in whole place (if you be not provided) let my love prevail with your
Honor, for the entertainment of this bearer, a Gentleman and a Kinsman of mine,
in whose commendations I dare thus far use my credit, his heart shall be as
fair as his hand upon any occasion of your Employment, and for his wit it is
both in Caput and Copie-holde, for he has read much, and observed more then a
little, his descent has been from the loins of an honorable Line, and for
his disposition every way, I hope you shall find it no way displeasing, not to
trouble you with long circumstance, leaving your happiness to your acceptance,
with my service to your command: in all humble love I take my leave for this
time. But rest during lif^.

Your Honors devoted, to be commanded, W. R.

The Lords answer.
MY kind Knight, I have received your letter, fulfilled your request, and
entertained your kinsman, of whom I am already so well persuaded, besides the
assurance of your knowledge, that I think a little matter shall not make
square in our loves: I find what you writ of him, and shall have much
employment for him, I thank you for him, and if he continue his carriage,
which I doubt not, he will be of better fortune then my favor, and yet
somewhat the more for your sake, I will take such a care of him, that ere many
months pass you shall find my love in him, so till I see you at my house,
where you shall make your own welcome. I rest,

Your most assured friend, E. S.

A Letter of a simple man to a Scholar, that was determined to play the Wagge
with him.
WOrshipful Sir, I understand by my honest friend and Scho^lfellow in our
Parish church, that your Worship has a great knowledge in casting of
Natiuities, and telling men's fortunes, to tell you truly what years I am, my
Grandame says I was at lawful age to enter upon my Fathers Farm at Lent
last, and then your Worship may guess much about the time, the the day and the
hours I do not well remember: But to the purpose, I hear say that in your
Study among the Stars, you have gone by all the Planets, and ten to one if
your Worship will go over them, but you shall find me in one of them, and
if you ask of them that dwell in those hou^es, some of them may tell you that
of me that all the world is not acquainted with, I pray you Sirlet me
entreat you to take a little pains for me, and chiefly, what good hap or
ill is like to before me, as well among men as women, and when I come for my
note, I will better consider your pains, in the mean time I have sent you a
piece of gold that saw no light this many a day: so till I hear from you,
which I pray you let be as soon as you can, I commit your Worship to God.
From my house at Columsbery this second day of July, 1615.

Your Worships to command, Ienkin Hoguiskine.

His Answer.
MY good Friend, I received your Letter and your kind Token, and though I love
not to show my skill in those secrets, yet ^or your Schoole-fellowes sakes I
have taken a little pains for you: I will tell you what I have found among
them all: if you were borne upon the Sunday, Sol is a hot Planet, and you will
be much subject to Sun-burning, especially (if you go to Plough bare headed:
if upon the Monday, the Moon is full of water, and if you ^^ll your brains
too full of Drink, you may grow Lunatike, and so be in danger of Bedlame: if
upon Tuesday, Mars is a bloody fellow, and if you go to Fisticuffes, you will
hardly be without a bloody nose: if upon Wednesday, you must wear ^ Nightcap,
and be ever at your book: especially (if you can write and read) and be in
any Office in your Pa^^ish: if upon the Thursday, you will be as proud as a
Beggar, especially (if you wear your best clothes) on a working day: if upon
a Friday, beware Wenches, least they make thee a poor man, especially (about
Cuckoo time:) and if upon a Satterday; Oh you will be so froward that (if you
Marry) your Wife will never endure the house with you, especially (if she be
of the breed of a Scholar:) and therefore not yet having heard any news in
any of the houses of you: until I hear from you again, I can say no more to
you, and so I rest,

Your assured Friend. T. W.

A Letter to a Friend, on the otherside of the Sea.
DIstance of placo must make no difference of minds, Love and Life amongst
hearts make an end together, I have long longed to hear from you, and if I
had known whether, I had ^are this written unto you: but now having met with
him that means shortly to see you, I have thought good to let you know, that
I yet live to love you, and forget net to pray for you, that all happiness may
befall you; Glad I would be to see you, and in the mean time to hear from
you, how the world goes there about you, whether al birds be of one feather,
and how they fly together, what blazing stars have been lately seen, and
what your Astronomers think what will follow of their appearance, whether your
wine be watered before it come over, and how youth and age agree upon the
Conjunction Coplatiue: how the great Fish and the little agree together in your
seas, and how your Rabbets escape the Kite abroad, and the Pole-Cat in their
Borowes, how the fexes and wolves prey upon your Geese and Lambs, and what
sport your Swallows make with the Flies in the air. I wish you not to write
of any Wonders, because they are incredulous, nor of matters of state, for they
may be perhaps ill taken: but only how honest men thrive, and knaves have
their rewards, how Wise men are honored, and Fools laughed at, and how the
weaker sort hold their strength with the stronger, when Wenches eyes pull out
men's hearts out of their Bellies, their wits out of their braiues, and their
money out of their purses, and such matters of no moment, then must needs if
you will take a little pains so set down in a little Paper, I shall be glad
to look upon them, and in my love to requite them, for our World to hear it,
were a world to think of it: But the Messengers haste not giving me time to
write of it until the next Post, I will say but this of it, God bless the
best, and mend or end the worst, grant all honest hearts good lives in it, and a
joyful departure when they are to leave it, to which prayer, hoping you will
say Amen, till we meet, and always, I rest,

Yours, or not mine own. I. G.

His Answer.
MY long acquaintance, and worthy beloved friend^ I have lately received your
letters, wherein I find your desire to hear of the passages in the world on
this side the salt water. Now to satisfy in as much as I can, let me tell you
that I find some difference in the natures of Nations, but touching their
di^sions, I think they are much alike through the whole World, for on the one
side, I ^inde the powerful, imperi^us: the ambitious en^ious, the covetous
never satisfied, the licentious idle, and the foolish unprofitable: on the
other side Majesty gracious, Honor v^r^uous, wealth charitable, Thrift
wealthy, (...) all, and Religion loyal, and Labor commodious. Now looking
into the danger of Greatness, the charge of Honor, the care of wealth, the
misery of want, the ^^lly of wantonness, and the beggary of idlenese: I have
chosen the mean for my part of music, where I shall neither stra^n my voice,
nor stretch my stringes, but with little charge keep my instrument (...) tune:
The passages are here as in other places, when January and May meet in
conjunction, there are strange kinds of countenances that show not the best
content.

And when Winds are highest in Summer, the fruit shall fall (...) they be
ripe, Many idle exercises are more costly then comfortable, much talk and
little truth, and gaye outsides have poor insides, ^athes^ and lies as common
as Highways, and painted images make feels idels, honest men thought more
silly then the wise among she Wizards of the world, and the Devil among the
Brokers daily hunted with beggars, murmuring of war among unquiet Spirits,
and Peace guarded for fear of a close stratagem^. In sum, such variety of
business, that every man's brain is ^ul of humors: and for women they are of
such force, that they put men to great patience: for my self, I see the world
at that pass, that I think him happy that is well out of it: in sum, God
bless the best while the worst mend, and sen^ us his grace, and health with a
happy meeting: so till I hear from you, which I wish often with my hearts love
that shall never end but with life, with my hearty commendations I commit you
to the Almighty.

Yours as mine own. R. G.

A Letter from a friend in the City to a Scholar in the University.
HOnest Ned, since I left the blessed place wherein thou dwell, I am come
into a world that does amaze me with imaginations, how Nature could so iuggle
with the world as to make men become shadows, women picture: but near the end
of days I see the Devil labors hard about his harvest, else could madness
never so overrule, as to turn wisdom out of doors. The disloyalty of
Subjects to most gracious Princes, unthankfulness of servants to most
bountiful masters, unthankful hearts to best deserving Spirit, disobedient
children to most careful parents yea most ungracious creatures to the most
gracious Creat^r, makes me fear a ne^^ dealing upon the earth, to cleanse the
World from iniquity, the Devil is feared in his colors, but followed in his
conditions, and heaven more spoken o^, the looked after, charitable mouths have
other meanings in their heart, and ^^thes are so common that they are little
in account, the cup of (...) is top full to the brimme, (...) to the health
of the Devil: Reason (...) to the World, that A. T. to much in the world ^akes
him a woeful Scholar that keeps that lesson in his heart, Jack a Lent scarce
a Gentleman will ride on Cocke-horse, like a rascal, and Io^e Fiddle in a
French hoode will be a Lady before her Mistress. Prison is become a practice
of policy to deceive the witt^ with a plot of villainy: The breath of some man
is deadly, especially upon a capital ^ffence: when justice impartial weeds
the land of the unnatural: The Pruner of the three trees has gotten^ much by
unwholesome fruit, who when he has pared the outside, puts the rest in an
earthen pi^. Believe me Ne^, I shall not be at rest till I be with thee, where
I may walk to the well that yeeldes the Spirit a sweet Water. Shortly I hope
to see thee, in the mean time, let me hear from thee that upon the least of
thy wish, I may the sooner be with thee. Farewell.

Thine if his own. R. D.

His answer.
Kind Francke, in perusing of thy Letter, I find no little touch of passion,
and that thy brain is not a little distempered with the cares of this world,
which though they touch not thy person, yet being a Christian, thou can not
but hate a Jew: far mine own part, I have read of many idle passages in times
past, but I am most heartily ^ory to hear of the sinful occurrents of this
age: I have read in the Discourse of Sin, that Envy is a pestilent humor in a
pestiferous spirit, and that Pride is the fore-horse of Follies, that draws
the Devils Car into hell: I have read likewise, that Queen Helens lust was the
spoil of Trey, and that her name will never be blotted out of the black book
of Infamy: I have read of many things, of which I have taken some notice, as
of the Cuckoo ^illing the Sparow that hatcheth her, and the Turkey cock
beating his hen when he has trod her, but a Dog to be too saw^ie with a
Lion: fie upon it, there is almost no beast can abide it. I read likewise, that
upon a time, that sin was grown to such a a height that the Devil laid about
him like a great Lord, but God be thanked, there was an Angel that had
authority over him, seeing his ^^^kes, quickly weakened his force, fetched
him into his precinct, and kept him so fast locked in his chain, that he could
not pass beyond his ^^^its, but what is all this to thee, no more but a (...)
of thy kindness, as thou writest what thou have seen, so I what I have read,
when set the Hare against the Goose giblets and there would be a strange ^ish
of didlums: well, when thou art weary there, come hither, and as we may, we
will be merry together: Farewell.

Thine, or not his self, W. R.

A Letter to a Scholar that took upon him the Interpretation of Dreams.
SIR I hear by a kinsman of mine, among other your deep judgments in many
other learned points of Art, of your excellent judgment in the interpretation
of Dreams, and being persuaded much of your kindness, by such as has
conuersed much in your company, I am bold to entreat your opinion upon some
apparisions that lately troubled me in my ^leep, and though I will not be
frighted with Furies, nor will trust unto flatteries, yet if I may have some
notice of the issue of these night troubles, I shall take it for a kindness,
that I would not bury in oblivion. First, me thought I saw Phaeton in the
sky, sitting in Sols glorious Carre, and many fiery driuers about him, but on
a sudden giving his horses the bridle, for want of holding they run with such
a speed, that the Carre was overthrown, Phaeton fell down and all his driuers
with him: with the sudden noise whereof I awoke, when I fell a sleep again, I
saw, me thought, certain great Stars mounting above the Sun, but coming
near his heat they were suddenly dissolved, hang a while in the air, and at
last fell into the bottom of the earth, with the fall whereof I awoke, now
toward morning, taking a little nappe, me thought I saw a kind of Fury or
she Devil let out of hell with charms or poisons to do much hurt in the
world, but a gracious power came from heaven, for the good of the world, and
with the breath of his mouth made her so vanish away, that I never heard more
what bec^me of her. These were the three dreams which troubled me in my
sleep, the interpretation whereof, leaving to the description of your kind
patience: I rest.

Your loving friend, R. I.

His answer.
SIR, though my profession be not to interpret night troubles: yet at the
request of your friend, I am content to tell you mine opinion of your strange
apparitions. Touching your first dream, it should seem you are somewhat
Poetical, and having the day before read of the fiction, were troubled in the
night with a fable: for your mounting Stars, I guess you were the evening
before at the Star or the Moon, or some such elemental sign, studying some
Tavern Astronomy, that your brain being in the altitude of Canary. taking
the candles for stars, seeing one of them by mischance (...) with his candle
stick down to the ground, being a little troubled with it to bed-ward, brought
out this strange vision in your ^^^pe, For the third, if you come to Furies,
she Devils, or such kind of Spirits, I have nothing to say to them, nor will
trouble my thought with them.

And therefore leaving such as love Hell to deal with such Hagges, Beseeching
God to bless me and thee, and all honest hearts from all such horrible
creatures: I rest,

Your loving friend, L. T.

A Letter of a Patient to his Physician.
MAster Doctor, your Patient co^mends him to your patience, to bear a little
kind chiding for your too long absence: my disease holds his own, and my
pain nothing diminished, and if you come not the sooner your Physic will be
past working, for my stomach is weak, and my heart grows faint, and yet I
feed, though my (...) be not the best, loath I am to languish if I may have
hope of comfort, but your absence makes me doubt of my recovery. I pray you
therefore haste you unto me, and let me be assured of your comming^ lest you
come too late, you know my disease and are acquainted with my body, for my cure
I leave it to God and your conscience, and so entreating your present answer
of your Speedy presence, I commit you to the Almighty.

Your sick loving Patient, T. N.

His answer.
MY good Patient, I fear your impatience has by some passion increased your
pain, I know the force of your disease cannot but be weakened, if you be not
mor afraid then hurt, you will not die of this malady, if my business were not
great, I would see you, or if your need were great, I would not be from you:
but knowing every erampe is not a con^ultion, nor every stitch at the heart: I
will only wish you to put off melancholy, to take heed of cold, to have mind
rather of heaven then earth: Eat good meat, but not too much: Drink good
wine, but measurably: be in charity with all the world, but not too far with
any, especially with the feminine gender: use metion for natural Physic,
(...) let a merry heart be your best Physician, for conceit is hurtful, if it
be not contentiue, and it is past the reach of my reason to eure a corrupted
mind: shortly, and God willing, I will see you, in the mean time imagine I am
with you, for indeed I will not be long from you: and this let me tell you, that
to put you out of fear, I have no fear of you, but that you will be past
Physic ere my hope fail of your cure; and that will not be in haste, and so
hoping that you are not so week in spirit, but that you can endure a little
pain with patience in hope or assured health, till I see you, and always I
rest,

Your Physician and loving friend: W. R.

A Letter from a young Gentleman to an old Captain.
MY good Captain, having of late no little disposition to martial disciplino,
and in the field of blood to adventure life for honor, I am to entreat your
advice as one long experienced in that course, for what you shall think fit
^or my furniture for such service as may deserve regard, and how I may so carry
my self in all companies, that I may not be ^anished the best: and i^ it please
you shortly to go over to your Company, that you will let me serve under your
Colors: and so beseeching your present answer, that I may the better
determine of my desires, leaving to your kind di^cretion the care of my
instruction, protesting in my best endeavors to show my love in you service;
till I hear from you, I rest.

Your affectionate friend, B. R.

His answer.
SIR, your desire I mislike not, if your body will answer your mind, your
book wars yield n^ blows, and therefore seem sweet in reading, but come
to the trial of the buisinesse, and you will find it full of bitterness, but
if resolution have taken root with you, and not easily to be removed, I will
tell you what I think shall most behoue you to carry with you; a good heart,
a stayed head, and a strong stomach, a purse to de^ray necessary charge, and a
care in laying out of expenses, neither offer nor take wrong, at least not
much: borrow little, pay all, observe the wise, love the honest, be not idle
nor ill exercised, beware of for^eits, play and wanton pleasures, for thy
furniture, thy armor and pike, thy piece and thy sword, shall be sufficient to
make thee a Soldier: serve God, and fear not the Devil, let thy enemy see
thy face, and not thy back, and be not proud of any honorable action; but give
God the glory of all: when I go, which will be shortly, I will give thee
notice, in the mean time see me, and I will love thee: Farewell.

Thy assured loving friend, B. W.

A dogged Letter to a displeasing Companion.
AFter my hearty commendations, hoping that you are in good health, as I was at
the writing hereof, when my head aked, wishing you no better comfort, then a
Scould to your wife, desirous to hear from you, that I may never hear more of
you, and sorry with my slefe to be troubled with the thought of you, assuring
you that there is no man cares less for you, for the vileness I know in you,
and the villainy I hear of you, wishing all honest men to beware of you, no
wise man to trust you, hoping, if that God do not the sooner m^nd you, the
Gallows will and you: to deal plainly with you, as a Rakehell I found you, so
a Rakehell I leave you.

Yours as you see by your good service. T. M.

His answer.
O Man in desperation, how are thy wits out of fashion; it seems by thy
spite, thy Spleen is full of corruption, for thy wishes they cannot hurt me;
nor thy words trouble me, ^ory I am that thy wits are a w^^ll gathering, or
gone God knows whither: what ill soever you think of me, I knew better then
you think of me, if your head ache, you should better binds up your brains,
then let them fly^ so near Bedlam, to rail without discretion, upon a
causeless imagination: but while the wise note your folly, and the honest
pity your ^urie, I shall be the less sorry for you, because I will have
nothing to do with you: if your breath be as (...) as your pe^ne, no
Christian will abide you, and so (...) nothing but as an idle humor follows
you, a worse plague then a scoulding wife, which is as near hell as may he,
will torment you: as a Woodcock I know you, and a Dawcock I hold you* and so
(...) I see better of you, to you^ mad fits I leave you, and so rest as you
see by the course of your own cards.

Yours, as you mine, D. R.

A Letter of Reconciliation.
HOnest Daniel, I thought to try the virtue of thy love in thy patience, but I
see we are all weak, when rage gets vpto his height. Reason is a poor man, if
thou did think I was mad, thou might have been sorry and not angry,
and if well in my wits, thou might have thought it an humor of jest to try
a friend in earnest: only lovers have not been of a little continuance, and
shall a conceit of unkindness break the knot of our friendship, ^acre be it
from both and either of us, thou know thine own desert, and my disposition
and might therefore suspect my distemper of brain through the (...) of the
same disease, then fall into collor upon (...) of male content: But since I
began a (...)* I will end the combat, and all causes set aside, love thee in
spite of all spite, and therefore let us be as we were, and ever will be, one
mind in two bodies, and so with hearts shaking hands, and shaking of all ill
humo^rs, that may make the least breach into our loves till I see thee, And
always I rest:

If not thine, not mine own. W. T.

His Answer.
MY most worthy Beloved, and never to be removed kind Wilkin, believe me it: I
can be angry and ^ke with kindness to meet with humors in their kind, only
to be out of your dept for a few good words. I took a little pains to blot a
little pa^er, which if you will put to the fice, mine shall soon consume to
ashes, and to avoid all memorial of mad humors: I confess Nature is subject
to imperfection, yea and Reason is sometimes weak in discretion, but love is
ever himself, where he lives in the Spirits of understanding. Think
therefore of me as of your self, who rather embrace kindness then believe
madness, and leaving all humor of jest, have a heart that will ever love you
in earnest. So patting off all thought of quarrel, where the combat is but a
conceits of kindness in the irremoueable resolution of infringeable affection:
I rest as I have been and can now be none other.

But thine what I am mine own. I. G.

A letter written from an old man to his son before his death.
MY Son, thou art now coming into the world, that I am going out of, and yet
before my departure out of it, let me tell thee what I hold needful for thee
to have care of in it, I know thou will not break thy bread all in one house,
seed always of one dish, nor live always in one place, and therefore let me
read thee a short Lecture for thy carriage in all courses, the Court is a
place of charge more then ease, the City gawdes of more price then worth, and
the Country sportes of more pleasure than profit, yet is there no service to
the King, no dwelling to the City, nor pleasure to the Country, but all the
weight of the worth of them is in the hand of Wisdom, who in the knowledge of
the use of them makes the best esteem of them: but least long Lessons may
ouercharge thy Memory, take this one Rule for thy learning in all, and thou
shall find it good in more then a few, wheresoever thou go, note the best,
choose the best, and keep the best, be not, buried in earth before thou
come to thy Grau^, nor build Castles in the Air, least they fall down
upon thy head, Let not thy eye abuse thy heart, nor thy tongue discredit thy
Will, and let Reason govern Will in all the passages of Nature, be neither
needy nor ungrateful, vn^^urteous, nor unkind, and examine thy Conscience in
the care of thy content, ground thy love upon Virtue, the hope upon reason, and
thy happiness upon grace, live as a Stranger in the world, and make all the
have thou can into Heaven, be loyal to thy Prince, natural to thy Country,
faithful to thy friend, kind to thy neighbor, and honest to the whole World,
So shall God bless thee, the best love thee; and the worst not hurt thee.

And thus so weak in body, that the Spirit faints in forced to express the
full of a Fathers love unto thee, with my Prayers to the Lord of heaven for thy
preservation in this World, and eternal happiness in the World to come, with
my loves blessing, and therewith what I am able to leave thee, to the merciful
guarde of Heavens glory I commit thee.

Thy most loving Father, W. I.

His Answer.
MY most loving Father, this Legacy of your love, for the direction of my life,
how much I prize in my hearts thankfulness, the eye of your judgment shall
beh^ld in my observation, and give me leave to tell you, that in this little
time that I have spent idely in this World, I have had some taste of the meat
that you have given me, where I find that the best meat may be spoiled in
the dressing, while a cunning Cook will make a rich service of small cost, and
though giddie heads are in love with gawdes, yet since the better sort of
opinions esteem a small Diamond before a great Sapphire, I care not if I rather
adventure far for the honor of virtue, then lessen my estate, by breach of
arms, and since there are so many counterfeites, that the best Ieweller may be
mistaken, I will meddle with no such wares as may call repentance to an after
reckoning, while my heart looks toward heaven, I hope the earth shall not
blind mine eye, nor the vain delights of nature prevail against the virtue
of Reason: but alis in the power of powers, by whose grace being guided, I
shall be ever so preserved, that howsoever my heart be wounded, my ^aith shall
never be confounded, in hope whereof, and prayers for which, beseeching the
almighty either in health to prolong your days, or in the Election of his love
to call you to a better life, more esteeming these precepts of your love, then
all the portion you can leave, ^aning your blessing, I humbly take my lea^e.

Your most loving and obedient Son, W. R.

A Letter to a Kinsman that came from the University to the Court, was given
much to study.
MY good Cousin, I hear since you came from the Uniuersity to the Court, yo^ are
inclined much to Melancholy, your mind only delighted in reading and study,
and among many variety of matters of import, that you take much delight in
searching out of Petigrees, and Heraldry, the knowledge whereof I hold both
honorable and profitable: but the use thereof requires a heedefull care, ^or
in discoursing of matters unfit, may be brought within the compass of folly:
but as a friend to give you a caueatinal your course of that study, take my
adui^^ for the bettering of your understanding in the best of your Cotes: ^ee
not too busy with the Crown, and of all beasts beware of the Lion, if he
sleep, wake him not least you trouble his patience, and in his walk cross
not his way, least his frown grows wrothfull, for other beasts think of them
as your reason will give you leave: where you find hon^urs, note if you can the
desert^ of them, and for bought Cotes, consider of them in their kinds, times
alter and natures in them, and therefore in the setting down of Angiquities,
there may be much deceit through the corruption of the Writers or directors for
strange Cotes, as to see an Eagle have a Fly in her mouth, and a Mause bite a
Catte by the tail, or a Goose keep a Fox in his den: Wonder at it, but
make no words of it, and if you see a black Swan in a blew field, and an E^le
in her belly, running out at her tail, or a Peacocke pulled out of his
feathers, and making his Perch upon a cross bar, smile at the conceit, but
keep the censure of it to your self. To conclude, Read much, but believe
little: Think much, but speak little, and know much but meddle little, but in
meddling with other men's cotes, look that you loose not more then your own
ierkin: And so wishing your Studies as profitable as pleasing to you, till I
see you, I commit you to the Almighty:

Your loving C^nse^, W. R.

His Answer.
Sir, I have read your Letter, and considered of the contents: To the answer
whereof, give me leave to tell you that I am not determined to hurt mine
eyesight with too deep looking into a Millstone, nor to believe Antiquity
f^^th ^ then Reason may carry my understanding, and whatsoever I find of
^^tes, I will so carry my due and true allegiance to the Crown, that I will
(...) all touch of dis^o^altie: For the Lion, I will neither trouble him,
waking nor sleeping, and for his walk, wish no beast to be so f^^lish, as to
cross his pleasure in his passage: for your marcy conceits of strange Cotes,
I will only smile at my contecture of them, and so long as I know a F^lc^n
from a Buza^d, an Eagle from an Owl, and a Nightingale from a Cuckoo. Let me
alone to judge of the Natures of Birds, and how they are borne, and when I
look into the nature of Honor, whether by purchase, favor or desert I note
the time with the persons, and so go on with my opinions to the judgment, I
keep to my (...).

Your very loving Kinsman, T. D.

A Letter of unkindness upon a conceit of ill carriage in a Friend.
THere are two ill qualities in a Woman, and two worse in a man: In the first
unkindness and inconstancy, in the second, unfaithfulness and
unthankfulness: and will you bear both the imperfections, that none may
exceed you in evil, wha^ my deserts have bin at your hands you know, and what
your requital has bin to me, I would I knew not: but what shall I think? is
every man only for himself, and let the world go as it li^t, has virtue
abandoned the earth, and is wisdom so rapt up in the mistie clouds of
concupiscence, that she can scarce show any glimmering of the light of live
grace: God forbid, for virtue has her working in all the children of her love:
of which I would you were one, that I might joy as much in your conversion, as
I fear your confusion: Be notangry though I seem bitter, for I am touched to
the quick, yet write I more out of love then hate, for I will suspend my
opinion until your answer give me satisfaction, that I shall shortly with
your presence clear my thought of your indignities, till when and always I
rest,

Yours as you know, and shall know, T. M.

His Answer.
WHat women are I Know, but what me^ should be I know, and what I am you shall
find, always one and the same, in i^remoueable affection to an assured
friend. Virtue I know has her working in the hea^ts of the honest, and I hope
you will not tax me of a contrary condition: but if a miss report breeds a
miss belief, an ungracious conceit may work a grievous unkindness; if your
deserts, and my requital were weighed together in an even Ballens, I hope
there would not be much in equality: but let humors bleed their last, and
better thoughts will follow: I am content to make a bitter sweet of an angry
love, shortly I will see you, and then so satisfy you that the old Proverb
shall come new in proof. The falling out of Lovers is the renewing of love: in
which I will rest without all doubts,

Yours as I have been, and ever will be, R. D.

A fantastic Love Letter.
Mistress if you were not a witch, your eyes could not have so wrought in my
heart, as to make me think of nothing but your love: and if your words were
not char^^es they could not so command me from my self, as to sever me wholly
to your service: but if it be so that you are borne a Creature only to
craci^^e my spirit, I must only pray for patience to mitigate my passion,
finding your nature as ^arre from pity, as my hope is from happiness, that if
there be any spa^ke of grace in you, let it kindle a cole in your kindness, to
warm the life of my love, that I may not die in the col^ fear of disdain:
but reviving in the virtue of your favor, I may honor you above the whole
world: so leaving my life to the answer of your own love, I rest,

Yours what you will, T. R.

Her answer.
Servant, if you were not a fool, you would not run so from your wits, as to
write you care not how, upon an imagination you know not what: mine eyes be
mine own, and if your heart be not yours, shall I wink because you are
wilful? No such matter; and my words have made a metamorphosis of your wit, I
am sorry my breath should blow away your understanding; yet lest you should
think I am past grace, in the pity of perplexities, let me entreat you not
to fear your own^ shadow: walk temperately in the Sun, and the heat will
do you no hurt. So wishing you better then you wish your self, not to trouble
your head with idle humors: I rest, as I have reason,

Your loving Mistress, M. T.

A Letter of grief to a fair creature, that was separated from her second
self, for playing false with a third person.
SWeet soul that once was, now the most wretchedest creature that is, how have
you made a metamorphosts of your self, when you were virtuous, you were fair;
now you are vicious, you are foul: when you were w^e, you were honored; now
you are foolish, you are scorned: when you were gracious, you were beloved; now
you be wicked, you are hated. Oh strange alteration, from virtue to vice, from
wisdom to folly, from grace to ^inne, as to make the creature so offensive to
the C^^ator: what shall I say unto you? but only that I am sorry for you, but
cannot help you, and only pray for you, that your sin may be forgiven, that
your shame may be forgotten: and so beseeching the Highest, whom you have
offended most in the mercy of justice, to show the glory of Majesty, in the
sorrow of humanity and Christian charity, with a broken heart to think of
your wounded soul, wishing your true repentance to be a president for the
conversion of all such unhappy creatures: I rest,

Your friend, and no further, but in prayer for your souls health, T. R.

Her answer.
MY once kind friend, now worthily far off from the title of such comfort,
with sigh^s let me write that which I seal with the tears of my heart: I now
find the wound of conscience so deep cut into my heart, as comes too near the
danger of my soul, and were not Faith the strong hold of Hope, Patience would
be too ^ull of fear: I confess shame to be a gentle punishment of ^inne, and
repentance a true pleader for mercy, for none ^ees the angry face of sin, but
the repentant sinner. For the world, I hate it, and my self most in it, for my
sin, I loath it, and abhor my self for it, and for my life, I am weary of
it, that I care not how soon I were rid of it: but all things to Gods
pleasure, to whom I beseech you in Christian charity to pray for me, that the
Enemy of Christ may not prevail against me, that whatsoever befall me, I may
not fall for ever. So with a bleeding heart in the bitterness of grief, as
full of sorrow as a sinful soul can hold: I rest,

Your worthy, forsaken friend, E. R.

A Letter to a friend for his opinion in diverse points of considerations.
MY honest Ned, I pray thee write me word by this ^earer how thou do, thy
opinion of the world, of life and death, honesty and wit, and what comes into
thy head, when thou have leisure to be idl^, I long to hear from thee, to
read thy conceits, which if they be of the old fashion, are better then of the
new form: ^ee what will be, to me it shall be welcome, and thy self better
whenever I may see thee: for dull wits and (...) heads, so beat about the
market in this Town, that I had rather go a mile wide, then keep way with
such wild: geese: and so loath to trouble thee with trifling news, to no good
purpose, in the affection of a faithful heart, I rest*

Thine what mine, B. W.

His answer.
KInd Henry, to answer thy request, in a few words let me tell thee, for the
world I find it a walk that soon wearieth a good spirit, this life is but a
puff, and death but an abridge^ent of time. Now for some notes I have taken of
the world, and diverse things in it: let me tell thee, that if all the wealth in
the world were in one chest, it would not buy one hour of life, if all the
henesty of the world were in one heart, it would not buy ^ne bit of bread and
if all the wit in the world were in one wicked pate, it would not buy one jot
of grace: and therefore it is meet with death at a meaner price, and to carry
money with honesty, the better to go to market, and to join grace with
wit, to find the high way to heaven. This is all for this time I have had
leisure to think upon as more comes in my head, I will make you acquainted with
it, in the mean time, mark what I have written, and it will do thee no hurt
in reading: Farewell.

Thine, or not mine own W. F.

FINIS.

