FANTASTICKS: Serving for A PERPETVALL Prognostication. Descants of 1 The
World. 2 The Earth. 3 Water. 4 Air. 5 Fire. 6 Fish. 7 Beasts. 8 Man. 9
Woman. 10 Love. 11 Money. 12 The Spring. 13 Summer. 14 Harvest. 15 VVinter. 16
The 12. Months 17 Christmas. 18 Lent. 19 Good Friday. 20 Easter day. 21
Morning. 22 The 12. Hours. 23 Midnight. 24 The Conclusion.


LONDON, Printed for Francis Williams. 1626.

To the Worshipful and worthy Knight, Sir MARK IVE of Rivers Hall in Essex,
N.B. wishes on earth hearts ease, and heaven hereafter.
SIR, your many favors, and my small deserts, make me study how to discharge
my self of ingratitude, which not knowing better how to do, then by the
labor of my spirit, to show the nature of my love, I have thought good to
present your patience with this little volume of varieties, in which, though
the Title promise no matter of great worth, yet it may be, if you peruse it,
you shall find somewhat that you may like in it: howsoever it be, it may serve
you in the Winter, to keep you from sleep by the fire side, and in the Summer
in shady walks, to pass away idle time.

In brief, wishing it of that nature, that might come near the worthiness of
your acceptance, I leave it with my better service, to the favor of your good
discretion: and so in all humility rest,

Yours affectionately to command, N. B.

To the Reader.
IT was my hap of late, walking through the fields, to light upon a piece of
paper, in which I found a kind of discourse, set down upon an imagination of
midnight. By whom it was written, I know not, but by whomsoever, I liked it so
well, that wishing my self able to do half so well, I fell into an humor of
imitating the vein, so near as I could, in description of the twelve hours,
the twelve months, and some special days in the year: how well to your
liking, I know not; but my labor herein has not bin little, and my desire
much, I mean to do well; which if I have not, I can be but sorry, that my dull
wit has not bin fed with a more pleasing humor: but if you be able to judge
of the worth of it, and like it, I shall be more glad then proud of it:
howsoever it be, hoping of your kindness, I leave it to your like censure; and
so, loath to entertain your patience with a long tale to little purpose, I thus
conclude, and in affection and discretion, I rest,

Your friend, N. B.

FANTASTICKS. Descants of the Quarters, Months, and hours of the year, with
other matters.
The World.
TOuching my opinion of the world, I will tell you as briefly as I can, what I
think of it: a place wherein are contained the variety of things: Men think,
women talk, beasts feed, birds fly, fishes swim, and worms creep: air
pearceth, winds blow, cold nippeth, fire heateth, grass grows, and time
withers. Wealth is a Jewel, and poverty is a plague: Conscience is a charge,
and care is a burden. Pride is a Lord of misrule, and beauty is painted. Mars
must yield to Mercury, and Diana is a strange woman: Cupid is an idle
invention, and all is as good as nothing. Love is more talked of then proved.
Covetousness the key of wit, Nature the trouble of Reason, and Will the master
of the Senses. Beauty is an eye sore, Learning a task, Ualour a heat, and
reason a study. A King, a great man: a Soldier, a stout man: a Courtier, a
fine man: a Lawyer, a wise man: a Merchant, a rich man: a Beggar a poor man:
and an honest man, an honest man.

Fair weather, is cheerful: foul weather is melancholicke. The day is
lightsome, and the night is darksom. Meat is necessary, and sleep is
easefull, and drink does well, and exercise does not amiss. Law is good, and
punishment is meet, and reward would be thought on: and fools would be pityed,
and so. Opinions differ, and Judgments vary, and Time travails, and Truth is
a virtue, and wisdom an honor: and honor is a title, and Grace a gift, and
Patience a blessing, and Content a Kingdom: and so from one thing to another,
a trouble in all. A kingdom full of care: wit full of trouble power full of
charge: youth full of action: Age full of grief: and none content with his
condition: wishing in one, willing in another: thinking in one, doing in
another: working in one, crossing in another: thoughts, words, and deeds, so
different in their effects, that for ought I can see in it, when I have well
considered of it, I can say thus much of it, He is happy that has not to do
with it. And not to dwell too long upon it, to conclude my opinion briefl^ of
it, I hold it the Labyrinth of wit, and the toil of understanding, the
pilgrimage of patience, and the purgatory of reason. Farewell.

Love.
TOuching my Judgment of Love, it is, if it be any thing, such a thing to
speak of, that to tell truly, I know not well what to say of it: but yet what
I imagine of it, I will tell you: at the first, I guess, it was an old
nothing, to exercise wit in idleness, and now, is a kind of new-nothing to feed
folly with imagination: but be it what it will be, or may be, this wanton Love
that this world is too full of, whatsoever it is, thus much I find of it: It is
begotten by the eyes, bred in the brains, walks in the tongue, grows with
the flesh, and dies in an humor: and this ill commonly does trouble wit,
hinder Art hurt Nature, disgrace Reason lose time, and spoil substance: It
crosses wisdom, serves Beauty, and sotteth Folly: weakneth strength, and
baseth Honor: It is only Wills darling, Patience trial, and Passions
torture, the pleasure of melancholy, and the play of madness, the delight of
varieties, and the deviser of vanities: The Uirgins crack, and the Widows
cross: The Batchelors bane and the married man's Purgatory: the Young man's misery
and the Ageds consumption: The abuse of Learning, the ground of Envy, the
stirrer of wrath, and the cause of mischief: The disquiet of the mind, the
distractor of the Wit, the disturber of the Senses, and the destruction of the
whole body. A fained god, an idle fancy, a kind of fury, and in some kind a
frenzy. To conclude, I hold it an Invention of idleness, and an Imagination of
Indiscretion: the plague of people, andt he mock of the Word. Farewell.

Money.
TO tell you mine opinion of money, I think it the Monarch of the world: the
maintainer of Pride, the Nurse of Covetousness, the Steward of Lechery, the
sower of Sedition, the cause of war, the sack of a City, and the overthrow of
a Camp: The Gluttons Purueyour, and the Drunkards Cupbearer: the Thiefes
tempter, and the Hangmans Master: The misguider of Wit, the corrupter of
Conscience, the blinder of Reason, and the overthrow of Honor: the Usurers
God, the poor man's oppression, the Lawyers hope, and the Laborers hire: does
good to few, but hurt to many: pulls down the Churches, and builds the fair
houses, makes the Prodigal an Ape, and the miser dogged: makes Bridges over
the Sea, and fire in men's brains: fetch^th the Beasts from the Wilderness,
and the Birds from the Air: it draws fancies out of fine Wits, and eloquence
from learned mouths: It makes friends foes, and enemies friends: It serves all
professions, all qualities, and conditions, from the King to the Beggar.

In sum, not to talk too much of it, having so little of it: I thus conclude
my opinion of it: I think it a necessary dross, and a dangerous metal, the
relief of the honest, and the ruin of the wicked. Farewell.

The Spring.
IT is now Spring: a Time blessed of the Heavens for the comfort of the Earth,
now begins the Sun to give light unto the Air, and with the replexion of his
beams to warm the cold earth: the Beasts of the woods look out into the
plains, and the fishes out of the deep run up into the shallow waters, the
breeding fowls fall to building of their nests, and the senseless creatures
gather life into their bodies, the Birds tune their throats to entertain the
Sun rising, and the little flies begin to flock in the air: now Cupid
begins no nocke his Arrows and sharp their heads: and Venus, if she be, will
be known what she is: Now Pallas and her Muses try the Poets in their
Pamphlets, and Diana, if she be to be seen, is a grace to her fairest
Nymph: Time is now gracious in Nature, and Nature in time: the Air wholesome,
and the earth pleasant, and the sea not uncomfortable: the Aged feel a kind of
youth, and Youth, the Spirit full of life: it is the messenger of many
pleasures: the Courtiers progress, and the Farmers profit: the Laborers
Harvest, and the Beggars Pilgrimage. In sum, there is much good to be spoken
of this time: but to avoid tediousnes, I will thus conclude of it: I hold it in
all that I can see in it, the Jewel of time, and the Joy of Nature.

Farewell.

Summer.
IT is now Summer, and Zephirus with his sweet breath cooles the parching
beams of Titan the leaves of the trees are in whisper talks of the blessings
of the air, while the Nightingale is tuning her throat to refresh the weary
spirit of the Trauayler: Flora now brings out her Wardrop, and richly
embroydreth her green Apron: the Nymphs of the Woods in consort with the
Muses sing an Aue to the Morning, and a Vale to the Suns setting: the Lambs
and the Rabbettes run at base in the sandy Warrens, and the Plow lands are
covered with corn: the stately Heart is at Layre in the high wood, while the
Hare in a surrow sits washing of her face: The Bull makes his walk like a
Master of the field, and the broad-headed Ox bears the Garland of the market:
the Angler with a sly takes his pleasure with the fish, while the little
Merline has the Partridge in the foot: the Hony-dewes perfume the Air, and
the Sunny-showers are the earths comfort: the Greyhound on the plain makes the
fair course: and the wel-mouthed Hound makes the Music of the woods: the
Battle of the field is now stoutly fought, and the proud Rye must stoop to
the Sickle: The Carters whistle cheeres his forehorse, and drink and sweat is
the life of the Labourer: Idle spirits are banished the limits of Honor, while
the studious brain brings forth his wonder: the Azure Sky shows the Heaven is
gracious, and the glorious Sun glads the spirit of Nature: The ripened fruits
show the beauty of the earth, and the brightness of the air the glory of the
heavens: In sum, for the world of worth I find in it, I thus conclude of it:
I hold it a most sweet season, the variety of pleasures, and the Paradise of
love. Farewell.

Harvest.
IT is now Harvest, and the Lark must lead her young out of the nest: for the
Sith and the Sickle will down with the grass and the corn: Now are the hedges
full of Berries, and the highwayes full of Rogues, and the lazy Limbs must
^^eepe out their dinner: The Ant and the Be work for their winter provision,
and after a frost, the Grasshopper is not seen: Butter, milk, and cheese, are
the Laborers diet, and a pot of good Beer quickens his spirit. If there be no
plague, the people are healthy, for continuance of motion is a preservation of
nature: The fresh of the morning, and the cool of the Evening are the times of
Court walks; but the poor traveler treads out the whole day: Malt is now
above wheat with a number of mad people, and a fine shirt is better then a
Frize Ierkin: Pears and Plummes now ripen apace, and being of a watery
substance, are cause of much sickness: The pipe and the taber now follow the
Fayres, and they that have any money, make a gain of their markets. Bucks now
are in season, and Partridges are Rowen-taild, and a good Retriuer is a
Spaniell worth the keeping. In sum, it is a time of much worth, when, if God
be well pleased, the world will thrive the better. And to conclude, this is
all that I will say of it; I hold it the Heavens Bounty, the Earths Beauty, and
the Worlds Benefit, Farewell.

VVinter.
IT is now Winter, and Boreas begins to fill his cheeks with breath, shakes
the tops of the high Cedars, and hoyseth the waves of the Sea, to the danger of
the Sailors comfort: Now is the Earth nipt at the heart with a cold, and her
Trees are disrobed of their rich apparel: there is a glass set upon the face
of the Waters, and the Fishes are driven to the bottomes of the deep: The
Usurer now sits lapt in his furs, and the poor makes his breath, a fire to
his fingers ends: Beauty is maskt for fear of the air, and youth runs to
Physic for Restoratiues of Nature: The Stagge roares for loss of his
strength, and the Flea makes his Castle in the wool of a blanket: Cards and
Dice now begin their harvest, and good Ale and Sack are the cause of civil
wars: Machiauil and the Devil are in counsel upon destruction, and the
wicked of the world make have to hell: Money is such a Monopoly, that he is
not to be spoken of, and the delay of suits is the death of hope. In it self
it is a woeful Season, the punishment of Natures pride, and the play of misery.
Farewell.

January.
IT is now January, and Time begins to turn the wheel of his Revolution,
the Woods begin to lose the beauty of their spreading boughs, and the proud
Oak must stoop to the Axe: the Squirrell now surueyeth the Nut and the Maple,
and the Hedgehogge rowles up himself like a football: an Apple and a Nutmeg
make a Gossips cup: and the Ale and the Faggot are the Uictuallers merchandise:
the Northern black Dust is the during Fuel* and the fruit of the Grape heats
the stomach of the Aged: Down beds and quilted Cappes are now in the pride of
their service, and the Cook and the Pantler are men of no mean office: the
Ox and the fat Weather now furnish the market, and the Coney is so ferreted,
that she cannot keep in her borough: the Currier and the Lime-rod are the
death of the foul, and the Faulcons bells ring the death of the Mallard: the
trotting gelding makes a way through the mire, and the Hare and the Hound put
the Huntsman to his horn: the barren Do subscribes to the dish, and the
smallest seed makes sauce to the greatest flesh: the dried grass is the horses
ordinary, and the meal of the beans makes him go through with his travel:
Fishermen now have a cold trade, and travelers a foul journey: the Cook room
now is not the worst place in the Ship, and the Shepherd has a bleake seat on
the Mountain: the Blackbird leaves not a berry on the thorn, and the garden
earth is turned up for her roots: the water floods run over the proud banks,
and the gaping Dister leaves his shell in the streets, while the proud Peacocke
leaps into the pie: Muscouia commodities are now much in request, and the water
Spaniell is a necessary servant: the Lode horse to the mill has his full back
burden; and the Thresher in the barn tryes the strength of his flayle: the
Woodcocke and the Pheasant pay their lives for their feed, and the Hare after a
course makes his hearse in a pie: the shoulder of a hog is a shooing horn to
good drink, and a cold alms makes a beggar shrug. To conclude, I hold it a
time of little comfort, the rich man's charge, and the poor man's misery.
Farewell.

February.
IT is now February, and the Sun is gotten up a Cockestride of his climbing,
the Ualleyes now are painted white, and the brooks are full of water: the Frog
goes to seek out the Paddocke, and the Crow and the Rooke begin to mislike
their old Makes: forward Connies begin now to kindle, and the fat grounds are
not without Lambs: the Gardener falls to sorting of his seeds, and the
Husbandman falls afresh to scowring of his Ploughshare: the Term travelers
make the Shooemakers Harvest, and the Chaundlers cheese makes the chalk walk
apace: The Fishmonger sorts his ware against Lent: and a Lambe-skinne is good
for a lame arm: the waters now alter the nature of their softnes, and the soft
earth is made stony hard: The Air is sharp and piercing, and the winds blow
cold: the Tauernes and the Innes seldom lack Guest^, and the Ostler knows how
to gain by his Hay: the hunting Horse is at the heels of the Hound, while the
ambling Nagge carries the Physician and his footcloth: the blood of Youth
begins to spring, and the honor of Art is gotten by Exercise: The trees a
little begin to bud, and the sap begins to rise up out of the root: Physic now
has work among weak bodies, and the Apothecaries drugges are very gainful:
There is hope of a better time not far off, for this in it self is little
comfortable: and for the small pleasure that I find in it, I will thus briefly
conclude of it: It is the poor man's pick-purse, and the misers cutthroat, the
enemy to pleasure, and the time of patience. Farewell.

March.
IT is now March, and the Northern wind dries up the Southern dirt: The
tender Lips are now maskt for fear of chopping, and the fair hands must not
be vngloued: now rises the Sun a pretty step to his fair height, and Saint
Valentine calls the birds together, where Nature is pleased in the variety of
love: the Fishes and the Frogs fall to their manner of generation, and the
Adder dies to bring forth her young: the Air is sharp, but the Sun is
comfortable, and the day begins to lengthen: The forward Gardens give the
five Sallets, and a Nosegay of Uiolets is a present for a Lady: Now begins
Nature (as it were) to wake out of her sleep, and sends the Taueller to survey
the walks of the World: the sucking Rabbit is good for weak stomachs, and
the diet for the Rhume does many a great Cure: The Farrier now is the horses
Physician, and the fat Dog feeds the Faulcon in the Mew: The Tree begins to
bud, and the grass to peep abroad, while the Thrush with the Blackbird make
a charm in the young Springs: the Milke-mayd with her best beloved, talk away
weariness to the Market, and in an honest meaning, kind words do no hurt: the
Football now tries the legs of strength, and merry matches continue good
fellowship: It is a time of much work, and tedious to discourse of: but in all
I find of it, I thus conclude in it: I hold it the Servant of Nature, and the
Schoolmasters of Art: the hope of labor, and the Subject of Reason. Farewell.

April.
IN is now April, and the Nightingale begins to tune her throat against May:
the Sunny showers perfume the air, and the Bees begin to go abroad for honey:
the Dew, as in Pearls, han^s upon the tops of the grass, while the Turtles
sit billing upon the little green boughs: the Trowt begins to play in the
Brooks, and the Sammon leaves the Sea, to play in the fresh waters. The Garden
banks are full of gay flowers, and the Thorn and the Plumme send forth their
fair Blossoms: the March Colt begins to play, and the Cosset Lamb is learned
to butt. The Poets now make their studies in the woods, and the Youth of the
Country make ready for the Morris-dance; the little Fishes lie nibling at a
bait, and the Porpas plays in the pride of the tide: the shepherds pipe
entertaines the Princess of Arcadia, and the healthful Soldier has a
pleasant march. The Lark and the Lamb look up at the Sun, and the labourer
is abroad by the dawning of the day: Sheep eyes in Lambs heads, tell kind
hearts strange tales, while faith and troth make the true Lovers knot: the aged
hairs find a fresh life, and the youthful cheeks are as red as a cherry: It
were a world to set down the worth of this month: But in sum, I thus
conclude, I hold it the Heavens blessing, and the Earths comfort. Farewell.

May.
IT is now May, and the sweetness of the Air refreshes every spirit: the
sunny beams bring forth fair Blossoms, and the dripping Clouds water Floraes
great garden: the male Dear puts out the Ueluet head, and the pagged Do is
near her fawning: The Sparhawke now is drawn out of the mew, and the Fowler
makes ready his whistle for the Quail: the Lark sets the morning watch, and
the evening, the Nightingale: the Barges like Bowers, keep the streams of the
sweet Rivers, and the Mackrell with the Shad are taken prisoners in the Sea:
the tall young Oak is cut down for the Maypole: the Sith and the Sickle are
the Mowers furniture, and fair weather makes the Labourer merry: the Physician
now prescribes the cold Whey, and the Apothecary gathers the dew for a
medicine: Butter and Sage make the wholesome breakf^st, but fresh cheese and
cream are meat for a dainty mouth* and the Strawbery and the Pescod want no
price in the market: the Chicken and the Ducke are fatned for the market* and
many a Goflin never lives to be a Goose. It is the month wherein Nature has
her full of mirth, and the Senses are filled with delights. I conclude, It is
from the Heavens a Grace, and to the Earth a Gladness. Farewell.

June.
IT is now June, and the Hay-makers are mustered to make an army for the field,
where not always in order, they march under the Bag and the Bottle, when
betwixt the Forke and the Rake, there is seen great force of arms: Now does
the broad Oak comfort the weary Laborer, while under his shady Boughs he sits
singing to his bread and cheese: the ^ay-cocke is the Poor man's Lodging, and
the fresh River is his gracious Neighbor: Now the Faulcon and the Tassell try
their wings at the Partridge, and the fat Bucke fills the great pasty: the trees
are all in their rich array: but the seely Sheep is turned out of his coat: the
Roses and sweet Herbs put the Distiller to his cunning, while the green
apples on the tree are ready for the great bellied wives: Now begins the Hare
to gather up her heels, and the Fox looks about him, for fear of the Hound:
the Hook and the Sickle are making ready for harvest: the Meadow grounds gape
for rain, and the Corn in the ear begins to harden: the little Lads make
Pipes of the straw, and they that cannot dance, will yet be hopping: the Air
now grows somewhat warm, and the cool winds are very comfortable: the
Sayler now makes merry passage, and the nimble Footman runs with pleasure:
In brief, I thus conclude, I hold it a sweet season, the senses perfume, and
the spirits comfort. Farewell.

July.
IT is now July, and the Sun is gotten up to his height, whose heat parcheth
the earth, and burns up the grass on the mountains. Now begins the Canon of
heaven to rattle, and when the fire is put to the charge, it breaks out among
the Clouds: the stones of congealed water cut off the ears of the Corn: and
the black storms affright the faint-hearted: the Stag and the Bucke are now
in pride of their time, and the hardness of their heads makes them fit for the
Horner: Now has the Sparhawke the Partridge in the foot, and the Ferret does
tickle the Cony in the borough. Now does the Farmer make ready his teame, and
the Carter with his whip, has no small pride in his Whistle? Now do the
Reapers try their backs and their Arms, and the lusty Youths pitch the
sheafes into the Cart, The old Partridge calls her Couey in the morning, and
in the evening, the Shepherd falls to folding of his flock: the Sparrowes make
a charm upon the green Bushes, till the Fowler come and take them by the
dozens: the Smelt now begins to be in season, and the Lamprey out of the River
leapes into a Pie: the Soldier now has a hot march, and the Lawyer sweats in
his l^ned Gown: The Peddler now makes a long walk, and the Aqua vitae Bottle
sets his face on a fiery heat: In sum, I thus conclude of it, I hold it a
profitable season, the Laborers gain, and the rich man's wealth. Farewell.

August.
IT is now August, and the Sun is somewhat toward his declination, yet such
is his heat as hardens the soft clay, dries up the standing ponds, wythereth
the sappy leaves, and scorcheth the skin of the naked: now begin the Gleaners
to follow the Corn Cart, and a little bread to a great deal of drink makes
the Trauailers dinner: the Melowne and the Cucumber is now in request: and Oil
and vinegar give attendance on the Sallet herbs: the Alehouse is more
frequented then the Tavern, and a fresh River is more comfortable then a fiery
Furnace: the Bathe is now much visited by diseased bodies, and in the fair
Rivers, swimming is a sweet exercise: the Bow and the Bowl pirke many a purse,
and the Cocks with their heels spurn away many a man's wealth: The Pipe and
the Taber is now lustily set on work, and the Lad and the Less will have no
lead on their heels: the new Wheat makes the Gossips Cake, and the Bride Cup
is carried above the heads of the whole Parish: the For ne^ty pot welcomes home
the Harvest cart, and the Garland of Flowers crowns the Captain of the
Reapers. Oh, it is the mercy time, wherein honest Neighbors make good cheer,
and God is glorified in his blessings on the earth. In sum, for that I find,
I thus conclude, I hold it the worlds welfare, and the earths Warming-p^^.

Farewell.

September.
IT is now September, and the Sun begins to fall much from his height, the
meadows are left bare, by the mouths of hungry Cattle, and the Hogs are
turned into the Corn fields: the winds begin to knock the Apples heads
together on the trees, and the fallings are gathered to fill the Pyes for the
Household: the Sailors fall to work to get before the wind^, and if they spy a
storm, it puts them to prayer: the Soldier now begins to shrug at the
weather, and the Camp dissolved, the Companies are put to Garrison: the Lawyer
now begins his Harvest, and the Client p^yes for words by weight: the Innes now
begin to provide for ghests, and the night ^aters in the stable, pinch the
Trauailer in his bed: Paper, pen, and ink are much in request, and the quarter
Sessions take order with the way-layers: C^ales and wood make toward the
Chimney, and Ale and Sack are in account with good fellows: the Butcher now
knocks down the great Beeues, and the Poulters feathers make toward the
Upholster: Walflet Oysters are the Fishwiues wealth, and Pippins fine are the
Costermongers rich merchandise: the flayle and the fan fall to work in the
Barn, and the Corn market is full of the Bakers: the Porkets now are driven
to the Woods, and the home-fed Pigges make porke for the market. In brief, I
thus conclude of it, I hold it the Winters forewarning, and the Summers
farewell.

Adieu.

October.
IT is now October, and the lofty winds make bare the trees of their leaves,
while the hogs in the Woods grow fat with the fallen Acorns: the forward Dear
begin to go to rut, and the barren Do grows good meat: the Basket makers
now gather their rods, and the fishers lay their leapes in the deep: the load
horses go apace to the Mill, and the Meal-market is seldom without people:
the Hare on the hill makes the Greyhound a fair course and the Fox in the
woods calls the Hounds to a full cry: the multitude of people raises the price
of wares, and the smoothe tongue will sell much: the Saylor now bestirreth his
stumps, while the Merchant lives in fear of the weather: the great feasts are
now at hand for the City, but the poor must not beg for fear of the stocks:
a fire and a pai^e of Cards keep the ghests in the Ordinary, and Tobacco is
held very precious for the Rhewme: The Coaches now begin to rattle in the
street: but the cry of the poor is unpleasing to the rich: Muffes and Cuffes
are now in request, and the shuttel-Cocke with the Battel-doore is a pretty
house-exercise: Tennis and Baloune are sports of some charge, and a quick
bandy is the Court-keepers commodity: dancing an^ ^encing are now in some use,
and kind hearts and true Lovers lie close, to keep off cold: the Titmouse now
keeps in the hollow tree, and the black bird sits close in the bottom of a
hedge: In brief, for the little pleasure I find in it, I thus conclude of it:
I hold it a Messenger of ill news, and a second service to a cold dinner.
Farewell.

November.
IT is now November, and according to the old Proverb, Let the Thresher take
his flayle, and the ship no more sail: for the high winds and the rough seas
will try the ribs of the Ship, and the hearts of the Sailers: Now come the
Country people all wet to the Market, and the toyling Carriers are pitifully
moyled: The young Herne and the Shoulerd are now fat for the great Feast, and
the Wood cock begins to make toward the Cockeshoot: the Warriners now begin
to plie their harvest, and the Butcher, after a good bargain drinks a health
to the Grasier: the Cook and the Comfitmaker, make ready for Christmas, and
the Minstrels in the Country, beat their boys for false fingring: Scholars
before breakefast have a cold stomach to their books, and a Master without
Art is fit for an A B. C. A red herring and a cup of Sack, make war in a
weak stomach, and the poor man's fast, is better then the Gluttons surfeit:
Trenchers and dishes are now necessary servants, and a lock to the Cubboord
keeps a bit for a need: Now begins the Goshauke to weed the wood of the
Phesant, and the Mallard loves not to hear the belles of the Faulcon: The
winds now are cold, and the Air chill, and the poor die through want of
Charity: Butter and Cheese begin to raise their prices, and Kitchen stuff
is a commodity, that every man is not acquainted with. In sum, with a
conceit of the chilling cold of it, I thus conclude in it: I hold it the
discomfort of Nature, and Reasons patience. Farewell.

December.
IT is now December, and he that walks the streets, shall find dirt on his
shoes, Except he go all in boots: Now does the Lawyer make an end of his
harvest, and the Client of his purse: Now Capons and Hens, beside Turkies,
Geese and Duckes, besides Beef and Mutton, must all die for the great feast,
for in twelve days a multitude of people will not be fed with a little: Now
plummes and spice, Sugar and Honey, square it among pies and broth, and Gossip
I drink to you, and you are welcome, and I thank you, and how do you, and I
pray you be merry: Now are the Tailors and the Tiremakers full of work
against the Holidayes, and Music now must be in tune, or else never: the
youth must dance and sing, and the aged sit by the fire. It is the Law of
Nature, and no Contradiction in reason: The Ass that has borne all the year,
must now take a little rest, and the lean Ox must feed till he be fat: The
Footman now shall have many a foul step, and the Ostler shall have work
enough about the heels of the Horses, while the Tapster, if he take not heed,
will lie drunk in the Seller: The prices of meat will rise apace, and the
apparel of the proud will make the Tailor rich: Dice and Cards, will benefit
the Butler: And if the Cook do not lack wit, he will sweetly lick his
fingers: Starchers and Launderers will have their hands full of work, and
Periwigs and painting will not be a little set by, strange stuffes will be
well sold, strange tales well told, strange sights much sought, strange things
much bought, and what else as falls out. To conclude, I hold it the costly
Purueyour of Excess, and the after breeder of necessity, the practice of
Folly, and the Purgatory of Reason.

Farewell.

Christmas day.
IT is now Christmas, and not a Cup of drink must pass without a Caroll, the
Beasts, Foul and Fish, come to a general execution, and the Corn is ground
to dust for the Bakehouse, and the Pastry: Cards and Dice purge many a purse,
and the Youth show their agility in shooing of the wild Mare: now good cheer
and welcome, and God be with you, and I thank you: and against the new year,
provide for the presents: the Lord of Mis-rule is no mean man for his time,
and the ghests of the high Table must lack no Wine: the lusty bloods must
look about them like men, and piping and dancing puts away much melancholy:
stolen Uenison is sweet, and a fat Coney is worth money: Pit-falles are now set
for small Birds, and a Woodcocke hangs himself in a gynne: a good fire heats
all the house, and a full Almes-basket makes the Beggars Prayers: the Maskers
and the Mummers make the merry sport: but if they lose their money, their
Drum goes dead: Swearers and Swaggerers are sent away to the Alehouse, and
unruly Wenches go in danger of Judgment: Musicians now make their Instruments
speak out, and a good song is worth the hearing. In sum, it is a holy time,
a duty in Christians, for the remembrance of Christ, and custom among friends,
for the maintenance of good fellowship: In brief, I thus conclude of it: I
hold it a memory of the Heavens Love, and the worlds peace, the mirth of the
honest, and the meeting of the friendly. Farewell.

Lent.
IT is now Lent, and the poor Stockfish is sore beaten for his stubbornness:
the Herring dominiers like a Lord of great Service, and the fruit of the Dairy
makes a hungry Feast: Fasting and mourning is the life of the poor, and the
Dogs grow lean, with the lack of bones, while the Prisoners heart is nipt
with penury: the Beasts of the Forests have a bare feed, and the hard crusts
try the teeth of the Beggar: The Byrd has a little shelter in the Bush, and a
bitter frost makes a backward Spring: The Sun gives but little warmth, and
the March wind makes the Air cold: The Fishermen now are the Rakers of the
Sea, and the Oyster gapes, to catch hold of the Crab: Solitariness and
Melancholy breed the hurt of Nature, and the naked nesse of the Earth is the
eyes discomfort: Idle people sit picking of Sallets, and necessity of exercise
is an enemy to study: the winds grow dangerous to the Sayler, and the Rocks
are the ruin of the Merchant: the Sentinel now keeps a cold watch, and the
Sconce is nothing comfortable to the Soldier: the shepherd has little
pleasure in his Pipe, and Age has but a dead feeling in love: the Colt has a
ragged coat, and the half mewed head disgraceth the Dear: the Faulcons wing
is but young feathered, and the deep f^llow wearies the Huntsman: there is
nothing pleasing but hope, that the days will lengthen and time will be more
comfortable. I conclude, in it self, it is an uncomfortable season, the
Heavens frown, and the Earths punishment. Farewell.

Good Friday.
IT is now Good Friday, and a general Fast must be kept among all Christians,
in remembrance of Christ's Passion: Flesh and Fish must be vanished all
stomachs, strong or weak: Now begins the Farewell to thin fare, and the
Fishmongers may shut up their shops till the Holy Days be past: the Butchers
now must wash their Boords, make clean their Aprons, sharpen their knives, and
sort their pricks, and cut out their meat for Easter Eve market: Now must the
Poulters make ready their Rabbet^ and their Foul, the Cooks have their Ouens
clean, and all for Pies and Tarts against the merry Feast: now the Maids
bestir them about their houses, the Launders about their Linen, the Tailors
about Apparel, and all for this holy time: Now young Lambs, young Rabbets, and
young Chickens dye for fine appetites, and now the Minstrell tunes his
Instruments, to have them ready for the young people: but with the aged and the
religious, there is nothing but sorrow and mourning, confession, contrition,
and absolution, and I know not what: few that are merry, but children that
break up school, and wenches that are upon the marriage. In sum, it is such
an odd day by it self, that I will only make this conclusion of it: It is
the Bridle of Nature, and the Examiner of Reason. Farewell.

Easter day.
IT is now Easter, and Jack of Lent is turned out of doors: the Fishermen now
hang up their nets to dry, while the Calfe and the Lamb walk toward the
Kitchen and the Pastry: The velvet heads of the Forests fall at the loose of
the Crosse-bow: the Samman Trowt plays with the Fly, and the March Rabbit
runs dead into the dish: the Indian commodities pay the Merchants adventure:
and Barbary Sugar puts Honey out of countenance: the holy feast is kept for the
faithful, and a known Jew has no place among Christians: the Earth now
begins to paint her upper garment, and the trees put out their young buds,
the little Kids chew their Cuds, and the Swallow feeds on the Flies in the
Air: the Storke cleanses the Brooks of the Frogs, and the Sparhawke
prepares her wing for the Partridge: the little Fawn is stolen from the Do,
and the male Dear begin to heard: the spirit of Youth is inclined to mirth,
and the conscionable Scholar will not break a holy day: the Minstrell calls
the Maid from her dinner, and the Lovers eyes do troule like Tennis balls.
There is mirth and joy, when there is health and liberty: and he that has
money, will be no mean man in his mansion: the Air is wholesome, and the Sky
comfortable, the Flowers odoriferous, and the Fruits pleasant: I conclude, it
is a day of much delightfulness: the Suns dancing day, and the Earths
Holy Day. Farewell.

Morning.
IT is now Morning, and Time has woond up the Wheels of his day Watch, while
the Lark, the Suns Trumpet, calls the Labourer to his work: there is joy
and comfort through the whole world, that the spirits of life are awaked out of
their dead sleep: It is the blessed time of reason, in which the best things
are begun, while Nature goes to experience for the better perfection of her
business: The Sun now begins to draw open the Curtain of his Pauilion,
and with the heat of his Beams draws up the unwholesome mists in the Air:
the Mother Earth is recovered of her cold sickness, and sends forth her fair
flowers to perfume the infected air: now the Sorceresse with her magic Art
puts her charms to silence, and the Birds of the woods make music to the
poor traveler. Now begin the wits of the wise, and the limbs of strength to
compass the world, and make Art honorable: Thieves now are either caued or
imprisoned, and knowledge of comfort puts care to a Non plus. The beasts of the
forests use the silence of fear, and the Wolf like a Dog dares not look out
of his den: the Worms into the earth, and the Toads into the Waters, fly
for fear of their heads: This is a time that I joy in, for I think no time
lost, but in sleep: and now have imaginations their best means to attire
themselves in the golden liuerie of their best graces; to which the night is at
no time by deprivation of action. I conclude, it is in it self a blessed
season, a dispersing of the first darkness, and the Dial of Alexander.
Farewell.

One of the Clock.
IT is now the first hour, and Time is, as it were, stepping out of darkness,
and stealing toward the day: the Cock calls to his ^enne, and bids her beware
of the Fox, and the Watch having walked the streets, take a nap upon a stall:
the Bell-man calls to the maids to look to their locks, their fire, and their
light, and the child in the cradle calls to the Nurse for a Dug: the Cat sits
watching behind the Cupboord for a Mouse, and the Flea sucks on sweet flesh,
till he is ready to burst with the blood: the spirits of the studious start out
of their dreams, and if they cannot fall asleep again, then to the Book and
the wax Candle: the Dog at the door frayes the Thief from the house, and the
Thief within the house may hap to be about his business. In some places Bells
are rung to certain orders: but the quiet sleeper never tells the Clock: not
to dwell too long upon it, I hold it the farewell of the night, and the
forerunner to the day, the spirits watch, and Reasons workemaster. Farewell.

Two of the Clock.
IT is now the second hour, and the point of the Dial has stepped over the
first stroke, and now Time begins to draw back the Curtain of the night:
the Cock again calls to his Hen, and the Watch begin to buss^e toward
their discharge: The Bell-man has made a great part of his walk, and the
Nurse begins to huggle the child to the Dugge: the Cat sits playing with the
Mouse which she has catched, and the Dog with his barking wakes the servants
of the house: the studious now are near upon waking, and the thief will be
gone, for fear of being taken: The Forresters now be about their walks, and
yet stealers sometim^ cozen the Keepers: Warreners now begin to draw
homeward, and far dwellers from the town, will be on the way to the market;
The Soldier now looks toward the Court de Guard, and the Corporal takes
care for the relief of the Watch: the earnest Scholar will be now at his
^ooke, and the thrifty Husbandman will rowse toward his rising: the Seaman
will now look out for light, and if the wind be fair, he calls for a Can of
^ee^e: the fishermen now take the benefit of the tide, and he that bobs for
Eeles, will not be without Worms. In sum, I hold it much of the nature of the
first hour, but somewhat better. And to conclude, I think it the enemy of
Sleep, and the entrance to Exercise.

Farewell.

Three of the Clock.
IT is now the third hour, and the Windows of Heaven begin to open, and the
Sun begins to color the Clouds in the Sky, before he show his face to the
World: Now are the spirits of life, as it were, risen out of death: the Cock
calls the servants to their days work, and the grass horses are fetched from
the Pastures: the Milke-maids begin to look toward their dayry, and the good
Huswife begins to look about the house: the Porrage pot is on for the
servants breakfast, and hungry stomachs will soon be ready for their
victual: the Sparrow begins to chirpe about the house, and the Birds in the
bushes will bid them welcome to the field: the Shepherd sets on his Pitch on
the fire, and fills his Tar-pot ready for his flock: the Wheel and the Reele
begin to be set ready, and a merry song makes the work seem easy: the
Plough-man falls to harness his horses, and the ^hrasher begins to look
toward the barn: the Scholar that loves learning, will be hard at his Book,
and the Labourer by great, will be walking toward his work. In brief, it is a
parcel of time, to good purpose, the exercise of Nature, and the entrance into
Art. Farewell.

Four of the Clock.
IT is now the fourth hour, and the Sun begins to send her beams abroad,
whose glimmering brightness no eye can behold: Now crows the Cock lustily,
and claps his wings for joy of the light, and with his Hens leaps lightly
from his Roust: Now are the Horses at their Chafe and Prouender: the servants
at breakfast, the Milk-maid gone to the field, and the Spinner at the Wheel:
and the Shepherd with his Dog are going toward the Fold: Now the Beggars rouse
them out of the Hedges, and begin their morning craft; but if the Constable
come, beware the stocks: The Birds now begin to flock, and the Sparhawke
begins to prey for his Ayry: The Thresher begins to stretch his long arms,
and the thriuing Labourer will fall hard to his work: the quick witted brain
will be quoting of places, and the cunning workman will be trying of his
skill: the Hounds begin to be coupled for the chase, and the Spaniels follow
the Faulconer to the field: Travelers begin to look toward the Stable,
where an honest Hostler is worthy his reward: the Soldier now is upon
discharge of his Watch, and the Captain with his company may take as good rest
as they can: In sum, I thus conclude of it: I hold it the Messenger of
Action, and the Watch of Reason.

Farewell.

Five of the Clock.
IT now five of the Clock, and the Sun is going apace upon his journey: and
fie sluggards, who would be asleep? The Bells ring to Prayer, and the streets
are full of people, and the highways are stored with Travelers: the
Scholars are up and going to school, and the Rods are ready for the Truants
correction: the Maids are at milking, and the servants at Plough, and the
Wheel goes merrily, while the Mistress is by: the Capons and the Chickens
must be served without door, and the Hogs cry till they have their swill:
the Shepherd is almost gotten to his Fold, and the Heard begins to blow his
horn through the Town. The blind Fiddler is up with his dance and his song,
and the Alehouse door is unlocked for good fellows: the hounds begin to find
after the Hare, and horse and foot follow after the cry: the Traveler now is
well on his way, and if the weather be fair, he walks with the better cheer:
the Carter merrily whistles to his horse, and the Boy with his Sling casts
stones at the Crows: the Lawyer now begins to look on his Case, and if he give
good counsel, he is worthy of his Fee: In brief, not to stay to^ long upon
it, I hold it the necessity of Labor, and the note of Profit. Farewell.

Six of the Clock.
IT is now the sixth hour, the sweet time of the Morning, and the Sun at
every window calls the Sleepers from their beds: the Marygold begins to open
her leaves, and the Dew on the ground does sweeten the Air: the Faulconers now
meet with many a fair flight, and the Hare and the Hounds have made the
Huntsman good sport: the shoppes in the City begin to show their wares, and the
market people have taken their places: The Scholars now have their Fourmes,
and whosoever cannot say his Lesson, must presently look for Absolution: The
Forester now is drawing home to his Lodge, and if his Dear be gone, he may
draw after cold scent: Now begins the cursed Mistress to put her Girls to
their taskes, and a laz* Hylding will do hurt among good Workers: Now the
Mower falls to whetting of his Sithe, and the Beaters of Hemp give a hoh to
every blow: The Ale Knight is at his Cup ere he can well see his drink, and
the beggar is as nimble toung'd, as if he had been at it all day: the
Fishermen now are at the Craier for their Oysters, and they will never lyn
crying, while they have one in their basket: In sum, not to be tedious, I
hold it, the Sluggards shame, and the Laborers praise. Farewell.

Seven of the Clock.
IT is now the seventh hour, and Time begins to set the world hard to work:
The Milke-maides in their Dayry to their Butter and their Cheese, the Ploughmen
to their Ploughes and their Harrowes in the field: the Scholars to their
Lessons, the Lawyers to their Cases, the Merchants to their accounts, the
Shop-men to What lack you? and every Trade to his business: Oh it is a world to
see how life leapes about the lims of the healthful: none but finds something
to do: the Wise, to study, the strong, to labor: the Fantastic, to make
love: the Poet, to make Uerses: the Player, to conne his part: and the Musician
to try his note: every one in his quality* and according to his condition,
sets himself to some exercise, either of the body, or the mind: And therefore
since it is a time of much labor, and great use, I will thus briefly conclude
of it: I hold it the enemy of Idleness, and imployer of Industry.

Farewell.

Eight of the Clock.
IT is now the eight hour, and good stomachs are ready for a breakfast: The
Huntsman now calls in his Hounds, and at the fall of the Dear the Horns go
apace: Now begin the Horses to breathe and the Labourer to sweat, and with
quick hands, work rids apace: Now the Scholars make a charm in the
Schools, and Ergo keeps a stir in many a false Argument: Now the Chapmen
fall to furnish the shoppes, the market people make away with their ware: The
Tavern hunters taste of the the other Wine, and the nappy Ale makes many a
drunken Noll: Now the Thrasher begins to fall to his breakfast, and eat
apace, and work apace, riddes the Corn quickly away: Now the Piper looks
what he has gotten since day, and the Beggar, if he have hit well, will have
a pot of the best: The Traveler now begins to water his horse, and if he were
early up, perhaps a bait will do well. The Osteler now makes clean his
stables, and if Ghestes come in, he is not without his welcome. In conclusion,
for all I find in it, I hold it the Minds travail, and the Bodies toil.
Farewell.

Nine of the Clock.
IT is now the nynth hour, and the Sun is gotten up well toward his height,
and the sweating Traveler begins to feel the burden of his way: The
Scholar now falls to conning of his Lesson, and the Lawyer at the Barro falls
to pleading of his Case: the Soldier now makes many a weary step in his
march, and the amorous Courtier almost ready to go out of his Chamber: The
market now grows to be full of people, and the Shopmen now are in the heat of
the market: the Faulconers now find it too hot flying, and the Huntsmen begin
to grow weary of their sport: The Byrders now take in their Nets and their
Rods, and the Fishermen send their Fish to the Market: the Tavern and the
Alehouse are almost full of Guestes, and Westminster and Guild Hall are not
without a word or two on both sides: The Carriers now are loading out of Town,
and not a Letter but must be paid for ere it pass: The Crier now tryes the
strength of his throat, and the Beareward leads his Bear home after his
challenge: The Players Bills are almost all set up, and the Clarke of the
Market begins to show his Office: In sum, in this hour there is much to do,
as well in the City, as the Country: And therefore to be short, I will thus
make my conclusion: I hold it the toil of Wit, and the trial of Reason.
Farewell.

Ten of the Clock.
IT is now the tenth hour, and now preparation is to be made for dinner: The
Trenchers must be scraped, and the Napkins folded, the Salt covered, and the
Knives scoured, and the cloth laid, the Stools set ready, and all for the
Table: there must be haste in the Kitchen for the Boyld and the Roste,
provision in the sellar for Wine, Ale, and Beer: The Pantler and the Butler
must be ready in their Office, and the Usher of the Hall must marshall the
Seruingmen: The Hawke must be set on the Perch, and the Dogs put into the
Kennell, and the Guests that come to Dinner, must be invited against the
hour: The Scholars now fall to construe and parce, and the Lawyer makes his
Clyent either a Man or a Mouse: The Chapmen now draw home to their Innes, and
the Shopmen fall to folding up their Wares: The Ploughman now begins to grow
toward home, and the Dayry maid, after her work, falls to clensing of her
Uessels: The Cook is cutting soppes for Broth, and the Butler is chipping of
loaves for the Table: The Minstrels begin to go toward the Tauernes, and
the cursed Crew visit the vile places: In sum, I thus conclude of it: I hold
it the Messenger to the stomach, and the spirits recreation.

Farewell.

Eleven of the Clock.
IT is now the eleventh hour, children must break up School, Lawyers must
make home to their houses, Merchants to the Exchange, and Gallants to the
Ordinary: the Dishes set ready for the meat, and the Glasses half full of
fair water: Now the market people make toward their Horses, and the Beggars
begin to draw near the Towns: the Porrage put off the fire, is set a cooling
for the Plough folk, and the great Loaf, and the Cheese are set ready on the
Table: Colleges and Halles ring to Dinner, and a Scholars Commons is soon
disgested: The Rich man's Guests are at Courtsey, and I thank you: and the
poor man's Feast is Welcome, and God be with you: The Page is ready with his
Knife and his Trencher, and the meat will be half cold, ere the Guests can
agree on their places: The Cook voides the Kitchen, and the Butler, the
Buttery, and the Serving men stand all ready at the Dresser: the Children are
called to say Grace before Dinner, and the nice people rather look then eat:
the gates be loekt for fear of the Beggars, and the Minstrels called in, to
be ready with their Music: The pleasant wit is now breaking a Jest, and the
hungry man puts his Jaws to their proof: In sum, to conclude my opinion of
it, I hold it the Epicures Joy, and the Laborers ease.

Farewell.

Twelve of the Clock.
IT is now the twelfth Hour, the Sun is at his height, and the middle of the
day, the first course is served in, and the second ready to follow: the dishes
have been red over, and the reuersion set by: the wine begins to be called
for, and who waits not is chidden: talk passes away time, and when stomachs
are full, discourses grow dull and heavy: But after Fruit and Cheese, say Grace
and take away: Now the Markets are done, the Exchange broke up, and the Lawyers
at Dinner, and Duke Humphreys servants make their walks in Paul's, the Shop
men keep their shops, and their servants go to dinner: the traveler begins
to call for a reckoning, and goes into the stable to see his Horse eat his
prouender: The Plough man now is in the bottom of his Dish, and the Laborer
draws out his Dinner out of his Bag: The Beasts of the field take rest after
their feed, and the Birds of the Air are at I^ke in the Bushes: the Lamb lies
sucking, while the Ewe chewes the Cud, and the Rabbet will scarce peep out of
her Borough: the Hare sits close asleep in her muse, while the Dogs sit
waiting for a bone from the Trencher: In brief, for all I find of it, I thus
conclude in it: I hold it the stomachs pleasure, and the spirits wearines.

Farewell.

Midnight.
NOw is the Sun withdrawn into his Bedchamber, the Windows of Heaven are
shut up, and silence with darkness have made a walk over the whole Earth, and
Time is tasked to work upon the worst Actions: yet Virtue being her self, is
never weary of well doing, while the best spirits are studying for the bodies
rest: Dreams and Uisions are the Haunters of troubled spirits, while Nature is
most comforted in the hope of the morning: the body now lies as a dead lump,
while sleep, the pride of ease, lulls the Senses of the Sloathfull: the tired
Limbs now cease from their labors, and the studious brains give over their
business: the Bed is now an image of the Grave, and the Prayer of the
Faithful makes the Pathway to Heaven: Lovers now enclose a mutual content,
while gracious minds have no wicked imaginations: Thieves, Wolves, and Foxes,
now fall to their pray, but, a strong lock, and a good wit, will aware much
mischief: and he that trusts in God will be safe from the Devil.

Farewell.

The Conclusion.
ANd thus to conclude, for that it grows late, and a nod or two with an heavy
eye, makes me fear to prove a plain Noddy, entreating your patience till to
morrow, and hoping you will censure mildly of this my Fantastic Labor,
wishing I may hereafter please your senses with a better subject then this; I
will in the mean time pray for your prosperity, and end with the English
Phrase, God give you good night.

FINIS.

