THE PASSION of a Discontented Mind.



LONDON Printed by V. S. for John Baily, and are to be sold at his shop at the
door of the office of the vi. Clarks in Chancerie lane. 1601

THE PASSION of a Discontented Mind.
FRom silent night, true Register of mones;
From saddest soul, consumed with deepest sins;
From heart quite rent, with sighs and heavy groans,
My wailing Muse her woeful work begins:
And to the world brings tunes of sad despair,
Sounding naught else but sorrow, grief, and care.
Sorrow, to see my sorrows cause augmented,
And yet less sorrowful, were my sorrows more;
Grief, that my grief, with grief is not prevented;
For grief it is must ease my grieved sore.
Thus grief and sorrow care's but how to grieve;
For grief and sorrow must my cares relieve.
The wound fresh bleeding must be stancht with tears,
Tears cannot come, unless some grief preceed;
Griefs come but slack, which does increase my fears,
Fears, lest for want of help I still should bleed.
Do what I can to lengthen my lives breath,
Ifteares be wanting, I shall bleed to death.
Thou deepest Searcher of each secret thought,
Infuse in me thy all-affecting grace;
So shall my works to good effects be brought,
While I peruse my ugly sins a space:
Whose staining filth so spotted has my soul,
As naught will waste, but tears of inward dole.
O that the learned Poets of this time
(Who in a loue-sicke line so well indite)
Would not consume good wit in hateful Rhyme,
But would with care some better subject write:
For if their music please in earthly things,
Well would it sound if straind with heaunly strings.
But woe it is to see fond worldlings use,
Who most delight in things that vainest be;
And without fear work Virtues foul abuse,
Scorning souls rest, and al true piety:
As if they made account never to part
From this frail life; the pilgrimage of smart.
Such is the nature of our foolish kind,
When practiced sin, has deeply taken root,
The way to penance due is hard to find,
Repentance held a thing of little boot.
For contrite tears, souls health, and angels joy,
Most men account a mere phantastike toy.
Ill working Use, deuourer of al grace,
The fretting moath that wastes souls chief bliss,
The sly close thief that lurkes in every place,
Filching by peece-meale, til the whole be his.
How many are deceived by thy bait,
T'account their sins as trifles of no weight?
O cursed custom, causing mischief still,
Too long thy craft my senses has misse-led;
Too long have I bin slave unto thy will;
Too long my soul on bitter sweetes has fed:
Now surfeiting with thy hell poysned cates,
In deep repent, her former folly hates.
And humbly comes with sorrow-rented heart,
With blubbred eyes, and hands vprear'd to heaven;
To play a poor lamenting Mawdlines part,
That would weep streams of blood to be forgiven:
But (oh) I fear mine eyes are drained so dry,
That though I would, yet now I cannot cry.
If any eye therefore can spare a tear,
To fill the wel-springs that must wet my cheeks;
O let that eye to this sad feast draw near:
Refuse me not, my humble soul beseekes;
For all the tears mine eyes have ever wept,
Were now too little had they all bin kept.
I see my sins arraigned before my face,
I see their number pass the moathes in Sun,
I see that my continuance in this place
Cannot be long; and all that I have done
I see the Judge before my face has laid,
At whose stern looks all creatures are afraid.
If he be just, my soul condemned is;
And just he is, what then may be expected,
But banishment from everlasting bliss?
To live like cursed Caine, base, vile, abiected:
He in his rage his brothers blood did spill;
I more unkind mine own souls life do kill.
O could mine eyes send trickling tears amain,
Never to cease till my eternal night,
Till this eye-flood his mercy might obtain,
Whom my defaults have banished from his sight:
Then could I bless my happy time of crying,
But ah too soon my barren springs are drying.
Thrice happy sinner was that blessed Saint,
Who though he fell with puff of woman's blast,
Went forth and wept with many a bitter plaint,
And by his tears obtained grace at last:
But wretched I, have fallen of mine accord,
Ten thousand times against the living Lord.
Yet cannot strain one true repentant tear,
To gain the bliss from which my soul is banished;
My flintie heart some sorrowing does forbear,
And from my sense all true remorce is vanished:
For heart and sense are cloyd with dregs of sin,
And there is no place for Grace to enter in.
No place (dear Lord) unless thy goodness please
To pity him that worst deserves of any;
And in thy tender mercy grant him ease,
As thou tofore have mercy showed to many:
Yet none of those do equal me in sin,
Oh how may I hope mercy then to win.
The traitor Judas heir borne to perdition,
Who for a trifle did his Lord betray,
In equal doom deserves more remission,
Then my defaults can challenge any way:
He sold him once, that once for gain was done,
I oftentimes, yet less then nothing won.
The bloody minded Jews, in fury mad,
Until on Christ their cruel rage was fed,
In their fell anger more compassion had
Then I, for whom his harmless blood was shed:
Their hellish spite within a day was past,
My sinful fit does all my life time last.
For every stripe that he from them did take,
A thousand deadly sins have I committed;
And every wound as deep a wound did make,
As did the cords wherewith my Christ was whipped:
Oh hateful caitife, parricide most vile,
Thus (with my sin) his pure blood to defile.
O sin, first parent of man's ever woe,
The distance large that seuers hell and heaven;
Senses confounder, souls chief overthrow,
Grafted by men, not by the grafter given:
Consuming canker, wasting souls chief treasure,
Only to gain a little trifling pleasure.
Happy were man, if sin had never bin,
Thrice happy now, if sin he would for sake;
But happier far, if for his wicked sin
He would repent, and hearty sorrow make:
Leaving this dross and fleshly delectation,
To gain in heaven a lasting habitation.
There is the place wherein all sorrows die,
Where Joy exceedes all joys that ever were;
Where Angels make continual harmony,
The mind set free from care, distrust, or fear:
There all receive all joyful contentation,
Happied by that most heavenly contemplation.
Now see (alas) the change we make for sin,
In steed of heaven, hell is become our lot;
For blessed Saints, damned fiends we ever win;
For rest and freedom, lasting bondage got:
For Joy, content, eternal love and peace,
Grief, despair, hate, iarres that never cease.
The worm of conscience still attends on us,
Telling each hour, each instant we shall die;
And that our sins cannot be parted from us,
But where we are, thither they likewise fly:
Still urging this, that death we have deserved,
Because we fled from him we should have served.
What greater sin can touch a humane heart?
What hellish fury can be worse tormented?
What sinner lives that feels not a part
Of this sharp plague, unless he have repented?
And yet Repentance surely is but vain,
Without full purpose, not to sin again.
And is it not then plain follies error,
To covet that that brings with it contempt,
And makes us live in fear, distrust, and terror,
Hating at last the thing we did attempt?
For never sin did yet so pleasing taste,
But lustful flesh did loathe it when it was past.
Witness my woeful soul, which well can tell,
In hiest top of sinne's most fresh delight;
Although my frailety suffered me to dwell,
Yet being past, I loathed it with despite.
But like the swine, I fed mine own desire,
That being clean, still coueteth the mire.
So greedy is man's beastly appetite,
To follow after dunghill pleasures still;
And feed on carrion like the ravening kite,
Not caring what his hungry maw does fill:
But works evermore his wills effect,
Without restraint, controlement, or respect.
O, why should man, that bears the stamp of heaven,
So much abase heavens holy will and pleasure?
O, why was sense and reason to him given,
That in his sin cannot contain a measure:
He knows, he must account for every sin,
And yet commits sins that countlesse bin.
This to peruse (dear God) does kill my soul,
But that thy mercy quickens it again;
O, hear me, Lord, in bitterness of dole,
That of my sins do prostrate here complain;
And at thy feet, with Mary, knock for grace,
Though wanting Mary's tears to wet my face.
She, happy sinner, saw her life misse-led,
At sight whereof, her inward heart did bleed,
To witness with her outward tears were shed.
O blessed Saint, and O most blessed deed:
But wretched I, that see more sins than she,
Nor grieve within, nor yet weep outwardly.
When she had lost thy presence but one day,
The want was such, her heart could not sustain;
But to thy tomb alone she took her way,
And there with sighs and tears she did complain:
Nor from her sense, once moved or stirred was she,
Until again she got a sight of thee.
But I have lost thy presence all my days,
And still am slack to see thee as I should;
My wretched soul in wicked sin so stays,
I am unmeet to see thee, though I would:
Yet, if I could with tears thy coming tend,
I know I should (as she) find thee my friend.
Tears are the key that open the way to bliss,
The holy water quenching heavens quick fire;
The atonement true twixt God and our amiss;
The Angels drink, the blessed Saints desire:
The joy of Christ, the balm of grieved heart,
The spring of life, the ease of every sinart.
The second King of Israel by succession,
When with Vriahs wife he had offended,
In bitter tears be waild his great transgression,
And by his tears found grace, and so repented:
He, night and day in weeping did remain;
I, night nor day to shed one tear take pain.
And yet my sins, in greatness, and in number,
Far his exceed; how comes it then to pass,
That my repentance should so far be under;
And graces force, dear God, is as it was:
Truth is, that I, although I have more need,
Do not, as he, so truly weep indeed.
O wherefore is my steely heart so hard?
Why am I made of metal unrelenting?
Why is all ghostly comfort from me bard?
Or, to what end do I defer repenting?
Can lustful flesh, or flattring world persuade me,
That I can escape the power of him that made me?
No, no, the secret Searcher of all hearts,
Both sees, and knows each deed that I have done,
And for each deed will pay me home with smart,
No place can serve, his will decreed to shun;
I should deceive my self, to think that he
For sin would punish others, and not me.
Our first borne sire, first breeder of man's thrall,
For one bare sin was of perfection reft,
And all mankind were banished by his fall
From Paradise, and unto sorrow left:
If he for one, and all for him feel pain,
Then, for so many, what should I sustain?
The Angels made to attend on God in glory,
Were thrust from heaven, and only for one sin,
That but in thought (for so records the Story)
For which they still in lasting darkness bin:
If those, once glorious, thus tormented be,
I (basest slave) what will become of me?
What will become of me, that not in thought,
In thought alone, but in each word and deed;
A thousand thousand deadly sins have wrought,
And still do work, whereat my heart does bleed:
For even now, in this my sad complaining,
With new made sins, my flesh my soul is staining.
O that I were removed to some close cave,
Where all alone retired from delight,
I might my sighs and tears untroubled have,
And never come in wretched worldlings sight;
Whose ill bewitching company still brings
Deep provocation, whence great danger springs.
Ill company, the cause of many woes,
The sugared bait, that hides poysned hook;
The rock unseen, that shipwrackt souls o'rethrowes,
The weeping crocodile, that killes with look,
The readiest step, to ruin and decay,
Graces confounder, and helles nearest way.
How many souls do perish by thy guile?
How many men without all fear frequent
Thy deadly haunts, where they in pleasure smile,
Taking no care such dangers to prevent?
But live like Belials, unbridled or untamed,
Not looking they shall for their faults be blamed.
Alas, alas, too wretched do we live,
That carelessly thus work our own confusion,
And to our wills such liberty do give;
Ay me, it is the devils mere illusion,
To flatter us with such sense-pleasing trains,
That he thereby may take us in his chains.
This well foresaw good men of ancient time,
Which made them shun th'occasions of foul sin,
Knowing it was the nurse of every crime,
And Syren-like would train fond worldlings in:
Alluring them with show of musickes sound,
Until on sins deep shelfe their souls be drowned.
But he is held no sotiable man,
In this corrupted age, that shall refuse
To keep the cursed company now and than;
Nay but a fool, unless he seem to choose:
Their fellowship, and give them highest place.
That vildest live, and furthest off from grace.
But better it is, believe me, in my trial,
To shun such hel-hounds, factors of the Devil;
And give them leave to grudge at your denial,
Then to partake with such in sin and evil:
For if that God (in Justice) then should slay us,
From hell and horror, who (alas) could stay us?
Good God; the Just (as he himself has spoken)
Should scarce be saved, O terror vnremouable,
What then should they that never had a token,
Or sign of grace (souls comfort most behoueable)
But graceless lived, and all good deeds did hate.
What hope of them that live in such a state?
O who will give meteares, that I may wail
Both nights and days, the dangers I have past;
My soul, my soul, it is much for thy avail,
That thou art gotten from these straits at last:
O joy, but in thy joy mix tears withal,
That thou have time to say; Lord hear me call.
I might as others (Lord) have perished,
Amid my sins and damnable delights;
But thou (good God) with care my soul have cherished,
And brought it home, to taste on heavenly lights:
Ay me, what thanks, what service can I render
To thee, that of my safety art so tender?
Now do I curse the time I ever went
In sins black path, that leads to damnation:
Now do I hate the hours, I have misse-spent
In idle vice, neglecting souls salvation,
And to redeem the time I have mis-worne;
I wish this hour, I were again newborn.
But vain it is, as says the wisest man,
To call again the day that once is past,
O let me see what best is for me than,
To gain thy favor whilst my life does last;
That in the next I may but worthy be,
Even in the meanest place to wait on thee.
I will, as did the prodigal son sometime,
Upon my knees with hearty true contrition,
And Weeping eyes, confess my former crime,
And humbly beg upon my low submission,
That thou will not of former faults detect me,
But like a loving father now respect me.
Or, as the wife that has her husband wronged,
So will I come with fear and blushing cheek:
For giving others what to thee belonged;
And say, My King, my Lord, and Spouse most meek,
I have defiled the bed that thou did owe;
Forgive me this, it shall no more be so.
Yet, for the world can witness mine abuse,
I Will hide my face from face that witcht mine eyes;
These graceless eyes, that had my bodies use,
Till it be withred with my very cries:
That when my wrinckles shall my sorrows tell,
The world may say, I joyed not, though I fell.
And thus will I, in sorrowing spend my breath,
And spot my face with neuer-dying tears,
Till aged wrinckles messengers of death
Have purchasde mercy, and removed my fears:
And then the world within my looks shall read,
The piteous wrack unbridled sin has bred.
And that which was a pleasure to behold,
Shall Be to me an euer-griping pain;
All my misdeedes shall one and one be told,
That I may see what tyrants have me slain:
And when I have thus mustred them apart,
I will display on each a bleeding heart.
And lest my tears should fail me at most need,
Before the face of faith I Will fix my Saviors passion;
And see how his most precious side did bleed,
And note his death and torments in such fashion;
As never man the like did undertake,
For freely he has done it for my sake.
If this his kindness and his mercy shown,
Cannot provoke me unto tender crying;
Then will I back again turn to mine own,
Mine own sin, cause of this his cruel dying:
And if for them no tears mine eyes can find,
Sighs shall cause tears, tears make my poor eyes blind.
No far fetched story have I now brought home,
Nor taught to speak more language than his mothers,
No long done Poem, is from darkness come
To light again, it is ill to fetch from others:
The song I sing, is made of heart-bred sorrow,
Which pensive Muse from pining soul does borow.
I sing not I, of wanton loue-sicke lays,
Of trickling to yes, to feed fantastic ears,
My Muse respects no flattring tatling praise;
A guilty conicience this sad passion bears:
My sin sick soul, with sorrow woe begone,
Lamenting thus a wretched deed mis-done.
FINIS.

