A SECOND TREATISE Of The SABBATH, OR AN EXPLICATION OF the Fourth Commandment.

Written, By Mr EDWARD BREREWOOD professor in Gresham College in LONDON.



AT OXFORD, Printed by John Lichfield, and are to be sold by Thomas Huggins.
Ann. Dom. 1632.

AN EXPLICATION OF THE fourth Commandment.
REmember, (...) Zechor memento in Exodus, is in Deuteronomy. 5. (...) shemor,
obserua, observe.

Moral, is that which pertains to Manners, either

1. By the instinct of Nature, as belonging to the inward law written in our
hearts: or

2 By the instruction of discipline, as being of the outward law pronounced by
God; as that of observing the seventh day; so that it may be termed Natural,
as being, not of the institution of Nature, but of the disciplining of nature:
not of Nature as it was at the first ordained by God, but as after informed by
him.

Moral, is not every Rule (in our sense) that generally does inform men's
manners, that after such a manner the custom of Nature informs them; but the
natural information of them; namely that which by the natural light of
understanding we see to be good or bad; and by the natural inclining or
declining of the will, following that light, we affect of obhorre.

Ob The reason of the commandment ( because the Lord rested the seventh day)
concerns equally Jews and Gentiles; therefore the commandment belongs
equally to them all.

Sol The Lords resting on the seventh day, is not the reason of the
obligation, for that follows the decree of Gods pleasure only; but only of
the election of the day, viz: the 7th; namely that for that cause it pleased
him to exempt that day before any of the other, and charge it with a
commandment of rest. So that there it is not assigned; as the reason of the
commandment, why a Sabbath should be observed, but why that day before other
was charged with the commandment.

By the natural light of vnderstanding] not as actuated and perfited by
discourse or foreign discipline, or prescription of laws, but by the power
of nature which belongs to us, and is found in all Nations. For although that
radiant light which shined in our first parents be fallen with their fall, and
the beams of it be gone, yet some spark of that light remains, it is not
utterly extinguished, but (as after the falling of the Sun) some twilight is
left, enough to see the generalities of our duty, if we follow it, and if we
follow it not, we despise to be directed, by that light, which is enough to
condemn us. Romans 1.

In the Commandment of the Sabbath are considered

1 The admonition for the observing, Remember.

2 The matter commanded. 1. Sanctification of the 7th day. 2. Vacation from
work, servile work (...)

3 The persons: Thou, thy Son, Daughter, Manservant. etc.

4 The reason: Because the Lord rested on that day from Creating.

Ob. That commandment is charged only with the admonition ( Remember)
therefore that specially amongst the rest the Lord would name observed.

Sol. To that commandment specially is the admonition ( Remember) annexed,
either, because

1 It is not merely moral and a law of nature, as the others are, but partly
ceremonial, as touching the determination to a certain day; And therefore
being not so effectually imprinted by nature in the hearts of men, needed a
special admonition for the observance, least it should slipp out of mind.

2 It was given before in the wilderness of Sin Exodus 16. 23, 26. with the
giving of Manna, and by some neglected, whereof they are admonished by the word
Remember.

3 It was not continually to be observed every day as the other commandments,
but after the intermission of 6. days, the 7th day was to be consecrated to
rest; which they were specially required to remember, least their desire of
lucre might cause them to work on that day also.

4 Because it has relation as (...) the reason of the election of that day
(the (...)) to the former times, the times of the Creation, because even so God
wrought in 6. days, and rested the seventh, which they are charged to
remember and do likewise.

5 Because although the transgression of that commandment were in it self
formally, no more vicious then of the rest, yet in respect of the evil
consequences which might follow on the ignorance of Gods law, to the hearing
whereof that day was consecrated, it was more dangerous.

Ob. No commandment so vehemently urged by the Prophets, nor the transgression
so greviously rebuked as that of the Sabbath, therefore it is a principal
precept.

Sol. It is most vehemently exacted, because the observing of it was most
neglected, not because it was more excellent then the rest. And the
transgression most greivously rebuked, not because the transgression of the
commandment being absolutely in it self considered, was more sinful, but
because considering it respectively in relation to the events and consequences,
occasionally proceeding of that transgression, it was more dangerous:
Forasmuch, as it being the day dedicated to the exercise of their Religion (the
only day of the week amongst the Jews) both for invocation and adoration of
almighty God, and specially, for their instruction in the law of God, which was
that day only read in their Synagogues; upon the contempt of that commandment,
the ignorance of Gods law, being the foundation of all divine Religion, must of
necessity ensue. In which respect, the transgression of it was more perilous
amongst the Jews, then amongst Christians, who have other days in the week
besides the Sabbath, both for public prayer, and instruction.

Touching sanctifying of the Sabbath; The duty in general of sanctifying it,
is commanded by God: But the particular manner of sanctifying it, is not
prescribed by him, but the Church; The act is Gods ordinance; The particular
manner and limitation of the act touching time, place, order, is the Churches
decree; The thing it self, or matter, is of divine constitution, but the
manner and circumstances of that sanctification were left to the determination
of the Church.

The Sabbath day implies 1. number, one of seven. 2. Order, the 7th of that
number, none else: For first, in the relating of that commandment it is never
found in the Scripture (...) but every where (...)

2ly The reason assigned for the rest on that day, will not serve for every day
of seven, but only for the 7th day, namely Gods rest from the works of
creation: as the reason assigned now for the celebration of the Lords day,
namely the resurrection of Christ and the descent of the Holy Ghost, will not
fit any other.

And thirdly, If the understanding of the commandment were, one of seven, and
not precisely the seventh day, then had it been lawful for the Jews to have
translated their Sabbath to any other day of the week.

Thou shall do noe work, thou nor thy Son etc.
Thou] is not taken generally as in the other commandments, (where no
difference of persons is specified) but Limitedly, as signifying the Father,
Master, Owner, Freeman, namely that either has the power to dispose of others,
or at least the liberty to dispose of himself.

1 Because Thou is either taken in the same sense in the first place, and in
the latter, or otherwise, if otherwise, there is Aequivocation committed in the
very next words; If in the same sense, therefore Limitedly, as in distinction
of Children and Servants, that is, Parents, Masters etc. for so it is taken in
the latter place.

2 Because either the negative conjunction ( nor) excludes nothing that was
not employed in the word ( Thou) and then it was added superfluously of
children, servants, etc: or if it exclude those that are not employed in the
word ( Thou) then is it clear that the word ( Thou) contains not children,
servants, etc.

Fathers, Masters, Freemen, are considered either Personally, as particular
men; so the first clause belongs to them, Thou shall do no work etc. or
Relatiuely, as governors of their households* so the second clause, Thou nor
thy Son etc. as if he had said, neither shall thou do work on the Sabbath
day, neither shall thou suffer them that are under thy government to do any.

The word ( Thou) imports every Freeman, or every man as far as he is free,
and has power to keep it, or to dispose of himself. For some are free
simply, who by their condition are so; others Limitedly, as servants may be by
their Masters permission; namely, so far as the disposition of themselves, or
their own actions is allowed them. In which case only Servants come under the
obligation of the commandment, but yet that is not as servants, but as in some
sort free, namely as they are primary authors themselves of their own works,
and not as Ministers of their Masters work.

The Sabbath is called Holy, not Formally, for any peculiar inherent holiness
it has above other days, but Finally, because it was ordained and consecrated
to holy exercises in the service of God.

The commandment is partly
Moral, Remember to sanctify the Sabbath Ceremonial: The 7th day is the
Sabbath.
The sanctification then of the Sabbath is Moral, but the limitation of it to
the seventh day is Ceremonial.

The commandment of sanctifying the Sabbath was not given from the beginning,
as it seems,

1 Because there was no remembrance that it was observed by any of the ancient
Patriarks.

2 Because where it is given to Moses Exodus 16. it is spoken of as a new
thing, as the rulers coming, and report to Moses verse. 22. and Moses answer
to them verse. 23. do plainly declare; namely that the morrow was the Rest of
the holy Sabbath to the Lord, whereof they could not have been ignorant, if it
had been usual before.

3 Because, it is said to be given to the Israelites Exodus 16. 19. to be a
sign between God and them Exodus 31. 13. Ezech. 20. 12. but it was not a sign
to the Israelites more then to other Nations, if it had been given from the
beginning to Adam and his posterity.

4 Because, in the beginning there was no occasion in men's labor, to draw them
away from the contemplation and worship of God, but that every day might be a
Sabbath, for the state of innocence admitted neither one nor other, but man of
himself was most prone to the honor of God.

Ob. God sanctified the seventh day presently after the Creation, Genesis 2. 3.
Ergo

Sol. 1 God sanctified it himself by resting in himself, and producing no
more creatures; but he commanded not Adam to sanctify it: for where it is said
that God sanctified the seventh day, because in it he rested from all his
works; that (because) seems not so much to note the occasion why he
sanctified it, as the formal cause or condition of the sanctification, which
consisted in the rest of God in himself, ceasing to work more in the Creation
of things.

Sol. 2 Or if it note the occasion (which I rather think) yet it designeth not
the time of the sanctification; so that although it be said that God sanctified
the seventh day, because he rested in it from the Creation (which Moses there
fitly observes, because he writes there of that rest of God) yet it follows
not that he sanctified it then, when he rested, but that for that reason he
sanctified that day rather then any other, when he gave the commandment
touching the Sabbath in time of the Law.

Sol. 3 Or else he sanctified it from the beginning by destination to
sanctify, ordayning that to be the day which in the Law he would sanctify; But
not by Actual explication, to sanctify or command.

In it thou shall do no work.
Namely, of thy election when thou may abstain, or, 2ly. Thou shall not do
thine own work; But yet a servant out of obedience to his master, as a
servant, might if he were commanded: neither is that excluded by the
commandment; for whereas in licensing or commanding the 6. days work he
uses both words (...) whereof (...) imports to work and labor as a
servant, or to serve, and (...) to work simply without any implication of
service; In commanding the seventh days rest, he says not (in opposition to
the first) (...) thou shall not work as a servant, but only in opposition to
the second (...) But had God intended to exclude servants obedience to their
Masters, touching works on the Sabbath day, as well as works that are freely
done, he would have added (...) as well as (...) having used both in licensing
of the 6 days work.

And if it be answered that one is employed in the other, then to express both
was superfluous in the former place.

Thou shall do no worke] that is, thine own, that is referred to thine own
end, for first, they are forbidden to do that work on the Sabbath, which they
were licensed to do on the six days: but that was their own work (...)
Exodus 20. 9. Opus tuum.

2 The declaration of Esaias. 58. 13. imports it plainly; If thou turn from
doing thine own will etc. not doing thine own works. And of the Apostle Heb.
4. 10. for he that is entered into his Sabbath, has ceased from his own
works, as God did from his. But those only (in Gods esteem) are a man's own
works that proceed from his own will; which he chooses to do, and whereof
he is the Author: which he does for his own sake and satisfaction; not those
which he does as the Minister of another, to whose commandment and inforcement
he is subject. They are not therefore the works of a servant as a servant,
but the works he does freely of himself that are there forbidden.

Q. Whether works of labor, or also sins be forbidden by the commandment of
the Sabbath.

A Both, namely, works of labor, as it is a day of vacation; and works of
sin, as it is a day of sanctification; for that day being specially dedicated
to holiness, proclaims sins committed on it to be specially sinful,
because besides the transgression of other commandments, which they naturally
import, they imply also the transgression of this Commandment, touching the
special sanctifying of the Sabbath day. So that although the act or labor, or
work it self be but one, as to kill, to steal, etc. yet the guilt is twofold
when it is done on the Sabbath.

The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, etc.
1 Either because it was the memorial of his rest after the Creation.

2 Or because it was the day of man's vacation. commanded by him.

3 Or because it was to be dedicated to his worship and service, and not as
the six days to be employed in ordinary work.

Thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, etc.
In the several mention of every one with the Pronoune ( Thy) it is manifest
that relation is still had to ( Thou) mentioned in the first place, and
therefore the Commandment was given to him, to whom all these belonged.

Nor the stranger that is within thy gates, etc.
Strangers to the Israelites were either in respect of their Offspring only,
but not of religion, as Proselites, that had received the seal of the
Covenant, Circumcision, and these stood merely in the same obligation with the
Israelites: or in respect of Religion also, which were amongst them on any
occasion of outward affairs; which were by the Magistrate to be restrained;
not because the Commandment belonged to them directly, but obliquely only, and
in relation to the Israelites, to whom strangers work on the Sabbath might
give occasion, or example to offend.

The work of a servant, as an absolute person; namely his free and elective
works, are forbidden himself in the first clause ( Thou shall do no work)
But his works as he is a relative person, namely a servant, that is, his
imposed works, which he does not of his own will, but by reason of his
subjection to his Master, are forbidden his Master, not him self, in the
latter clause ( Nor thy Servant.)

The former clause then ( Thou shall do no work) is to be understood of
absolute and free doing, wherein the doers work according to their own
pleasure, not of respective, and enforced doing, where there is mingled some
passiuenesse with the doing, as when in respect of their servile subjection to
their Masters, and fear of their displeasure and punishment, servants are made
to do those works, which of their own will, they would gladly leave undone.
It is therefore to be understood of Elective, and not of Coactiue works.

To observe one day of seven, for the Sabbath, is not of the Moral Law.
1 Because that part of the Commandment whereby the Sabbath is limited to the
seventh day, is confessed to be ceremonial.

2 Because the Number, one of seven, and Order, the last of seven, are not
otherwise specified in the Commandment then in the very same word ( the
seventh day) therefore both are either Moral, or both Ceremonial.

3 Because although some of the Ancient have affirmed that one of 7 is to be
kept holy unto the Lord, yet none of them (perhaps older then an hundred
years) have said it to be Gods Moral Law.

The Commandment forbids
Literally, servile works of the body Labors. Mystically, servile works of
the soul- Sins: and so is St Ambrose to be understood in Luc. 13. that the
Law forbids Servilia opera in Sabbato, id est, peccatis gravari.
The Commandment of the Sabbath enioynes 1. Outward worship of God by the name
of Sanctification. 2. Cessation from works as a necessary preparation for that
worship: That, as the End, This, as the Means. But if we speak not of the
Immediate but remote end, it is the inward and spiritual, not outward and
ceremonial worship; which although it come within the intention of the
Lawgiver, yet not within the obligation of the Law, because it being the End
unto which the Commandment is directed and ordained, cannot be the Matter of
the Commandment, the Matter being comprised in the Commandment, but the End
being outward in relation of it, besides that the inward worship seems to be
the matter of the first Commandment.

Works of necessity are excused al on the Sabbath, because the Necessity
excuses the Condition of their servilenesse, both common to freemen and
servants, because every one is bound by the instinct of nature to avoid
mischief imminent to himself, or his neighbor. And works of Charity because
they are enjoined (to love our neighbors as our selves) by the moral Law,
whereas servile works are excluded on the seventh day but by a ceremonial
Commandment. And it is but just and right, that where they cannot consist
together (I mean where they cannot be both observed) that the Ceremonial
rather then the Moral be omitted.

Six days shall thou labor and do all thy works, etc.
Is a Permission it seems and no divine Commandment. 1. Because, else it
should be unlawful to exempt any time out of the six days, even to worship
God, and consequently he should sin that should dedicate any of the six
days to that service: as it was a sin to exempt any time of the seventh day
to do work. 2. Because in that Commandment were involved a double precept,
as being of diverse days, and contrary duties, and contrary qualities, the one
Affirmative, the other Negative; which therefore cannot be the same
Commandment. 3. The Jews that have collected 613 Commandments of the Law,
never observed this for one of them.

In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread. is the inflicting of
punishmeut, Genesis 3.
not the enjoining of a Commandment, a denouncing of Malum panae, that he and
his posterity was to suffer, not any obliging of them unto it, as bonum to be
done; as if every one sinned that sweat not when he did eat, or lived not by
his sweat. And yet neither has that any more relation to the six days then to
the 7th, if it be a Commandment; or if the meaning of it be only that man
should gain his living by his sweat, is it any obligation for labor all the
six days, if by his labor in less space he be able to purchase it!

In the sweat of thy browes] that is, thou shall do it of necessity being
enforced, by the curse laid on the earth, but not of duty, being enioyn'd unto
it by Gods Commandment, which was no more then the former clause that ((...))
in sorrow he should eat of the earth: or that to the woman, In sorrow shall
thou bring forth; or that to the Serpent, Upon thy belly shall thou go, and
dust shall thou eat. etc.

He that will not labor neither let him eat, 2. These, 3. 10.] Not he that
cannot, by occasion of Impotency; nor he that needs not, by reason of plenty;
but he that being able, and needing, yet will not work, let him not eat; that
is, at the charge of others, for as touching their own, the Apostle would not
interdict them: for is it not just that a man should sustain himself of his
own* or had the Apostles rather a man should perish of famine, then be
releived of his own?

Six days shall thou labour] If it had intended a Precept, not a Permission,
it had been crossed by Gods own Commandments of refraining all servile works
in sundry of their Anniversary feasts, which of necessity must often fall on
some of the six days. And which is more absurd, Gods moral Commandment (for
such the same men acknowledge it to be) should be crossed by his Ceremonial
Praecepts.

The Lords day of what Institution.
Christ gave no such commandment to his Apostles, for neither is any
remembrance found of it in the histories of his life and doctrine, the
Gospells; nor record of any such Commandment in the writings of the Apostles
given or to be given by Christ, or by his appointment to the Church, or to the
Apostles.

For if it be said that Christ commanded it to the Apostles, although the
Commandment be not mentioned.

1 An uncertainty is affirmed which cannot be proved, and Christ belied for
any thing that appears.

2 A door for the authority of unwritten Traditions is opened which will be
ill endured.

3 The Apostles are secretly accused for concealing Christ's Commandment from
the Church.

For I demand whether the commandment was given them to the end to be
published to the church or no? If not, it cannot bind the Church; for a law is
of no force without promulgation, till it be known to be a Law, for how can
that Law bind the consciences as the Law of God, which is not declared to be
the Law and will of God? If it was given the Apostles to that end, then they
sinned grievously in concealing that Commandment of Christ from the Church,
which he delivered them to be declared to the Church. Neither were it enough to
be declared by speech only (which yet cannot be proved) but they should have
committed it to writing, being of the importance it was, and seeing it
concerned not only the Church then being, but the whole Church that should be
to the worlds end: whereof their writings were to be directions, but their
speech not so.

The Lords day seems to be celebrated in the Church rather by Imitation of
the Apostles, then their Constitution; for we find their example for holy
assemblies on that day, but Commandment of theirs given to the Church for
celebrating that day, we find none.

Ob: The Sabbath is an everlasting covenant, Exodus 31. 16. But the old Sabbath
was to cease in our Saviors death, therefore, that which succeeds in place
of it, is also of divine ordinance.

Sol. 1. The Sabbath is everlasting in respect of the thing signified, that is,
the eternal rest of the Elect with God, after the finishing of their labors
in the world, whereof the Apostle discourses in the 4th to the Hebr: but not so
in respect of the sign. 2. Everlasting is taken either
Absolutely, that has no end at all. Limitedly, that has no certain end
prefixed, or known period appointed for the continuance, although in nature or
divine ordinance it has a determined period.
The first the Jews call (as Burg: notes) (...) ever and ever; The second
(...) only, as in this place: So that the Sabbath is said to be everlasting,
no otherwise then Circumcision is called Genesis 17. 13. and the Aaronicall
priesthood, Exodus 28. 43. and 29. 9. that is, not simply so, during all
eternity, or all time, but respectively, during all the time of the old
covenant, or the time of the Law, while the Israelites were to be Gods peculiar
people.

Ob: It was Gods ordinance and appointment, that the Apostles should ordain
that day to be observed in the Church: therefore it is by divine ordinance.
Sol. Gods ordinance is either
Secret, namely, the ordinance of his Counsel or Providence, in which sense
the administration of all things is performed by his ordinance. Revealed,
namely the ordinance of his Commandment, declaring such and such things, to be
his will.
So the Institution of the Lords day is not his ordinance. He ordained indeed
by his secret decree ( voluntate beneplaciti) that it should be established
instead of the Sabbath; but he ordained it not by his own manifest decree,
that is, his Commandment ( voluntate signi, or revealed will) that he would
have it so.

The Commandment of the Lords day, may be termed divine diverse ways.

1 Either because the Apostles established it, being enlightened, and inspired
by the holy Ghost to ordain it.

2 Or because they had received the authority from God, whereby they were
enabled or warranted to do it.

3 Or because it was dedicated or ordained to divine use, namely the solemn
worship of God.

So that the preeept of the Lords day is in these respects divine, but yet is
not a divine Precept, because the Act of commanding it; or imposing the
observation of it on the Church; is not divine, but (at most) Apostolical.

Ius divinum, may be interpreted either.
Divine ordinance, in which respect, those things only which are instituted by
God himself are termed to be Iure divino. Divine right; in which respect
those things that belong to the worship of God although the ordinance or
Commandment whereby they are exacted be humane, may be termed to be Iure
divino.
So that things consist Iure divino, either Originally or Materially.
Originally that proceed from divine Institution and have God for their Author.

Materially; that belong of right to divine worship, although the right by
which they are required be humane Institution (that is) ordained of men in
zeal of Gods glory. And in the second sense, the Lords day is justly termed
to be Iure divino. The worship of God that belongs to the Lords day is of the
Law of God and nature (Thou shall worship the Lord thy God) but the peculiar
belonging of that worship to that day, is not of those Laws, (that is) the
worship considered in it self is de iure divino; but the Annexion of it to
that day rather then any other, is but de iure humano, as being merely
ceremonial.

If Ius divinum be that, or taken for that which is established by divine
Authority, the Lords day is in some sort de iure divino: In some sort, namely,
not by Personal, but by delegate divine authority (that is) not prescribed
personally and immediately by God himself, but only by virtue of that Authority
which by God was committed to the Apostles for the ordering and governing of
his Church: but being taken for divine ordinance, or commandment, it is not de
iure divino.

To entitle a Commandment divine is required, 1 First that the Authority be
divine whereby it is ordained.

2 That the Author himself that ordains it, be so also: that is, that both
the power whereby, and the Person that does immediately establish it, be divine:
which divine authority is confessed to be in the Apostolic Constitutions, but
the immediate Authors are denied to be divine. Now as all other events and
Actions receive their denomination from their immediate not remote causes, as
to be termed Necessary or Contingent, Natural or Violent, Divine or humane:
so the constitutions of the Apostles, although they proceed originally from
the instinct and inspiration of the Holy Ghost, Gods spirit; yet proceeding
immediately from the institution of the Apostles themselves, which delivered
them to the Church in form of Commandments, they are to be termed humane
constitutions, and not properly divine.

Laws may be said to be established by God, either in respect of the

1 Institution, when they are ordained and prescribed by him, as that of the
Lords day is not.

2 Approbation or Confirmation, when they are allowed by him; and thus it may
be said to be established by him.

Ob. The decrees of the Apostles delivered to the Church proceed from the Holy
Ghost, therefore, they are divine.

Sol. They proceed from the Holy Ghost occasionally and mediatly, as disposing
the minds of the Apostles to exact them for the good of the Church; But
Immediately and Actually from the Apostles. Or else, from the Holy Ghost by way
of inspiration but not by way of Iniunction or Commandment. I say by way of
Inspiration, from the Holy Ghost illuminating the understanding of the Apostles
to perceive that such a decree would be good for the Church: but not by way of
Injunction as charging them to impose such a Commandment upon the Church. So
that here was direction only without obligation, the Holy Ghost assisting but
not appointing; and therefore no divine Commandment. For the establishing of
the commandment will no more prove a divine Action because the Apostles
received the light whereby they established it from the Holy Ghost: then the
sight of the eye an heavenly action, because it receives the light whereby it
sees from the sun.

The Precept of the Lords day was instilled and inspired into the minds of the
Apostles as a thing expedient and worthy to be commanded, but not as a
commandment, or that ought of duty or necessity to be commanded.

The decree of the Lords day is of God, or the spirit of God dispositiuely or
directiuely, enlightening the understanding of the Apostles and Church to see
that it was expedient and profitable for the Church, but not Immediately or
Imperatiuely, by way of Mandate or obligation, as charging the Church to do
it, as in Act. 13. 2. Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I
have called them. So that as it proceeds from the Holy Ghost, it is no
commandment, but as from the Apostles and Church it self: As when I give a
man light whereby he may see his way, or else advise him to take that way, I
do not therefore impose any Commandment on him to proceed that way.

The Precept of the Lords day, being indeed but an Ecclesiastical or
Apostolical constitution, may notwithstanding be termed divine.

1 Originally; because the Authority whereby the Apostles established it was
received from God.

2 Because it was destinated to the worship of God: Obiectiuely.

3 Materially; because it is of things belonging to divine not humane affairs.

4 Exemplarily, because it was ordained by Analogy or Imitation of the
Sabbath, which in the old Law was commanded by God himself.

Ob: The celebration of the Lords day was deduced by the Church from the
Commandment of the Sabbath, therefore it is a divine decree.

Sol: If it were deduced from it by way of Illation, as conclusions are from
their principles, it were virtually or consequently a divine decree: but it is
derived from it only by Imitation or Analogy, or by way of Example, as from a
pattern; and yet that derivation was not caused by divine ordinance (for there
is no Commandment of God to imitate that pattern) but by humane discourse,
reasoning, that it is convenient, that in the new Law one day of seven be
reserved for God, because God himself so commanded in the old. And that day
should be the first of the seven, because it was the day of Christ's
resurrection, the New Lawgiver; or the day wherein God began to create the
world: or the day wherein the holy Ghost descended visibly from heaven upon the
Church.

Ob: By Christ's Laws we are bound to hear his Apostles and obey them as
himself, He that hears you hears me: Luc. 10. 16. As my Father sent me, so
send I you, etc. Ioh. 20. 21. Therefore he that transgresses the Apostles
Commandment, does also transgress the Commandment of Christ.

Sol: 1. The trangression of the Apostles Commandment, is also a transgression
of Christ's, not Formally and Directly, but Consequently, and Concomitantly,
because he has charged to obey his Apostles, which proves not the Apostles
decrees to be divine Commandments, but being humane Commandments, to be
warranted and approved by divine authority.

2 The Apostles constitutions may be termed divine Commandments, not in
respect of their Institution, which is humane, as being the Act of humane will,
and discourse, but in respect of their Obligation, because we are by Christ's
Commandment charged and bound to obey them.

So that (He that hears you hears me, etc.) is not to be understood
properly, as of the Personal or Identicall hearing of Christ, but Analogically
as of Christ's interpretation or estimation, of that obedience or disobedience
to his Apostles as performed to himself, and of their despising, as if
himself were despised, because the honor or dishonor of the Ambassador
redoundeth to him that sent him, as in Mat. 25. 40. What ye have done to the
least of these, ye have done it to me, that is, in mine acceptance and
estimation. So that these and the like speeches are to be understood as of
Analogy, not of Identity.

As my Father sent me, so]
So, in the general manner, that is, Immediately from my side, as I was sent
immediately from my Father: or, So, namely in some proportion, and resemblance,
not in equality: for the Father sent his son in whom was the fullness of
power. ( All power is given to me, etc. Mat. 28. 18) But the son sent his
servants to whom was granted a certain measure of the spirit, and some
participation of power: yet in some manner and resemblance so; as namely,

1 To the same general end, as to reconcile men to God, and to preach the
Gospel, Go teach all nations, etc.

2 Furnished with the same power and graces of the spirit (but nothing in the
same measure) of binding and loosing sins, of doing miracles for the
confirmation of the truth.

The Apostles are considered two ways either as

1 Apostles, that is, Messengers of Christ to preach the Gospel, and the
things belonging thereto: that is, the Articles of faith, the Sacraments of
Grace, and the fundamental rules of holy life, that is, the precepts of Gods
Moral Law: In which respect, all that proceeded from them was De iure Divino;
they being but the proclaymers, or messengers to declare Gods will unto men:
for in this respect they received not only authority to teach, Mat. 28. 19. Go
and teach all, etc. but also the particular points which they were to teach,
verse. 20.

2 Governors of the Church which they had gotten to Christ by appointing, and
setting down of Canons, and convenient rules for the good ordering, and
discipline of the Church: in which respect they received authority from Christ
indeed; but particular commandment touching the Rules, and Laws, which they
were to ordain, they received not, seeing they no where declare, or signify
such Canons, or Commandments to have been prescribed by Christ to the Church,
or given themselves for that purpose, but deliver them as their own
ordinances: Such as are Not to ordain a Presbyter or Bishop that had two
wives, Tit. 1. 6. and 1. Tim 3. 2. and so Deacons, viz. and so widows the
wives of one husband, 1. Tim. 5. 9. The ordinance of seven Deacons in the
Church, Act. 6. 3. To make collections for the poor, on the first day of the
week. 1. Cor. 16. 2. To salute each other with an holy kiss, Romans 16. 16.
That a woman should pray in the Church covered, 1. Cor. 11. To anoint the
sick with oil, Ia. 5. 14.

The Apostles Constitutions are not divine Ordinances.

1 Because the Church has altered, and abolished some of them, as 1. the
salutation by kissing:

2. The excluding of widows under 60 years old, which were after received by
the Church at 50. Novel: 6. Canon: 6. after that at 40. Council: Chalced: Canon.
15. 3. abstaining from things strangled, etc.

2 Because the Apostles themselves intimate sometimes so much. As, I speak
this by permission, not by Commandment. 1. Cor. 7. 6. To the rest, I speak,
not the Lord, 1. Cor. 7. 12. Other things I will order, etc. 1. Cor. 11. 34.
Extreme unction (as it is termed) was an Apostolic Commandment, Iam. 5.

3 Because neither the divine Authority imparted to them by Christ, nor the
suggestion of the Holy Ghost, is sufficient to make them divine Commandments?
Not the Authority, because all the power, and authority of Princes, is likewise
from God: Romans 13. yet their decrees are no divine commandments. And secondly,
because Gods Commandments, are declarations of Gods pleasure, what he would
have done; therefore imparting of Authority to give commandments, without
specifying what he would have commanded, is not sufficient to make them Gods
commandments. Not the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, being but by
Illumination, or suggestion; 1 Because all the good works of men should by the
same reason be divine actions, as proceeding from the suggestion of the Holy
Ghost. 2 Because if inspirations of the Holy Ghost be divine commandments, it
follows that so many divine Commandments are given to men, as good works,
or words, or thoughts proceed from them* And withal that infinitely more
Commandments are imposed by God, to good, them to wicked men.

4 Because Christ gave not the Apostles alone that power of ordayning Laws in
the Church, as for themselves Personally, but to the Church, in whose name, as
being the first Governors of it, they received it: for else it should follow,
that now the Church, since the Apostles times, is destitute of power to make
laws: and consequently, that all the Laws brought into the Church by general
Counsels are unjust, because established without lawful Authority, and that
many mischiefs of heresies, and schisms, may befall the Church, which she
has no power, or means to help. If therefore that Authority of ordaining
Laws was given by God to the Church (in whose behalf the Apostles received
it) it follows that if the Apostles decrees be divine Commmandements, because
they received that power from God, that all the ordinances of the Church, by
the same reason are divine Commandments.

5 Because if the Law of observing the Lords day be a divine Commandment, then
it is so, either because it proceeded from God immediately, without the
intervention of man (which must be showed out of the word of God) or else if
it be to be reputed a divine Commandment because it proceeded from God
Mediatly, then all humane Laws, that are good and just, are also divine
comandements. By me Kings reign and Princes, etc. Prove. 8. 15.

6 Because if the constitutions of the Apostles, delivered to the Church, had
been Gods Commandments imposed on the Church by them (as the judicial and
ceremonial precepts of the old Law were by Moses) then would they have
signified withal to the Church, that they had been Gods own commandments,
whereof they were but the Messengers, or reporters (as Moses and the Prophets
use was Thus says the Lord) for otherwise they should wrong both the Church,
who would have received them with the more reverence, knowing them to be Gods
own commandments, and not the Apostles; and also God himself, by not
declaring them to the Church, to be Gods own commandments, which God had
given as his commandments to the Church.

But if it be answered, that the ordinance of the Lords day was not an
Inspiration only, but a divine Revelation of Gods pleasure touching it; it may
be refelled. 1 Because it is but a voluntary assertion that cannot be proved. 2
Because such a Revelation made to the Apostles, is no divine Precept to oblige
the Church; for if a revelation has the force of a divine Commandment, yet
has it so only in relation to them, to whom it is a revelation, not to others,
except it appear to them that such was Gods revelation. For I ask, whether by
that Revelation, God commanded the Apostles to ordain such a Precept in the
Church touching that day? Or whether by it he commanded the Church, but
revealed it to the Apostles, that they should publish it as his commandment to
the church? If the first; it follloweth, that although that commandment be
divine in relation to the Apostles, yet in relation from the Apostles, to the
church, it is Humane, except God had commanded the Apostles to publish it in
his own name: But if that Revelation was made to the Apostles, not to the
intent they should be ordainers or Authors of such a commandment in the
church, but that they should be publishers of that commandment to the church,
which God had for that purpose revealed to them in his name; then did the
Apostles sin most grievously that published it not in his name to the church,
which they had received from God, to publish as his precept: especially seeing
it could not oblige as a commandment of God, which was not promulgated in his
name, and as his commandment; therefore there was no such revelation made to
the Apostles, especially seeing neither in the Apostles writings, nor in those
Fathers that lived with the the Apostles, or nearest their time, or any other
of all Antiquity, there is any remembrance found of any such Revelation or
commandment.

That which the Apostle says 1. Cor. 7. 12. (to the rest speak I, not the
Lord) he spoke either without the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and then it is
manifest, that all Apostolic ordinances are not divine commandments; or if
by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, then it follows that these inspirations
are not the Lords commandments.

Ob. The Apostles were the instruments, and oracles of the Holy Ghost, because
he taught them all things Ioh. 14. 26. he lead them into all truth Ioh: 16. 13.
It was he that spoke in them Mat. 10. 20. Marc: 13. 11. Therefore their decrees
are the commandments of the Holy Ghost.

Sol. The Consequence is denied, for teaching is a passible act of the
understanding, whereby it is enlightened to see the truth; but commanding is an
active operation of the will, whereby it obliges them to whom the
commandments do belong. So that (to teach them all things) is, to enlighten
their understanding in all things; neither all things absolutely (for then
should they be omniscient) but as our Savior seems there to declare it, by
remembering them of all things he himself had told them; or all things
necessary to the mystery of redemption, to the Gospel of Reconciliation; And
so to lead them into all truth belonging to the doctrine of faith, or into all
truth, necessary to salvation, or, to the performance of their Apostolical
function. And so lastly was it the Holy Ghost that spoke in them, not
personally, for in Luc. 12. 12. it is declared thus the Holy Ghost shall teach
you what you ought to say. But it follows not, because the Holy Ghost taught
the Apostles all things, or all truth necessary for the preaching of the
Gospel, therefore he commanded all those ordinances, touching the government,
manners and discipline of the Church, which by the Apostles were established;
Or because he directed them what was to be believed touching faith and
doctrine, therefore he limited, and enjoined them what was to be commanded,
touching manners and discipline.

The Apostles touching Matters of Faith, or declaration of the Gospel to the
world, were Messengers only; and received not only Authority to preach, but
particular instructions also of every point they were to preach, from Christ
himself. But as touching Matter of Government, or Administration of Discipline,
to be exercised in that Church which they gathered out of the world, they were
more then messengers, namely deputies or Vicars of Christ, and received (by
delegation from Christ) Authority, whereby they were warranted, and enabled to
order the Oeconomie of the Church; but were not limited by personal, and
particular instructions from Christ; how every thing must be done, but were
enlightened only by the Holy Ghost, to see what was most convenient for
themselves, and for the Church, and so to command it. But whatsoever they
taught, or commanded as Messengers of the Gospel, touching faith, love and the
Sacraments, was de iure divino, because they commanded in that behalf, nothing
but what Christ had commanded them to teach, or command the Church, that is,
they were but the reporters of Christ's commandments, and not ordainers of them.

The old Law contained many determinations, both in ceremonial Praecepts,
touching the manner of Gods worship, and also in judicial touching Peace and
Justice to be kept amongst men: But the new law (being the Law of Liberty)
imposes not these determinations; but contents it self with three General
sorts of Praecepts, namely

1 The Moral commandments, that belong to the Law of nature. 2 The Articles
of Christian faith. 3 The Sacraments.
But all other matters, pertaining to the determination, or particular manner,
either of divine worship, or humane judgments, are freely permitted by Christ
(the giver of the new Law) to the governers of the church, and to the princes
of the nations to be appointed: so that all such particular determinations are
but de iure humano.

The Apostles have a twofold relation; One to the work of the Gospel; whereof
they are the dispensers, that is, to doctrine; of which Christ being the
Author, and they only the Messengers and Ministers, that which they deliver is
de iure divino; Another to the Church, whereof they are the overseers and
governors, that is, to order and discipline: of the particular ordinances, and
determinations of which Government, the Apostles themselves being directly
Authors (although they received the Authority whereby they were warranted from
God) it appears they are but de iure humano.

Ob. St Paul 1. Cor. 14. 37. affirms that the things which he wrote, were the
Commandments of the Lord.

Sol. The things he wrote, namely touching the points he there entreated of,
that is, of the use of Prophecy, and of Tongues: definitely those; but not
indefinitely all; for to the rest speak I; not the Lord 1. Cor. 7. 12.
Concerning virgins I have no commandment of the Lord, ibid. ver. 25. but I
give my advice.

The celebration of the Lords day had for occasion. 1. The resurrection of our
Savior that day: 2 The example of his Apostles: 3 The custom of the Church
freely imitating (without Precept) that Example, who yet solemnized it not in
stead of the old Sabbath, but together with it; as yet is usual in Aethiopia
and Syria; And all this while it was observed, not of necessary obligation, or
iniunction (for any thing that appears) but of voluntary devotion. But at
last it obtained obligation by the Institution of Princes, and Synods of the
Church; The first Emperor that commanded it was Constantine the Great, Cod.
lib. 3. Tit. 12. lib. 3. The Synod that decreed it was the Council of
Laodicea Can. 29. Anno Christi 364.

The Apostles Examples of assembling to divine service on the Lords day,
enforce no Commandment on the Church to do the like (else by their example we
are also to keep the Jewish Sabbath) because examples have not the force of
Laws, which all men ought to keep, but of Counsels only and persuasions, not
amiss to be followed of them whose case is alike.

Touching the preaching of the Gospel unto the world, it was necessary our
Savior should give his Apostles, not only authority to preach, but particular
commandments and Instructions, touching every thing they were to preach,
because their Preaching respected the doctrine of the Church, which is
Catholic; and ought to be the same always, and over all the world: But
touching the Governing of the Church, it was convenient he should give them
authority, and charge to govern it, but particular instructions and prescript
Rules were not so necessary, because it belonged but to the discipline of the
Church; for which, either at all seasons, or in all parts of it, the same Rules
of Government are not convenient.

1 The solemnity of the Lords day consists not by any Precept of theirs (that
is the Apostles) but by their Example.

2 Or if it did as touching Sanctification by holy assemblies, yet not touching
general Vacation from work, as in the old Sabbath.

3 Or if both were the Apostles Precepts, yet it follows not they were Gods
Commandments: for although the Solemnity of the Sabbath had been enjoined the
Apostles by God, to be translated to the Lords day; yet it does not follow,
that the old Commandment touching the Sabbath was by Gods ordinance also
translated to that day. For if the Lords day be charged with the same
Commandment, precisely that the Sabbath was, so that there is no other change
save of the day, then is it no less displeasant to the Lord, to do any light
work on the Lords day then on the Sabbath, as, to go out of our places, Exodus
16. To kindle fire, Exodus 35. To gather sticks, etc. And every one that
transgresses it, deserves to dye, Exodus 31 14. 15. For God is the same, who
gave all these charges touching the Sabbath. If therefore the Commandment be
also the same, there is as much reason for the one, as for the other.

Besides the Lord loves not one day more then another, therefore if the duties
belonging to both days be the very same, there was no reason to transfer
those duties, from one day to another.

Ob: The celebration of the Lords day has warrant by Scripture. 1. Cor. 16. 2.
Act. 20. 7. etc.

Sol: 1. Warrant of Example it has, that it may be done; warrant of
Commandment it has not, that it must be done.

2 There are 2 points in the celebratio^ of that day, 1 Sanctification by
public devotion in solemn assemblies, for which we have the Apostles
Practice, but not Precept.

2 Vacation from work, for which we have no evidence, either of Precept, or
Practice of theirs.

Ob: There cannot be so many reasons for the celebration of any other day, as
the Lords day,

1. Creation of the world. 2. Nativity. 3. The Resurrection of Christ. 4.
Descent of the Holy Ghost, etc. Therefore the Church could not have dedicated
another day.

Sol: The argument is denied: because though these are good reasons for the
Election of the day, why the Church should incline to make choice of that day
before any other, yet not sufficient for obligation, to bind them to observe
that, and exclude all other, for the Church notwithstanding these reasons,
might have dedicated another day to that solemnity without breaking any
Commandment of God.

Ob: The Lords day is instead of the Sabbath, and equivalent unto it, therefore
the sin is equal in transgressing of either.

Sol: It is instead of it, because it has succeeded it; and is equivalent unto
it, as touching the Use, being consecrated to the solemn worship of God and
Rest, as that was; but not equivalent, either as touching the Institution,
because it is ordained not by God, but by the Church; or as touching the
Obligation, because it is not charged, as that was with Gods commandment; so
that there is the like End of both, but not the like Beginning; the like
equivalence of Occasion for both (the Resurrection of Christ, and the
manifestation of man's redemption, being as excellent a work as rest from
creation) but not equivalence of Authority in establishing of both; The like
utility in observing of it, but not the like Necessity and obligation to
observe it.

Ob: Esaias 66. 23. speaking of the renewed state of the Church by Christ, says,
That from month to month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath, all flesh should come
to worship, etc. Therefore the Sabbath of Christians is established by divine
voice.

Sol: 1. He speaks not only of the Renewed state (by Grace) but of the
Glorified state of the Church, as is manifest by the 22 and 24 verse. And that,
of their worshipping from Sabbath to Sabbath, is not to be understood
Literally, but Figuratively to note not so much the manner, and intermissions,
as the everlasting continuance of that worship, by those seasons of worship (
the new Moons and Sabbaths) that were familiar to the Jews.

2 Or if it be understood of the Militant state of the church under grace, yet
1. it proves the Sabbath of Christians and the worship exercised on it, only to
be foreseen, and fore-spoken of by the spirit of God, but not to be commanded
by God: Prophecies are no Decrees. And 2, although it were not only foreseen,
but also preordained by the counsel of God, yet might that ordinance have
effect, without divine commandment, by humane constitution.

3 Or if it imply a commandment of God touching the Sabbaticall worship of
God, their does it also of that monthly worship (in the New Moons) which is
utterly abandoned in the church of God: both which together the Apostle does
reject. Col. 2. 16.

There is a threefold Sabbath,
1 External, of the body from servile work. 2 Internal, of the soul from
sin, from the guilt of sin, freed from damnation; from the Crime of sin
freed from disobedience, by the merit and grace of Christ. 3 Aeternall, from
both labor and sin, and all the pains and passions of this life. The first
was the Sabbath of the Law. The second of Grace. and the third of Glory.
The observing of the Lords day has descended from the Primitive Church, from
hand to hand to us as a Tradition of the Apostles; namely by Tradition it is
come to us, as their Practice, not as their Precept, and as to hold by virtue
of their Example, not of their Commandment.

1 The Christians of the Primitive Church, were bound to keep a Sabbath to the
Lord, because it is of the Moral law; 2 To keep the seventh day, they thought
inconvenient, least they should seem to yield obligation to the Ceremonial
law. 3 Yet to keep one day in seven, the imitation of the like commandment
given by God to the Jews, directed them. And, 4, of them they elected the
first day, in memorial of Christ's Resurrection from the dead.

The prescription of one day in seven is but an Imitation of the like
prescribed to the Jews, not a divine commandment. I say, but the imitation of
a divine Commandment. But yet the commandment that it imitateth, and whence
it has warrant and direction, being but ceremonial, the imitating
Commandment cannot be Moral.

QVAESTIO.
Whether the Commandment touching Servants vacation from work in the Sabbath
be given directly to themselves, or to their masters concerning them.
SErvants works are theirs, either
Originally, Personally, that proceed from their own election and motion; or
Ministerially, executiuely, that are performed by their labor, but enjoined by
their Masters commission.
The first are properly their own works, as being the Authors; the second
properly their Masters; not theirs, as being but Ministers, and performed of
them, not of Election, but of necessary obedience, which they owe to their
Masters by the law of Nations; which law of nations, the laws of God dissolve
not; the first therefore are their own sins, the second their Masters
sins, Servants may be considered either
Absolutely* as persons retaining some degree of liberty, and working freely, or
Respectively, as servants obeying their Masters commandments, and working by
virtue of such commandments.


In the first they sin, in the second not.

Works are either
Of Labor, as the several trades, and states of men's lives, and vocations, by
nature not evil; or Of Sin, which are evil by their natures, as to steal,
etc.
The first, servants may perform on the Sabbath without sin, by their
masters commandment, not the second.

Ob. The work done on the Sabbath is sin: the work is the servants,
therefore the sin.

Sol. 1 The work considered Materially; as touching the labor is the
servants; for he performs it; but considered Formally, as touching the
transgression of the law, is the masters, for to him the charge and
commandment of his servants cessation from work was given, and he it is that
imposes the work.

2 The work considered Naturally is the servants that does it. but Morally it
is the Masters that commands him to do it, or else it would not be done: The
servants in Act, the Masters in Imputation.

Ob. If the servant ought to work by the Masters Commandment on the Sabbath,
then either willingly, and so seems to sin against God in being willing to
further the breach of Gods commandment; or unwillingly, which seems not to
agree with his duty toward his Master.

Sol. 1 Willingly notes either
The Propension and free election of will, or The Obedience and yielding of the
will.


In this last respect the servant ought to work willingly, because he owes
willing obedience to his Master touching labor, not so in the former. So that
the work, which of his own absolute and primary will or election he would not
do, yet he does of a conditional and secundary will, as in respect of the
condition of a servant, who is bound (touching matter of labor) to submit his
own will to his Masters pleasure.

Sol. 2 In work enjoined on the Sabbath, there is

1 The substance of the work, Labor.

2 The Quality of the work, sinfulness; as a transgression of Gods law; of
which, as the first is in Nature before the latter, so the readiness and
obedience of a good Servants will, extends it self to the first, not to the
latter, id est, as it is his masters Work, not his sin.

Ob. The servants work on the Sabbath is the Masters sin, therefore if the
servant consent to the work, he consents to the Masters sin.

Sol: To that which is sin Materially, but not to it as it is sin Formerly;
for it is considered either as the Execution of his Masters command, and so he
consents; or as the transgression of Gods Commandment, and so he consents
not. So that he consents only to the work, Per se, to the sin Per
Accidens, only as it is annexed to such a work. The Act then of the consent
passes only to the work, no farther, and yields an approbation no further
then to it, no way approving of the transgression, or sin annexed with it. As
I may love a learned man, that is withal vicious; yet I love him for his
learning, not for his vice; so the servant his Masters work, as it has
adjoined his Masters profit not his sin.

Ob. Every one ought if he can, to prevent his neighbors sin, not to lend
his hand, or shoulder to the execution of it: But servants work on the Sabbath
is the Masters sin; Ergo.

Sol. The servant ought to prevent his Masters sin by lawful means, not by
unlawful: Disobedience touching matter of labor is unlawful; and evil must
not be done, for the good that may come of it. The servant therefore may advise
or entreat his Master, but disobey he must not; Neither does he in that case
lend his hand to the work as it is his Masters sin, but as the performance
of a servants duty, which is to labor for his Masters profit, when he shall be
commanded by his Master.

Ob. Ier. 17. 21. 22. All Judah and Jerusalem are commanded on peril of their
souls to bear no burden on the Sabbath, nor bring it in by the gates of
Jerusalem, nor out of their houses, nor to do any work, but to sanctify the
Sabbath.

Sol. 1. I answer first, the Commandment is given touching servants and
cattle; (...)
Take heed to your souls; what? the souls of your persons? no, for it is
given to the Kings of Judah amongst others, ver. 20. But Kings did not carry
burdens; But to the souls under their charge, namely servants and cattle; for
the servants are called in Scripture their Masters souls, as appears Gen: 12.
5, and 36. 6, yea the work that is immediately specified, viz. carrying of
burdens (the peculiar work of servants and cattle) imports so much.

2 The Commandment is given touching them to the Kings and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, not to the servants themselves;

First, because that charge was given to them, to whose fathers the
commandment of the Sabbath had been anciently given verse. 22. The word is
(...) the citizens of Jerusalem, for the Jews had no word to signify a
citizen but (...).
but those were the natural Israelites, whereas their servants were for the
most part strangers.

Secondly, because the charge is given to them out of whose houses burdens
were forbidden to be carried verse. 22. but those were the Citizens or owners,
not servants.

Thirdly, because the charge was given to them of whom it is said, They would
not hear nor obey, but made their necks stiff. verse. 23. which cannot be
understood of servants; for would not they have been glad of one days rest,
after a whole weeks toil? or had they rather undergo continual toil and
pain to break Gods commandments, then take their ease to keep it and please
God?

Fourthly, The Commandment it self, Carry no burdens, neither do any work
in the Sabbath, that is, let none be carried, does import as much. For although
the work touching the Execution of it, were the work of their servants, and
cattle; yet it is the Masters and owners by a just imputation, because done by
their commandment: and the servants and cattle are but their Instruments
merely under their dominion and appointment. So that in Gods estimation, They
are reckoned to carry those burdens, which by their Commandments are carried.

The Commandment is not given to servants as servants, that is, touching
works commanded them by their Masters,

1 Because it is given to them, to whom this speech is directed. Thy servant
shall do no work, but that is the Master. Exodus 20. 10.

2 Because the rest of servants was one special end of that Commandment, on
the seventh day thou shall rest, that the son of thy handmaid may be
refreshed, Deuteronomy. 5. 14. That thy man servant and maid may rest as well as thou.
But the end of the commandment is not the matter of the commandment,
therefore servants are not commanded to rest.

3 It is given to them who are willed to remember that themselves were servants
in the Land of Egypt, and that the Lord had delivered them from it, Deuteronomy. 5.
15. but those were free men, not servants, Ergo, 4. Because given to them who
had power to keep it without the transgression of the Law of Nations (which
the Laws of God dissolve not) But servants have not that power (being merely
(touching labor) at their Masters disposition, and his Instruments: contrary,
the Masters had that power both for themselves, and their servants.

5 Because it was more agreeable to reason, to give it to them who had more
power, by reason of their government, and were like to have more care of Gods
Commandments, by reason of their discretion, and age. But both these belonged
to the Masters rather then to the servants.

6 Because servants are often commanded to obey their Masters in all things,
touching labor, but no where in Scripture either restrained, or reprehended
for such labors performed by their Masters Commandment, but the Masters
themselves.

Ob: Servants working on the Sabbath at their Masters command is scandalous,
and gives the Godly occasion of offense.

Sol. offense is either
Active, whereby people are occasioned to offend, that is, to sin. Or
Passive, whereat they are offended that is, displeased.
The first it gives not at all; the latter it gives, but by occasion of their
frailty and ignorance that are offended, for although the godly may be justly
offended with such works done, yet not justly in relation to the poor
servant, that unwillingly executes them, but the sinful Master that commands
them.

Again, scandal properly taken for Ac tiue scandal, or scandal given, is
nothing else but an exemplary sin; and therefore implies Materially, sin,
that is, offense against God; and Formally, Example, whereby others are
occasioned to fall into sin, that is, sin against our neighbor; but
improperly taken for Passive scandal, or scandal (as they call it) taken; is,
when that which in it self is no sin, becomes to any other, through the
error or frailty of the obseruer (who judges not aright) an occasion of some
sin. And of this latter sort of scandals only, are servants works done on the
Sabbath by their Masters commandment, which nevertheless in relation to their
Masters, are full and proper scandalls.

Ob: The servant ought not to obey his Master commanding the transgression of
Gods commandments; but when he commands him to work on the Sabbath he does
so, Ergo,

Sol: It is a transgression of Gods commandment in respect of the Commander,
not of the Executer; or else the proposition is true by transgression Formally
taken, but not Materially; namely for the work that has the transgression
annexed, not Naturally, but Casually, as being done on such a day.

Ob: God has forbidden the Master to command his servant any work on the
Sabbath, therefore he has no right to command him such work, therefore the
servant may justly refuse it, being commanded.

Sol: The argument is denied; for although God has restrained the Masters
commandment, yet not so the servants obedience, by that precept: and therefore
the same service he owes his Master by the Law of Nations, he still stands
bound unto, if it be exacted. So that the servant can neither reject his
Masters commandment justly (because although his Master be limited touching
commanding by that precept, yet is not the servants liberty enlarged, or
purposed to be so, but by the Masters grant and consent) nor wisely; seeing in
rejecting, he incurreth his Masters displeasure and punishment; and in obeying
he commits no sin.

Ob: Rest is given to servants by that Commandment. Exodus 23. 12. Deuteronomy. 5.
therefore they may justly challenge it, and consequently they may justly refuse
work.

Sol: Rest is given to servants not Immediately, by any grant made directly to
themselves, but Mediately by commandment given to their Masters, not to set
them to work: so that they are to expect it by their Masters leave and
allowance, and not to be their own carvers: Wherein although the Masters sin
against God* in not performing that deed of mercy toward their servants, which
God commanded them to perform; yet is not the servant thereby loosed from his
obligation of servile obedience; much less ought he to make himself his
Masters judge in pronouncing of his own liberty, but if he may challenge it,
it must be by lawful course, as by complaint unto them, to whom the oversight
of laws belong, who yet cannot justly free him from his Masters service that
day directly by with drawing his obedience, but only by restraining (by some
enforcement if commandment will not serve) his Master from commanding.

2 Although they may justly challenge the rest and liberty, intended for them
in that commandment, yet does it not follow, that if they challenge it not,
they thereby incur sin; for they may do it, but they are not bound to do
it, for intended it was for a favor toward them, to comfort them, not for an
obligation, to bind or entangle them, as it must have proved, if they had
been commanded to disobey their Masters, exacting their labor; namely, by
provoking their Masters heavy displeasure against them.

FINIS.

