A LEARNED TREATISE OF THE SABBATH, WRITTEN By Mr EDWARD BREREWOOD, Professor
in Gresham College, LONDON. TO Mr NICOLAS BYFIELD, Preacher in Chester. With
Mr BYFIELDS answer and Mr BREREWOODS REPLY.

AT OXFORD, Printed by John Lichfield Printer to the Famous University, for
Thomas Huggins. An. Dom. 1630.

Prove all things, hold fast that which is good: 1 These. 5. 21. For the fruit
of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth, proving what
is acceptable to the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 9. 10. Holy Father, Sanctify them through
thy truth: Thy word is truth. Ioh 17. 17. These faults I desire the reader to
amend before he read the book.
PAGE 9. line 10. leave out and, p. 25. l. 13. read consecration, for,
participation, p. 27. l. 17. r. not of the, for, not the, page 28. l. 2. r.
commandment, for commandments, l. 7. read Gods command, f. God commands, p.
29. l. 26. read greater, for, great. p 30. l. 3. r. per accidens, for, per
accidence, l. 15. r. thereof, for, thereon, p. 32. l 4. r. servant, for,
servants, p. 30. l. 21. r. respected, for, expressed, l. 29. r. in the Sabbath,
for, in Sabbath, p. 42. l. 5 r. of the commandment, for, of commandent, p. 47.
l. 14. r. their, for there, p. 54. l. 7. r. harvest, for, heaviness: p. 68. l.
r. perpetual, for, perpetually, p 79. figure 9. r. volly, for, valley, p. 81.
Mr Brerewoods text should be continued, p. 90. r. short, for shord, p. 91. r.
for a great part, for, of a great profit, p. 91. l. 23. r. who, for whose, p.
94. (for) should be out, ib. the, for, your, p. 95. the gap at (appointment)
should not be, nor any point.

Many mispointings, and lesser faults there are, by the darkness of the copy,
and the oversight of the Printer, which the judicious reader may easily correct.

A TREATISE OF THE SABBATH WRITTEN BY Mr EDWARD BREREWOOD to Mr NICHOLAS
BYFIELD preacher in Chester.
SIR I am but a stranger unto The occasion of this treatise.
you, yet I am bold to trouble you, because you have troubled me, with as
strange an occasion: There is a young man (one John Brerewood dwelling in this
City, but borne in that, whom his Father and Graundfather, when they left this
World, left very young. And left he was especially to my care, who am his
uncle. That youth I placed here in London, to serve in condition of an
apprentice: and placed he is with a man of so good religion report and trade,
that if I might have picked him a master in the whole City, I think I should
have chosen none before him. In this man's service he has spent two years and
more, and (God showing him, and in his behalf me also more mercy then either
of us deserved,) I began to receive comfort of him after some sorrow, that his
former untowardness had caused, and to recover good hope, after my former doubt
and fear; but yet for all this, Gods good pleasure it was to abate this
contentment of mine, and by the youths new follies, to bring me into new
perplexities, for being not long since sent to Chester about his Masters
business, he returned again so strangely altered, that I have seldom seen
in so short a time so great a change. For so dejected he was in his
countenance, so dull and wretchlesse about his business, so alienated quite
from his master, and so obstinately resolved (whether by fair means or by
foul) to forsake his service; that I was not fuller of sorrow to see him so
changed, then of wonder to imagine how he became so. And yet the care and
pains I took by the endeavor of my self and of my friends to recover and to
resettle him, was equal to both, and so much more they were, because I
labored to cure a disease, whereof I could not perceive the cause. For the
pretenses which at first he made of the unableness of his body and
toilesomenes of his service, I know were but fained excuses, or else complaints
of laziness, as being assured that there are 20000 in this City of less
bones, that make noe bones of greater labor. But the true cause of all this
distemper, fell out to be at last a case of conscience (and full glad I was
that the case proved no worse) then that he had such feeling of conscience,
(for I had imagined sundry others) although it grieved me not a little, to see
his conscience so seduced, and the point that pricked him was this: his Master
on the Lords day sent him forth sometimes on arrands, as to bid guests, or
fetch wine, give his horse provender (which last his Master reme^breth not that
ever he bad him past once) or about some other light business. and he was
instructed (he said) that to do these things or any other work on the Sabbath
day, although it were such work as might lawfully be done on another day; and
although he did it not of his own disposition, but only in obedience to his
Masters command; yet was a sin and transgression of Gods commandments
touching the Sabbath, and that he was not bound to yield, nay that he sinned
against God in yielding obedience to every such commandment of his Masters
that day, which by the precept of almighty God was wholely precisely
consecrated to rest and the service of God. To this effect (he told me) he was
instructed when he was in Chester and that you Sr were his chief instructor,
out of which doctrine he deduced (as natural reason rightly taught him to do)
that he ought in such cases to reject the comcommand of his Master and in no
sort to perform it; which because he could not do without his masters great
offense, and his own affliction, he saw no other course to be taken but to
forsake his masters service, that so becoming his own Master, he might not be
commanded to sin, against God: Which resolution of the young man's being so
peremptory, and obstinate, as for a time I found it to be, if it moved me both
to melancholy and anger who can justly blame me? For I saw not only a poor
youth (my near kinsman) entangled with the conscience of another man's sin,
(if it be sin) but withal his utter ruin for his condition in this World
hardly ventured, his Master wronged, his friends grieved, and my self
especially indammaged, that am in bond deeply engaged for him: and yet this
was not all that inwardly afflicted me, but some thing there was beside that
might well stir as patient an heart as mine to indignation; Namely because I
perceived this doctrine of yours, (whereof this resolution of his proceeded,
and his ruin was likely to follow) neither to have good beginning, nor likely
to have good ending; but to begin in ignorance and to end in sin, to
begin in mistaking the Law of God and to end in the wicked disobedience of
seruams to their Masters, and in the rebellious contempt of the laws of men.
But for the transgression of men's laws by this doctrine, or the mischiefs
that may ensue of it, in the commonwealth, I will not meddle: I will not
censure the one, nor divine of the other, you are a teacher of Gods word,
within the compass of that word I will stay with you and by it, examine with
your patience; whether this frame of your doctrine be grounded on the rock or
on the sand, on the firm rock of Gods law, or on the fickle sand of your own
fantasy misunderstanding the law, and so whether it tend to the edification or
ruin of the Church; For touching the commanding of the Sabbath, (upon which I
aver this doctrine of yours cannot be grounded) lay it before you and
consider it well. And tell me to whom is the charge of servants ceasing from
work on the Saboath The commandment not given to servants but their Masters.
day given? Is it to the servants themselves or to their Masters? It is given
of servants I confess, their work is the matter of the commandment. But I
demand whether it be given and imposed to the servants themselves, or to the
Masters whose servants they are? For if the commandment be not given to them,
then do not they transgress the commandments, if by their Masters they be
set to work, but the Masters to whom the law was given, that the servant
should not work, and consequently the sin is their Masters and not theirs:
so if the law be not imposed to them, then it requires no obedience of them,
It obliges them not, therefore is neither the transgression of it any sin to
them, but only to those to whom it was given as a law. For the better clearing
of which point let me ask you a question or two of other commandments, that
for their form are parallel to this, and whereof you have no prejudice. God
commanded the Israelites that no stranger should eat of the paschall lamb;
again that no Ammonite nor Moabite should enter into the congregation of the
Lord, to the tenth generation. Good Sit tell me did the stranger sin if he
eat of the passover being supposed invited? Or did the Ammonites or Moabites
sin if they came into the congregation being admitted? Did the stranger (I
say,) and the Ammonites and the Moabites, in these cases sin, of whom the
commandments were given, or the Israelites to whom the commandments were
given touching them; no but it is clearly the Lords meaning that the
Israelites should not admit of any gentile to the participation of the
Passover, nor receive the Ammonites and Moabites into the congregation of the
Lord: Let me ask you one question more, of a case that has fallen in my
remembrance: A precept comes out from the Prince; That every Citizen in London
shall on such a day keep his servants within doors and not suffer them to go
a broad. If not withstanding that precept, some Master sends forth his servant
about his business, does the servant transgress the Princes commandment by
obeying his masters: Or ought he by pretense of that precept to disobey his
Master and neglect his charge? It is plain he does the former and therefore he
ought not to do the latter. For the commandment was given to his master not
to him, and the purpose of it was to restrain his Master from commanding such
service and not to restrain the servant from obeying his Master if it were
commanded: there it is apparent that the obligations of commandments
pertains to them to whom they are prescribed as rules, and not to them of
whom only (as being the matter of the precept) they are prescribed.

Now that that clause of the Commandment touching servants was not given to
the servants them selves, but to their Masters, in whose power and disposition
they are, the text and tenor of the commandment does clearly import; for
mark it well and answer me; to whom is this speech directed? Neither thy
son nor thy daughter, shall do any work on the Sabbath day: is it not to
the Parents? For can this manner of speech (thy son thy daughter) be rightly
directed to any other then the parent, and is not by the same reason the clause
that next follows, (neither shall thy man servant nor thy maidseruant do any
work on the Sabbath day) directed to the Masters of such servants? Seeing that
phrase of speech (thy man servant thy maidseruant) cannot rightly be used to
any other? It is therefore as clear as the Sun, even to mean
understandings, (if they will give but mean attendance, to the tenor of Gods
commandments, rather then the fond interpretations and deprauations of men)
that that clause of the commandment touching servants cessation from working
on the Sabbath, is not given to servants themselves but to their Masters
concerning them. Or if to any dark understanding, which some gross cloud may
ouershadow, this seem not clear enough, the declaration yet of Moses himself
touching the commandment, will make it so: of Moses I say, who can neither be
suspected of ignorance, as having been with the Lord 40 days together in the
Mountain when he received the tables of the commandments: Exodus 24. v 18.
Exodus 33. v. 11.
and with who^ the Lord talked familiarly, as a man does with his friend: nor
yet of corruption as being by the Lords mouth pronounced faithful in all his
house: he therefore in the 5 of Deuter. 14. (which is only the place of
Scripture, besides the 20 of Exodus, where all the branches of that
commandment are repeated) after the several prohibitions touching the works
of sons, servants, cattle, etc. adds this Epiphonema: That thy man servant
and thy maidseruant may rest as well as thou: It is to this (thou) therefore to
whom this charge is directed that the servants should rest upon the Sabbath;
who can be conceived to be no other then the master of those servants, which
yet moreover the reason of that commandment (touching servants rest immediately
added) will better clear from all exception; for remember (says Moses) that
thy self wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God brought
thee out thence with a mighty hand, and an out stretched arm: Therefore the
Lord thy God has commanded thee to make a day of rest, for to whom was that
spoken, remember that thy self wast a servant in the land of Egypt, but to
them that had been servants, and now were not servants? Or to what intent and
purpose is that (remember) brought in? remember that thy self wast a servant,
but to move compassion in them toward their own servants, and allow them a
time of rest, having themselves felt the burden and affliction of servants in
Egypt, and remembering how glad they would have been of some remission; but if
the commandment of rest had been directly and immediately given to servants
themselves, what needed any persuasion to that effect? Would not servants, over
set and wearied with six days toil, be of themselves glad to rest on the
seventh? Or would they be so hot set on work, whereby yet they gained
nothing, but their labor for their pains, and the profit being another man's,
that the commandment of God could not restrain them, but they needed also to
be persuaded? Or if persuasion had been needful, were this a convenient
persuasion to use to servants? Remember that thou wast a servant in the land of
Egypt: which even now, when they were out the land of Egypt were servants?
And (to proceed with the text) what other importance has that other reason,
which immediately follows. And (remember that the Lord thy God has brought
thee thence) out of Egypt with a mighty hand and outstretched arm. Therefore
the Lord thy God has commanded thee to make a day of rest. Has it any other
but to declare that the Lord who had redeemed them from their continual
slaueries, has just title and right to impose on them the commandment of the
Sabbath for their servants rest; importing as much, as if he had said, although
of thy self thou should have compassion of thy servant and allow him rest.
Remembering that thy self wast a servant in the land of Egypt, yet art thou
more effectually obliged to do it, because the Lord has commanded thee. (The
Lord) that brought thee out of thraldom and incessant labors in Egypt, and
therefore has reason to command one days rest, in a weeks revolution (Thee)
that by his redeeming hand art set at liberty from that labor and servitude.
Where mark again that the Lord is said to have commanded them, who a little
before were said to be servants in Egypt and by his goodness were freed from
that slavery; which reason could not be intended or directed to them, which
still remained in servitude. It is clear therefore that all this persuasion of
Moses for servants resting on the Sabbath, was not directed to the servants
themselves, who to take their ease on the Sabbath needed neither to be
commanded nor entreated (license would serve their turn) but to the Masters
whose desire of gain, by the servants labor might stand betwixt the Sabbath
and the servants rest: and to make an end with the text, with the last words
of it: what is it, that the Lord for these reasons commanded? was it barely to
keep and observe the Sabbath, as it is in the vulgar English, Latin and
Greek translations? No they are all short, it is (...) that Deuteronomy. 5. 15.
is to make a day of rest. Now to make it to be so, imports not only to
observe it himself, but to cause others also to observe it, which is evidently
the property of Masters and governors: wherefore seeing both the commandment
touching servants rest from labor on the Sabbath day and reasons added, by
Moses to persuade that point, (and draw their minds to obsequiousness) are
evidently directed to the Masters and not (neither of both) to the servants
themselves, I take it out of all question as clear as the Sunshine at midday,
that if servants by their Masters command do any work on the Sabbath the
sin is not theirs, who as touching their bodily labor are merely subject to
their Masters power, but it is their Masters sin: for their sin it is that
transgres the law. They transgress the law, who are obliged by it: they are
obliged by it, to whom it was given and imposed, and given it was as I have
plentifully proved only to Masters.

Or if notwithstanding all these evidences, you will still contend that the
prohibition touching bodily labor on the Sabbath is directly imposed on the
servants themselves, see whether you bring not the Ox and the Ass and other
cattle also under the obligation of this commandment, whose work is
immediately after that of servants prohibited, and precisely under the same
form of words, whose labors yet on the Sabbath I hope you will not say to be
in them sins and transgressions of Gods law? But as the labor of the beast
is the sin and transgression of the Master, to whom the commandment of the
beasts resting from labor wasgiuen, so is the labor of the servant also,
which by the Masters commandment he executed on that day (as being touching
bodily service incident to mankind in like degree of subjection) the Masters
sin, and not the servants. For distinction must be made between the matter
and the form (if to speak in schoolemens style offend you not) that is
between the act and the guilt of sin, of which in this case the act indeed,
wherewith the commandment of the Sabbath is violated is the servants, but the
crime and guiltiness is the Masters that sets him on work, for seeing sin
formally taken is nothing else but the transgression of the law or
unlawfulness ((...) as the Apostle terms it most 1 Ioh, 3. 4.
properly and exactly, even as guiltines is the obligation to punishment, for
that transgression, it appears manifestly, that his is the guiltiness, whose
the transgression is; and his the transgression, to whom the law was prescribed
as a rule, and that is the Masters, to whom it is not only imposed that he
himself should do no work on that day as a particular man in the first
clause: Thou shall do no work, but also that none of his should do any as he
is the Father or Master of a family, in those clauses that follow. Neither
shall thy son nor thy daughter, nor manseruant nor maidservant, etc. which
latter point touching his keeping of the Sabbath viz. as the governor of his
house, had not been so well provided for, and regulated by the law of God, if
these clauses of children and servants abstinence from labor on the Sabbath,
had been given directly to themselves, and not to their governors.

But you will reply perhaps that the commandment touching servants rest on the
Sabbath, is given to their Masters indeed, but not only to them, but to their
servants also. No such matter; for if it be; let that appear and set down the
clause wherein it is manifestly expressed or necessarily implied, that servants
are forbidden all labor on the Sabbath day, as servants I say touching matter
of service or labor imposed on them by their Masters, for that in those works
which servants do on the Sabbath day of themselves and not as proceeding from
their Masters iniunction, but from their own election it is no question but
they transgress the commandment: but those works they do not as servants,
that is at another command; but as in the condition of their service, or
favor of their Masters they retain some degree of liberty, and have some
disposition of themselves permitted unto them, so in that respect fall into the
clause of free men viz. the first clause of the commandment: Thou shall do no
work; but to servants as servants (in case they be commanded to work) which
is our question, there is no clause of the commandment imposed.

Whereby may easily and clearly be discerned the difference betwixt the equity
and wisdom of Almighty God in the constitution of the law of the Sabbath,
obliging Parents, and Masters and owners, for the children, and servants and
cattle that are merely under their powers; and the rashness and iniquity of
wretched men interpreting the law as immediately and directly obliging the
children and servants themselves: for (good Sir) consider it well, and tell me
whether it be more equal to impose the law of ceasing from work to the
servants themselves, or to their Masters in whose power they are? Servants are
not homines turis sui nor operum suorum domini as Lawyers speak; they are but
their Masters living instruments (...) as Aristotle terms them, they have
noe right or power to dispose of themselves, they cannot play and work at
their own pleasure (for this is the condition of freemen, not of servants) but
are merely and entirely for bodily labor and service under the power and
commandment of their Masters and under their power for service only: in such
sort as they can neither justly perform any labor, which their Masters
forbid, nor omit any which their Masters command, but are under their
inforcement, and punishment also if they disobey. This I say is the property
and obligation of a servant, and that by the law of nations, which allows,
and ever has done, Masters over their servants (as the law of nature does
Parents over their children) not only a directive, but a correctiue and
coactiue power: So then I pray you (tell me) whether the commandment touching
the Sabbath was not of common reason, rather to be imposed on them which were
at liberty, and had power to obey it, then on them which were utterly void and
destitute of that power, and liberty? Whether in such a case it were not more
reasonable to inioyne the Masters that they should not command, then inioyne
the servants not to obey, for the poor servants if their Masters command them
could not choose but work, the law of nations bound them unto it, which had put
them under their Masters power, and inforcement: but the masters might forbear
to command, there was no law, that bound them to that, or enjoined them to
exact ought of their servants. It was therefore much more agreeable both to the
wisdom and justice of Almighty God to impose the commandment rather on the
Masters then on the servants, for thereby was prevented the disobedience of
servants to their Masters, and the punishment that might attend on that, and
the breach of the law of nations, (all which the other had occasioned) and yet
the Masters were in noe sort wronged: for their servants remained in their
power, no less on the Sabbath, then the other six common days, only the Lord
did qualify, and determine the act, or execution of that power, on the Sabbath
day namely to command their servants cessation from bodily labor and instead
of that to exercise themselves in spiritual works of holiness; it was I say
(to establish the commandment in such form) more agreeable to the wisdom,
and justice of God; and was it not also to his goodness, and compassion? For
say that the commandment touching servants vacation was given to themselves,
not to their Masters, should not thereby poor servants (to whom every where
else the law of God appears mild and pitiful) be entangled with
inextricable perplexity? For suppose his Master inioyne him some work on the
Sabbath day (covetous Masters may soon do it) especially if they think that
precept touching their servants cessation, not to touch them) or else they may
be ignorant of the law of God, (as Christians and Jews, may happily serve
Pagans) Admit I say some Master commands his servant to work on the Sabbath,
what should the servant do, should he work? God has forbidden him; should he
not work? His Master has commanded him: for the law of God is set at strife
with the law of nations, and that poor servant like the Sailor between Sylla
and Charybdis, stands perplexed and afflicted in the midst between stripes
and sin: for he must of necessity either disobey Gods commandment, which is
sin; or his Masters, which is attended with stripes. Besides it is absurd
that the law of God, should restrain the servant from obeying his Master, and
yet not restrain the Master from commanding his servant unlawful things: As it
is also another absurdity that that day which by the law given was manifestly
intended to bring servants release, and remission of their weekly toil;
should by the decree of the law it self above all other days breed their
greatest perplexities: forasmuch as above all other days (if their Masters be
not men that fear God) enforced they are (there is no avoidance) to venture
either on sin or stripes, for either God must be disobeyed, and sin
cleaves to their souls, or their Masters; and stripes light upon their
bodies, either they must obey God, and be plagued by men; or obey men, and be
condemned by God: you will say it is better to obey God then men; and worse to
diobey him that can cast both body and soul into hell, then him that can only
for a time afflict the body: true, who doubts it? But that is not the point I
stand upon; the point is how it agrees with the tender goodness, and
compassion of Almighty God toward poor servants (whose condition is yet
honest and lawful) to plunge them into such perplexities, as namely to impose
on them a commandment, which they can neither keep nor break without a
mischief and inconvenience; neither keep as the servants of men nor break as
they are the servants of God: neither keep without sharp punishment; nor
break without heavy sin: all which intanglement of servants, and
calumniation against both the justice and mercy of God, is clearly avoided, if
the commandment be given (as the tenor of it does simply import) to the
Masters, and not to the servants; which I have sufficiently proved, both by the
evidence of holy scripture, so to have been, and by the evidence and
inforcement of reason, that it should be so. And does not the practice of holy
governors registered in the Scriptures, declare, that they had the same
understanding of the commandment? Nehemiah, when he saw among the Jews at
Jerusalem the Sabbath profaned with treading of wine presses, carrying of
burdens, buying and selling, whom reproves he for it? The servants by whose
employment and labor these things were done, and the Sabbath defiled? No but
them under whose power the servants were, the rulers of Judah; and what rulers?
the Magistrates only? Noe such matter; but the freemen of Judah, that is to say
the Masters of those Servants: for such (namely freemen) the word (...) there
used does properly import, not only the Magistrates or rulers of the
commonwealth, for the septuagint which (being them selves Jews) I hold, best
knew the property of their own language; translate (...) by the greek word
(...) which word is properly and directly opposed to servants: and every where
almost in the old Testament where the hebrew word (...) is found (which is
known, to signify a freeman) and is translated in the greek (...), it is in
the chalde (...), which is manifestly known to be the same with the hebrew
(...) but far more usual in the Chaldie tongue. They were the freemen of
Judah then that by Nehemiah were called to account, and reproved, for the
profanation of the Sabbath by those servile labors which (no question) had
been executed by their servants; but if the servants by those labors, had
themselves transgressed the commandment: had he not done both justly, to have
made them partakers of the reproof, who had been partakers of the sin?
(seeing the commandment of God lay equal on both) and wisely to; that if he
could not restrain the masters from commanding, yet he might restrain the
servants from obeying, and so have two strings to his bow? This Nehemiah did
not (who understood well the commandment) but rebuked the freemen, or Masters
only, and omitted the servants; and yet, dealt (you will not deny I am sure)
both justly and (...) for had he done more wisely think you to rebuke servants
for not resting on the Sabbath, that would have rested with all their hearts,
if they had not been constrained to work? Or had he done more justly to
exact that of the servants which, (for ought that appears) the commandment
of God exacted not from them? For what work is it that men are forbidden of
the Sabbath? Is it not the same that is permitted on the six days, their own
work. Thou shall do all thy work (...). and is it the servants work where
about as a servant he is employed, that neither is undertaken of himself, nor
for himself? that neither begins nor ends in himself, but begins in
his Masters command, and ends merely in his Masters profit; and from
beginning to end is performed in his Masters fear? It is manifest that in the
account of God, it is not; for God beholds the heart, and that is a man's own
work with him, that proceeds from his own will. And therefore in Isaiah: it
is the will that is forbidden, about the profaning of the Sabbath, that which
in the law was (...) thy work is there (...) thy Isaiah. 58. (...)
will and that most justly, for the will it self indeed is the proper seat
and subject of sin, which essentially is nothing else, but the inordinate, or
unruly election, or resolution of the will varying from the Scripture, or Gods
law (for this very election of man's will, is the proper form of actual sin)
these outward unlawful actions of ours, are but the expressions or
manifestations or fruits or effects of sin, sin properly they are not which
has her residence, and inhesion in the soul it self, and passes forth of it
only the tincture and evidence and name of sin they carry with them, because
they issue from a sinful determination of the will, and are no whit further
sinful then they are voluntary. Seeing therefore sin consists especially
in the exorbitance of the will, they that are only ministers of another
exorbitant will, are only ministers of another man's sin, which so far only
becomes their own sin, as their own will concurreth thereunto. The
servant therefore doing that work on the Sabbath day in obedience to his
Master, which of his own will and election he would not do, although the
work whereby the commandment of God is transgressed, be in some sort his, yet
the transgression is none of his, but his Masters, that exacted the work, so
that although the work as naturally considered be the servants, yet morally it
is the Masters; The labor of it is the servants, but the sin of it is the
Masters: for the sin is not the servants obedience to the Masters
commandment, but in the Masters disobedience to Gods commandment, which has
indeed prohibited the work of servants in the Sabbath, but yet the
prohibition is imposed, and directed to their Masters not to them, who are only
ministers, not authors of their own labors; now in the imputation of sin,
difference is to be made betwixt the authors and the ministers. Betwixt the
principal, and isntrumental agents. For is it the sin of the eye when it
beholds vanity, and of the tongue when it is loose to blaspheame, slander,
ly, or of the hand when it is stretched forth to strike, and shed blood? They
may be termed the sins of these members I confess, because in these sins,
these members are abused, but are these works properly the sins of these
instruments, or of the dissolute mind; of those subordinate Ministers, and
servants of the soul, that perform their natural obedience; or of the
inordinate soul herself that misgouerneth them? But you may object, that
these are Objection.
natural instruments, in the works of the soul, and confer only power, but
the servant is a voluntary instrument in the works of his Master and
conferreth also will: I answer; he conferreth will indeed Sol.
if he be a good servant, by reason of the obligation of obedience wherein he
stands to his Master, but yet not absolute but conditional will: not the
self election, but only the obedience and yielding of his will; and that only
as it is his masters work: not as it is his Masters sin; for the work on
the Sabbath, having sin annexed to it, and so being a sinful work, the
servant and the Master must divide it betwixt them: the work is the servants,
and the sin is the masters, for the servant does but his duty, in obeying his
Masters commandment, but the Master transgresses his, in disobeying Gods
commandment, touching his servants ceasing from that labor: But seeing I have
begun to object I will proceed a little farther in that course, both the
more evidently to declare my meaning least it be obnoxious to calumniation, and
also to resolve the objections that may be produced against servants obedience
touching work on the Sabbath if my imagination be so good as to find them,
and my learning also to satisfy them. For first, it seems that servants are
touching this Object.
commandment in better cond^^^on then other men: if by their works on the
Saba^th they transgress it not: and transgress it they do not if it be not
imposed on them, but only on their Masters. Touching Sol.
them I answer that the works of servants are of two sorts, some proceeding
from them as they are servants that is upon their Masters commandment: others
proceeding from their own election: unto which namely not by any commandment
of their Masters, but by the way of their own desires they are carried. Of the
first sort of works they are only Ministers, of the second they are authors.
And touching this second sort I confess (although of the former it be far
otherwise) both that servants have a several obligation of their own, and
that their transgression and sin is several, and therefore that themselves
are bound to answer it to the justice of God, but whether the sin of these
second works, be peculiarly the servants, or that the Master also participate
with the servant in that guiltiness. It may be a question. for if they be done
merely by the servants election (beside the knowledge and contrary to the
commandment of his Master) it seems to be particularly the servants sin.
But if they be occasioned by the Masters negligence then does he certainly
participate in guiltiness with his servant although in a diverse sort, for it
is a sin of commission in the servant (...) unlawful act, and a sin of
omission (...) the (...) neglecting his due care, because by the (...) Almi^hty
God the Master is bound not ^nly (...) command his servant to work, but to
command him not to work on the Sabbath day: well then the works which
servants do on the Sabbath day on their own election are condemned: the
works (...) do by obedience, are excused by their Masters ^mandement; but
what works are so excused* Ar^ all? No; but briefly all those which while they
are performed as by the Servants of men, they that d^^ ^^^m are not impeached
for being the servants of God. That is to say the works of labor but not the
works of sin: for to the first they are obliged by the law of nations, but the
second are forbidden them by the law of God, not nakedly forbidden as their
labor on the Sabbath is, but directly and immediately forbidden them, for it is
clear that all the other commandments being indifferently imposed without
either specification or exception of any person whatsoever, respect not any
more one then another: and therefore hold all men under an equal obligation,
and so was it altogether convenient, because they are no less the secret laws
of nature, then the revealed laws of God. and no less written with the finger
of God in the fleshly tables of the heart, then in the tables of stone, all of
them forbidding those things that by their property and nature, or (as the
Schoolmen say) ex suo genere, are evil; but the commandment that forbids
servile works on the Sabbath is of a different sort, first because the servant
is, touching the matter which it forbids (labor) wholly subject to another
man's command: secondly because the commandment forbids not the servant to
work but only forbids the Master his servants work; thirdly because the
thing it self namely servants labor, is not evil materially and ex suo
genere, as the matters of the other negative commandments are: but only
circumstantially, because its done upon such a day: for idolatry, blasphemy,
dishonouring of Parents, murder, adultery, theft, false testimony, coveting of
that is other men's; which are the matter of other commandments are evil in
their own nature; and therefore forbidden, because they are evil in their
own nature: But to labor on the Sabbath is not by nature evil, but therefore
evil because it is forbidden. So that the native illness in the other, causes
the prohibition, but the prohibition in this causes the evil, for laboring
on the seventh day; if God had not forbidden it had not been evil at all (no
more then to labor on the sixth,) as not being interdicted by any law of
nature, as the matters of all the other commandments are for although the
secret instinct of nature teaches all men, that sometime is to be withdrawn
from their bodily labors, and to be dedicated to the honor of God (which even
the prophanest Gentiles, amidst all the blind superstition, and darkness,
wherewith they were covered, in some sort did) appointing set times to be spent
in sacrifice and devotion to their Idols, which they took for their Gods) yet
to observe one day in the number of seven, as a certain day of that number,
and namely the seventh in the rank, or a whole day by the revolution of the
Sun, and with that severe exactness of restraining all work (as was
enjoined to the Jews) is but merely ceremonial, brought in by positive law;
and is not of the law of nature; For had that form of keeping Sabbath, been a
law of nature, then had it obliged the Gentiles as well as the Jews, seeing
they participate both equal in the same nature: yet it did not so, but was
given to the Israelites, to be a special mark of their separation Exodus 31.
13. Ezech. 20. 12. 20.
from the Gentiles, and of their particular participation to God: neither shall
we find either in the writings of Heathen men (whereof some were in their
kind very religious) that any of them had ever any sense of it, or in the
records of Moses, that it was ever observed by any of the holy Patriarchs
before it was pronounced in mount Sinai: But if it had been a law of nature
her self, and so had obliged all the Patriarchs; and as large as nature her
self, and so obliged all the Gentiles: and had it not been as durable, as
nature too, and so obliged us Christians also? Certainly it had; for if that
precise vacation and sanctification of the Sabbath day, had consisted by the
law of nature, then must it have been by the decree of all Divines immutable,
and consequently right grievous should the sin of Christians be, which now
profane that day with ordinary labors, and chiefly theirs, which first
translated the celebration of that day, being the seventh, to the first day of
the week; who yet are certainly supposed to be none other then the Apostles of
our Savior:

To turn to the point and clearly to determine it; the Master only is
accountable unto God, for the servants work done on the Sabbath: but for what
work? Namely for all the works of labor, but not for the works of sin:
and how for the works of labor? Namely, if he do them not absolutely, of his
own election, but respectively, as of obedience to his Masters command; for
touching labors, servants are directly obliged to their Masters. But touching
sins, themselves are obliged immediately to God. Therefore those they may do
because their master commands them: these they may not do (although commanded)
because God forbids them.

The servants then may not in any case, sin at the commandment of any Master
on earth: because he has received immediately a direct commandment to the
contrary, from his Master in heaven. For it is better to obey God then man. And
there is no proportion betwixt the duties which they owe as servants to their
Masters according to the flesh. And which they owe as Children to the father of
spirits: or betwixt the obligation wherein they stand to men, who have power
but over their bodies in limited cases, and that for a season. And that
infinite obligation wherein they stand to him that is both creator and
preserver, and redeemer, and Judge of body and soul; sin therefore they may
not, if their Masters command them, because God has forbidden them (not only
forbidden I say but forbidden it them) But labor they may if their Masters
command them, because God has no way forbidden them that; God has indeed
forbidden the Masters exacting that work on the Sabbath; but he has not
forbidden the Servants execution of that work if it demanded or exacted: he
has restrained the Master from commanding it, but he has not restrained the
servants from obeying if it be commanded, for although I acknowledge the
servants work on the Sabbath to imply sin: yet I say it is not the servants
fault. And albeit I confess the commandment of God be transgressed and God
disobeyed by such works on the Sabbath, yet it is not the servant that
transgresses the commandment, it is not he that disobeyeth God. For the
question is not the passine sense, whether God be displeased with these works,
but of the active who displeases him. The thing is confessed but the person is
questioned. Confessed, that is, that there is sin committed in that work,
but questioned whose sin it is. For work having relation both to the Master
and to the servant: to the Masters commanding and to the servants executing; I
affirm that the work is sinful only on the Masters part, not on the
servants, namely as it is an effect of the Masters command not as an effect of
the servants obedience. And the case seems clear. The matter whereabout the
servants labor is, is the Masters. So is the command that sets him to it. So
is the awe and fear that keeps him to it. So is the profit that redoundeth of
it. And above all the commandments of God whereby that work of the servant is
forbidden is given directly to the Master. And in the servant all is contrary.
It is not his own work. It proceeds not from his own will. His condition
exacteth his obedience about labor, and above all God commands of ceasing from
labor belongs not to him, I mean not to him directly, as the person to whom
it is given, but only as the subject or matter whereof it is given; for he is
one of them indeed, whose works are forbidden, but not of them to whom it is
forbidden, one of whom but not to whom the commandment was imposed. But where
the law was not imposed, sin cannot be imputed seeing sin is nothing but
the transgression of the law; it is not therefore the servants but the Masters
sin.

But there is another objection, for admit the servants Objection.
work upon the Sabbath be the Masters sin, that imposes it. Is it not sin
to give consent and furtherance to another man's sin? But this servants do
when they execute their Masters commandments, and consequently it is unlawful
so to yield, lawful therefore it is to resist and reject such commandment. I
answer first touching the point of consenting that in such a work is to be
considered the Sol.
substance and the quality, that is the work it self and the sinfulness of
it, servants may consent to it, as it is their masters work, not as it is
their Masters sin, for except these things be distinguished, God himself can
no more avoid the calumniation of being the author, then poor servants of
being the ministers of sin; for that God concurreth with every man to every
action whatsoever, as touching the substance of the action, is out of all
question, seeing both all power whence actions issue are derived from him, and
that no power can proceed into act without his present assistance and
operation, but yet to the crime, the faultiness, the inordination, the
unlawfulness of the action (wherein the nature of sin does for malice
consist) he concurreth not. But it wholly proceeds from the infection of the
concupiscence, wherewith the faculties of the soul are originally defiled, the
actions themselves issuing from the powers, and the sinfulness of the actions
from the sinfulness of the powers, like corrupt streams flowing from filthier
springs. It is not therefore every concurrence of the servants with the Master
to a sinful action which causes the stain, and imputation of sin upon the
servant: as when he consents and concurreth only to the action not to the
sin: namely likes and approues it, as his masters work, yet utterly dislikes
it, as it is his masters transgression, likes of the work for the obligation
of obedience, wherein (touching work) he stands to serve his Master, and yet
dislikes of the sin, for the great obligation wherein every one stands
toward the honor of God. But yet (to answer secondly to the point of
resisting) the servant ought not for any dislike or detestation Sol.
of the annexed sin, to resist or reject his Masters commandment touching
the work: for in obeying he is at most but the minister of another man's sin
(and that as they say per accidence, namely as it is annexed to such a work)
but in resisting he is directly the author of his own sin, by withdrawing
his obedience about bodily service from him that is his Lord according to the
flesh: even that obedience wherein both by his own covenant and the law of
nations he stands bound unto him, and that without any exception of the
Sabbath more then other days. And is it wisdom in a servant to commit
himself sin to prevent his Masters sin? That is to offend God himself
least another man should offend him; no not so, we must not do evil that
good may come thereon (especially do evil our selves that another good may
come of it) rather we must carry two eyes about us that while we look with
one to the end (that is to the glory of God), we look with another to the
means that they be lawful and agreeable to the will of God, and not dishonor
him with our sinful actions, while we would honor him with our good
intentions. But yet one scruple Object.
remains because every person that did any work on the Sabbath day, was by
the law to be cut off from his people, and to dye the death, every person
therefore, the servant as well as the master. I answer Exo. 31, 14. 15.
that the judicial commandment is to be understood Sol.
of the same persons to whom the moral commandment was given; the
commandment touching punishment of them, to whom the commandment the offense
was imposed: but I proved before, that the moral commandment was not imposed
to servants as servants, but to them that were at liberty. All they therefore
that did any work on the Sabbath were to die the death by the Judicial law:
they I say that did it: not they that were made to do it; which were as well
passive as active in doing of it: namely they that did it of election, as free
that might obstaine from work and would not, not they that did it of
iniunction and necessity, as servants that would abstain from work and might
not; whose condition was such that they would not work by their masters
direction, might be made to work by their masters compulsion, for a hard case
it were if poor servants to whom no commandment to cease from work was given
by God; and yet might be compelled to work by men, should dye for it, if they
did so work. It is therefore to be understood of them that work willingly of
themselves or (as authors) cause others to work (as masters do their
servants) not of them who only (as ministers) and against their wills are set
to work. And rather because the work of the servant (that I say which he
does by the commandment of his master to whom for matter of labor he is
merely subordinate) even reason and equity will interpret the masters work.
And certainly that God accounts it so, the declaration of that precept in
another place does, make manifest. Exodus 23. 12.
Six days thou shall do thy work, and the seventh day thou shall rest that
thine Ox and thine Ass, and thy Son, and thy Maid, etc. may be refreshed,
for is it not manifest that the servants work is accounted the Masters, seeing
the rest from the Masters work is the refreshing of the servants, the Master
therefore who by the moral law was commanded that his servants should not
work on the Sabbath was by the Judicial to be punished with death, if the
servant did work that day by his commandment.

And thus have I proved my assertion, namely that the commandment of the
Sabbath was not given, nor fit to be given to the servants themselves but to
their governors, both by arguments of reason which is the rule of men, and
authority of Scriptures, which is the rule of Christians, and cannot find any
thing material in either of both that may reprove it: but yet if I should
admit (which I doubt you will never prove) that the commandment was directly
given to servants themselves, as servants, and that they might lawfully disobey
their Masters touching those works where by the precept of the Sabbath might
be transgressed: yet have I another exception against your doctrine; namely for
condemning every light work (such as inviting of guests, or fetching of wine
from a neighbors house, or giving a horse provender) (for these are the very
instances which bred the question) for transgression of Gods commandments,
forbidden on the Sabbath: no; it is not; the commandment imports no such
thing for it is not [(...)] that is every work, but [(...)] that is there
forbidden, that is every servile work, for such the word [(...)] properly does
import, and servile work, by the interpretation of the best divines is
accounted, either that which is attended with the toil of the body, or at
least intended and directed to lucre and gain of riches, with some care of the
mind, such as men's ordinary work is wont to be on common days. And that the
work there forbidden has a special relation to the gain of riches is the
better appare^t because the same word [(...)] signifies (opes) as well as
(opus) riches as well as work, and not only where the commandment was
pronounced (in the 20 of Exodus) but wheresoever it is repeated in the books
of the law^, which is oftentimes (and differently for other circumstances) the
same word [(...)] is ever retained and never changed, not every work therefore
absolutely, but every work of such a kind, namely consisting in toil and
tending to gain is restrained by the commandment, and is there not evident
reason to understand it so? For seeing the intendment of the precept is clearly
(in the point of that days vacation) that the body should be refreshed by
abstinence from labor, And (in the point of sanctification of it) the mind
should be refreshed by attendance to spiritual exercise: it follows
manifestly that if there be any works that resolve not the body and so hinder
not the refreshing of it, nor dissolve and alienate the mind from the service
of God, and meditation of Godliness, that these works are not forbidden
because neither the vacation which the commandment imports, nor that
sanctification which it intends is impeached by them.

And if you will object that even very light works are expressly forbidden in
the law, so that to kindle fire on the sabbath day was unlawful, I must
answer Exodus 353.
you that that and some other were but ceremonial precepts not moral (and
belonged to the curious observance of the commandment) and therefore obliged
the Jews and none else: for that such light and labourlesse works on the
Sabbath were no transgression at all of the moral commandment the practice of
him whose every action was our instruction, of him who was the giver of the law
as God, and the only keeper of it as man, will put all out of question, for had
that exact and extreme vacation on the Sabbath been required by Gods moral
commandment, and so every light work been a transgression of it, would not
our Savior have repooued the Jews Luke. 13. 15.
for loosing their beasts from the staules, and leading them to water on the
Sabbath day? Yet he mentions, and reproues it not (and think Sr by the way,
he that condemned not bringing of beasts to drink, would not condemn bringing
meat to beasts) or would he have (not suffered only) but excused the Luke. 6.
plucking of ears of corn, and rubbing out the grains on the Sabbath day as
he did in his disciples? or would he himself Ioh. 9. 6.
on the Sabbath day have made clay, and anointed with it the eyes of the
blind? or would he have commanded others to do such works on the Sabbath, as
he did the impotent man, whom he had healed, namely to Ioh. 5. 8. 9.
take up his bed that day and depart? See then how this severe preciseness of
yours agrees with the practice and doctrine of our Savior: who not only
suffered these light works to be done without reprehension, but excused them,
but did them himself; but commanded others to do them: therefore in his
judgment, who was the law giver, and must be the Judge of all the sins of
men; they were no transgression of the commandment of the Sabbath.

For vain it were to reply that Christ was Lord of the Sabbath, and therefore
might dispense with the commandment at his own pleasure: vain it were I say,
for although he were Lord of the Sabbath as God, being so the law giver, yet
was he subject to the commandment, as man, being as the Apostle says Galat.
4. 4.
made under the law; for what else imports that kind of speech (made under
the law) but that he which by nature was not under the law, as being God, was
yet made under the law as becoming man: which law first himself pronounced:
he came ^o fulfill, and secondly his Apostles that he had fulfilled it in that
he had no sin: but every transgression of the law was sin, therefore in no
sort he transgreffed the law, and it not only were (not) vain in this manner
to excuse our Saviors actions, but a very hard and dangerous point, when
question is made of our Saviors fulfilling of the law, to fly in this case to
the refuge of dispensations: as if our Savior that came to satisfy for all our
transgressions of the law, performed not the law himfelfe, with such perfect
and exact obedience as might answer the justice of God, and the strictresse of
his commandments, but that something must be helped or supplied by
dispensation. The truth is therefore that our Saviors obedience, answered
exactly, and perfectly satisfied the exigence of that, and all other
commandments of Almighty God, performing all to the utmost that they required,
and therefore those easy and slender works, were no breaches of the
commandment touching the Saboth.

But let that be admitted also; first that the commandment was immediately
given to servants, Secondly that it was given touching the lightest degree of
works. Let servants be the persons, and those works the matter to whom, and
of which the commandment was given, is your doctrine yet justified hereby, and
subject to no other reproof? The persons have afforded me exceptions against
it because the commandment was not given to servants. And the matter because
it was not imposed touching that light sort of works; the time also will,
because it cannot be understood of the Lords day; for what day was it, of which
the charge of vacation was so strictly given? Was it not the seventh day of
the week? The seventh (says the precept) is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God;
In it thou shall do no work. And why the seventh? Because in six days the
Lord finished all the works of creation, and rested the seventh day;
therefore he sanctified the seventh day, and what day is it whereof we
question? The Lords day? That Is the first day of the week It is therefore the
seventh day of the week (the Sabbath of the Jews) not the first day of the
week (the Sabbath of Christians) that was so strictly by Gods commandment
destined to rest. Therefore the works done on the Sabbath day are no
transgressions of Gods commandments. But Object.
you will say the old Sabbath is abolished, and the celebration of it
translated to the first day of the week. Translated, by whom? By any
commandment of God? Where is it? The holy Scripture we know to Sol.
be sufficient; it contains all the commandments of God, whether of things
to be done, or to be avoided, or to be believed. Let me hear either one
precept, one word of God out of the old Testament that it should be
translated, or one precept, one word of the son of God, out of the new
Testament, commanding it to be translated, I say one word of any of his
Apostles intimating that by Christ's commandment it was translated. It is
certain that there is none. Therefore it is evident that the solemnity of the
Lords day was not established Iure divino. Not by any commandment of God, and
consequently that to work on that day, is certainly no breach of any divine
commandment. How then has the first day of the week gained the celebration
and solemnity to become the Sabbath of the Christians? By the constitution of
the Church, and only by that, yet of that most ancient Church, I confess that
next followed the ascension of our redeemer. But yet all this is but Ius
humanum it is but the decree of men, which must not equal it self with Gods
commandment, and must be content with a less degree of authority and
obligation then the commandment touching the Sabbath, might challenge that was
pronounced in the ears of men with the voice of God, and written in tables
with the finger of God. What then do I doubt of the just abolishment of the
Jews Sabbath; no in no sort; it is abolished and that justly I confess; yet
not by any repeal of any contrary decree; but only by expiration, because it
is grown out of date; It was established for a sign * Exodus 31. 13.
of difference betwixt the people of God and the profane nations, the Jews
and Gentiles: but this difference is ceased, the partition wall is broken
down, Jews and Gentiles in Christ are made all one: all are become the people
of God, the Sabbath was (says the Apostle) a shadow * Ezech. 20. 12.
of things to come, whereof the body was in Christ, the body therefore being
come, what should the shadow be expressed? For was it the shadow of Christ's
Colos. ^. 17.
resting in the grave that day? That is past; or was it a shadow of rest and
liberty from the slavery of sin in the kingdom of grace, that is obtained;
or is it a shadow of the eternal rest of the blessed in the kingdom of Glory?
That is sure to be obtained (Christ has given his word, and we have received
the pledge of his holy spirit) These things are shadowed in Sabbath. And these
things are already performed in Christ. The first is past, the second is
present, the third is assured. The Sabbath therefore that was the shadow of
these things, when the things themselves were come, vanished of it self. But
might not the celebration of the Sabbath, which thus ceased, be justly
translated by the Church to the first day of the week? Yes certainly both
might and was justly. For I consider that the generality, was of the moral
law, of the law of nature, namely that men should sequester sometime from
worldly affairs, which they might dedicate to the honor of God, only the
speciality, that is the limitation and designement of that time, was the
churches ordinance appointing first one certain day, and that in relation of
Christian assemblies, namely that they might meet and pray, and praise God
together with one voice in the congregation. And secondly defigning that one
day to the first day of the week, for some special reasons and remembrances.
For first it was the day of Christ's resurrection from the dead. Secondly it was
the day of the holy Ghosts descention from Heaven to power infinite graces upon
Christians. The first of them for our justification as the Apostle speaks.
The second for the sanctification, and edification of the whole Church (to omit
some other reasons of less importance) justly therefore was the consecration
of the Sabbath translated to that day. But what of that? What if the
consecration of the Sabbath was by the Church translated to the first day of
the week? Was therefore the commandment of God translated also? That that day
ought to be observed under the same obligation with the Sabbath? For if the
commandment of God were not translated by the Church, together with the
celebration from the seventh day to the first day, then is working on the
first day no violation of Gods commandment; was the commandment of God then
translated from the Sabbath to the Lords day by the decree of the Church? No:
the Church did it not, let me see the act. The Church could not do it, let me
see the authority: the Church could not translate the commandment to the first
day, which God himself had namely limited to the seventh. For could the
Church make that Gods commandment which was not his commandment? Gods
commandment was to rest on the seventh day and work on the first; therefore
to rest on the first and work on the seventh was not his commandment: For
does the same commandment of God enjoin both labor and rest on the same day?
Is there fast and loose in the same commandment with God? Thou shall work on
the first day says that, and work on the seventh says this. Can the Church
make these the same commandment? But say the Church has this incredible and
inconceivable power: Say it may forbid to work on the first day, by the virtue
of the very same precept. That does neither expressly command or license to
work on that day. Say that the Church of God may translate the commandment of
God from one day to another at their pleasure, did they it therefore? I spoke
before of their authority whether they might do it. I enquire now of the act,
whether they did it; did the Church (I say) ever constitute, that the same
obligation of Gods commandment which lay on the Jews, for keeping of the
Sabbath day should be translated and laid upon the Christians for keeping of
the Lords day? Did the Church this, no no, they did it not; all the wit and
learning in the World will not prove it.

But you may object, if the old Sabbath vanished Object.
and the commandment of God was limited and fixed to that day only, then is
one of Gods commandments perished. I answer that the generality of that
commandment to keep a Sabbath wherein God Sol.
might be honored, was moral; But the speciality of it, namely to keep, (1)
one day of seven, (2) the seventh, (3) one whole day, (4) with precise
vacancy from all work, were merely ceremonial; the specialities then of the
commandments are vanished: But for the generality of it, it is a law of
nature, and remains. But, as the speciality of that commandment implies
plain contradiction, with the sabaaticall of the Lords day, so the generality
of it can enforce nothing for it, for these are miserable consequents, (indeed
plain fallacies of the consequent) that God has sometime commanded vacancie,
for his honor, therefore he has commanded the first day of the week to be
that time, or this, God has commanded us some time to rest, therefore that
time we must precisely abstain from all manner of works: can the Church make
these good consequences? If it cannot, the celebration of the Lords day, can
with no enforcement of reason be deduced out of the morality of Gods
commandment. But if you will reply: that the Church has established the first
day of the week to be the Christians sabbath not by way of consequence, as
deducing it out of commandment but merely by authority, appropriating and
fixing Gods moral commandment to it; you may say your pleasure, but I shall
neither believe, nor you prove that such authority belongs to the Church: or
that such an act has been established by the Church: which I am sure you can
never do neither of both, for seeing that all divines acknowledge that the
singling out of such a day to be sanctified, namely the seventh rather then
any other was merely ceremonial, although it was Gods own designation. I
hope that you will confess the special designement of the first day of the
week to that honor, before other days, being made only by the Church, to be
also but ceremonial. But certain it is that no ceremonies, which come not
under the obligation of Gods moral law, should oblige to the observation of
ceremonies. Therefore it will never consist with reason, that the moral law of
God can by any authority of the Church oblige Christians to the celebration of
the Lords day.

It is not therefore the translation of the old commandment of God from the
one day to the other (which yet if it were translated) can oblige servants no
otherwise then it did under the old law) but the institution of a new
commandment, of the Church her self (yet guided by the spirit of God) that
consecrated that day to the solemn service of God; what then does not the
constitution of the Church, for the celebration of the Lords day, bind equally
the consciences of men as the old commandment did, for the celebration of the
Sabbath? Bind it does, but not equally: for the Church is no way equal unto
God; the authority of it is less then the authority of God, therefore is the
obligation of the Churches ordinance, less then the obligation of Gods
ordinance. But yet bind the conscience it does, and that firmly and
effectually, (even the conscience of every member of the Church) to true and
exact obedience. For he * Mat. 18, 17.
that hears not the Church is no better then an heathen or a publican. And
never was Church on earth more undefiled then that that ordained that
institution. He that despises the Apostles of Christ despises Christ
himself, and the Apostles were governors of that Church: for acknowledged it
is that the celebration of the Lords day, was the ordinance of that Church and
of those governors. Therefore it is sure that that ordinance does oblige the
conscience of every Christian man; but if you ask me how far does that
constitution of the Church oblige the conscience? I answer you as far as it
does command, (you will desire no more) further it cannot: It cannot oblige
further, then it does ordain; it cannot bind the conscience for guiltiness,
further then it does for obedience; because all guiltiness does presuppose
disobedience; now that the Church ordained solemn assemblies of Christians, to
be celebrated that day to the honor of God, and in them the invocation of Gods
holy name, thanksgiving, hearing of the holy Scriptures and receiving of the
Sacraments, is not denied; It is out of question, all antiquity affords
plentiful remembrance of it. But that it inioyneth that severe and exact
vacation, from all works on the Lords day, which the commandment of God
required in the Jews Sabbath, you will never prove. It relisheth too much of
the Jewish ceremonies, to be proved by Christian divinity. For this is no
proof of it, that the Lords day is succeeded in place of the Sabbath. Or as
some divines term it, as the heir of the Sabbath. It is I say no proof at
all, (except it were established by the same authority, and the observance of
it, charged with the same strictness of commandment) for if it succeed the
sabbath in place, must it therefore succeed in equal preciseness of
observation? (So if the Pope succeeds Peter in place, must he therefore
succeed him in equality of power?) the Lords day therefore succeeds the
Sabbath in the point of sanctification, for celebration of the assemblies, for
the Church has precisely commanded that, but not in the point of exact and
extreme vacation, from every kind of work, for that the Church has not
commanded: and so although the Lords day may well be termed the heir of the
Sabbath, yet is it not ex ass haeres as the civil lawyers speak. It
inheriteth not the whole right of the Sabbath, for that right and prerogative
of the Saoth was not given to the Sabbath and its heirs; it it was no fee
simple (and if I may speak in the lawyers style) it was only a tenure for
term of life: namely during the life of the ceremonial law, which life ended
in the death of our Savior. This reason therefore of the succession of the
Lords day in place of the Sabbath is no reason. Any other reason besides this
or else authority which I might in your behalf object to my self, I know none
worthy mentioning: for the commandment of God as I have proved is not of this
day. The commandment of the Church is of this day, but not of these works,
neither will all the histories of the ancient Church, nor cannons of the
ancient counsels, nor any other monuments or registers of antiquity afford you
(as I am certainly persuaded search them as curiously as you can) record of any
such constitution of the Church for the general restraint of works on the
Lords day; you may find I know in some of the ancient Fathers much sounding
the prerogative of that day: as that it was a holy day in Hist. Eccles. lib. 4.
cap. 22.
Eusebius: a day of Christian assemblies in Apolog. 2.
Justin Martyr; and a day of rejoicing in Apologe. cap. 16.
Tertullian: a festival day in Epi. ad mag.
Ignatius; and some more of the like, but does any of all these import or imply
a general restraint? a desista^ce from all work? No, they do not; neither
shall you find in these, nor in any other records of antiquity any
constitutions of the Apostles; and of the first Church extant to have effect;
no nor any relation or remembrance that such a constitution had ever been made
by them nay I find clear evidence to the contrary, for would Constantine the
Great (that most holy Emperor and the best nursing Father of Christian
religion that ever Prince was) would he I say have licensed by his decree, the
country people freely (libere liciteque are the words of the constitution) to
attend their sowing of grain, setting of vines, and other husbandry on the
Lords day, if those works had been forbidden by the commandment of God, or
decree of the Apostles, and first Church? Or would the Fathers in the council
of Laodicea (one of the most ancient and approved counsels of the Church)
enjoin the vacancy of the Lords day with this condition; And if men can?
Certainly servants full ill can if they be constrained by their Masters to
work: would they I say have added such a condition, had it been simply
unlawful, for all sorts of people by the ancient sanctification of the first
Church to do any work that day? It appears therefore that there were no
such universal constitutions of the Church. The actual forbearing of all
works by some Christians that day I stand not on: nor on the exhortations of
some ancient Fathers to that purpose, some remembrances of both are to be found
I know, but these are particular examples, and persuasions; constitutions of
the Church they are not, edicts of sundry Princes likewise, and decrees of some
provincial counsels are extant I confess in record to the same effect, and
those are constitutions indeed but partly, not of the Church, partly not
universal, nor very ancient, and therefore are no sanctions to oblige the
whole Church, which beside the law of God and decrees of the Apostles (to whom
the government of the whole Church by our Savior was committed) and the canons
of the universal Synods no positive constitution can do. What then? Would I
set at liberty that every man may freely profane the Lords day with
extraordinary labor? No, I would not, I confess it is meet Christians should
abandon all worldly affairs that day and dedicate it wholly to the honor of
God, that Christians should not be less devout and religious in celebrating of
the Lords day, then the Jews were in celebrating of there Sabbath, for the
obligation of our thankfulness to God is more then theirs, although the
obligation of his commandment to us in that behalf is less; Meet it is I
say. And wish with all my heart it were most religiously performed even with
all abstinence from worldly affairs, and all attendance to Godly devotion. But
yet notwithstanding I deny that together with the institution of the Lords day
there was any such constitution of theChurch established whereby men were
obliged to the strict desisting from all work. But what does the honor of God
then stand at the courtesy of man to profane that day (if they list) with
work at their pleasure? Not so, for beside the constitutions of some ancient
counsels both the edicts of christian Princes have every where restrained that
profanation: neither of which (for matters that fall under their power) can
be transgressed without sin and disobedience to God, whose commandments
although not directly yet reductiuely) those constitutions are: for God has
commanded all men to honor their Parents (the parents of their country) stand
in the first rank. The son of God has commanded all Christians to hear the
Church, and that under forfeiture of communion of Saints, but they that despise
the Canons of the Church, or edicts of the Prince, hear not the one, honor
not the other, therefore they that transgress either of these constitutions,
transgress also Consequently I say though not immediately the commandments of
God, but yet neither of them both (to come near home) are transgressed by
servants if they work by their Masters commission, and not of their own
election, for neither does the one law or the other give liberty and warrant to
Servants to be rebellious to their Masters touching point of service, that day
more then others. But in forbidding of work, first they intend not your
precise abstinence from any light and labourlesse work as both the censure of
the Church, and judgment of temporal Magistrates make manifest, which never
took hold on any man for such manner of works. And secondly they purpose to
forbid the Masters commanding or allowing of work and not the servants obeying
if he be commanded; for the law is intended and takes hold of them that have
the liberty and power to keep it, not of them that have not, but are merely
under the power and disposition of another man, wherefore if Servants work on
the Lords day of their own choice, it is their own sin, but if their
Masters command, it is their masters sin. And he stands bound to answer
the law, no warrant therefore, nor encouragement have servants by any of these
laws, to reject their commandments touching matter of work or service on the
Sabbath or any other day.

And is not this more agreeable to the doctrine of the holy Apostles of our
Savior, every where delivered touching servants? Do they not often, and with
exceeding earnestnes command and exhort them to obedience, no where permitting
them any point of liberty, and that without exception of Master, of labor, or
of time? for (that we may take a very short view of their doctrine touching
servants obedience) what masters are they to whom servants ought to be
obedient? Infidells and believers says Paul (...). Tim. 6. 1. 2. Covetous and
froward says Peter 1. Pet. 2. 18. that is, even to all, obedient to all. How?
In what sort? From the heart says the Apostle, Collos. 3. 23. in singleness
of heart as unto Christ in another place: Ephesians. 6. 5. without any replying,
not so much as answering again. In a third Titus. 3. 9. That is in all
readiness and humility, obedient to all in such sort: how far? In what
points? Even in all things: servants be obedient to your Masters in all things.
Colos. 3. 22. please them in all things, Titus. 2, 9. think them worthy of all
honor. 1. Tim. 6. 1. In all things? Yea in all things belonging to the
condition of Servants; that is in all service, in all labor which is the
proper character of all servants, and (obedient to them in all things) why?
That the name of God and his doctrine be not evil spoken of, 1. Tim. 6. 1.
which two last points of the Apostles doctrine touching servants obedience I
would advise you Sr specially to consider, for whereas it is out of question,
that infidells exacted works of their Christian servants (as in the beginning
of the Church many believing servants had unbelieving masters) on the Lords day
no less then others; if their yielding to that exacting of their Masters had
been sin; would he have commanded them to obey their Masters in all things?
And to please them in all things without excepting of any day or of any labor?
For that heathen Masters would exact of Christian servants their ordinary
labor and service on the Lords day as well as on others you have no reason to
doubt, except you think that heathen men would tender and respect more the
religion of their Servants (that religion which themselves esteemed to be
superstition and folly) then their own profit. And then if Christian servants
should have withdrawn their obedience that day rejecting and resisting their
Masters commandments, whereas their unbelieving servants willingly obeyed
them, and labored for their profit, had they not caused the name of God which
they worshipped to be blaspheamed and the doctrine which they professed to be
evil spoken of? (which was the point of the Apostles doctrine I especially
remembered you of) That God I say which commanded and that doctrine which
instructed servants to disobey their Masters, and by depriving them of their
service caused their hindrance? The Apostle knew full well this was not the way
to propagate the Gospel, and enlarge the kingdom of Christ, he knew it was
Christian meekenes and obedience, and humility, and patience that must do it:
and therefore he commands Christian servants to give their Masters all
honor, to obey the^ in all things, and to please the^ in all things that so
their Masters seeing them more serviceable and profitable servants, and withal
more virtuous then others were, might sooner be drawn to like of the religion
that made them such, whereas the contrary would have bin manifestly a scandal,
and grievous impeachment to the propagation of the gospel, and defamed it, for
a doctrine of contumacy and disobedience, and for a seminary (as it were) of
disturbance and sedition of families and commonwealths. And not only alienated
the affections of Masters from their Christian servants: but inflamed all men
with indignation and hatred against the Christian religion and the professors
of it. Such therefore evidently is the importance and intendment of the
Apostles doctrine (as impartial men whom prejudice or selfe-conceipt leads not
away, may soon discern) very far differing from this doctrine of yours.
Touching which point of the Apostles instruction given to servants for this
effectual and general obedience, you will not reply (I hope) as some have
done; that at first indeed it was permitted for the good of the Church least
the increase of it, and proceeding of the Gospel should be hindered by offense
given to the Gentiles. For would that have been permitted if it had been
unlawful? Or could the Church of God be increased by the sins of men? His
Church increased by that whereby himself was dishonored? Or would the
Apostles have permitted men to sin (as now Jesuits do) for the good of the
Church (nay exhorted and commanded to it) who had himself expressly taught that
we must not do evil that good may come of it. No neither of both can be,
because either of both were a stain, and derogation to the righteousness of
God: the intention therefore of the Apostles was simple, without all tricks of
policy to teach servants all exact and entire obedience to their Masters,
touching all works that belong to the duty of servants, namely that were in
themselves honest and lawful without excepting of any day. Neither shall you
find (as I am verily persuaded and I speak not at random) if all the
monuments of antiquity be searched through either the practice of Christian
servants, or the doctrine of Christian preachers to have been any other, I say
you shall not find any remembrance in the ancient Church (if you search the
books of histories) that it was the custom of Christian servants to withdraw
their obedience from their Masters on the Lords day, no (if you search the
books of doctrine) that every any Father or teacher of the Church so persuaded
or instructed them: no, nor yet if you add to them the Heathen writers also,
that lived in the age of the ancient Church, and whereof diverse were sharp
and bitter enemies to the Christian religion, and apt to take every advantage
to calumniate and disgrace it (such as Lucian, Porphyrie, Julian, Libanius;
Eunapius and others were) you shall never find the detraction of servants
obedience, objected to Christians; And certainly if in all antiquity, no
history be found to record it, no father to persuade it, no enemy toobiect it,
it may well seem evident that this doctrine of servants withdrawing obedience
from their masters, for work on the Lords day was neither taught nor practiced
in the ancient Church.

And therefore Sr to draw to an end (for I grow weary, and have already both
dulled my pen and my self) I would advise you in the name of Jesus Christ,
whose Minister you are and whose work you have in hand, to examine this
doctrine of yours, what foundation it may have in the word of God and what
effect in the Church of God; least the foundation happily be your own
fantasy not Gods word and the effect prove the poisoning not the norishing of
the church. I know Sr you are not the first that set this doctrine abroach, nor
the only man that draws of the vessel, although few draw so freely as you.
But I would advise you sir in the name of God to beware betimes and draw not
too deep. It is all naught, it relisheth already with them that have good
tastes, like the water of Marah. It will prove like that of Meribah a little
lower and if you hap to draw to the bottom you will find the dreggs to be
nothing but disturbance and sedition both in Church and Commonwealth. But I say
in the beginning, I would neither censure nor divine of the evil consequence
of this Doctrine: let them censure (if they will) to to whom the government of
the Church and Commonwealth, and provision of peace in both does belong. And to
divine (me thinks) there is little need; the events are too evident even to
mean foresights already to require divination: for who (when he sees that
seed sown) doubts what grain will be reaped in heaviness? I will therefore
neither censure nor divine of the fruits of your doctrine, but omit both and
make an end. If the reasons which I have produced against your opinion satisfy
not you, you may do well to satisfy them. And to establish your doctrine with
better. It is the part of Christ's minister, to give a reason of his doctrine
when it is called in question, and accused of novelty and of sinful
consequence, as I accuse yours: and if you take me to be in an error and be
able to reform it, it is your duty to do it. If your brothers beast went a
stray, you were to reduce it homeby Moses law. Christ's law will less suffer
you, to see your brother go astray and not restore him. Wherefore if you be
assured that your doctrine is truly Christian and be able to justify it; you
are bound to do it.

The faith you owe to Christ, whose minister you are, the charity you owe to
Christians, whose pastor or doctor you are, exact it of you, and I especially
challenge it, that have felt my self specially grieved, and (as I think)
wronged by occasion of it, I look therefore you should both answer my
arguments, if they persuade you not, and produce better to persuade me; but
first in your answers, I must entreat you to deal with me (as I would with
you) honestly and ingeniously, and without either perverting or shifting of any
arguments; to answer directly to the force of them. And secondly in your
reasons to let me have as few words as you will, but direct and material
arguments; For if they be light and have but small force, they will not move
me. If sophistical and have but seeming force, I shall espy the deceit, I
think and be able to discern betwixt a visard and a visage; both the one sort
and the other of such arguments will but prejudice your cause with me, and were
better kept for some other disciple; but if you find your self not able to
establish and justify this doctrine wherewith I take my poor kinsman to have
been corrupted, then I challenge you as you will answer it at the judgment
seat of almighty God when your accounting day shall come, to repair the ruin
you have made in his conscience, and (remoouing his scandal which hinders him
in his vocation) to establish him in his former obedience to his Master. So
fare you well; and the spirit of truth be with you.

May 16. 1611. At Gresham house in London.

