THE GOOD AND THE BADDE, OR Descriptions of the Worthies, and Vnworthies of
this Age.

WHERE The Best may see their Graces, and the Worst discern their Baseness.



LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe for John Budge, and are to be sold at the
great South-dore of Paul's, and at Britains Bursse. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL and Worthy, Sir Gilbert Houghton, of Houghton
Knight, the Noble favorer of all virtuous spirits: the highest power of heaven
grant the blessing of all happiness to his worthy hearts desire.
Worthy Knight:
THe worthiness of this subject, in which is set down, the difference of
light and darkness, in the nature of Honor and disgrace, to the deseruers of
either, has made me (upon the note of the Nobleness of your spirit) like the
Eagle, still looking toward the Sun; to present to your patience, the
Patronage of this little Treatise, of the Worthies and Vnworthies of this Age:
Wherein, I hope, you will find some things to your content, nothing to the
contrary: which leaving to the acceptance of your good favor, with my further
service to your command: I humbly rest,

Your Worships devoted, to be commanded, Nicholas Breton.

TO THE READER.
I Am sure that if you read thorough this Book, you will find your
description in one place or other: if among the Worthies, hold you where you
are, and change not your Card for a worse: If among the other, mend that is
amiss and all will be well. I name you not, for I know you not; but, I will
wish the best, because the worst is too bad: I hope there will no body be
angry, except it be, with himself for somewhat that he finds out of order,
if it be so, the hope is the greater, the bad will be no worse: yet the world
being at such a pass, that living Creatures are scarcely known from pictures
till they move, nor Wisemen from fools till they speak, nor Arteists from
Bunglers, till they work; I will only wish the Worthy their worth, and the
contrary, what may mend their Condition; and for my self but pardon for my
presumption, in writing upon the natures of more worth then I am worthy to
write of, and favorable acceptance of no worthy intention of reprehension, by
the least thought of malicious disposition. So leaving my book to your best
like, with my better labors to the like effect: In hope to find you among the
Worthies: I rest,

At your command, if worthy, N. B.

THE GOOD AND THE BADDE: OR, Descriptions of the Worthies, and Vnworthies of
this Age.
A Worthy KING.
A Worthy King is a figure of God, in the be preserved: he is a scourge of
sin, and a blessing of Grace, Gods Vicegerent over his people, and under him
supreme Governor, his safety must be his Councels care, his health, his
Subjects prayer, his pleasure, his Peers comfort; and his content, his
Kingdoms gladness: his presence must be reverenced, his Person attended, his
Court adorned, and his State maintained; his bosom must not be searched, his
will not disobeyed, his wants not vnsupplied, nor his place unregarded. In
sum, he is more then a man, though not a God, and next under God to be
honored above man.

An Unworthy King.
AN Unworthy King, is the usurper of Power, words uncomfortable, and his
actions intolerable. In sum, he is the foil of a Crown, the disgrace of a
Court, the trouble of a Council, and the plague of a Kingdom.

A Worthy Queen.
A Worthy Queen is the figure of a King, who

A Worthy Prince.
A Worthy Prince is the hope of a kingdom, the imagination: in his wisdom he
startles the spirits of expectation in his valor, he subjects the hearts of
Ambition in his Virtue, he winnes the love of the Noblest, and in his bounty
binds the service of the most sufficient: he is the Crystal glass, where
Nature may see her comfort; and the book of Reason, where Virtue may read her
honor: He is the Morning-starre, that has light from the Sun, and the
blessed fruit of the Tree of Earths Paradise: he is the study of the wise in
the state of Honor, and in the subject of Learning, the history of admiration.
In sum, he is in the note of wisdom, the aim of Honor, and in the honor
of Virtue the hope of a Kingdom.

An Unworthy Prince.
AN Unworthy Prince is the fear of a kingdom,

A Worthy Privy Counceller.
A Worthy Privy Counceller is the Pillar of a

An Unworthy Counceller.
AN unworthy Counceller is the hurt of a King, cover of his counterfaite
religion, and traitorous inue^tion is the Agent of his Ambition: He is the
cloud of darkness, that threatens foul weather; and if it grow to a storm,
it is fearful where it falls: he is an enemy to God in the hate of Grace,
and worthy of death in disloyalty to his Sovereign. In sum, he is an unfit
person for the place of a Counceller, and an unworthy Subject to look a King
in the face.

A Noble man.
A Noble man is a mark of Honor, where

An Unnoble man.
AN Unnoble man is the grief of Reason,

A Worthy Bishop.
A Worthy Bishop is an Ambassador from the Surgeon of the Soul, in
launcing the sores of sin, the terror of the Reprobate, in pronouncing their
damnation; and the joy of the faithful, in the assurance of their salvation.
In sum, he is in the nature of Grace, worthy of Honor, and in the message
of Life, worthy of Love: a continual Agent betwixt God and man, in the
preaching of his Word, and Prayer for his people.

An Unworthy Bishop.
AN Unworthy Bishop is the disgrace of Learning, Church, and a woe in the World.

A worthy Judge.
A Judge is a Doom, whose breath is mortal

An unworthy Judge.
AN unworthy Judge is the grief of Justice in verdict of a Jury, with a stern
look, he frighteth an offender, and gives little comfort to a poor man's
cause. The golden weight ouerwaies his Grace; when Angels play the Devils in
the hearts of his people. In sum, where Christ is preached, he has no place
in his Church; and in this Kingdom, out of doubt, God will not suffer any such
Devil to bear sway.

A Worthy Knight.
A Worthy Knight is a spirit of proof, in the

An Unworthy Knight.
AN Unworthy Knight is the defect of Nature,

A Worthy Gentleman.
A Worthy Gentleman, is a branch of the tree faithful, and in reward
Bountiful: He is made of no Baggage stuff, nor, for the wearing of base
people; but is wouen by the Spirit of Wisdom, to adorn the Court of Honor.
His apparel is more comely then costly, and his Diet more wholesome then
excessive, his Exercise more healthful then painful, and his Study more for
Knowledge then Pride; his Love not wanton, nor common, his gifts not niggardly,
nor prodigal: and his carriage neither Apish, nor sullen. In sum, he is an
approuer of his Pedigree, by the Nobleness of his passage, and, in the course
of his life, an example to his posterity.

An Unworthy Gentleman.
AN Unworthy Gentleman is the scoff of

A Worthy Lawyer.
A Worthy Lawyer is the Studient of knowledge, Forma pauperis, for small fees:
He is a mean for the preservation of Titles, and the holding of possessions,
and a great instrument of Peace in the Judgment of impartiality: He is the
Clyents hope, in his Cases pleading, and his hearts comfort in a happy issue:
He is the finder out of Tricks in the craft of ill conscience, and the joy of
the distressed in the relief of Justice. In sum, he is a maker of Peace,
among the Spirits of Contention, and a continuer of quiet, in the execution of
the Law.

An Unworthy Lawyer.
AN Unlearned and unworthily called a Lawyer, But what a taking are poor
Clients in, when this too much trusted cunning companion, better read in Pierce
Plowman, then in Ploydon, and in the Play of Richard the Third, then in the
Pleas of Edward the Fourth; persuades them all is sure, when he is sure of
all? and in what a misery are the poor men, when, upon a Nihil dicit, because
indeed, this poor fellow, Nihil potest dicere, they are in danger of an
Execution, before they know wherefore they are condemned: But, I wish all such
more wicked then witty, unlearned in the Law and abusers of the same, to look
a little better into their consciences, and to leave their crafty courses, lest
when the Law indeed lays them open, in stead of carrying papers in their
hands, they wear not papers on their heads, and in stead of giving ear to
their Clients causes, or rather eyes into their purses, they have nere an Ear
left to hear withal, nor good Eye to see withal; or at least honest Face to
look out withal: but as the Grasshoppers of Egypt, be counted the
Caterpillars of England, and not the Fox that stole the Goose, but the great
Fox that stole the Farm, from the Gander.

A Worthy Soldier.
A Worthy Soldier is the child of Valor, and the executioner of Wrath upon
the wilful offender: He disputes questions with the point of a Sword, and
preferres Death to indignities: He is a Lion to Ambition, and a Lamb to
Submission: he has Hope fast by the hand, and treads upon the head of Fear.
He is the Kings Champion, and the Kingdoms Guard, Peaces preserver, and
Rebellions terror: He makes the Horse trample at the sound of a Trumpet, and
leads on to a battle, as if he were going to a breakfast; he knows not
the nature of Cowardice, for his rest is set up upon Resolution: his strongest
fortification is his Mind, which beats off the assaults of idle humors, and
his life is the passage of danger, where, an undaunted Spirit stoopes to no
Fortune; with his arms he wins his Arms, and by his desert in the field, his
Honor in the Court. In sum, in the truest Manhood he is the true man: and
in the creation of Honor, a most worthy Creature.

An Untrained Soldier.
AN Untrained Soldier is like a young hound, his hands of it, then to learn
how to discharge it with a grace: he puts on his Armor over his ears, like a
waste-coate, and wears his Murrian like a nightcap; when he is quartered in
the field, he looks for his bed, and when he sees his Prouant, he is ready to
cry for his victuals; and ere he know well where he is, wish heartily he
were at home again, with hanging down his head, as if his heart were in his
hose: sleep till a Drum, or a deadly bullet awake him, and so carry
himself in all Companies, that till Martial Discipline have seasoned his
understanding, he is like a Cipher among figures, an Owl among birds, a Wise
man among fools, and a shadow among men.

A Worthy Physician.
A Worthy Physician is the enemy of sickness, necessary member for an
unnecessary malady, to find a disease and to cure the diseased.

An Unworthy Physician.
AN unlearned, and so Unworthy Physician, is

A Worthy Merchant.
A Worthy Merchant is the heir of adventure, Silla, and sails close by
Caribdis, and having beaten out a storm, rides at rest in a harbor: by his
Sea gain, he makes his land-purchase, and by the knowledge of Trade, finds
the key of Treasure: out of his travails, he makes his discourses, and from
his eye-obseruations, brings the Moddels of Architectures; he plants the earth
with foreign fruits, and knows at home what is good abroad: he is neat in
apparel, modest in demeanure, dainty in diet, and civil in his carriage. In
sum, he is the Pillar of a City, the enricher of a Country, the furnisher of
a Court, and the worthy servant of a King.

An Unworthy Merchant.
AN Unworthy Merchant is a kind of Peddler,

A good man.
A Good man is an image of God, Lord over always to look upward, and a Soul
that gives life to all the Senses, he lives in the World as a Stranger, while
Heaven is the home of his spirit: his life is but the labor of sense; and his
death, the way to his rest: his study is the word of Truth, and his delight is
in the law of love: his provision is but to serve necessity, and his care the
exercise of Charity: he is more conversant with the divine Prophets, then the
worlds profits, and makes the joy of his soul in the tidings of his salvation:
he is wise in the best wit, and wealthy in the richest treasure: his hope is
but the comfort of mercy, and his fear but the hurt of sin: Pride is the
hate of his soul, and Patience the worker of his peace, his Guide is the
wisdom of Grace, and his travail but to the heavenly Jerusalem. In sum,
he is the Elect of God, the blessing of Grace, the seed of love, and the
fruit of life.

An Atheist, or most badde man.
AN Atheist is a figure of desperation, who danger of Society, the love of
Vanity, the hate of Charity, and the shame of Humanity: he is Gods enemy,
his Parents grief, his Countries plague, and his own confusion; he spoils
that is necessary, and spends that is needless; he spightes at the Gracious,
and spurns at the Godly: the Tavern is his Palace, and his belly is his God,
a Whore is his Mistress, and the Devil is his Master: Oaths are his Graces,
Wounds his Badges; Shifts are his practices, and beggary his paiments: He
knows not GOD, nor thinks of Heaven, but walks through the world, as a Devil
toward Hell: Virtue knows him not, Honesty finds him not, Wisdom loves him
not, and Honor regards him not: he is but the Cutlers friend, and the
Surgeons Agent, the Thiefes Companion, and the Hangmans Benefactor: he was
begotten untimely, and borne unhappily, lives ungraciously, and dies
unchristianly: He is of no Religion, nor good fashion, hardly good complexion,
and most vile in condition. In sum, he is a Monster among men, a Jew among
Christians, a fool among Wisemen, and a devil among Saints.

A Wise man.
A Wise man, is a Clock that never strikes but

A Fool.
A Fool is the Abortiue of wit, where Nature

An Honest man.
AN Honest man is like a plain Coat, which, without tricks or complements,
keeps the credit of a good Conscience from the scandal of the World, and the
worm of Iniquity: which, being wrought, by the Worke-man of Heaven, fits him
best that wears it to his service: and, where Virtue is more esteemed then
Vanity, it is put on, and worn with that ease, that shows the excellency of
the Workman: His study is Virtue, his word Truth, his life the passage of
Patience, and his death the rest of his Spirit: His travail is a Pilgrimage,
his way is plainness, his pleasure Peace, and his delight is Love: His care is
his Conscience, his wealth is his credit, his charge is his Charity, and his
content is his Kingdom. In sum, he is a Diamond among Jewels, a Phaenix
among Birds, an Unicorn among Beasts, and a Saint among men.

A Knave.
A Knave is the scumme of Wit, and the scorn Earth, and banished from Heaven:
He was begotten ungraciously, borne untimely, lives dishonestly, and dies
shamefully: His heart is a puddle of Poison, his Tongue a sting of iniquity,
his Brain a distiller of deceit, and his Conscience a compass of Hell. In
sum, he is a Dog in disposition, a Fox in wit, a Wolf in his prey, and a
Devil in his Pride.

An Usurer.
AN Usurer is a figure of Misery, who has

A Beggar.
A Beggar is the child of Idleness, whose life Randevows is commonly in an
Alehouse: His study is to counterfeit Impotency, and his practice, to cozen
simplicity of Charity, the juice of the Malt is the licour of his life, and at
bed, and at board a Louse is his companion: He fears no such enemy, as a
Constable, and, being acquainted with the stocks, must visit them, as he
goes by them: He is a Drone that feeds upon the labors of the Be, and
unhappily begotten, that is borne for no goodness; his staff and his scrippe
are his walking furniture, and what he lackes in meat, he will have out in
drink: He is a kind of Caterpiller that spoils much good fruit, and an
unprofitable creature to live in a commonwealth: He is seldom handsome, and
often noisome, always troublesome, and never welcome: he prays for all, and
preyes upon all, begins with blessing, but ends often with cursing: if he have
a License, he shows it with a grace, but if he have none, he is submissiue
to the ground: sometime he is a Thief, but, always a Rogue, and in the nature
of his profession, the shame of Humanity. In sum, he is commonly begot in a
Bush, borne in a Barn, lives in a Highway, and dies in a Ditch.

A Virgin.
A Virgin is the beauty of Nature, where the

A wanton Woman.
A Wanton Woman is the figure of Imperfection, a kind of Devil: her beck is a
net, her word a charm, her look an illusion, and her company a confusion:
her life is the play of idleness, her diet the excess of dainties, her love
the change of vanities, and her exercise the invention of follies: her
pleasures are fancies, her studies fashions, her delight colors, and her
wealth her clothes: her care is to deceive, her comfort her Company, her house
is vanity, and her Bed is ruin, her discourses are fables, her vows,
dissimulations, her conceits subtilties, and her contents varieties: She would
she knows not what, and spends she cares not what, she spoils she sees not
what, and does she thinks not what: She is Youths plague, and Ages Purgatory,
Times abuse, and Reasons trouble. In sum, she is a spice of madness, a
spark of mischief, a tutch of poison, and a fear of destruction.

A quiet Woman.
A Quiet woman is like a still wind, which neither heart lies at rest, and her
childrens Glass in the notes of her Grace, her servants honor in the keeping
of her house, and her neighbors example in the notes of a good nature: She
skorns Fortune, and loves Virtue, and out of thrift gathers Charity: she is a
Turtle in her love, a Lamb in her meekness, a Saint in her heart, and an
Angel in her soul. In sum, she is a Jewel vnprizeable, and a joy
unspeakable, a comfort in Nature incomparable, and a Wife in the world
unmatchable.

An Unquiet Woman.
AN Unquiet Woman is the misery of man, Must, her Reason Will, her Resolution
Shall, and her satisfaction So: She looks at no law, and thinks of no Lord,
admits no command, and keeps no good order: She is a cross, but not of
Christ, and a word, but not of Grace, a creature, but not of wisdom, and a
servant, but not of God. In sum, she is the seed of trouble, the fruit of
travail, the taste of bitterness, and the digestion of death.

A good Wife.
A Good Wife is a world of wealth, where just

An Effeminate Fool.
AN Effeminate fool is the figure of a Baby; he the Cheek: To talk Idly,
to look demurely, to go Nicely, and to Laugh continually: To be his Mistress
servant, and her Mayds master, his Fathers Love, and his Mothers none-Child; to
play on a Fiddle, and sing a Loue-song, to wear sweet Gloves, and look on
fine things: To make purposes, and write Verses, devise Riddles, and tell lies:
To follow Plays, and study Daunces, to hear News, and buy trifles: To sigh
for Love, and weep for kindness, and mourn for company, and be sick for
fashion: To ride in a Coach, and gallop a Hackney, to watch all Night, and
sleep out the Morning: to lie on a bed, and take Tobacco, and to send his Page
of an idle message to his Mistress: to go upon Gigges, to have his Ruffes set
in print, to pick his Teeth, and play with a Puppet. In sum, he is a
Man-child, and a Woman's man, a gaze of Folly, and Wisdoms grief.

A Parasite.
A Parisite is the Image of iniquity, who for the in sin: he is like a dog
at a door, while the devils dance in the chamber, or like a Spider in the
house top, that lives on the poison below: he is the hate of honesty, and the
abuse of beauty, the spoil of Youth, and the misery of Age. In sum, he is a
danger in a Court, a Cheater in a City, a Iester in the Country, and a
Iacke-an-Apes in all.

A Bawd.
A Bawd is a kind of Woman-Beast, who having

A Drunkard.
A Drunkard is a Nowne Adjective, for he cannot

A Coward.
A Coward is the child of fear, he was begotten in cold blood, when Nature
had much ado Metamorphosis: rather then he will fight, he will be beaten, and
if his legs will help him, he will put his arms to no trouble: he makes
love commonly with his purse, and brags most of his Mayden-head, he will not
marry but into a quiet family, and not too fair a wife, to avoid quarrels: if
his wife frown upon him, he sighs, and if she give him an unkind word, he
weeps: he loves not the horns of a Bull, nor the paws of a Bear: and if a
dog bark, he will not come near the house: if he be rich, he is afraid of
Thieves, and if he be poor he will be slave to a Beggar. In sum, he is the
shame of manhood, the disgrace of Nature, the skorne of Reason, and the hate
of honor.

An honest Poor man.
AN honest Poor man is the proof of misery, Bayard of ten-toes: his apparel
but the clothing of nakedness, and his wealth but the hope of heaven: He is a
stranger in the world, for no man craves his acquaintance, and his funeral is
without Ceremony, when there is no mourning for the miss of him: yet may he be
in the state of Election, and in the life of love, and more rich in Grace, then
the greatest of the World. In sum, he is the grief of Nature, the sorrow of
Reason, the pity of wisdom, and the charge of Charity.

A Just man.
A Just man is the Child of Truth, begotten by virtue

A Repentant Sinner.
A Repentant Sinner is the Child of Grace, who Adam, and puts on Christ: His
heart is the Anuile of Truth, where the brain of his Wisdom beats the
thoughts of his Mind, till they be fit for the service of his Maker: His
labor is the travail of Love, by the rule of Grace to find the highway to
Heaven: His fear is greater then his Love of the World, and his Love is
greater then his fear of God. In sum, he is in the Election of Love, in the
book of Life, an Angel incarnate, and a blessed Creature.

A Reprobate.
A Reprobate is the Child of sin, who being

An Old man.
AN Old man is the declaration of Time, in the with wind, and a withered Tree,
that has lost the sap of the Root: or an old Lute with strings all broken,
or a ruined Castle that is ready to fall: He is the eyesore of Youth, and the
jest of Love, and in the fullness of Infirmity, the Mirror of Misery. Yet, in
the honor of Wisdom, he may be Gracious in Gravity, and in the government of
Justice, deserve the Honor of Reverence: Yea, his Words may be notes for the
use of Reason, and his Actions examples for the imitation of discretion. In
sum, in whatsoever estate, he is but as the snuff of a Candle, that pinke it
never so long, it will out at last.

A Young man.
A Young man is the Spring of Time, when Nature and yet, his breeding may
either better or worse him, though to wish a Black-Moore white, be the loss
of labor, and what is bred in the bone, will never out of the flesh. In sum,
till experience have seasoned his Understanding, he is rather a Child then a
man, a prey of flattery, or a praise of providence, in the way of Grace, to
prove a Saint, or in the way of sin, to grow a Devil.

A Holy man.
A Holy man is the chiefest Creature in the workmanship his Charity, the rule
of his life, and his hope, the Anchor of his Salvation: His study is the state
of Obedience, and his exercise the continuance of Prayer; his life but a
passage to a better, and his death, the rest of his labors: His heart is a
watch to his Eye, his wit, a door to his Mouth, his Soul, a guard to his
Spirit, and his Limbs, but laborers for his Body. In sum, he is ravished
with Divine Love, hateful to the nature of Sin, troubled with the Vanities
of the World, and longing for his Joy but in Heaven.

FINIS.

