A MERRY DIALOGVE BETWIXT THE TAKER and Mistaker.

Imprinted at London for James Shaw, and are to be sold at his shop near
Lud-gate. 1603.

TO MY VERY LOVING, AND APPROVED GOOD FRIEND, THE LOVER OF ALL VERTVES AND
labourer in good studies, Signor John Florio, per fect Reader of the Italian
language, Nicholas Breton wishes, worthy advancement of many good de serts,
increase of comforts, and eternal happiness.
Unthankfulness is too great an unkindness to come near the nature of any
good disposition; and therefore, to avoid the desert of so ill a Touch, to
manifest my good will in more desire then ability, I have given you a token of
my love, in a little fruit of my labor: wherein if I be not mistaken in my
conceit, you shall find somewhat worth the taking view of. The Dialogue is not
tedious, nor the matter so serious, but it may pass the musters of a merry
humor: wherein the Taker shall find how he may be mistaken, and the Mistaker,
how he may be taken. My hope is you will take all in good part, and smile at
them that are so mistaken in their wits, that they know not well, what to take
well. But lest I take too long a time, in troubling you with a longer preface,
then either the matter requires, or your patience will admit: with many
thanks for your many undeserved kind passages (of which, I have taken such
remembrance, as I hope shall one day be better considered) leaving my book to
your kind patronage, and my love to your like employment; I rest always

Your affectionate poor friend, Nicholas Breton.

To the Reader.
IF I be not mistaken, there are many Takers and Mistakers in this world, who
take themselves to be wise with a little wit, and rich with a little wealth. Some
are taken for religious, that with their hypocrisy cousin a number of simple
people: other are taken for good men, that have a little more wealth then
honesty: and some are taken for fools, that have more conscience then
cunning: but happy are they, who take the right course to their souls
comfort. In this discourse following, you shall see diverse pretty passages
betwixt the Taker and the Mistaker, perhaps as pleasing for the mirth, as
prof^^^ble for the matter. Now how every one will take it, I know not. The best
minds I know will take nothing ill, that is meant well; and for the worst,
they know not how to take any thing well, how good so ere it be: and therefore
entreating every man to take it as he list, lest I should be beholding to I
know not whom for I know not what, I leave to the Printer to take his price,
and you to take your pleasure; and so rest

Your friend, if I be not mistaken, NICHOLAS BRETON.

A merry Dialogue betwixt two Travelers. Dorindo, and Lorenzo.
LORENZO well met, how do thou this fair morning?


Lor. A thousand good morrowes to mine honest Dorindo: but how goes the world
man? no news stirring worth the hearing?


Dor. More then are true, or worth the telling: and therefore I had as leeue
hold my peace, as have no thanks for my tatling: but I pray thee tell me,
where have thou been this many a day? I heard that thou have been over the
water, I know not how far.


Lor. Indeed the sea is a pretty brook to wade thorough, and a years travel
will tread a pretty piece of ground: but to tell you where I have been, I
cannot; for my way was long, and my memory is short: but had I time to tell
thee that which I could, (at least if my memory would serve me) I should make
thee like the better of home, and the worse of travel while thou live.


Dor. And why, I pray thee?


Lor. It is not so soon answered, but rather let me say, why not? For much
danger, and more fear, little safety and less gain, made me wish either to
have known less, or somewhat more worth the knowing.


Lor. I pray thee why? were thine eyes not matches, or thy wits out of order?


Dor. Truly whether the fault be in my wits, or mine eyes, I know not: but I
am sure I was so overtaken in mistaking of every match that I met withal, that
I had as leeue almost be an Ignorant, as deceive my self with imagination.


Lor. True, for as good to lose thoughts, as to lose by them: but whence or
whereupon grew this grief of yours?


Dor. I tell you by mistaking.


Lor. But how I pray you?


Dor. Why, the first thing that I was mistaken in, was my self: in whom I was
the most mistaken of any thing in the world. For, with only a little
observation, I was persuaded, that there was no matter of worth, but I had it
by heart; and for trifles, I would not be troubled with them: but, when that
reason came to ripping up of the secrets of wisdoms intelligence, I saw my wit
so wilful, that I was mistaken in all matters that I met with.


Lor. What, men, women and children?


Dor. Yea, only in them: for touching other creatures, I made no great care of
my conceit of them. But now to tell thee, in my travels how I was mistaken: to
run over all my courses, it were too tedious, let suffice as much as may make
thee merry to hear, and wise to remember. First, when I left my country and
came a board the Buon-a-venture, we had no sooner weighed anchor, hoissed
sails, and put to sea, but with a fresh gale of wind, and fair weather, we
were so merry above hatches, that me thought there was none so merry alive as
the sailors. But we had not thus passed five leagues, till the sky was
ouercast, the wind came about and grew high, the air thick and foggie, and
the drizling rain came so beating in our faces, that we were glad to get under
hatches: where we were scarcely set in our Cabines, but the tempest grew so
great, the winds so rough, and the waves so high, that we were glad with
throwing out almost all the goods into the sea, to save our lives in the bare
vessel. Now when I came on shore, well moiled and poor, having lost all that
I had abord, more then a little money in my purse, which was so little, as that I
will say little of it: I began to think with my self how I was mistaken, to
think, that one fair day, and a little fair weather, could make me think,
that the sailors life (which every minute is subject to danger of one harm or
other, and betwixt a board and the water, has a walk, but in a short and
vnsteadie room) should be compared to the land life, where there is pleasure
in the fair weather, and shilter against the foul, and no fear of wind nor
water, nor many other dangers which I will omit to speak of. And in stead of
a whirle poole in the water, a walk large enough to walk man and horse too,
till they were both weary. Now here was my first mistaking.


Lor. It may be, if the weather had held fair, and that you had met with a
good prize, you would not have thought your self mistaken in the merry life of
the mariner.


Dor. Indeed sometime the joy of taking, helps the misery of mistaking.


Lor. Yea, but when the thief that has taken a purse, if he be overtaken in
the high way, and so take the gallows for his Inn, that joyful taking in the
beginning brings a sorrowful mistaking in the end.


Dor. Well, as for that part, it is none of my play, and therefore I will leave
it to them that love it.

Now to tell thee of my second mistaking. When I had been a little on shore, had
weathered my self, dried my clothes, filled my belly, and emptied my purse, I
now began to think how my wits should work for my welfare: and first,
intending to seek intertainment of some Noble person, that would honorably
look into the virtues, valor, and good qualities of a good mind, I began to
put on a resolution to adventure any fortune, and endure any discomfort, that
might be a hinderance to my happiness. And with this resolution traveling till
I was weary, almost penilesse, and exceedingly hungry, I came to the view of
a goodly, fair, and gorgeously built house, which stood as it were a mile from
a city near adjoining. Now in hope there to find some such person, as I
before spoke of, I began to rowze up my self, as one that had an assured hope,
at least of some good victual, I mean of a good dinner scot-free, howsoever
otherwise fortune would be my friend. When, ere I would approach too near the
house, lest I should be seen in any unfit manner, I combed my beard, gartered
up my stockings, trussed every point, buttoned every button, and made my self
ready in the best manner I could, to appear before the presence of such as I
should meet withal in this gallant mansion. But when I came near unto the
house, and finding the door shut, I did imagine (being about the mid time of
the day) that the servants were all at dinner, and the lord of the house either
laid down to sleep, or gone into his closet, to talk upon some accounts with
his lady: but hearing no sound of any noise, nor voice within of either man or
dog, I feared some ill fortune, that there was some great sickness, or
danger of death that might dampe the spirits, and so cause the sorrow of the
whole house: but staying awhile, and neither hearing any voice within, nor any
poor creature without at the gate, that might hope of alms from the hall, I
feared the charity within was so little, that my comfort without would be
according: but after that I had stood awhile, loath to lose time, I knocked at
the door; where I knocked long, before I had any answer, and in the end was
saluted at a window far within by an old fellow, who it should seem, to
save a groat had slept out his dinner; whose speech (with a wide mouth gaped
out) was this: What lack you? My friend (quoth I) I pray you let me speak
with you. No (quoth he) I cannot come down, I am busy, my master is not at
home, and here is no body in the house but I and my wife, and she is not well:
but say your errand and I will hear you. My errand thought I, was there ever
such a kennell for such a curre? does he take me for some sorry fellow, or has
he no better kind of greeting for strangers? And thus while I stood musing and
fretting at my fortune and this bad fellow, he shut the window: and I with a
sigh, to see how I was mistaken in this fair house, turning me from it, I met
with a fool in a pyed coat, who looking upon me after he had ouerlaughed
himself, told me: Sir, you are mistaken, this is a banqueting house, where
the gazers are only fed with conceits, for there is not a chimney that
smokes, nor a door open, it is called Mock-begger, ha, ha, ha. Now when the
fool went thus laughing away, and left me more fool to tarry there. Before I
stirred my foot, out of my pocket I took my table book, in which I writ
down my second mistaking.


Lor. Indeed this is too common a mistaking in many countries, but it may be
you might have taken it in such a time, as might have given you cause to have
spoken better of it: but indeed fair houses are for rich men, and cottages for
the poor: and therefore being in that predicament, it is no marvel you had no
better entertainment. But I pray you proceed with your travel.


Dor. I will tell you, melancholy walking a little from this Mocke-begger, I
began to frame my self to the humor of a cunning beggar: when meeting with a
grave old man (who by his velvet coat, his golden chain, and his rich furred
gown should seem to be at the least some rich Burgor, if not some
Burga-maister of some city) this well apparelled picture with a kind of life
that gave the body leave to carry the head upon a square pair of shouldiers, I
in hope to find more comfortable then the fair house master Mocke-begger, I
saluted with a great reverence; and requited with a proud nod, I yet adventured
to board with a few words. When hoping to have found him a man of no less
understanding spirit, to judge of the estate and conditions of men, then
bounty, in the relief of the unfortunately distressed, I fell aboard with him
with these words. Sir, I think you have heard of the hard fortune of the
Buon-auenture, who put into your harbor this other night, hardly saving her
life, with loss of all her goods, and some of her peoole. My self, with much
ado well weather-beaten as you may see, with some few that lie sick in the
haven, got to shore, and am now traveling toward your city here before me.
Loath I am to enter into any base course for my comfort: but, if I might be
beholding to your good favor, in this time of my distress, giving me your
name withal, I doubt not if I live, but either by my self, or my better
friends, to find a time, either to requite or deserve it. He, as one whose
heart was so shut up in his purse, that he understood nothing but ware and
money, after a harsh humme, or two, gave me this answer: Was there nothing
saved of her goods I pray you? what was her fraught? Sit, quoth I, it was most
silks and spices, but some pearl, and money, more then would have been
willingly lost. Good commodities, quoth he; by my fay, a shrewd mischance: I am
sorry for ye, I would I could do ye good, but I am now in have going about a
little business, and therefore I cannot stand to talk with you, God be with
you; the town is hard before you, you will be there anon: But, if you have any
jewels or pearl that you have saved, I will give you money for it, if I like
it. Truly Sir, quoth I, jewels I have not many, only two rings on my fingers,
and this bracelet of pearl I have saved: my bracelet cost me a hundredth
crowns, if it please you to have it of the price it cost, though against my
will, I will part with it. With that upon his bottel red nose he claps on a
pair of spectacles, and looking on my pearl, found fault with the roundnesse,
and the clearenesse, and I know not what else, till at the last, thinking to
make a gain of my misery, he offered me ten crowns: saying, that he had no
need of it; but rather then be disfurnished of money (being a stranger) he would
adventure so much on it: whereat, I swallowing a sigh, and concealing my
discontent, desired him to pardon me, I hoped to find some of my countrymen in
the city, that I would be as bold, as I might withal. Thus, with an idle word
or two, did I leave this good old gentleman, in whom how much I was, and many
more, no doubt, have been mistaken, I refer to the judgment of those that can
spell him without book, and may desire never to come near him within book.
This was my third mistaking: to take the shadow of a man, and the substance of
a money-bagge, without charity, or humanity, by the hypocritical figure of
gravity, to be a creature of understanding, a man of honor, and a blessed
relieuer of the miserable.


Lor. Alas how many thousands are so mistaken? Why, the blessed Saints
holiness, the Martyrs faithfulness, the Virgins pureness, and the prayers
of the elect, I have heard, and read of: but I never heard of any rich
apparel, or chains spoken of among them; for God bless us from it, some say
the devil has a chain wherein he leads a number into hell; but I hope it is
not gold. I know not that, but I think not, for murderers hang in iron
chains, and therefore he will not be at cost with them, all alike: but how he
does with the covetous, the lecherous, and the ambitious, that knows God and
not I. But shall I tell you further of my mistakings.


Lor. Yes, for Gods sake.


Dor. Then let me tell you.


Lor. I had scarcely got within the gates of the city, but that it was my hap
to meet with a country man of mine own, and somewhat of alliance unto me.
This man at first seeming to be glad to have met me in that city, promising me
to bring me accquainted with some other of my country men, and that he would be
ready to do me all the pleasure he could: this did not a little content me,
hoping that for country, and kindreds sake, I should find no little friendship.
But after that he had made me know three or four of my country men, and
brought me to an Inn, where for my money I might lodge, neither inuiting me to
dinner or supper, only was content to take a cup of wine of me, and to tell me
that he hoped to drink with me before my going out of town: thus was I
mistaken both in kin and country, to hope of any comfort. But the next morning
coming to a tailors house (which was likewise a country man of mine) I had no
sooner talked with the good man, about the pawning of my bracelet, and taking
up of some stuff for my apparel, but his wife in an inner room, almost as
quick of ear as of tongue, with a wide gaping mouth came to us with this
greeting: Go too, goodman-goose, meddle with no pawning nor taking up, you have
paid enough for playing the Fool, and yet will be an Ass still? I pray you
wife quoth he, be quiet: and then to me, Truly gentleman, I would be glad to do
you any pleasure, but I have such a wife that I dare do nothing without her
consent: if you bring your stuff I will do it you, as well and as good cheap
as any man. Now, I that took him to have been the master of the house, was
much mistaken, for the woman ware the breeches, and he was to work for the
house: when pitying the poor man's case, and much commending his patience, sorry
to think how I was mistaken, I took another course for my contentment. I was
not long in town before I had learned how to turn pearl into gold, and gold
into silver, and so to furnish my self of such necessaries, as I found most
fitting for my use: when there passed not many days before I fell upon another
fortune, where I was as I was still in every thing mistaken.


Lor. I pray you tell it, we have time enough, and I long to hear it.


Dor. I will tell you.

It was my hap after that I had done my devotion in the Church, and holy
places, passing through the streets, beholding as well the fair houses, as
sweet creatures at their doors and windows; to cast mine eye upon a very
artificial fair, sharp witted, wanton eyed, and fair handed, small footed,
straight bodied, and, as I after found, smooth tounged gentlewoman: I say
gentle, for she was so gentle, that she was as tame, as a little filly, that had
been brought up al by hand. This fine mistress, I had some hope to do some
good upon, when setting a good face on the matter, after a courteous salutation
I fell to kissing of her hand: which she endured with such a pleasing smile, as
gave me cause to proceed further in my purpose. I had not so soon began to
go about her, but she had me at every turn, and in the midst of my talk would
be fidling with a ring, in which was a painted diamond, that I ware on my
finger, which she would commend with wishing her hand worthy such a favor.
Now I that hoped to have found so gallant a wench, as francke handed, as free
hearted, and as liberal for love, as ready for entertainment, found that
artificial beauty, was but a shadow, or rather cover of covetousness, or an
instrument of wit, to draw on folly, into the ruin of prodigality: so that,
here I found my self so mistaken, that it made me afraid a long while after,
to be busy with the female kind.


Lor. In truth this was a pretty mistaking: but if she had been for you, and
would have mistaken you for her husband, by whom you might craftily have been
taken, and so been carried to Bride-well, or paid for your pardon; what a
taking would you then have bin in?


Dor. I know not, but it is better, as it was: for as I found it, so I left it. I
only spent a few fair words, but not a penny money, for I would not pay for my
repentance: but so leaving her, as I found her, with a Bazo los manus, went
about my other business: which I had not long followed, but I fell upon
another mistaking.


Lor. What may that be, if you can remember?


Dor. I will tell you.

It was my hap to hear of a gallant Captain that was to do a piece of service
upon a city of the Turks, under whom who could get entertainment, might
quickly purchase both honor and wealth. Now, my youth being trained up in
arms, and my fortune falling upon such a point, it was not long before I made
and got means of entertainment at the hands of this gallant soldier, of whom
I hoped to receive the due of my desert: but after that he had in many
desperate pieces of service employed me, and saw in me that true valor, that
made him in the envy of my good deserts, fear some near pressing toward his
pride, in stead of advancing my fortune, or rewarding my service, he still put
me upon such continual exploits, as threatened every hour narow escape of my
life. But in the end seeing his misery, to make a gain of those that did him
honor, handfasted to the well deserving, and rather plotting the death, then
advancing the fortunes of the valiant, got means for my discharge from him;
and sorry to think how I was mistaken in him, as I tell you, I left him: when I
had not gone far, but I light upon another mistaking.


Lor. And how I pray thee? if it be not troublesome to thee to recite it, I
pray thee let me hear it.


Dor. You shall.

The mistaking of a Divine.
It was my hap in a little field near unto a Church in a country town, to
overtake a little old man in agowne, a wide kassock, a nightcap, and a
cornercap, by his habit seeming to be a Divine; of whom I was in hope to find
that sacred fruit of charity, that might be some comfort in my return: whom
beginning to salute with a few Latin words: My friend, quoth he, do not
deceive your self, I understand not your Greek. We here, that dwell far
from the city, and are not troubled with fine ears to our reading, care for
no more but to discharge our duties in our places, I mean of a Vicar, for I am
no better: the Parson is a man of greater place, and of fair possessions, who
dwells a great way hence, and therefore seldom comes into this country. I
use twice a year to bring him his rent, and perhaps a couple of Capons against
Christmusse, for my Land-lady, and that is as much as they look for. And for my
parishioners, they are a kind of people, that love a pot of Ale better then a
Pulpit, and a corne-ricke better then a Church-doore: who coming to divine
service, more for fashion then devotion, are contented after a little capping
and kneeling, coughing and spetting, to help me to sing out a Psalm, and
sleep at the second Lesson, or awake to stand up at the Gospel, and say Amen
at The peace of God; and stay till the Banes of matrimony be asked, or till
the Clarke have cried a pyed stray bullock, a black sheep or a gray mare:
and then, for that some dwell far off, be glad to be gotten home to dinner.
Now we that have no more living then will hardly serve to keep a poor house,
are not in case, God help us, to do any thing for our poor brethren; and
therefore my good friend trouble us not with other speech then we understand,
lest if you come before the Constable, he take you for some coniurer, and so
bring your self to some trouble, which I would be sorry to see: for truly you
seem a handsome man; God has done his part in you: God be with you. Oh Lord
(thought I) is this man possible to be a Churchman, and knows so little what
belongs to the Church? Well, this was no little mistaking: but going a little
further, leaving this poor Sir Ienkin to his mother tongue, I ouertooke a
plain fellow to my seeming, clad in a homespun ierkin of russet wool, a
pair of close breeches of the same, a falling band somewhat courser then fine
Cambricke, a pair of woollen stockings, and a half boot, like a good high
shoe. Now, this plain outside, I guessed to be lined with no excellent stuff
in the inside: and therefore somewhat more boldly then rudely saluted him in
this manner: Good fellow, well overtaken. You are welcome, quoth he: but to
clappe a man on the shoulder before you know him, is a point quite out of the
rule of all good manners, at least that ever I learned. Alas, quoth I, goodman
clown, can your nose abide no jest: Yes Sir, quoth he, with my friends; but
mine ears have no pleasure in a fool. This touching me too near the quick,
replied again: Oh sir, quoth I, then if your friends be fools, you will shake
hands with the^; but a stranger will put you out of patience. He little moved
herewith, (as it seemed) made me this answer: My friend, I pray you keep your
way, I would be loath to hinder your walk: but if your passion be no greater
then my impatience, we shall not fall out for a trifle. But Sir (quoth I) how
might I fall in either with your self, or such another, for a matter of good
earnest? It seems you are a man of sense, and had I not given you cause of
displeasure which I am sorry for, I would have acquainted you with somewhat, that
by your good means, I might perhaps be the better for. Truly sir, quoth he, my
estate is not such as can make me bountiful to the best deserving; but so
far as discretion will give me leave, I would be glad to pleasure a stranger.
My house is not far hence, but on the further side of this field; whither (if
it may be no great hinderance to your travel) I will entreat your patience to a
pore pittance, and if in either my advise, or better means I may stead your
desire, you shall find that you do not look for; nothing that you shall pay
for; and somewhat that perhaps you shall thank me for: and therefore, I pray
you bear me company for this night; to morrow you shall take your journey at
your pleasure. This kind offer (having no reason to refuse) I took most
thankefully: and by the way after a few discourses of my fortunes, I acquainted
him with the resolution of my intent; which was, either to serve in the wars,
or in Court, or to profess some trade, or to follow my study. To which, I
asked his advice for my good, in all and every one of them: to which, as I
propounded the question, he made me this answer. And first, quoth he, my
friend, I am sorry, by these your discourses, to have occasion to call to mind
the folly of my youth, which taught me nothing in mine age, but the repentance
of lost time: but for that I have tried fortune to the uttermost of her malice,
and in the end am come to that you see, I would be glad to tell you a merry
tale, how I was mistaken in many courses, before I hit on the right compass:
in which, if you can gather any thing for your good, I shall think it the best
gain that I have made of it. Now finding this unlooked for and undeserved
kindness at his hands, and nothing more fitting the humor of my fortune at
that time, I entreated him most heartily, to make me in this first to be
beholding to him. Whereupon, with a very little preamble he fell into this
plain trot: I will tell you, quoth he, when I was young as you are, and had as
little to care for as you have, being brought up at home with ease and plenty,
and weary of welfare, would feign have I know not what, when having the world
more at will, then wit to govern my affections, and a desire to see more then
I could well carry away, thinking my mothers best cream but bare milk; and
others thinnest milk, as good cream as might make butter; taking leave of no
friend, and flattering my thoughts with fortune, I would to sea forsooth, with
a sight of such spirits, as (but that they looked like men) would have made
poor people afraid of them: yet these were the men with whom (in more have
then good speed) I must go lose abroad what I had gotten at home. When, hoping
to have light on some good prize, I was taken prisoner with the enemy: of whom
being stripped of that I had, with a few old rags on my back, among a few of
my fellow sailers that were set on shore in a poor taking, I found how I began
to be mistaken; to leave the land for the sea, and a safe home for a strange
harbor. But now on shore with my good fellows in fortune, every man shifting
for himself, and I trying so many ways to the wood, that I lost my self in
the plain, weary of doing nothing, began to look about me for my better
profit: but such were my crosses in all my courses, that I could never thrive
till I got home again. For to make an abridgement of a long tale, I will tell
you: In courting I found more cost then comfort; in war, more danger then
ease; in learning, more study then profit; in traffic, more gain then
conscience; in service, more pain then honor; in marriage, more care then
quiet; and in love, more pleasure then virtue: so that in all my courses being
so mistaken, that I found a cross to my comfort in every of them, I fairly
left the Courtier to his courtesies, the soldier to his marches, the scholar to
his studies, the merchaut to his traffic, the married man to his purgatory,
and the lover to his vanity: and home returned to my poor cottage that my
parents left me; and, as my wife tells me, my sons shall possess after me.
Here I live in a mean course, content and glad of Gods blessings, never in
danger to be mistaken, because I trust only to experience: while doing honor
to God, and following my business, with the sweat of my brows, I gain the
food of my senses, with my necessary appurtenances. O my friend, believe me,
he that is contented is rich, while he that is rich is not contented: a little
suffices nature, and excess is but hurtful; beauty, but the inchaunter of
wit; ambition, but the overthrow of virtue; covetousness, the corrupter of
conscience; authority, the charge of care; pride, the hate of nature; envy,
the nurse of malice, and wrath, the inuenter of murder; sloth, the loss of
time; drunkenness, the shame of nature; gluttony, the ground of sickness;
and locherie, the fire of sin. These notes when I had taken by the light of
Gods grace, and observation of times, leaving all extremities, I took this
mean course: where though home be homely, yet living quietly and contentedly,
I find it true, That he who serves God heartily, lives happily, and dies
joyfully. Now my good friend, if I might advise you for your good, I would wish
you to take a stayed course, and lay away all running humors: look home, love
home, live at home, a small assurance is better then a great hope; and a little
possession, then a great possibility: and when a man has of his own, he
need not borrow of his neighbors. Travel may be pleasing, and service
hopeful, traffic gainefull, and wealth powerful: but a convenient house, an
honest patrimony, a kind wife, obedient children, faithful servants, and
loving neighbors, make such a commonwealth of contentment in the true conceit
of a careful understanding; that a king of a molehill, were better then a
lord of a great hutch. Oh, to see in a fair morning, or a Sunnie evening, the
lambs and rabbets run at bace, the birds billing, the fishes playing, and
the flowers budding, who would not leave the drinking in an alehouse, the
wrangling in a dicing house, the lying in a market, and the cheating in a
fair; and think that the brightness of a fair day, does put down all the
beauties of the world. But I doubt I grow tedious, and therefore being so near
home, I will entreat your patience till we have supped, and only assure you of
a good welcome, to supply the want of better cheer. With this breaking off his
talk, he took me by the hand and led me into his house, the door open, as
unfearful of thieves, or unprovided for strangers: where we were at the entry
saluted with a modest smile of a kind wife, humble courtesies of most sweet
children, due reverence of comely servants, and a table furnished for both the
host and a good guest. Here (though no inn) yet I took up my lodging; where
with the entertainment of much kindness, having fed both body and mind with
sufficient comforts, with due thanks for all courtesies, I took leave of the
whole family, of whom in general I received kindness. In the morning not too
early, receiving an extraordinary golden favor, for a friendly farewell,
calling to mind his discourses of mistaking, and noting mine own crosses in my
courses: I took his counsel for my comfort, and with as much speed as I
could, leaving my travel turned even fair home again.

And thus much for this time of my travel. Now what say you of yours? for I am
sure you have not lived always at home.


Lor. Oh fine tale, you were the best mistaken in that man of all other: for,
where you hoped well of other, you found the contrary; but of him you thought
but little, and found much good. But it is no rare thing: for a man may look
like an owl, that has more wit then ten asses; and a woman may bride it like
a maid, that has been the mother of many children. A king in a play may be a
beggar from the stage, and a clowted shoo may have a pate beyond all the
parish. Oh, take heed of a wolf in a lambs skin, and talk not of hawking,
till you have been a Faulconer: for if a man have not his five wits, he may be
a fool in four of them. But, lest you take my words for a lecture, which may
be more tedious then pleasing, I will a little tell you of my travel, and how I
was taken in every corner.


Dor. Yea Sir, now you speak somewhat to the matter. If your taking were like
my mistaking, then perhaps we should shake hands for our fortunes. But
howsoever it was, I pray you make me acquainted with it.


Lor. I will, and first you shall understand, that my first travel being
cross the seas, I was taken short of my course, and by strange people carried
to a strange place: where being taken for no worse then I was, I was used no
better the^ I should be. But after that I had got out of this taking, I forth
with fell to devise with my self, what course I should take for my comfort.
And first I would take upon me to be a Courtier, when I would be so gay, as if
honor attended upon colors: but wise men taking me as I then was, but a
fool, brought me into such a taking; that what with love, and what with sorrow,
I took such passions, as brought me to a weak taking. And yet I was taken
among the best for an honest man, and a well meaning. But in taking my courtly
course, my word was so taken in every corner, and my name so taken in every
book, that I grew so afraid of takers, that I durst not almost go into any
place for fear of taking. And to think of the sundry kinds of taking, it is
strange to think, that any one should be taken up, and taken down so many
ways as I was. If I but courted a wench, I was taken for a wencher; if I
talked merrily, I was taken for a iester; if I looked sadly, I was taken for a
spy; if I were liberal, for a prodigal; if thriftie, for a snudge; if
valiant, a quareller; if patient, a coward; if rich, wise; if poor, a fool:
so that they, who knew not how to take any thing as it should be, took me to
be any thing that they would have me to be. But this was not enough: for if I
gave my word, I was taken for a surety; if I brake it, I was taken for a
banck-rupt; if I kept it, I was taken for a silly fellow; if I talked of a
disease, I was taken for a Physician; if of a case, a Lawyer; if of arms, a
Captain; if of religion, at least a Doctor: so that (as I said before) I was
taken so many ways, that I knew not well which way to take my self. But
beyond all these, not only my self was thus taken to be this and that: but my
horse was taken post, my purse was taken prisoner, my word was taken hold of;
and what was I, or had I, but was either taken up or down: my horse was taken
up, my purse was taken down; my word was taken up, my mind was taken down: in
brief, you could not be more mistaken in any thing, then I was taken for every
thing. But lest you should think I would chop Logic with you, or think much
of my breath in telling of a long tale, I will tell you, how I had like to have
been taken napping. Going to an Ordinary to dinner with a friend of mine, who
had been with me at the taking up of a little money, no sooner we were entered
into the house and scarce set down to a table, short above an hour for
covering toward supper, but we were taken up for a rest at Primero: when being
taken for a gamester, I had the trick put upon me; which no sooner I espied,
but having got a small rest or two, faining an urgent business, I took
occasion to leave off; for which cause I was taken for a cheater. Which fitting
some of that place, who taking me for a fine fin-gred companion, fell a board
with me for assistance and advise, so far that at last, in an assurance of my
fidelity to them, and villainy to all the world besides, they put a sum of
money into my hands to go to play with. Which money I no sooner was master of,
but the wind serving well, and I in readiness to be gone, in the still time of
the night, got means to ship my self for Roane: where being a stranger, I was
to take what course I well could for my comfort. Where no sooner I was arrived,
but I smiled to think how I had ouertooke my takers. Now coming to Roane, and
finding diseases so rife, that an honest Physician might set his Apothecarie
well on work, I made a show with a little Allume and Copresse, to persuade such
wonders of my art or study; that who would not give me a good fee for a sore
finger? Oh, healing but a Whitloe on a Lords thumb, and the crampe in a Ladies
finger, I went for the cunning man, that had a cure for all diseases. So that
there was not a young wench that would have a child; a young man that was weak
stomacked; an old sir that was deaf nor an old Grandam blind; but would seek
to me for remedy. By reason whereof, I came to the knowledge of some secrets,
that made me sought to fair and near. To be short, I was taken for such a
Physician, that I took no little profit of my patients. But lost my skill would
be descryed, and so my profession discredit, I turned all my gettings into
gold, which I shipped with my self for Antwerpe. But ill gotten, ill spent; ere
I came half way over sea, I was taken prisoner by a pyrate, who after he had
taken my goods, kept me in hold for my ransom: which having paid, and gotten
away, take me ever after that what they would, I would take no profession upon
me; but taking the world as I could, I would think to use it as I had reason.
And thus much for my two first takings. Now, recovering my losses as well as my
wits and fortune would give me leave, I began to take an humor of love, and by
a little eloquence and fine dissimulation, to go about (as I took her) a
creature of more beauty then wit; and talk, then honesty. To be short, she
was of the doubtful gender, the common of two or three scores, or hundreds, I
know not whether. Now, this idle-times mistress I would have a kind boute
withal, to see if my wit could help my purse in going beyond the wiles of a
woman: but while I stood gazing on her leering eyes, she so stole away my heart
with a vain affection, that to tell you troth, I was taken in love, and that
so fast, as that to take hold of her kindness, she took hold of my cost. For
if she but spoke of that she liked, if my purse could purchase it, she was sure
to have it: so that in a little time, she took my kindness so kindly, that I
was counted the kindest man (I will not say, fool) in the world. Oh, I was not
only so taken, but so overtaken with this taking-mistresse, that she brought
me into such a taking, as is scarce worth the talking of. Oh, mine eyes were so
taken with beauty, my heart with vanity, my wits with folly, and my purse
with prodigality; that had I not the sooner left this taker, I had left
nothing for taking. Now sir, being thus weary of my loue-taking, or my taking
lover, I began to bethink me what course I were best to take for my comfort:
when finding many malicious people, that could not live quietly with their
neighbors, spend much money to little purpose, and so feed the Lawyers with
fees, that they left their purses without money: I began to think, that a
little study in the law, would gain much good in a commonwealth. Whereupon,
without much circumstance I got me into the formal outside of a jolly fellow;
and for the better countenance to my credit, furnished my study with more
books, then I had either time to read, or wit to understand. When having
gotten acquaintance with some setters for clients, rubbing over my poor
French, having Litl^ton before me, and a book of notes I know not of whose
writing, I would set on such a counselling countenance, as if I had bin at the
bar, before I know the hall: when, what with the multitude of clients and
golden fees, I made such a gain of my dissembling, that nere a Lawyer of my
standing, but I carried it clean from him, man and matter and all. In which
pretty thriuing course, I had not continued long, but that being found by my
learning unfit to plead for a black pudding, I was taken for a p^tti-fogger,
and not so good as a poor Clarke; so that my condition being found to be but a
practiser with cunning, to trouble the quiet of honest people, for fear of
being turned over the bar, I was feign to turn my compass to another
course. But to tell you, during the time of my profession, how honest a man I
was taken among knaves, and how contrary among honest men, I would be loath to
have notice taken: for indeed I was rather a bench-whistler, then a bencher;
and more meet (for my good conscience) to be arraigned at the bar, then to
plead at a bar. But as I said before, lest I should be taken for that I
truly was, I left that course, and took another invention by the back. I got
me into a country where I was unknown, and there hoping that men that sought
to win heaven by their good deeds, would surely enrich me with their charity:
I began to connterfeit a diseased creature, and seeming with the ruefull
countenance that I could frame for the purpose, I would so move the hearts, and
pick the purses of kind people, that I doubted not in time to grow a wealthy
beggar. And with this invention I went forward, till, after that I had so long
followed my profession, that my benefactors grew weary of their liberality:
it fell out by good, or ill hap rather, that I chanced to beg of a very neat
and handsome man, who seemed by his mild eye to have a heart pitiful to the
distressed. But he more cunning to pry into the knavery of my dissembling,
then to cure me of my disease, if I had had any, asked me of my pain, and how
long I had been diseased. Which, when I had untruly told him, he willed me to
come home to him, and he would undertake to heal me. Oh how glad I seemed of
his kindness, and promised to wait upon him, with many humble thanks. But
fearing this my undertaker should so overtake me in taking me napping in my
knauerie, I fairly took my way out of the town, and never came within the
gates after. Thus was I almost overtaken with a water, before I had made my
fire burn half kindly. To be short, if I should tell you all the courses that
I have taken, and how I have been taken in every of them, I should make you
think all your mistaking but a trisle, in comparison of many a miserable
taking that I have been in.


Dor. Why man, so long as you never took any course so far out of compass,
but you could guess whereabouts you were; nor ever went so far any way, but
you could find the way home again: let us take hands together like good
friends, and take all well that has hit well, and warning by that has fallen
amiss, to follow such a folly any further.


Lor. You say well, but yet ere I make a full end, I will tell you how kindly I
was entertained in a place, that by chance I took up for my lodging; where
being taken as indeed I was, a man of more honesty then wit, and kindness
then wealth: after good cheer and welcome, the good man of the house taking me
aside, began to read me this honest lesson: My friend, quoth he, for that I
take you for a man of that good disposition, that will take any thing well that
is well meant; let me tell you, there be many men in the world, that with
mistaking the right course of discretion, ^unne such wild courses as bring many
of them into many pitiful takings. Some no sooner come to their land, but they
take up their rentes before the day so long, that they are ready to make a new
taking for an old matter: other take money for leases, ere they know the value
of their lands: other take money for their lands, ere they well know the
Summarie of their rentes. All these are commonly taken prisoners, either with
the heart-ach for want of money; or the heade-ach, for want of wit. And, for
many of them, they are taken either with the beggar, the thief, the cheater,
or the fool. Some when they have nothing to take to, will take a wife to help
forward a mischief, or mend an ill matter, but such a one may hap to take a
wrong sow by the ear, that may bite him by the fingers for his labor: another
perhaps takes upon him to be a Physician, or a Surgeon, and with a pill and a
plaster, makes profession of great wonders. Now he with taking upon him much
skill, takes much money, and though for want of knowledge, or through crafty
villainy, he is determined to make a gain of his patient, he will one day give
him ease, and another day torment, as he finds the nature of his purse, in
stead of his pulses. Now, is it not pity, but that such a horse-leech were
taken and hanged, that to make a gain of grief, will bring any Christian into
such a taking?


Lor. O Lord, is it possible, that there is any such creature in the world,
that by so devilish a nature will show himself such a dog?


Dor. Too many, but give me leave a little. Some take upon them to be Divines,
which only make the name of God a cloak for their knauerie: but those may
rather be called lurch men, then Churchmen, who is they are not troubled with
much learning, so they (...) (...) more honest^ then they may well away
withal. But these who take eleven for tenths, and yet can scarce read any
other names, then are written in their Easter books, is it not pity, but
their places were taken from them, and given to them that could and would take
more careful pains in them?


Lor. I take it so: but there is such strange takings and takers in the world,
that, if God did not take the more mercy on them, surely the devil would take
away a great many of them: but let them go.


Dor. There are other that will take upon them to be Lawyers: and these having
scarce read a line of Littleton, only acquainted with a common case, either in
the masculine or the feminine gender, will set a solemn countenance upon the
matter, and taking money enough for fees, will bring poor clients into such a
taking; that, if they perceive not the sooner, how they are taken with the
fool, they will feel themselves too late to be taken with the beggar. Now,
these kind of injurious privy professors of the Law will take of all hands in
all matters, and when they are taken napping with the matter, they take small
hearts-griefe at any punishment that does befall them. Now, is it not pity
that such petty-foggers, as will pry into men's titles, plead on both sides,
and take all they can come by, were not taken from the bar, thrown over the
bar, and barred for ever coming more at a bar?


Lor. Yea, me thinks it is a great scandal to the Law, that such an offender
of the Law, as so abaseth the Law, should not be more sharply punished by the
Law.


Dor. You say well, but let me tell you a little more of takers. There are
other, that if they can write Item for a yeard of Satin, a half elle and
quarter of Taffety, fold up a piece of Grogeram, ask what lack you, and sell
an elle of Siprous, why he takes himself to be a Merchant, and that of no
mean account in his parish. But let him be, if he can make a gain of a
countenance, he is worthy to live by his wit: but, if he can take up wares or
money upon days, not caring for the payment, till he have enriched himself
with other men's goods, and upon a sudden take Lud-gate, and pay them with the
banck-rupt; is it not pity, but that he who so abuses the credit of a
Merchant, should be banished for ever coming more into the city?


Lor. Alas, if a poor Gentleman break day, in the payment of forty shillings,
the Sergeants will take him prisoner, and all the town will take him for a
shifter: but God bless me out of such takings.


Dor. Well, there are so many ill takers, that it is pity there are no better
orders taken with them, but let them go. Now there are some that take all that
comes, till being taken napping, the hangman takes order with their cloths.
Other take another man's wife for their own, that being taken with the matter,
either fall into a pitiful taking for their knavery, or make their purses take
order for their delivery. All these with many more, are wicked courses to be
taken. But to leave all occasions of ill taking: take a good course, serve God,
take a bit at home, rather then a banquet abroad, and water of thine own, then
wine of another: take account with thine estate for the defraying of thy
charge, take no rent before the day, take no counsel with the wicked, take no
pleasure in vanity, lest when you want that is necessary, you receive comfort
with sorrow, or despair in misery: take not a wife without wealth, for it will
help to hold love; nor without wit, for there is no plague to a fool; nor
without grace, for it is a hell to be jealous; nor without beauty, for there is
no pleasure in deformity; nor without education, for a slut will be noisome,
and a nouice idle; take her not too old for conscience sake, nor too young for
thrifts sake; take knowledge of her, ere you love her, lest if you be mistaken,
you were better to be without her. And last of all, take heed of a whore, a
pair of dice, a parasite, a pandor, a cheater, a flatterer, and a promoter.
Take a Courtier for a fine man, a Lawyer for a wise man, a Soldier for a
valiant man, a Divine for a learned man, a Merchant for a rich man, a clown
for a painful man, and a beggar for a poor man: but for an honest man, take
him as you find him, in what estate soever he be: If he be in a great one, give
him honor; if in a mean one, give him praise. Now if you find wealth, valor,
wisdom, learning, labor, and honesty, all in one man: note him for a rare
man, and take him for the best man. But, because in many it falls out, that
wealth causes pride; wit, cunning; learning, policy; valor, discord; pains,
grief; and poverty, misery: take good notice of every man that you have to
deal withal, and have to do with as few as you can. And for an end, if a
good occasion may be taken, slip it not; if a good gift may be taken, refuse it
not: and if you have taken a good course, leave it not. Take God for thy chief
good, thy wit for thy servant, thy wife for thy companion, and thy children for
thy comfort: and what thou have, take patiently and thankfully. So, shall thou
be sure at the count-taking of all the world, thou shall be taken into the
joys everlasting. This rule was I taught to take by them, whom I justly took,
and truly sound my good friends. So my good friend, for that I take a (...)
(...) a gracious disposition in you, that you will not take scorn of a small
gift of a poor friend: let me entreat you to take your supper and lodging
upon my charge, and this piece of gold toward the defraying of your further
charges. Thus when I had thankfully taken his kind offer, and further had well
taken to memory his good admonitions, I took my leave of him, and according to
his counsel took my way home again: where, how happy I should hold my self
to enjoy your company, I shall make you know by that you find.


Dor. Oh Sir, you have got the start of me, it was the suit I meant to have
made to you: but since it is your fortune to be before me, I am at your will to
be disposed.


Dor. Sir, complements are so common, that they be of small account, and
therefore I will say but this: Choose your own time, and make your own welcome.


Lor. If I can requite you, I will not forget you, and let this suffice you:
shortly I hope to see you, I will always love you, and wish I could ever be
with you.


Dor. What? shall we have old aduerbes? As in absence you may see me, so in
silence you may hear me? I pray you bear me company home, and I will bring
you half way back again.


Lor. Indeed figures are good among ciphers: but honest minds have plain
toungs, and therefore not to detract time, I am at your direction.


Dor. I thank you: Let us go.


FINIS.

