THE PILGRIMAGE TO PARADISE, JOINED WITH THE Countess of Penbrookes love,
compiled in verse by NICHOLAS BRETON Gentleman.

Coelum virtutis partia.

At Oxford printed, by JOSEPH BARNES, and are to be sold in Paul's
Church-yeard, at the sign of the Tygres head. 1592.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, VIRTUOUS, AND WORTHY LADY, THE LADY MARY Countess
of Penbrooke, continual health with eternal happiness.
RIGHT noble Lady, whose rare virtues, the wise no less honor, then the
learned admire, and the honest ferue: how shall I, the abject of fortune, unto
the object of honor, presume to offer so simple a present, as the poetical
discourse of a poor pilgrims travail? I know not how, but, with falling at
the feet of your favor, to crave pardon for my imperfection: who has read
of the Duchess of Vrbina, may say, the Italians wrote well: but who knows the
Countess of Penbrooke, I think has cause to write better: (...) if she had
many followers? have not you mo servants* and if they were so mindful of their
favors* shall we be forgetful of our duties? no, I am assured, that some are
not ignorant of your worth, which will not be idle in your service: that will
make a title, but a tittle, where a line shall put down a letter: and if she
have received her right in remembrance, you must not have wrong in being
forgotten: if she were the honor of wit, you are the comfort of discretion,
if she were the favorer of learning, you are the mainteiner of Art, and if
she had the beauty of Nature, you beautify Nature, with the blessing of the
spirit: and in sum, if she had any true perfection to be spoken of, you have
many mo truly to be written of: which among all, the least able to judge of,
and of all, the very least worthy, in your favor to write of, your poor
unworthy named poet, who by the indiscretion of his youth, the malice of envy,
and the disgrace of ingratitude, had utterly perished (had not the had of your
honor revived the heart of humility) will not so bury in the grave of oblivion,
but that your deserved fame, shall so sound in the ears of honorable hearts,
that, if I spoke, more then I may, the Judgment of the wise, and the tongues
of the learned, I know will no less clecre me of flattery, then wish, a mind
of more perfection, to be employed in your service: to conclude, I beseech you
so savor my labor, as to look on the work, think not of the ruins of
Troie, but help to build up the walls of Jerusalem* which figure* if it
seem obscure, let the poor pilgrim, that seeks Paradise, find heaven the
better by your favor: to the comfort of which, committing under heaven, the
hope of my hearts happiness, with humble prayer, for your eternal
prosperity, I rest in no less bounden duty, then humble service.

Your Lad^shippes unworthy named poet NICHOLAS BRETON.

To the Gentlemen studients and Scholars of Oxforde.
GENTLEMEN, I am persuaded, ye will think it not a little f^lly in me, to
have entered into so great a presumption, as, before the ^ies of so many
discreet judgments, to adventure the press, with the simple fruits, of my
imperfect labors. Yet when, I remember, that virtue is the honor of all
arts, and that my Muse has not altogether straied, from the strain of that
divine humor, I will rather hope of your undeserved favors, then look for my
desert in the contrary: the occasion, that made me first enter into this
action, was to acquaint, the honest minds of virtuous dispositions, with the
heavenly Meditations, of an honorable Lady, the weak discourse whereof, far
short of her worthiness, in true worth truly we^de, I have here rather
adventured to the correction of the learned, then else where would have passed
to the commendation of the ignorant give me then leave, with this book to
honor her: and for all other I will be ready to carry them after any of you,
in witness whereof, I have hereto subscribed my name, this 12th of April. 1592.

A poor well willer to your worthiness. NICHOLAS BRETON.

GEntlemen there has been of late printed in london by one Richard Ioanes, a
printer, a book of english verses, entitled Bretons bower of delighes: I
protest it was done altogether without my consent or knowledge, and many
things of other men's mingled with few of mine, for except Amoris Lachrima: an
epitaphe upon Sir Phillip Sydney, and one or two other toies, which I know not
how he unhappily came by, I have no part with any of the^: and so I beseech ye
assuredly believe.

TO MY HONEST TRVEFRIENDE Master Nicholas Breton.
IT is a needelesse thing (friend Breton) in these our days to revive the old
art of loving, seeing there are already so many courts of Venus, so many
Palaces of pleasure, so many pamphlets or rather huge volumes of wanto^ love
and daliance. This were to put fire to flax, and to offer soft bleeding hearts
as sacrifice to Cupids bow and arrows. But I mistake your meaning, the only
title of your book is Love, and the object Heaven. Love is the name, but God
is the mark and matter at which it aims. This Love quelleth and kills
Love, and yet is Love, not the Love of Martha, but the Love of Mary who loved
much, who loves Christ. This Love made Mary Magdalens tears, and makes the
best Mary living to ascend to Jerusalem and there to seek her lover in the
Temple. But finding him not among the Doctors she takes the wings of an
Eagle, and in her sacred thoughts flies above the Sun, never ceasing to
seek, till she have found her Lover. Lo here is Love, and here is labor,
but the labor is light, where the Love is great. ^or the heart there only
lives, where it loves. Marvel not therefore if this lovely Lady become a
pilgrim upon earth, and pass the sea, and wilderness of this world, till
she enjoys her Love. But, to be short (friend Breton) because this book of
yours touching the Love and pilgrimage of that pearelesse Lady is as a crystal
of truths well known unto me, I am both in respect of your self whom I love
and favor, and also in duty toward her, whom I serve and honor, most
willing to subscribe unto it. Your wit, pen, and art therein sound well
together. The song is sweet, the ditty sweeter, but that rare Phoenix is the
sweetest Phoenix, whom your wit pen and art can but well shadow with all your
Muses: for as an image is but an image, and the tincture of any thing is not
the substance thereof, so the colors of her honors are* in your book, but
the life of her virtue is in her self.

Your friend in true kindness, John Case, M. D.

Gulielmi Gageri legum (...) in Nicolai (...) ^
DVM, ^
Non vr^t Liuor, non (...)
Quem non Segnities, non Fastus, and Ardor (...),
Non capiat nitidis (...) Lib^do (...)
Non aduers^ premant, non vit^ (...)*
Recto quaerentem ^e, (...)* (...)
Mirandum plane cantas, sed (...)*
Vt sit mirandus qui cauit, and (...).
In eiusdem (...)
SIC Peregrina^tem singis, sic pingis Amante^,
Vt Peregrinantis (...)
Ore fauete omn^s, (...)
Nobilis, and vulg^ (...)
Quae ^ibi Musarum talem (...)*
Bret^one, and tantam (...)*
Quae Dea? non hominem vox (...)*
Non miror sacro quod sacra font fluant.
MIraris (re^ (...)) (...) Bretonus
(...) tam (...), (...)
Inuitante canit, canit (...) (...),
Multa hinc tam facile, and tam (...) culta (...).
Qui canit inui^a, canit (...) (...),
Aut nihil, aut nihili, (...), vel (...)*
Esto Minerua tuis Dea (...) lati^ Athenis,
Et tibi vel (...).
Some scoff at all that write, write not at all,
Some write, but to find fault with them that writer
Some ballat-makers scorn, and scorn by right,
Except they wince, because they feel the gall.
At timers some (o poor word) cast their gall,
Cast gall and all in such mind well they might:
Some through melancholy, or rival spite,
All Poets sdeigne, or some no Poets call.
Avaunt such scoffing, sin default, scorning spirits,
Or let our writers, ballat-makers, rimers:
In her own money pay Lycambes merits.
Poets fly higher, then such pety climers,
Let this suffice, that Breton is a Poet,
She said it, we subscribe it, his books shewit.
Mira. (...)*

IN NICOLAI BRETONI EANdem peregrinantem and amantem (...) Henrici Pricei.
QV Aemod^ (...) iter, (...), quid h^c est?
Hoc est. (...) quo (...) ^er
Huic in dux Brettons via, comes illa, qui^ hoc est?
Hoc est. In portu est (...) co^ esquire su^.
Ad Lectorem.
BElla Maro cecinit, lasciuam Naso (...)
Dissimili h^c canitur miles, (...)
Non animalis homo est quem sic in praelia ^rudit
Non est lasciuus virgini^ huius amor.
Transi^us est animae per mill pericula carnis,
Diuinique nou^m tradit amoris opus.
Idem ad Authorem.
SIT pietas (...), Deus est virtutis (...)
Tali^ dum recolis, viue Bretone, vale.
Sol gloria lucis.
FINIS.
THE PILGRIMAGE TO PARADISE.
FROM all those courses of a vain conceit,
Where virtue proves, her honor has no place,
Unto the Sun, of that bright shining heighte:
Where all the graces have their highest grace,
My Muse is weande, by wisdoms sound advise,
To make her pilgrimage, to paradise.
Which pilgrimage, is not, as poets feign,
Nor pieuish people, blindely do conceive:
A kind of walk, that worldly wealth may gain,
Whereby the devil, does the world deceive:
But, it is a walk, of only virtues will,
And to be found, but by the spirits skill.
Now, they that must this travail take in hand,
Are only five, each differente in their nature,
Which, with consent, do all contented stand,
To yield their service, to one only creature:
By whom they are unto their comfort led:
And, as he fares, are found, alive or dead.
Now, lies this walk, alonge a wilderness,
A forest, full of wild, and cruel beasts:
The earth vntilde, the fruit, unhappiness,
The trees all hollow, full of howletes nestes,
The aier unwholesome, or so foul infected:
as, ^ardely restes, that may not be rejected.
But, to go on with my intended tale,
Five servants, led, by one chief lord there were:
which, all were sworn in either bliss, or bale,
Their masters fortune, faithfully to bear:
And so resolu^de, to see, their service done,
On gods good speed their travail thus begone.
The lord and Master, first the Muses called,
And bad them stay, their straying kind of Musing:
whose pure conceit, their spirits so apalled,
As, made them have, their humors in refusing:
And make their state, but on that only story,
That was the grace, of their eternal glory.
Then gave a charge to every one, aparte,
To keep the compass of a true conceit:
what every one, should have for her desert,
That, to her hope, could keep the high way straight:
And then his servants, soundely did advise,
How they should find the path to paradise.
The first, his charge, was only, but to see,
what best might please, and what might worst offend:
what objects might but all as abiects be,
what harm to escape, what honor to attend:
A far, near hand, each side, before, behind,
How best to guide a pure, and perfect mind.
The second calde, his charge was but to hear,
In sweetest sounds, which was the soundest sweet:
what graces might, in Musickes ground appear,
And where the honors of the humors mee^e:
what careful notes, do comfort best conclude,
while Sitens songs, do but the soul delude.
The third then calde, was charged to take the sent,
Of every flower and herb, within the field:
which might but grow, whereas their graces went,
what sauoure might, the sweetest profit yield:
And what might hurt, least that the brain displeased,
The body might perhaps be all diseased.
The fourth then calde, did take his charge, to taste,
Of every fruit, that should become their food:
what beast might nourish, and might sweetest last,
And, in their travail most might do them good:
How sweet with sower, might best be tempred so,
As, tone, the the other might not well forgo.
Then came the fifte who took his charge to feel,
The grauelde causey from the hollow ground:
How best the toe, might trust unto the heel,
when settled faith had surest footing sound:
And so by leisure find, where sweetly lies,
The lovely path, that leads to paradise.
When thus each one, had learned what to do,
Instructed by the guide unto their grace:
Weying the worth, they were, to walk unto,
Wishing, and longing, to behold the place.
Onwards they pass, but with two poor attendauntes,
And, (on the earth) but with two poor defendauntes.
Their carriage was, but an unwieldy trunk,
Wherein to near their trash, was laid their treasure,
With weight whereof, their shoulders often thruncke,
Before they came, unto their place of pleasure,
But let that pass, until the time be cumme.
To make the reckening of a Roial sum.
But, to go on as I did first intend,
To tell the course, of these resolved creatures,
To take a travail, that should never end,
A note, above the reach of earthly natures,
Lo, thus it was, at least, as he did write,
That, seemde he winckt not, when he hit the white.
Alo^g the walk, the walk, alas, to long,
Amidde the haples hills, and doleful dales:
where sighs and sobs, do sound but sorrows song,
while sweetest truths are crossed by sorry tales:
And darkest clouds, are clapped before the sun,
This wary creatures, have their way begun.
A path unpleasant where no pleasure was,
That earthly people easily might perceive:
A passage hard, and narrow for to pass,
But for the life, that of his life took leave:
To pass the lake where death, and sorrow lies,
And kill them both, to come to paradise.
Wherein, no sooner, were they all set forth,
with resolution, never to return:
There did appear a light of little worth,
A mocking loie, whose end was but to morn:
Upon the left hand, of this selly creature,
Venus, fair painted, with her finest feature.
Who, wanting nothing, that might well adorn,
A cunning dame, to compass her desire:
with look askaunce, as if she had in scorn,
A meaner hope, them might a heaven aspire:
with strange devises of a world of toies,
would stop his passage to his further loies.
And up she stands a tipto, in her state,
As, if the earth, too base were for her feet:
with such a glaunce, as if she had in hate,
That less, then Monarchs, should her presence meet:
when, with such smiles, so near this walk she went,
As made them wonder what the vision meant.
When he, that first had taken charge to view,
What might their travail hinder or avail:
Finding, that in his sight a dimnes grew,
whereby the cleerenes of his sense might fail:
Feeling the humor, grow unto an Itche,
Began to fear the wonder was a witch.
When of the sudden, holding up his hand,
Betwixt his sight, and this same perlous thing:
Having no leisure, on his thoughts to stand,
what issue would, of this, ill humor spring:
went on alonge and kept his walk aright,
Until this vision vanished out of sight.
When, on the right hand fourthwith did appear,
Diana, she, of whom the poets writ:
A dame of state, yet with such smiling cheer,
As showed, where kindenes, did with honor sit:
who, with her nymphs, appareld all in white,
Did seem to pure an object for his sight.
When fearing, that the poets did not feign,
That did set forth Diana for divine:
when in her Beauty was so bright a vain,
As, seemde, that Phoebus on her face did shine:
Betwixt his sight, and this conceived sun,
Held up his hand, ere any hurt was done.
And thus betwixt first Venus, then Diane,
Onwardes he goes, his right intended way,
And noting well what he had vndertane,
And, that a stop might cause to long a stay,
Keeping the path, looking on neither side,
He follows on his best beloved guide.
When, walking on, his hoped happy way,
Upon the left hand rose a sudden sound,
which might have been a most unhappy stay,
But, that a sudden remedy was found,
For he that knew her Music was a charm,
His hearing stopped, for fear of further harm.
And, this was he that had the charge to hear,
And harken soundly to each secret sound.
what noise might not by any means cum near,
And where the Muses, soon would be a ground,
who having heard but how her harp was strong,
would not vouchsafe the hearing of her song.
But, when she saw how hardly she was used,
Her Beauty first barde from the walk of bliss,
And then her Music so in skorne refused,
As idle noise, wherein no honor is,
Away she went all angry as she was,
And left the poor man, o^ his way to pass.
When, one the right hand of the sodeine rose,
An other sound, but of a deeper sweet,
Where sure Diana, with her Nymphs had chose,
The ground of grace where all the Muses meet,
To show the world the heavenly harmony,
Where Nightingales, do make a company.
When he that heard the sweetness of the sound,
Fearing what hurt might quickly grow upon it,
If once his Muse, vnhapply might be drownde,
In worlds delight, ere, wit had ouergonne it.
The hearing stopped, of his unworthy sense:
Of such a sound, of such an excellence.
But when Diana plainly began to find,
That, one of all the world had warning took?
For coming near unto Acteons kind,
And that her silver sound was so forsook,
Away she went, but yet, with this sweet blessing,
Virtue is placed where pride may not be pressing.
When these were gone, that might have stopt^ his way,
Had he not kept the course of better care,
A new devise, again to breed his stay,
Came Flora forth, with all his fairest ware,
Laying abroad the ward^ope of her wealth,
Her fairest flowers, and ^ittest herbs for health.
But he that had the charge to take the sent,
Of every sauoure, both the sower and sweet,
Knowing what best might comfort, or content,
How, weeds were all, to tread but under feet,
The ho^some sauoure to his service used,
And fair flourd weeds, as poison foul refused.
But when that Flora, saw her great disgrace:
Withered with grief, she shrunk into the ground,
And, (as it seemed) displeased with the place,
For that, so little favor their she found,
She lets him go, until anon he met,
An other Lady, with another let.
And this was she, of whom the Poets writ,
Ceres the Princes of the Pesaunts treasure,
Who, both fortast, and eke for hunger fit,
Did only work, but for the bellies pleasure,
Who, with a cornu copia, sweetly dight:
would stay the spirit, with the flesh delight.
But he that had the charge, to take a taste:
Of every fruit, whereon, they were to feed,
what soon would rot, and what would longest last,
And what would prove, the sweetest food indeed.
Upon his lip his little finger plas't:
As if her gift were utterly disgras't.
Not, that the present seemed of no price,
But, that their comforts were of other kind:
And that, (God wot) it was a base devise,
with belly pleasures to abuse the mind:
which Ceres seeing, parted in a rage,
And left the pilgrim, to his pilgrimage.
Which, selly creature, softly going on,
Encountered with more crosses, then before:
A world of fools, and devils many a one.
In shape of men, in shape, and somewhat more:
which labourd sore, to make some stop, or stay,
To hinder love, in hitting virtues way.
But, he, whose charge, was charily to feel,
what ground was best to ground his footing on:
spurnde with his toe, and kicked of with his heel,
Their stumbling stones, till all the stops were gone:
which, when they saw, his bliss they could not balke,
They tanne away, and left him to his walk.
By which good hour, when heavens had happly tried,
How constant care, his passage, truly past:
And in the heart, no vile desire did bide,
while patient will, was with discretion placed:
They rockt the rules, of natures sense asleep,
while Angels songs, the soul did waking keep.
But, waking wit, that had no will to rest,
Till joy might come, unto her iourneies send:
And that the spirit, was not fully blessed,
Till humble faith, might see her heavenly friend:
Awakte this pilgrim, from his pensive vain,
And set him sweetly on his way again.
When, passing on, they fell into a wood,
A thicket full, of brambles, thorns, and briers:
A graceles grove, that never did man good,
But wretched sendinges of the worlds desires:
where Snakes, and Adders, and such venu^d things,
Had slain a number, with their cruel stinges.
Some, Metamorphosde, like Acteon, were,
Diana smiling at their lewd desires:
Some, Semitawres, and some, more half a Bear,
Other half swine, deep wallowing in the miers:
All beastly minds, that could not be reformed,
were to the shapes of their own shame transformed.
There might he see, a Monky with an Ape,
Climing a tree, and cracking of a Nut:
One sparrow teach an other how to gape,
But, not a tame one, taught to keep the cut:
And many a lack daw, in, his foolish chat,
while parets prated of they knew not what.
(...) But, when she saw, humilities affection,
won from the world to seek for heavenly favor,
And that the soul, by wisdom* ^ound direction,
In sacred flowers, should find the sweetest savor,
She raisde him up, and badde him there receive,
The true delights, should not the soul deceive.
When lifted up, by that fair hand of love,
That brought the heart an unknown happiness,
And every servant, sweetly did approve,
A blessing in their Masters blessedness,
with silent thoughts, they humbly did attend,
The words, that did their comfort comprehend.
Poor wretch quod she, thy faithful patient heart,
the highest powers in pity do regard:
where true repentance pleades for no desert,
But, bounties grace, where mercy gives reward:
The heavens have hard, thy humble happy prayer,
To help thy hope, and keep thee from despair*
The labor, that thy love has taken in hand,
Thy travail, minding, never to retire:
The happy stay, whereon thy hope does stand,
where humble prayer, but pity does aspire:
Have got thee grace in mercies glorious eyes,
To find the path that leads to paradise.
This is the (...), that patience only treades,
where life does go on pilgrimage to love:
whose humble heart, the holy spirit leads,
unto the height of blessed hopes behoue:
whom graces guard, till perils al be past,
And faith resolu'de, do find her rest at last.
Since thou have scapte the vaunt of Venus vain,
And not presumde Diana to approach:
Since Flora could no further favor gain,
Nor Ceres could thy careful thought encroch:
Since fools, and devils, all are driven away,
Bide but a night, and thou shall see the day.
Since thou have scapte the way of wretchedness,
where shameless minds to shameful shapes are turned*
And found the way of fairest blessedness,
where heart enflamde, with virtues fire has burned:
Keep on the path, and turn on neither side,
Grace to thy hope will be a happy guide.
Think it not long, to cumme to heaven at last,
Nor linger time to hinder happy speed:
Fear not the sun, though skies be ouercast,
And let a candell stand the night in steed,
So mark the light, that lives in virtues eyes,
And love shall lead thee straight to paradise.
Fear not the foes, nor forces thou shall meet,
For thou shall meet with monsters, many a one:
But faith resolu'de treds fortune under feet,
where virtue comes, will vices all be gone:
Hell cannot hurt, whom heavenly powers defend,
where grace begins* hope makes a happy end.
Lo near at hand, he that would hurt thee most:
An ougly Monster, full af all corruption:
By whose illusion, many souls have lost,
Their lively hopes, by lowdenes interruption.
A Lier, Theife, and master of all evil,
The sier of sin, the fiend^ of hell, the devil.
Seven are his heads, as many are his tails,
Ec^ head a tongue and every tail a sting,
And woe to them, with whom his tongues prevails,
within the compase of his tails to bring.
But skorne his words, or quite him with disgrace,
and thou shall kill, or make him fly the place.
His body is the very sink of sin,
Into which hole, all hellish filth does run.
A plague of pride, presumption did begin,
An endless plague, that was in pride begun,
where every head the body stands in steed,
with poisoned souls, the filthy paunch to feed.
His swords, are words, with which he is to fight,
whose forces can but faithles hearts offend,
For, if he look, but once at virtues light,
He faintes for fear, and feels his forces end,
But hear him speak, and never fear his spite,
when virtue laughes at vanities delight.
His greatest head, and that does gape most wide,
Is proud Ambition, swallowing worldly wealth:
which faithles souls, infectes, with filthy pride,
Killing the spirit, for the bodies health:
Upon which head, he bears a triple crown,
That, (Virtue sees) is near his tumbling down.
In which great head, his tongue is all untruth,
Lies, to bewitch the world unto his will:
The ease of Age, and high conceit of youth:
are greatest grounds of his ungracious skill:
To govern states, is such a stately thing:
what slave is he, that would not be a king?
And thus the villain, would the world persuade,
To proud attemptes that may presume to high,
But earthly ioies, will make him prove a ^ade,
when virtue speaks of loves divinity:
where humble heart, does to that heaven aspire,
where is no place for any proud desire.
The second head, is wicked avarice,
Choking it self, with trash, in stead of treasure:
whose tongue, is treason that can best devise,
To hurt the spirit, with the bodies pleasure:
But talk of virtues joy in Misery,
And he will pine to death in penury.
The third foul head, is filthy Gluttony,
Devouring more, then it can well digest:
Leading the heart, to loathsome villainy,
And of a man does make an ougly beast:
But, answer him with fasting, and with prayer,
The very words, will kill him with their aier.
The fourth bad head, is beastly slothfulnes,
Sleeping, and snorting, like a filthy swine:
Loosing the time in loathsome Idleness,
Dreaming, of that, which never was divine:
But answer him, with virtues careful watching,
He faintes, and falls, to find his ouermatching.
The fifte vile head, is filthy lechery,
which leads the heart, to hateful wickedness:
His tongue, a forge of fancies treachery,
To bring the soul, to all unhappiness:
But, answer him, with virtues chaste desire,
And, he will bite his very tail for ire.
The sixte is envy full of malice fraught,
Feeding on Snakes, that feign would virtue stinge:
which, where they find their forces come to naught,
Into his mouth, they back their poison bring:
But say how patience, leads to paradise,
He frets, and fumes, and in impatience dies.
The seventh is murder, most accursed head,
whose tongue is blasphemy, all did in blood:
which, with the hearts of harmeles creatures feade,
Lappes in the broth of an Infernal food:
But, say how virtue does for vengeance cry,
And dead he falls, or else away does fly.
Now, bear these heavenly lessons all by heart,
And take these books to benefit thy mind:
In each of which is hid a secret art,
whose proper use, may profit in his kind:
But chiefly do this holly book peruse,
where special comfortes, may thy spirit choose.
When, having given into his humble hand,
Seven sundry books, whereonto use his wit:
And last, the stay, whereon the state did stand,
Of happy life, where heavenly love does sit:
The holy book, of virtues blessed vain,
Home she returns unto her heaven again.
Which, when the pilgrim humbly did behold,
Carrying in mind, the comforts of his heart:
which, to his faith, her favor did unfold,
To keep the soul, from an Infernal smart:
Against the fury, of this fiende of hell,
Onwardes he goes, God speed his passage well.
When, not to stand, on circumstance too long,
He meets anon with this same monster thing:
who, by illusion, of the Sirens song,
would seek, a world, in bondage how to bring.
Turning himself, into a thousand shapes,
To fear fond children, and to cosen Apes.
And first, he looks, like to a fiery light,
which would consume, what so did cross his way:
But, soon was done, the force of his despite,
where virtue came, he had no power to stay,
And then, he would become a speaking bird,
But, God once namde, he durst not speak a word.
And by and by, he would become a Bear,
To fear young children with a foolish noise:
But, when a man, a beast, can never fear,
He found it prou'de, old children were no boys:
when, by and by, he would become an Ape,
Oh beastly thing, too near a human shape.
But, when that virtue found the vile effect,
Of Apish humors, with the Monckish minds,
She wholly did, the vermins iestes reject,
And forced him seek, for shapes of other kinds:
when all his sleightes, could do him little boot,
For, virtue knew, the devil by his foot.
No, though into an Angel fair of light,
He could transform him self, for to deceive:
Yet could he not his foot keep out of sight,
But, virtue could his filthy clawe perceive:
So by his foot, she plainly did descrie him,
Bidding auaunte, foul fiende, she did defy him.
When, as the pilgrim lifting up his eyes,
To heavenly powers from hell for to defend him:
Sweet Christ once namde, away the Serpent flies,
And, for awhile unable to offend him:
Til, once again, the heavens had given him leave,
To do his worst, sweet virtue to deceive.
When, in the shape whereof before I spoke,
with his seven heads, the wicked Serpent stands:
with such a sound, as made the earth to shake,
As, half the world, were subject, to his hands:
when first, his head, of pride began to speak,
And, to this pilgrim, did this poison break.
Thou little wretch, quod he, of lesser worth,
In human shape I know not what to name:
whom honors spirit, never could bring forth,
To seek the fortune of imperial fame:
How did thou fall into this forlorn path,
wherein the world so little pleasure has.
Where, see the ground of every secret grief,
which mortifies the body with the mind:
Subject to every cross, and for relief,
Pity, the whole, that thou must hope to find:
Patience a pain set down, life, but a death,
where care, and sorrow draw a sickely breath.
Where eyes must be embased to the ground,
Their pleasing humors, barred to behold:
And bended knees, to cappe, and courtzy bound,
while bared head, must bide the bitter cold:
The mind must stoop, the hand must loose his strength,
The heart must droupe, and life must yield at length.
Is this the reach, of Reasons noble wit?
To see a world, and seek for nothing in it,
In such a chair does charie humor sit?
To know a work of worth and not begin it:
who could of power conceive, the kingly pleasure,
would no conceit with such a comfort measure.
Humility? a jolly creeping thought,
Patience, a pretty purgatory:
Sorrow, a fit, for the physician wrought
And death, a gentill end of misery.
Fasting and prayer, all the spirits pleasure,
Notes for a King, to look upon at leisure.
No, stoop no thought, seek only to subdue,
Set no conceit, in honor with a crown:
In beggar mind, true conquest never grew,
The village, is a cotage to the town:
The Monarchy, does show, the noble mind,
He has no life, that cummes of lower kind.
What slave will serve, that easily may command?
what sense will stoop, that may be set alofte?
who will desire, that needs not to demand?
who loves the boordes may have his bed made soft?
Or who regardes, the rascal beggars tears?
That may have Music to content his ears.
What poor conceit, will beg for cru^mes of bread?
May have his table furnished all with cates?
Or break his heart with hammers of his head?
May pass his humors, with his pleasing mates:
Fair, wise, rich, learned, valiant, young, and old.
Power is the hand, does at commandment hold.
And so he stopped, but swelling with such pride,
As if his brain, would have with poison burst:
To whom, the pilgrim, presently replied,
Avaunt foul fiende, and Monster most accursed:
Thou hate of heaven, and greatest hagge of hell,
what wicked tale have thou presumde to tell.
Wretched, blasphemous spirit of presumption,
Ougly in shape, and horrible in sense,
Thou cursed substance of the souls consumption,
The heavens displeasure, and the worlds offense,
That know no worth, and art not worth the knowing,
Rot in thy root, ere thou have further growing.
Thou wicked witch, fond fortunes first deviser,
To bring a desperate spirit to defame,
And by illusion, first the souls surpriser,
That hears thy words, and will believe the same,
How durst thou once presume so near this path,
where hateful humor, never passage has.
Thou ground of grief, here is the ground of grace,
Thou foul infection, here is fairest health,
Thou cross of crosses, here is comfortes place,
Thou pitties want, and here is pitties wealth,
Thou dire impatience, dole* and deadly strife,
Cursed be the death, that stoppes the way of life.
Whose blinded eyes, are barde all blessed light,
whose crooked knees, are crampt for crafty creeping:
whose triple crown, in virtues humble sight,
will break thy neck, and rest in better keeping,
whose heart subdued, by hand of heavenly strength,
Must live in pain of never ending length.
Calst thou the rage of will, the rules of wit?
Is all the world, ought else but vanity?
who in the chair of changing choice does sit,
Knows nothing of divine humanity,
Nor in conceit, can comfort truly measure,
That knows, not pride, the plage of high displeasure.
Humility, high Angels happy thought,
while patience, is the devils purgatory:
Sorrow a fit, for faithes physicians wroughte,
while high heavens mercy, ends worlds misery,
Fasting, and prayer, happiness procuring,
while true repentance is but hope enduring.
Then stoop foul pride, whom heavens did full subdue,
Know that thy crown is cumming tumbling down:
Virtue does see how by Illusion grew,
The worlds disgrace, to grace thee with a crown:
Monarch of mischief, such is all thy mind,
Nor has he life, that cummes of such a kind.
His service, freedom, that made thee a slave,
His seat alofte, that makes thee lie full low:
His want a wealth, that sees thee nothing have,
His boorde a bed, that makes thee watch for woe:
His alms sweet, that saues the beggars tears,
while thou have naught, but cries to fill thine ears.
A poor conceit, that starues for lack of crumbs,
And yet will tell the world of delicates:
who often for hunger feedst upon thy thumbes,
when death and sorrow, are thy hellish mates:
Fair, wise, rich, learned, valiant, old, and young,
Take heed of pride, and of his poisned tongue.
And with that word I know not how it fell,
But, down the crown, came tumbling on the ground:
when as the head, with anger seemde to swell,
Like an Aposthume, of a poisoned wound:
which breaking inward, of the sudden shroncke,
Into the body, oh most beastly troncke.
The head of pride thus suddenly consumde,
Or, shroncke into this filthy sincke of sin:
The second head, foul Avarice presumde,
with wicked words, the miser minds to win:
Ah, beggar, worm, and needy wretch quod he,
what do thou think, that will become of thee.
Has patience bred in thee this poor conceit,
That cold and hunger be thy hearts content?
Do thou not see, how many thousands wait,
In honors field, upon the golden tente?
Or know thou not, power, wisdom, wit and pleasure,
All, have their Essence, in the golden treasure.
What face so fair, that is not graced in gold,
what wit of worth, but has in gold his wonder?
what learning, but, with golden lines does hold,
what state so high, but gold will bring him under?
what thought so sweet, but gold does better season,
And what rule best, but in the golden reason.
Be lord of lands, and cram thy chest with coin,
Fear naught but need, money will make a friend:
Let conscience learn, the cunning to purloine,
wit without wealth, has but a woeful end,
The golden scepter, and the golden crown,
Does make the subject on his knees come down.
The ground is fat, that yeeldes the golden fruit,
The study high, that hits the golden state:
The labor sweet, that gets the golden suite,
The reckning right, that makes the golden rate:
The hap is sure, that golden hope does hold,
And rich is gain, that serves the god of gold,
And with that word the wicked thing did cease,
when presently the pilgrim thus replied:
Oh cursed cancker, cross of conscience peace,
whose hateful heart, does all ill humors hide:
Thou kindling cole of an Internal fire,
Die in the ashes, of thy dead desire.
Impatient spirit living all by spoil,
Drunk like the dropsy, and yet ever dry:
Consumde with care, and tired out with toil,
Seeminge to live, and yet do ever die,
How du^st thou so the name of god blaspheme,
To give to dross so great a Diadem.
Thou stone-colde heart, with hungri^g after coin,
My care in heaven, does seek my hearts content,
Thou scrapst for pelf, I seek not to purloine,
In virtues field, I seek but mercies tent,
When wisdom, finds, in power of highest pleasure,
The world, al trash, compard to heavenly treasure.
Foul is the fair that has her gold in grace,
worthiness the wit, that has in wealth his wonder:
unlearned lives, put gold in honors place,
wicked the state, that will to coin cume under:
Base the conceit, that seasonde is with gold,
And beggar, rules, that such a reason hold.
Thou plodst for lands, I seek a living place,
Thou fearste but need, I, money make no fri^de:
Thy conscience, cunning, and my care is grace,
Thy wits wealth, woe, my hearts wish, heaven at end:
Thy gold is dross, and virtue is my crown,
where hearts submission, pulls ambition down.
Earth gives thee gold, heavens give me higher grace,
Men study wealth, but Angels wisdoms state:
Labor seeks pence, love has a higher place,
Death makes thy reckening, life is all my rate:
Thy hap is hell, my hope of heaven does hold,
God give me grace, die devil with thy gold.
And with that word, the head began to shrincke,
The face dead pale, and hollow grew the eyes:
And so, at last, did all, and wholly sincke,
Into that hell, that head of Avarice:
when up did start the head of Gluttony,
Vomiting out these words of villainy.
Poor (...) beggar, whereon do thou feed,
well fare the mouth, that feeds the belly full*
what staruing humor, stands thy wit insteede,
The want of victuaile, makes the body dull*
I find it true no triumph to a feast,
the belly full the bones will be at rest.
Some feed their eyes withstaring on the stars,
And starve the body to content the mind:
Some with their wits will be so long at wars,
They grate on crusts, when other men have dinde,
But let the frantic so their humor please,
Give me the life, of meat, and drink and ease.
When that the earth, does give us pleasing food,
what reason is it nature should refuse it:
If reason find, what will do nature good,
what boots to have it, if we do not use it:
Then let me feed, while I have power to eat,
The mouth was made to give the body meat.
Oh, when the tongue is pleased with a taste,
The stomach feeds, until the heart do laugh,
And then a cup with a carowsing cast,
And then a health out of a frindely quaffe:
Then works the brain in such a blessed wise,
As if the body were in paradise.
When thinking more to speak, his mouth ran over,
with beastly humors, loathsome to behold,
And in such sort, as he could not recover,
Till that he did, his filthy sense unfold,
when stopping so, the pilgrim began reply,
Die ougly venum in thy villainy.
Thou filthy, fat, and ouerfoggy flesh,
Foul bagpipe-cheekes, eyes starting from the head,
whom heavenly humors never can refresh,
That all in hell, have made thy hateful bed,
Heavens let me fast, from such a loathsome feast,
where to much feeding makes a man a beast.
Earth fill thine eyes, heavens feed my humble heart,
Dross fill thy belly, Grace content my mind,
Of worldly lunckets take thy pleasing part,
Grace, give my soul, one crum, and I have dinde,
So with thy frensies, do thy fancy please,
Heavens be my rest, whom earth can never ease.
Earth feeds of earth, heavens give the spirit food,
Nature corrupted lost the key of reason,
The body knows not of the spirits good,
Use is abuse, where truth is ^aust with treason,
Then role, and tumble in thy beastly ^iot,
The dish of mercy, be my spirits diet.
Oh, when the tongue is touched with cruel fire,
The stomach feeds, of an infernal flame,
A cup of coals to quench a foul desire,
A cureles hatt, consuming in the same:
Then works the spirit with such woeful cries,
As, proves in hell, was never paradise.
When, this same filthy hedde of Glotony,
Beastly bedight with his abhorred diet:
Choked with venum of such villainy,
As, breeds the ground of natures most disquiet*
Soncke back into the belly of the beast,
which, of such spirits, made his special feast.
When started up the head of slouthfulnes,
with ougly claws picking his gummy eyes:
who with the noddes of natures he uines,
Did in few words, this filthy speech devise,
what humor, wretch, does thee so waking keep,
That thou can feed upon so little sleep.
Sleep is the pride of ease, the height of pleasure,
The Nurse of nature, and the rule of rest:
The thoughts atonement, and the senses treasure,
The bed of love, that likes the body best:
Against unrest the only remedy,
And only medicine to each mallady.
And, therewithal unwilling more to speak,
Such heavy qualmes his heart had overcome:
with stretching yawnes, as if his Jaws would break,
He stopped his speech, as wholly stricken dumme:
when, nodding of his head from side to side,
To his deaf ears, the pilgrim thus replied.
Thou cursed serpent, ground of al disgrace,
By Idleness begetting Ignorance:
which do the sprigges of fairest roots deface,
with loathsome course of life's discountenaunce:
And makst a pleasure of the spirits pain,
Die in thy dream, and never wake again.
Sleep is the souls discase, the minds despite,
The curse of Nature, and the cross of rest:
The thoughts disquiet, and the darkesome night,
wherein the spirit, likes the body lest:
A loss of time and reasons malladie,
where death is found but sorrows remedy.
The watching virgins kindly were received,
when such as slept did loose their happy hour:
In dreams, the senses often are deceived,
when waking wits find shadows have no power:
Then sleep thy last, where life has never place,
God grant my soul, to watch, and pray for grace.
When thus the head of hateful slouthfulnes,
was soncke into the filthy sincke of sin:
The harmeful head of al unhappiness,
Did lechery, this loathsome tale begin:
Alas poor pilgrim, child of chaste desire,
Have thou bin burnt thou can not bide the fire?
A gentle jest, a man to be a maid,
what minsing humor does the senses measure?
That Nature can of beauty be afraid:
And loose her prime, before she know her pleasure,
Flesh has no favor in divinity,
Nor Nature, pleasure in virginity.
The child, that knows not how to make his choice,
Must be a babe, so babishe let him be:
But he that knows, how better to rejoice,
will seek a world, where sweeter thoughts agree:
No, think of love, to be that pleasing thought,
That, for his will, sets all the world at naught.
What figure finds not love out of a face?
what humors notes he not, in every hear?
In beauties eyes, what stars does he not place,
what roses in her cheeks, does she not bear?
what honey in her lips, and sweeter worth?
In her fair ground but he can gather forth.
It whets the wit, and does embolden will,
And makes Art to work beyond her self,
It makes nature, study reasons skill,
And in her humors, play the pretty elfe:
It brings fancy to a deinty feast,
And makes a man, that would be else a beast.
What deinty glaunces pass from eyes to eyes?
when sweet conceits, are secretly conceived,
what comfortes can the kissing hearts devise?
where kind effects of favor are received:
Age can report, and youth does daily prove,
There is no comfort to the course of love.
And with that word, did end his wicked charm,
Unto which sound, the pilgrim began reply,
Thou hateful head, and ground of every harm,
Venum, compounded all of villainy:
A foul infection of the fairest creature,
Die in the filth, of thy corrupted nature.
Thou sleepy sloth, that figurste out the swine,
with groueling humors, tumbling on the ground,
That can not think, upon a thought divine,
But live in dreams, where all deceits are found:
How durst thou speak in that foul thoughts defense,
which breeds nothing, but the souls offense.
Virtue and vice, were never friends in deed,
Diana knows, that Venus is no maid,
But faith, that does on heavenly blessing feed,
Of foolish beauty, may be well afraid:
when Natures pleasure in virginity,
Shows, flesh has favor in divinity.
(...) Equality is but a childish humor,
He is alone, that keeps the lofty seat:
what voice is hard? where al are in a rumor,
Or who is served? where every one is great?
why, patience is the pattern of a villain,
That never came near to a Kings pauilion.
And with that word she fed upon her Snakes,
As if her heart, did like none other food:
where to the pilgrim soon this answer makes,
Ungracious grifte, and void of heavenly good:
Feed on thy Snakes, until the poison fill thee,
And thine own cancker with corruption kill thee.
Equality is childrens blessedness,
where many brethren are but one in love:
The voice hard sweet, whose sound is holiness,
And God well served, where graces glory prove:
And he that patience paternes for a villain,
shall never know the King of heavens pauilion.
Thou never readst the book of Christ his Cross,
Nor can endure so sweet an A B C:
But, thou art bound to live with labors loss,
where all the woes of all the world may be:
God give my spirit, grace, to seek no more,
Then go the way, his Saints have gone before.
When, (as it seemde) the venum wrought so sore,
within the heart, as poisned so the head,
As shrinking down, it sight, and spoke no more,
But with the rest the filthy body fed:
when started up the head of Murthring wrath,
As newly cumme, from out, sum bloody bath.
Who grating of his teeth with knitting brow,
Shaking his fist, as if he mente to fight:
Thou patch quod he, where art thou plodding now?
has patience think thou, such a princely might:
That she can thee against my force defend,
And bring thee safely to thy Iourneies end?
My life is most, to lay me down in blood,
I can endure no daunting of mine eye:
I only love to feed on bloody food,
whom I once cease on, they are sure to die:
How durst thou then approach so near my sight,
whose fury stands withal the world to fight?
Poor patient hearts are tossed from post to post,
when bloody swords do walk the world with wonder:
Poor patience many a patrimony lost.
while will resolu'de, put wit and reason under:
Patience is often from princely seat pulled down,
while bloody minds, do bravely bear the crown.
Pity is known sometime to mar a city,
And Anger, oftentimes is cause of quiet:
Sometime as good be wilful as be witty,
when bloody dishes make a dainty diet:
what arms of honor? to a bloody field?
where Angers hand, makes patient hearts to yield.
When (as it seemde) half stuffed up with blood,
Stopping his tale the pilgrim thus replied:
Choke up thy throat, with that foul butchers food,
That never could the sound of mercy bide:
But do consume the heart of many a creature,
Die in the fury, of thy filthy nature.
Fret, fume, and chafe, I fear not of thy force,
I plod with patience, where thou can not cumme:
My patience has, such power in her remorse,
As furies senses, quickly will benumme:
And by her prowess, stoutly so defend me,
That thou, nor thine, nor ought else offend me.
Then lie, and bath, and tumble in thy blood,
And stare, and stamp, til thou have done thy worst:
Thy foul adherents, I have all withstoode,
And thou, art but a spirit all accursed:
who though thou makst a number know thy might,
Where patience cums, thou have no power to fight.
Poor patient hearts, are tossed from pain to peace,
When bloody swords, do breed but hellish woes:
And patience patrimony is no leace,
But in a ground, where grace and wisdom grows:
And patience sits with an Immortal crown,
where tir aunt heads to hell are beaten down.
Pity must be the princess of a city,
And Anger breeds nothing but disquiet:
wilful is good, so that the will be witty,
where blood is bard, the dish of mercies diet:
what Arms of honor, to that heavenly field,
where patience force, makes angers fury yield.
At which last word, the ^retting furious head,
Fell with the rest, into that sincke of sin:
And with the body fell down stroke as dead,
when patience did this pilgrims joy begin:
with praising heavens, and using humble prayer,
To comfort hope, and keep of al despair.
When leaving so the ougly Monster slain,
Onwardes she leads him on his happy way:
where ioiful pleasure after fear of pain,
Had set his senses at so sweet a stay:
That now, he thought, no Monster could offend him,
He had such proof, that patience would defend him.
But when the heavens that pity have of nature,
And know that senses, would be glad of rest:
Although the spirit, waking keep the creature,
Unto such work, as like the wisdom best:
Into their guard, did will the Angels take him,
Until they wild the spirit should awake him.
BUT when the spirit little time could spare,
Unto the heart, to give the senses rest:
And reason found, that virtues happy fare,
was in the hand, where with the soul is blessed:
He wild the senses from their sleep arise,
And follow patience to their paradise.
When having past the path along the wood,
They came unto a shore, near to a sea:
where lofty* waves did threaten little good,
when rocks with patience make a drowning plea:
where storms, and tempests, flawes, and rocks, and sands,
The perils show, wherein the sea man stands.
With patience here this pilgrim must Imbarke,
within a ship the buonauenture named:
when in the Map he found out many a mark,
whereby conceit his course most happly framed:
And to be short with a resolved mind,
They hoist up sails, God send a merry wind.
When as they found the tide would tarry none,
And little wit, it was to loose the wind,
what ground was best to cast their ancker on,
And how they might their surest passage find:
To escape the rocks, and to avoid the sands,
And keep their carriage, out of pirots hands.
And so, along the surging seas they slide,
Till passing by capa di buon speranza,
Not far from thence, they did intend to ride,
Till, some sweet wind that virtue ben auanza:
would bid them hoice their sails and to be gone,
Toward the heaven, they were to hope upon.
Where, after sounding, casting ancker out,
And striking sail, and winding up the cable,
Setting in order all things round about,
As well as such young Mariners were able:
with such good thoughts as might the time beguile,
They fell to walk upon the boordes awhile.
And riding but a while anon they spied,
A fisher man* all in his boat alone,
with every billow tossed from side to side,
As made them leare his last farewell anon:
when moved, with the pity of good nature,
They calde aboo^de this selly wretched creature.
(...) But, for I did but little time bestow,
Amidde the field to seek for honors fame:
And fortune sought, my (...) overthrow,
Before my ha^ had entrance to the same:
I left that life, and to the seas I gat,
where, how I liu*d I need not tell you that.
I think your selves can te^ as well as I,
If not, alas, it is no ease to learn:
So many labors in the life do lie,
As are not in a day for to dis^erne:
A day, a month, nor many a year, God wot,
As I could tell, if I have not forgotte.
First I did learn to set my compass right,
And by my compass, how my course to run:
To mark each point, as well by day, as night,
By night, to mark the stars, by day the funne:
Then take the Map, to look for rocks and sands,
Of which full often, the ship in danger stands.
Then narrowly to look to every leake,
And when the wind, did serve to hoise my sails:
To sound the depth, where se as begin to break,
And strike my sail, when once my sea room fails:
To Arm my fightes, and plant mine ordnaunce so,
I might not stand, in fea^e to meet my foe.
Then did I learn, to stand and guide the stern,
And now and then to help to hoise up ancker:
And otherwhiles the cunning to discernce,
To dress her sides to keep her from the cancker,
My terms of art, and patient to be painful,
And how to hope to make my voyage gainful.
To lie full cold, and hard, and fare full thin,
To frame my carkas to vnkindest natures,
To bear of stomes, and in a calm begin,
To learn to kill the little creeping creatures,
To eat a fusty cake, and teinted fish,
And one fresh morfell, make a deinty dish.
To make no conscience, so there came in gain,
when silver crosses, keep of many a curse,
A pitteous case to see the Merchant slain,
For his own goods to fill the pirots purse,
To swear, and stare, until we come on shore,
Then rifty tufty, each one to his skore.
The Master, he, sometime would fall asleep,
The Masters mate to much upon the can,
The boson, he, his cabin took to keep,
And in the cookerome, there the rye begare,
when all and some, in halte a dronc^en swowne,
would leave the ship, to sincke, themselves to drown*
But, when I saw the kind of life was such,
The grief to great for any true good minds:
The labor sore, the sorrow was to much,
To seek for that which but repentance finds,
I left the ship, with many a sorry note,
And took me sweetly to my little boat.
And here, my trade is poor, yet full of peace,
And peace is riches, though my trade be poor,
The sea is large, whose landlorde makes no lease,
I toil for fishes, and I seek no more,
when storms arise, unto the heaven I high me,
And in the sunshine, set me down and dry me.
But, for I see the bark, wherein you ride,
Of Buonaventure has the blessed name,
And patience is a pure a perfect guide,
Unto the favor of eternal fame,
I hope the course, is good that you intend,
Heavens bring you happly, to your Iournies end.
This poor man's tale when thus the pilgrim hard,
He did along his company entreat,
Promising him, a pilgrims poor reward,
Besides his hope, his comfort would be great,
If heavens did favor virtues enterprise,
Humbly to pass, the path to paradise.
But, when the fisher hard that fairest word,
Of paradise once sounding in his ear:
He gave consent, and hoist his boat a boarde,
And casting of, al sorrow, care, and fear:
They hoist up sails, winds seru'de what would you more,
Onwardes they go, God send them well a shore.
When leaving Scilla to those selly guides,
That careless are to keep their course aright:
By cu^st Charibdis, on he smoothly slides,
Till by good hap they had a land in sight:
To which they made, with might and maine as fast:
As winds would serve, and got to shore at last.
Yet, let me tell you, ere they came a shore,
As through the Ocea^ they did make their way:
Tempests arose, and many a wind blew sore,
That threatend, often the course of their decay:
Besides the pirots, that they put to flight,
which chrost their course with many a cruel fight.
One where they saw wrakes lie without relief,
An otherwhere, whales tumbling in the waves:
An other while, unto their deadly grief,
Storms threaten sore, the fishes maws their graves,
Yet, when the worst, of all these illes were past:
Safely arriu'de they came to shore at last.
Where, wethring of themselves against the sun,
First praising God, by his almighty power,
That guided them since first their course begun,
And brought them safely to that happy hour:
The heart laid down, the senses all to rest,
while Angels watch, the waking spirit blessed.
BUT, when the spirit had but little time,
To give the senses leave to take their rest,
Nor was the labor little for to clime,
The fiery ashes, of a Phoenix nest:
He bad them sweetly from their sleep arise,
And set them in their path to paradise.
Where, walking on, they met on their rigt hand,
A world of people, making pitteous moan,
Some lost their goods, some other lost their land,
Their parents, some, and some, their friends were gone:
Not one, of all, but some way were oppressed,
when all, and some, in some, were al distrested.
The Courtier, he, complainde, of loves disgrace,
The soldier, he cried out, of lack o^ pay,
The lawier, lack of hearing of his case,
The client, how his coin went to decaie:
The merchaunt, of the loss of his adventure,
The prentice of the bands of his Indenture.
The landlorde, of his tenaunts beggary,
The passinger of lack of amity:
The tenant, of the landlordes misery,
The beggar, all, of lack of charity:
The church men, of their small possessions,
The lay men, of the church transgressions.
Now, on the left hand, went an other crew,
A hateful sort, of hellish company:
which, to their wealth, and wortheles honor grue,
By wicked works, of woeful villainy:
which, by the trades of Machauile instructed,
were by the devil, to his hell conducted.
One, he blasphemde, and murthred many an oath,
An other, made of honesty, a jest:
An other made a tush, at faith, and troth,
An other boasted of a bloody feast:
And some, in power, how will did govern reason,
And other, of their policy in treason.
The Courtier, boasted of this brave attire,
what lordshippes, he had laid upon his back:
The soldier bragde what towns he set on fire,
How many cities he had helped to sack:
The lawier, of his quidities, and quirkes,
The client, of the knowledge of his ierkes.
The landlorde, of his tenants slavery,
And, how he kept the pesauntes all in awe,
The tenant of his cunning knavery,
when, with his landlorde, he could go to law:
The Merchant, how his gains were brought about,
The prentice, how, he got his freedom out.
The church men, they went boasting on their tenthes;
And twenties too, and yet they would have more,
The Lay men, of their laying lines at lengthes,
And how a chalk, did make a pretty skore:
The passinger, offained amity,
The beggar, of the bag of charity.
After all these, upon the right hand went,
A selly fool, for so I term him right,
with wringing hands, that seemed to lament,
Some crossing humor, to a vain delight:
For, love forsooth, and naught but love it was,
That made a woman make a man an Ass.
Of Venus frailty and of Cupids blindenes,
He cried out, oh, that ever they were borne,
And of his mistress, more, then most unkindness,
That did so much, his truest service skorne:
Yet, still, he lou'de her, and he did so love her,
It was his death, he never could recover.
And then he sight, and sobde, and hong the head,
And wept, and wailde, and cast up both the eyes,
And in a trance, as if a man were dead,
Or did some dying kind of fit devise:
Until he walkte, and then he cried oh love,
That ever lover should such sorrow prove.
And then he read his verses and his ^imes,
wherein he praisde her to to, out of reason,
And then he sight to think how many times,
he watched, the day, the night, the hour the season:
To find some fruit, of her deserved favor,
But al his flowers, were we^des that had no savor.
And then farewell, and then again farewell,
And farewell love, and farewell lovely sweet:
And farewell sweet, where love does sweetly dwell;
And farewell dwelling, for love sweetenes meet:
And farewell meeting, with loves stately store,
And farewell love, for he could live no more.
And thus the pilgrim, let the poor man go,
To loose his will, and seek his better wits:
which he had lost with following fancy so,
Unto the fury of those frantic fits:
That in his heart, had wrought that mallady,
that he must die, there was no remedy.
Now on the left hand went another creature,
Or rather spirit, in an ougly shape:
Hollow dead eyes, and most ilfauourde feature,
Mopping, and Mowing, like an old she Ape:
which in the fury of youths frenzy,
To cross loves Joy, is called Ielousy.
Cursing that ever Venus was so fair,
Or Cupid had the power to bend his bow:
Or ever word, had passage through the Aier,
From fancies tongue, to beauties ears to go:
when tickling humors, in Affections breast,
By fear of loies is Ielousies unrest.
Then winckt, and pinckt, and leerde and honge the lip,
And seemde to start, at every sudden breath:
And ground her teeth, as though some privy nip,
within her head, did fret her heart to death:
when, out she mumbled, most unhappy love,
That makst the mind, these passions to approve.
But when the pilgrim saw her Agony,
And, in what taking, wretched thing, she was:
Little contented, with such company,
He gives her leave upon her way to pass:
And keeps his course, until an one he came,
Unto a city, needles is the name.
Where entering in, on each side of the gate,
He found it poorly al with beggars guarded:
And by the forefront of that feeble state,
He thought small wealth where poor were so rewarded:
Til entered further, in the streets he found,
A world of wealth in every street abound.
I mean such wealth, as worldly people choose,
To make the comfort of their chiefest kind:
And such a bait as wicked spirits use,
To blind the sight of a bewitched mind:
In every shop, or silver gold or wares,
To starve the poor, and fill the rich with cares.
When notinge well, by ettery door he went,
He saw each house was with a plage infected:
where, though they liu'de content with discontente,
were in the rules of better cares rejected:
For, though the poison did not kill at first,
Yet did they swel, until at last they burst.
One house was plaged with a wicked master,
An other, with a most accursed dame:
An other with a child that was a waster,
An other, with a servant out of frame:
The richmen, most, were plaged with disease,
The pooremen, with small vermin, and fleas.
(...) The Counsel, grave, as best beseemde their place,
The Courtiers, gallant, full of fine conceit:
The Ladies, fair, and full of honors grace,
The servants, wise, that humbly did awaite,
Nothing amiss, that nature could devise,
To please the humor of Affections eyes.
And, let me not, to slightly ouerpasse,
The pleasing ground of every private grace:
where every sense, so sweetly pleased was,
As brought the wits into a wondrous case:
And such a case, as had not virtue ben,
To guard their sense, they had been ouerseene.
To see the presence of a princely Queen,
To mark the course, of grave discretion care:
To note the sightes, that are but seldom seen,
where youths desartes, in beauties favor are:
To hear the music of most silver voices,
And find the restes, wherein the song reioices.
To see what pleasure, power has in her hand,
To hear how youth, can court his kind desire,
To see, how wisdom does in power command,
And find, how beauty sets the heart on fire:
while humble servants, show their diligence,
Are not these notes, for sweet experience?
To see how virtues are in honor placed,
To see the aged all with reverence served,
To see the humble, by their service graced,
And beauties fame by faithful love preserved:
To see peace, plenty, wisdom, honor, love:
Are these not pleasures, for the heart to prove?
Now here the pilgrim did begin to fear,
Some of his servants, would be stolen away,
Either the Sent, the rast, the Eye, the Ear,
Or else the Feeling would be forced to stay:
Yet, for they swear, their service to his will,
He fearde the less, to lead them from their ill.
And, when he saw, what peril was in greatness,
while idle thoughts, in youthful humors sit,
And, what a folly, was in to much featenes,
where beauties wonders did but blind the wit:
And what long suites, did gain but little grace,
And last, what dangers do possess the place.
With humble prayer unto the powers on high,
To bless that prince and all those princely peers,
which in the honor of discretions eye,
were calde the wonders of these latter years:
From care, and cost, fancy, and wisdoms folly,
He took his walk unto a way more holly.
WHere ere they came, they came yet by the way,
Unto a Camp, on rather, kingly field:
where, many a stop, did fear too long a stay,
Such choice of honors, did such humors yield:
where horse and foot, were so in order planted,
As, no direction, in discretion wanted.
The chief commander, in his stately tente,
with noble minds of Martial men attended:
For every doubt of every ill intent,
with strongest gardes, of watch and ward defended:
whose grave discretion ruled by sound advise,
Performde the plot of many a rare devise.
To see the careful Colonels directed,
Each to his quarter, and his regiment:
And how each Captain, valiauntly effected,
The wonder grace of warlike government:
To see the true discharge, of every office,
And then the honor of adventures service.
To note the great provision every way,
For victuaile first, munition, armor, shot:
For forrege for their horse for grass, and hay,
And such prouaunte, as cheapest may be got:
For every ground, for every quarterfit,
Are not the works, for every simple wit.
To here the drums and (...) the larum strike,
The horses neie, and then, the trumpets sound,
To see the horsemen charge upon the pike,
And then the pikemen lay the horse on ground:
To hear the Canons roar, the small shot rattle,
And see their triumph, that do win the battle.
To mark the ordring of a court de guard,
To note the rules in walking of the round,
The scintinels, and every watch, and ward,
And of the mines, and working under ground:
To mark the planting of their Ambuscados,
And in the night, their sudden canuassados.
To see a City send her bullets out,
Against the force, of all her cruel foes,
To see her walls, all fortified about,
To bear the force of all their cruel blows:
To make her foes, perforce their siege to raise,
And through the world to win a wonder praise.
Are here not sights of force to stay the eye?
Or soundes, of power, for to in chaunt the ear,
Nay, may not well the heart be drawn awry,
From all conceits, to keep his compass there:
Sure, so it had, had not the spirit still,
Preseru'de the senses from a secretill*
For, then again, to see a city sackte,
Her buildings ruinde, and her people slain:
Her walls, al razed, and her castles cracked,
And al her wealth, but in a woeful vain:
Her old men mourning, and her young men dying,
The mothers, weeping, and their children crying.
To see her streets, alrunne with streams of blood,
Her houses, burning, all in flames offier:
To see her state, that al in honor stood,
Yield to the forces, of their foes defire:
Her roial strength, become a ruful story,
And death, and sorrow, end of al her glory.
To see the field, with dead men over spread,
To see the air infected al with smoke:
To see, the valiant Caualieros dead,
And many a soldiour hurt with many a stroke,
To see the steedes, lie tumbling on the earth,
And through the camp a Sickness or a dearth.
To see the soldiour starve, with lake of food,
And, in his march, to die with lack of drink:
To see the rich men live on poor men's blood,
And one close humor, at an other wincke:
To see each Captain, every way anoied,
And, by disorder, all the camp destroyed.
Did make the pilgrim willing to depart,
The place so full of danger and distress:
where wits might work but woeful was the Art,
where one man's health, bred many heaviness:
And therefore making there but little stay,
He follows patience on another way.
AND on they walk, until anon they came,
Unto a Church not built of lime or stone:
But that true Church, of that Immortal fame,
That is worlds wonder, and heavens love alone:
whose head, is Christ, whose Martirs are his pillars,
And al whose members, are his words wel-willers.
The gate, is Grace, Contrition, is the key,
The lock, is love, the porter, Penitence,
where humble faith, must heavenly favor stay,
Till pity talk, with virtues patience,
while Angels sighs, the sinners way devise,
To have his entrance into paradise.
Which is in deed, the plot of al perfection,
Drawn by the compass of divine conceit,
whose line, is life, laid by his loves direction,
who makes al flesh upon the spirit wait,
whose flowers are fruits, of faithes eternal favor,
Sweet to the soul, in everliving savor,
(...) Here sorrows tears, do quench the heat of sine,
And fire of love, does kindle life again:
Here does the ground of glory first begin,
And, here is virtue, in her highest vain:
Here, is, in some, the state of honors story,
And of all goodness, the eternal glory.
And here is, lo, that heavenly paradise,
whereto the pilgrim, made his pilgrimage:
where sa^red hi^rcy first did solempnize,
The spirit to the flesh in marriage:
And here the heart did find his spirit blessed,
To bring the senses to eternal rest.
Gloria in excelsis Deo.
IN this (...) plot of reasons highest pleasure,
The heaunly cour^, of the high king of kings:
where sacred spirits, have their special treasure,
And sweetest comfort, of contentment springs:
God bring your senses, by your hearts desire,
To feel the comfort of his kingly fire.
THE COUNTESS OF PENbrookes love.
FAIR in a plot of earthly paradise,
Upon a hill, the Muses made a Maze:
In midst whereof within a Phoenix eyes,
There sits a grace, that has the world at gase:
which Phoenix is but name unto a nature,
That shows, the world, has scarcely such a creature.
This true loves saint, by worthy beauty crowned,
Did seem to wish, but not express her will:
when strange desires, were in devises drowned,
To find, out wonders, farthest from her will:
The world came in, with presents many a one,
But, yet, alas, her love could like of none.
Clear was the day, when Phoebus shonne full bright,
But, her hearts eye, did higher light aspire:
April, brought in, both earth, and Aires delight,
But earth, nor Air, could answer her desire:
Fortune? she skornde, friends? who durst be a foe?
Servants? a world, would serve her will or no.
Wealth, was buttrash, and health was natures joy,
Honor, a Title, beauty, but a blast:
Power, but a trouble, pleasure, but a toie,
Youth, but a time, to quickly ouerpast:
Learning, alas, it lives in her school,
wisdom, her will, knows worldly wit a fool.
Yet still she wished, but said not what she would,
when still the world, did work, but still in vain:
Care with conceit, did all the best he could,
Brought in his gifts, but bare them back again:
when wealth, health, beauty, honor, power nor ease
wit, youth, nor learning, could her humor please.
Some brought in pearls, most orient to behold,
She knew them pearls, and so she did regard them:
Some brought in gemmes, of diamondes set in gold,
She knew their worth, and so she did reward them:
Some brought in works, of weomens rare devises,
She knew their pains, and so did give the prices.
Some brought in music of most silver sound,
which all, would cease, if ^hee but tucht astring:
Some brought in first the fairest flowers they found,
She took them as the comforts of the spring:
Some brought in this and some would bring in that,
But yet her wish was still she knew not what.
The soldiers came, and brought in all their arms,
She smilde to see, how beauty made a peace:
The pesants came, and offered up their farms,
But, she said love did never make a lease:
The merchants, came withal their money treasure,
She put it off, id did her mind no pleasure.
The lawiers came, and laid down all their books,
She knew, that truth, was all in yea and no:
The courtiers came with all their lofty looks,
But when she looked she made them curtzy low:
The scholars came and brought in all their arts,
She knew their practice, ere they learnd their parts.
The sailers brought their Rubies from the roc^es,
But, of such toies, her treasure was to full:
The shepards brought the fairest of their flocks,
But she could wear no cloth was made of woll:
Thus every one did bring in what they could,
Yet still she wished, but knew not what she would.
The poets came, and brought in their inventions,
But well she knew their fancies were but fained:
The muses brouhht the truth of their intentions,
which in their kinds were kindly entertained:
But yet the best, with all her worthiness,
Touched not the humor of her happiness.
But when the world, could not come near her wish,
And saw in vain it was, her will to seek*
The earth could yield no fruit, the sea no fish,
That could be found, that might her fancy leeke:
Some with a sigh, other, with pitteous moan,
All went away, and left her all alone.
(...) They will, sweet love is but the sum of well,
Thy well, is well, well, better, and the best:
That, with thy love, thy living souls may dwell,
Safe, in the hope of their eternal rest:
Thy rest the Joy, the soul cannot conceive,
Thy souls, the Saints, thy Mercy does receive.
Thy comfort is the tuch stone of true kindenes,
Thy kindness is, the very life of love:
Thy love is light, all other light but blindness,
Thy light is life, that death can never prove:
Thy death, was life, thy life is Joy for ever,
Unto the souls, that love and leave thee never.
What was? or is? or, on the earth shall be,
But that thou know, and know al what they are:
And that they have, their being but in thee,
Made by thy hand, and govern by thy care:
which thou do prosper, comfort, or defend,
And when thou will, shall wholly make an end.
Grast is the King, whom thou do only crown,
And wise the wit, that only knows thy will,
Happy the state, where thou do bless the town,
And blessed, the heart, that thou do keep from ill,
But yet the soul, does in her faith approve,
The life, the life, is only in thy love.
Shall I describe thy sweet and glorious seat?
But, as thou art unto thy servants seen,
Or shall my spirit humbly el^e entreat?
Some Angels help, that in the heavens has been?
That to the world, such glory may unfold,
Or, say it is, too glorious to behold.
Thy throne is Judgment, Justice is thy sword,
Mercy and truth are still before thy face:
Love, is thy law, and wisdom is thy word:
Virtue thy love, and Bounty is thy grace:
Pity thy state, where patience is the story,
Grace is thy gift, and Mercy is thy glory.
Thus in the seat of sacred excellence,
With Virgins, Saints, and Angels all attended,
Do thou possess that princely residence:
Till Judgment pass and Ioies be never ended:
When all the host of heaven and heavens do th sing,
An Alleluia, to their heavenly king.
Where trembling Joys distill the tears of love.
And loving fear does bring forth blushing faces,
And blushing faces, in their faith approve,
Unworthy creatures, to behold their graces.
which graces do this glorious music move,
The life of life, is in thy heavenly love.
Now for thy love; it cannot turn to hate,
Thou hate the life, that once does alter love
It is the stay of an eternal state,
A mansion house, that never can remove:
which, on the rock, of true Religion stands,
And never fears the seas of errors sands.
Now, thy Religion is the rule of life,
whose chiefest blessing is the joy of peace:
where love, cuts of the cause of every strife,
And sweet accord, does bring out loves increase:
And loves increase is such a joy to see,
As bringes the soul, unto his life in thee.
Alas, alas, all treasure is but trashe,
where love is banished by the state of strife:
The sweetest wine, is but as swinish wash,
Unto the water, of the well of life:
No, no, the pleasures, that, the world can prove,
Are all but sorrows, to thy heaunly love.
But, let me see what fruit, thy favor yeeldes,
Or in thy love, what happy life is found.
when sea, and land, hills, dales, and fairest fields,
Do all, but in, thy blessed gifts abound:
Besides the peace, wherewith the heart is blessed,
To bring the soul to thy eternal rest.
Thou do not joy to see a sinners death,
But, true repentance pleases thee far better:
Yea, thou will help at latest gasp of breath,
To make the soul confess it self thy debtor:
And where the soul, such comforts does approve,
Can there be thought a comfort like thy love?
No, no, this world is full of wanton toies,
which often keeps back, the comfort of thy care:
And many ways, does work the hearts anoies,
when fortunes hope does prove but heavy fare:
Oh heavens, who knew but half thy blessedness,
would hate the world with all his wretchedness.
Where show of faith does shape but falshods cloak,
when fancies tears, prove drops offonde desire:
wherefree conceits, will yield to kindenes yoke,
when sorrow paies, repentance for their hire:
while in thy love may living faith unfold,
Heart, may her hope, hope may her heaven behold.
What shadows here, do ouershroude the eye?
while Masking thoughts do March before the wind:
where loves conceit, does but illusion try,
when careless wit becomes the wilful blind,
And Nature finds her self still misconceiued,
where form, for matter has the soul deceived.
(...) Not that my wits can touch the smallest worth,
Of that high wonder worthiness of thine,
For, from a sinner, what can issue forth?
And who more sinner then this soul of mine?
which does with tears of true repentance move,
thy gracious help to glorify thy love.
For, as unto the sea, a water drop,
And to the sands a little pibble stone,
And as a corn, unto a harvest croppe,
And unto infinite, the number one:
So are my Muses in their Music short,
thy Kingly praise of praises to report.
But, as a scholar, that does go to school,
To make a letter, ere he learn to write,
And as the wit, that knows it self a fool,
Till higher wisdom teach it to endite:
So let my soul in her submission prove,
Hate of the world, and honor of thy love.
For, what is here that can content the heart?
That knows content, or what it does contain:
what thought ^o sweet, but brings as sour a smart,
Or pleasure such? but breeds a further pain:
what thing so good? but proves in fine so evil,
As, but for God, would bear men to the devil.
What is the Earth? the labor of our life,
what is the sea? a gulf of griezy lakes:
what is the Air? a stuff of filthy strife,
what is the fire? the spoil of what it takes:
when these are al, whence every thing does spring,
what is the world? but even a woeful thing.
What thing is man? a cloddde of miry claie,
Slime of the Earth, a slave to filthy sin:
Springes like a weed, and so does wear away,
Goes to the earth, where first he did begin:
Oh heavens think I, when man is wholly such,
what is in man? that man should love so much.
What has the world, to lead the mind to love?
In true effect, a fardel full of toies:
where, wey the pith, what every one does prove,
The perfectst gems, are most imperfect Ioies:
Consider al, what fancy brings forth,
The best conceit will fall out nothing worth.
What worldely things do follow fancy most?
wealth Beutie, love, fine diet, honor, fame:
what finds affect? both love, and labor lost,
Disdain, disease, dishonor, death, and shame,
where care, and sorrow, death, and deadly strife,
Do rule the roast, in this accursed life.
What thing is Beauty? color quickly gone,
And what is wealth? when riches fall to rust:
what thing is love? a toy to think upon,
Fine diet? dross, to feed a filthy lust.
what worldly honor? often unworthy praise,
what ease? the cause, whereby the life decaies.
What is disdain? the skorne of proud conceit,
And what disease? the death of discontent,
Dishonor next? the fruit of foul deceit,
And what is death? but end of ill intent,
Now what is shame? a shameful thing to tell,
And thus the world, but even the way to hell.
For beasts and birds, for fishes, flowers and trees,
And al such things created for our use:
what thing is man? to take such things as these,
By want of grace, to turn unto abuse:
Oh wretched world, when man that should be best.
In beastly things proves worse then all the rest.
But when I see this wretched state of man,
And all the world at such a woeful pass:
That since the course of humane care began,
More full of woe, good nature never was.
when this my soul, does with her sorrow see,
Lord says my Love, that I might live with thee.
And leaving so the world with all his woes,
And looking up to heaven and heavenly ioies,
And to the grace where virtues glory goes,
Noting the life, that never love anoies:
when in my soul, Idoe this sweetness prove,
Lord says my soul, how sweet art thou my love.
I see the sun, the beauty of the sky,
The moon and stars, the candles of the night,
They have their essence in thy heavenly eye,
That blindes the proud, and gives the humble light,
I see the rainbow, bended by thy hand,
That does both heaven, earth, sea and heaven command.
Thou gave the sun, the moon and stars a course,
which they observe according to thy will:
Thou make the tides to take their due recourse,
And setst the earth, where it does settle still.
Thou framdst the substance of each Element,
And settst thy foot upon the firmament.
Thus do thou sit in glory of thy throne,
with all the host, of highest heaues attended:
who, in thine ire, have kingdoms overthrown
And in thy love have little things defended:
whose glory more, then may by man be known,
And glory most, is in thy mercy showen.
Thus do thou sit, in honor of thy power,
Calling the poor unto thy rich relief,
Sowing the sweet, that kills every sower,
Giving the salve, that heals every grief:
Making them live, that long were dead before,
And living so, that they can die no more.
Thou madst the world and what it does contain,
Only but man, thou madst unto thy love:
And man's good will was thy desired gain,
Till proud attempt did high displeasure move:
Thou plagst his pride, yet when thou sawst his pain,
Thou ga^st the s^lue, that heald the wound again.
Ungrateful man, whom thou did only make,
In love, to love, and with thy love preseruest,
And for his love, enduredst for his sake,
Such death of life, as dearest love deseruest:
what cursed heart would to displeasure move thee,
That giving all, asks nothing but to love thee.
Oh love, sweet love, oh high and heavenly love,
The only lin^, that leads to happy life,
Oh love, that liu^st, for loving hearts behoue,
And makst an end of every hateful strife:
Happy, are they, that kindly can attain thee,
And how accursed, that dare but to disdain thee.
Thy love was cause, that first we were created,
Love is the life, that thou will have us lead:
Love is the cause, we never can be hated,
Love is our life, when other life is dead:
Love is thy grace, that higest good does give,
Love me then lord, and I shall ever live.
And with that word proceeding from her heart,
The trickeling tears distilled down her eyes:
As if her sense possessed in every part,
A secret joy that did the soul surprise:
when lifting up her hands, oh love quod she,
My soul is sick, she cannot be with thee.
And from the mercy of thy majesty,
Behold the sorrows, of my wounded soul:
Let pitties care of loves calamity,
My ruthful tears, thy register enrowle:
And think upon the passions that I approve,
For, truly, lord, my soul is sick of love.
And sick it is, and so well may it be,
A sweeter sickness, then a worldly health:
A healthful sickness, to be sick for thee,
where Natures want does, prove the spirits wealth:
while heart has set her highest happiness,
But to behold thee in thy holiness.
But, I am sick, and sick, in every vain,
Sick to the death, but not to die to thee:
For why thy love assures me life again,
And there to live, where death can never be:
Oh sweetest sickness, where the soul may see,
The way through death, to come to live with thee.
To live with thee, oh ever living love,
Oh let me die, that I may live no more,
Till in thy love, I may the life approve,
That may confess I never liu'de before:
Life is but death, where, thy love shines never,
Only thy love, is happy life for ever.
My sins my sins with sorrow and with shame,
Of faults and follies couerd have my face,
Death is my due, I have deserved the same,
Woe to the heart, in such unhappy case:
But if repentance mercy may obtain,
Look on me love, and I am well again.
Unhappy heart, that ever thee offended,
Unworthy eyes, thy blessing to behold:
Vncarefull ear, that ever tale attended,
But to the truth, that has thy mercy told:
unfaithful soul, that ever thought did move,
From everliving, with thine only love.
But, now the hartis dead to worlds delight,
And eyes in tears, pronounce repentance truth,
The ear is deaf until the heart be right,
To see the life, that of thy love ensues:
The faithful soul of pleasure is deprived,
Dead, till her life, be, by thy love revived.
Nor, let me te^pt that (...) love of thine,
To hasten time, beyond thy holy will,
But only look, upon this soul of mine,
That in thy love may be her living still:
Till she may hear this ioiful ^ounde of thee,
Come away love, and ever live with me.
But, yet my love, me (...) I see thee look,
As though my soul had thee displeased sore:
But, has my love* so high displeasure took?
That he will look upon my love no more:
Oh, yes, my love will not be angry ever,
And where he loves, he will be angry never.
Then, though thou chide, yet be not angry love,
But in thy kindenes gives thy sweet correction,
That humble heart may in repentance prove,
The dearest passage of thy loves direction:
whose blessed end may in this only be,
To live to die, to die to live to thee.
(...) Me thinks, I see, that glorious seat of thine,
whereto thy Saints, and Angels al assemble,
And in the presence of thy power divine,
with Ioifull fear, how even the highest tremble:
And when those spirits, do such passions prove,
Shall I presume, to think upon thy love?
Oh sweetest love, that carries such a force,
As keeps the heart of humble hope in awe:
And sweet again, that caries such remorse,
As has cut off, the curses of the law:
And sweetest yet, that in the soul does prove,
There is no sweet, indeed but in thy love.
Which feeds the hu^gry with a heavenly bread,
And cooles the thirsty from the living Rock,
which heales the sick, gives life unto the dead,
And wakes the careful, with the morning Cock:
which breeds the peace, that stinteth every strife,
And gives the fountain of the well of life.
It is the key that opes the door of grace,
Unto the care that thou have constant proved
And shows the favor of thy shining face,
Unto the blessed of thy dear beloved:
It is in sum, the infinite sweet pleasure,
Of tried faith, and true Repentance treasure.
Oh joy ofioies, what heart can comprehend thee?
Oh sweet of sweets, what sense that can conceive thee
Blessed be the hearts, that truly do attend thee,
And ten times blessed, that in their souls receive thee:
And fairly blessed, whom thou have faithful proved,
But chiefly blessed, whom thou have chiefly loved.
Me thinks I see, how sweetly thou do ride,
Above the heavens, upon the Cherubs high,
with all thine Angels set on every side,
with all the sound, of sweetest harmony:
wheral and some, their sweetest notes do frame
To sing the praises, of thy holy name.
Me thinks I see thy holy Martyrs crowned,
On humble knees cast down their crowns before thee,
And cry alowd, be thou alone renowned,
Let heaven and earth, and all the world adore thee.
when, my poor soul, with sin oppressed sore,
Can say Amen yet, though it say no more.
Oh that my soul could see that sacred light,
That might but lead me to thy holy will,
And learn the rule, that keeps the soul aright,
In perfect faith, thy precepts to fulfill:
And might so near, unto thy hand abide,
As from thy love, might never step aside.
But, what am I^ a worm, and wretched thing,
Unworthy creature, made of earth and claie:
Once to presume to speak unto my King,
On whom the state, of highest heavens does stay:
Let not presumption thy displeasure move.
But in thy pity look upon my love.
For I am sick, oh savior send me health,
My heart is hurt, come heal my deadly wound:
And I, am poor relieve me, with thy wealth,
Yea, I am dead, oh raise me from the ground:
My health, my wealth, my only resurrection,
let my soul live, but in thy loves perfection.
Behold the tear^s, of my repentaunt truth,
And wey my sorrows, by my sighing sobbes:
And in the rule, but of thy heavenly ruth,
Feel my poor heart, in horror how it throbbes:
And when thou see my soul thus woe begun her,
In thy sweet mercy, sweet love look upon her.
And from the dew of thy dear blessed love,
Let fall one drop, upon my dried heart:
wherein my soul, such comfort may approve,
As may assuage the rigor of my smart:
And being so by thy sweet hand relieved,
May so rejoice, as never more be grieved.
Lord, who dare look, against thy living power?
Or what does live? but only in thy love:
The sweet of sweets, where there was never sower,
But ioies of ioies, that can no sorrow prove:
Oh, purest proof, of love and life's perfection,
Blessed be the soul, that lives by thy direction.
But my heart pantes, my soul does quake for fear,
And sorrows pain, possesses every part:
My heap of sins, to heavy for to bear,
Press down desire, with terror of desert:
And, in great dread, of deep despair does cry,
Grace give me life, for in my sins I die.
For still the flesh is subject to offend,
while yet the spirit, groneth for thy grace:
But, thou have power the weakest to defend,
That unto thee, reveal, their heavy case:
Then from that hand, and mighty arm of thine,
Strengthen, this weak, and wounded soul of mine.
Thou that have said proud Esaw was thy hate,
And humble Jacob, was thy chosen love:
That do the power of worldly pride abate,
And workst the heaven of humble hearts behoue:
Make Esawes life with lacobs love agree,
Or kill the flesh, the soul may live with thee.
And from despair, that poisned sting of death,
Deliver lord, the sorrows of desire:
And at the latest hour, and gasp of breath,
Let humble heart, the hope of heaven aspire:
where faithful souls may in thy favor see,
That only love, does only live in thee.
What booteth me the world for to possess,
And want the jewel of my heavenly joy:
what earths delight? but is to me distress,
when natures health, does prove the souls anoye:
No, my sweet love, let this poor soul of mine,
Never have life, but in that love of thine.
One precious drop, of thy pure oil of grace,
Power down, sweet love into my wounded heart:
And to my faith, so turn thy loving face,
That from thy favor I may never part:
Look on thy Mary with her bitter tears,
That washed thy feet and wiptethe with her hears.
The greater depts forgiven the greater love,
Thy word has said, and it says ever true,
when patience life, in pitties love does prove,
In greatest mercy, greatest glory grue:
where one man's* sin, procured all men's pain,
And one man's grace, gave all men life again.
Oh high creator of all creatures living,
who nothing wantst that all things do possess:
what has the world that may be worth the giving,
Unto the honor of thy holiness:
But, only thanks, that thy true spirit moves,
In that true heart, that, thy true mercy loves.
But, still I see my love is sore displeasde,
And tells me of my great ungratefulness,
when so my soul, with sorrow is diseasde,
As in my heart, finds naught, but hatefulnes:
And with the tears of true repentance cries,
Lord save the life, that in thy mercy lies.
For, thou art love, the everliving God,
And only God, and only of the living,
who, though thou smitst thy children with thy rod,
Sweet is the care of thy corrections giving:
In which thy sweet, and kindest care correct me,
But in thy mercy, never do reject me.
Let never death against thy life prevail,
Nor ever hate, once look against thy love,
Nor faithful, hope thy heaunly favor fail,
But hearts contrition happy comfort prove:
And let the soul, even at the door of death,
Live by the ai^r but of thy heavenly breath.
Mine e^es are dim, my flesh, bare skin, and bone,
My sinews shroncke, and all my limbs are number,
Mine ears are deaf, but to the sound of moan,
My speech, is but, to sorrow stricken dum:
My blood dried up, my heart with sorrow soken,
Oh help the soul, before the heart be broken.
Behold the sorrows, that my soul does make,
And see what torments tear my heart a sunder,
where every tear, does other overtake,
where fearful care, puts faithful comforts under:
Oh my sweet life though I be deadly wounded,
Let not my faith be utterly confounded.
And Since oh king, that thou art only able,
To help the helples, only but in thee,
And by one crumme, from thy true mercies table,
The woeful soul, may well relieved be:
Of that sweet food, oh let my faith so taste,
That by thy love, my life may ever last.
What life is this, that wretches here we lead?
Caring and carking for our fleshly lives,
Never well filled, when we are too much fed,
where strange conceits for true contentment strives
Tearing our hearts, and tiring out our minds,
For that, in fine, which but repentance finds.
Where kindness proves a kind of leude conceit,
Leading the heart to lothsomnes of love,
while wisest wits on wanton humors wait,
And wilful fancies, do but follies prove:
where power and pride, so plage the world with woes,
That peace and virtue, all to ruin goes.
Where gold is held a God, silver, a Saint,
And dirt and dross, are dearest in regard:
where friendship fails, and faith begins to faint,
And curses rule, while blessed thoughts are barde:
And all and some, do in conclusion prove,
woe to the world, that lives not by thy love.
Where valor proves but foolish hardines,
And greatest wit, is wicked wilines,
And honor gotten by unworthiness,
Fills all the world with all unhappiness,
while virtue sighs, at sinners wickedness,
And Angels mourn, for our ungodliness.
Where parents grieve at childerns stubbornes,
And children smile, at parents childishnes,
where masters sigh, at servants idleness,
And servants laugh at masters wantonness,
while faithful souls in sorrows wretchedness.
Look, but in heaven, to have their blessedness.
Where subtle heads, are simple hearts illusion,
while Tyrant thoughts unjustly make intrusion,
And outward shows, are inward thoughts allusion,
while strange delights, are strong desires delusion:
And heedles care, does make up this conclusion,
That lack of grace, is all the worlds confusion.
Where brightest truth, by treason often blamed is,
While faithles heart, with falsehood all enflamed is,
And careful age with sorrow all ashamed is,
That careless youth so long at large untamed is,
That, where good nature, all (alas) misnamed is,
The faith of honor, utterly defamedis.
Where sore de^aies the care of true Gentility,
And strong disquiet stands for tranquillity,
And virtue is of too much imbecility,
where faith is found but full of al fragility,
when honors love, that lives by hopes humility,
Must walk among the beggars for ability.
Oh wicked fruit, of woeful hearts affection,
when once the soul, is touched with sins infection,
And will not learn, by care of thy correction,
To lead a life but by thy loves direction,
where in the fire, of thy bright suns reflection,
They may behold the height of their perfection.
But, what is Earth? and what but earth are we?
A goodly brag begun, and ends in dust,
where old and young, and all the world may see,
From whence we came, and whetherto we must:
Short time we live, no sooner dead, then rotten,
And scarce welburied, but we are forgotten.
Oh Lord thou know, this world is all but woe,
where sin does seek to get the upper hand,
The flesh would feign, the spirit overthrow,
But that, her stay does in thy mercy stand:
But, since the soul may conquer sin by thee,
Lord, let thy mercy only sight for me.
Let me but look, upon thy holy love,
And suck my honey from that heavenly hiue:
wherein my soul, such sweetness may approve,
That with that food she may for ever live:
And feeding, so upon thy sacred will,
when she is fed, yet may she hunger still.
Oh, bring me home, that long have been abroad,
And lead me straight, that long have gone astraie:
And raise me up, that have been ouertroade,
And on thy mercy, let me only stay:
That my poor soul, may in thy comfort prove,
Lo, what it is, to live but in thy love.
Some wish for gold, and some for golden graces,
Some wish for wit, and some for worldely pleasure,
Some wish for power, and some for stately places,
And some, alone, do wish for worldely treasure:
But, let my will, those wishes all displace,
And wish, alone, thy favor, and thy grace.
Some in their chariots, some in horses trust,
But, be thou still a strong defense to me:
Some here desire, but to possess their lust,
Let my souls love, be, but to live to thee:
Some wish, but here, to purchase worldly fame,
Let me but joy, to glorify thy name.
And not* alone, in sweetest words to move,
The worldly ears to wonder at the same:
But in my works thy praises I may prove,
I do but seek the honor of thy name:
That all true souls may justly say with me,
All that is good, directly comes of thee.
Let me but tuch the garment of thy grace,
I shall be healed of my sickest sore:
Let me but look upon thy loving face,
Such health will come, I shall be sick no more:
Yea, if thy* mercy mi^igate my pain,
If I were dead, I should revive again.
Forget, oh lord the follies of my youth,
And give me not the death of my desert*
But of the treasures of thy heavenly Truth,
Bestow an alms on my needy heart:
That in the secrets, of thy sacred love,
My careful soul, her comfort may approve.
Let not mine ear one listen to the sound,
Of vain conceits, that but deceive the mind,
Nor, let the world so give my heart a wound,
That, in my soul, mine eye be stricken blind:
But, let my spirit only make her choice,
But, in thy love, and mercy to rejoice.
Oh, that my ways, were all, and whole directed,
Unto the service of thy sacred will,
And, that my faith, had in my soul effected,
The happy comfort, of that heavenly skill:
That, in true love, might ever so attend thee,
As, in default, might, never more offend thee.
That I might leave this loathsome world of ours,
And choose the honor of thy childrens awe,
And in thy heaven, and with thy heavenly powers,
Learn, but obedience, to thy blessed law:
And with thy saints and holy Martyrs sing,
All lawde, and glory to my heavenly king.
Then, should my heart find out my heaunly rest,
And sorrow then should tuch my soul no more,
But heart and soul, both in thy mercy blessed,
Should day and night, thy holy name door:
And make the world, by some effects to see,
It is thy love has wrought this life in me.
And with that word, she sweetly fetch, a sigh,
And then a sobbe, and then a bitter tear,
As who should say, that either death was nigh,
Or else her heart, was stricken with a fear.
Or else the spirit might be overcome,
That for the time, her tongue was stricken dumme.
But, let it be, all blessed is the trance,
when, so the soul is overcome with love,
That virtues choice, does find it is no chance,
when humble faith does heaunly favor prove:
And when the senses from their sleep arise,
The spirit finds the life, that never dies.
So, when it seemde she waked from her sleep,
Or sudden trance, for so I term it right,
when such high care did so her senses keep,
That she awakt, with glory of the light:
Oh sacred love, and sweetest life, quod she,
what happy figure has appearde to me?
Did I behold, that fairest shining light?
That made me shake, for fear to see thy face,
And weep for joy, that in thy blessed sight,
My sinful soul, might come, and sue for grace:
And did I see, thy love so sweetly use me?
That, in thy mercy thou would not refuse me.
And did thy mercy so thy love entreat?
That justice gave her sword to mercies hand,
And did thy mercy sit in justice seat?
And did the judgment in thy mercy stand?
Oh blessed love, where mercy does approve,
The fruit of love, is mercy, mercies love.
I must confess my conscience did cond^mne me,
Of such offense, as I could not deny:
And of such crime, as thou migh^st well conte^ne me,
when by my due, I had deserved to die:
But when thy mercy did my sorrow see,
How in thy pity she did plead for me.
Behold, quod she, the true repentant heart,
which bleedes in tears with sorrow of her sin:
what passions have perplexed every part,
where penitence does pitties suite begin:
where true confession, does submission prove,
And true contrition, cries to me for love.
Behold the faith that has her fairest hold,
Upon the gift of thy especial grace,
Thy word of truth, that to the world has told
The faithful soul, in heaven shall have a place:
And true repentance, shall by me obtain,
The freed joys from everlasting pain.
When that vile serpent, every souls accuser,
That sought to bring my comforts to decay,
That ougly devil all the worlds abuser,
In furies rage, me thought did fly away:
And to the life, but of thy mercy leave me,
who to thy service, sweetly did receive me.
When all thy Saints, and martyrs came unto me,
And in their arms thine Angels did embrace me,
And all were glad what comfort they could do me,
And in a seat, of paradise so place me:
That al with joy surprisde, these ioies to see,
I wake and pray, the vision true may be.
For, this is it, sweet Lord, that I would have,
The world is short, in sounding my desire,
It is thy mercy that I only crave,
Thy virtues love, that set my heart on fire,
And in thy love, that only living bliss,
That world may wish, but know not what it is.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 8 lin. ^. on for one. p. 11. l. 2. end for sed. l. 10. endings for
sendings. p. 28. l. 19. in gold her grace, for her gold in grace. lin. 20. for
worthiness, read worthles. l. 21. lines, for li^es. p. 40. lin. 18. can offend
me, for offend me.


