LVTHERS LIFE COLLECTED, FROM THE WRITINGS OF HIM SELF, AND OTHER LEARNED
PROTESTANTS, TOGETHER With a further short discourse touching Andreas
Melanchton, Bucer, Ochine, Carolostadiius, Suinglius, Calvin and Beza, the
late pretended Reformers of Religion. Taken from the only report of learned
Protestants themselves.

By their fruictes you shall know them, do men gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of thistles? Math. 7.16. By JOHN BRERELEY Priest and Author of the
Protestants Apology.

AT S. OMERS, For JOHN HEIGHAN, Anno 1624.

With permission of Superiors.



TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Being requested by such as may challenge interest in my labors, to write
somewhat in satisfaction of those, whose meaner capacity is not able to
discern of learned discources, nor to wade into the depthe of more intricate
points and questions concerning religion, I could not make choice of any
thing more fitting in this kind, then the description of their lives and
proceedinges, who now in this last age under pretense of reformation, impugned
our ancient, and no less long before continued For the thousand years last
past Simon de Voion in his discource upon the catalogue of the docters etc.
printed at London 1598 in the epistle to the reader post med. affirms that
Anno 605. when pope Boniface was stalled in the papal throne, then falshoode
got the victory etc. then was the whole world ouer-whelmed in the dreegges of
antichristian filthiness abominable superstitions, and traditions of the pope,
then was that universal apostasy from the faith foretold by Paul. And
master Powel in his consideration of the papists reasons printed 1604. page
105. fine says. I grante that from the year of Christ 605. the professant
company of popery, has been very visible and perspicuouse: And master D.
Fulke in his answer to a counterfaite catholic, printed 1577. act. 11. page
36. initio says. The religion of the papists came in and prevailed in the
year of our Lord. 607. etc. and so universally that (says he) the revelation
of Antichrist, with the churches flight into the wilderernes, was anno 607.
when etc. (see this last in his reioinder to Bristoe printed 1581. page 347.
circa med.) And master Parkins in his exposition of the creed, printed 1596,
and after the last edition of his works* volum. 1. printed 1608. page 266. b.
initio says. During the space of 900. years from the time of Boniface, the
popish heresy has spread it self over the whole earth, and the faithful
servants of God were but as an handful of wheat in a mountain of chafe
which can scarce be discern^d: and Vorstius in his Antibellarminus printed
1610. page 154. initio says, quod ad Ecclesiam Romanam hodiernam attinet,
tametsi fatemur eam hactenus mill circiter annos, continuo sub hac corrupta
formae generatim accepta durasse etc. Also master Naper in this treatise upon
the revelation (for the supposed worth thereof dedicated to his majesty, and
reprinted at london 1594. and again reprinted at london 1611. cum priuilegio
regiae maiestatis, and as appears by the preface thereto, imprinted and set
out diverse times in the french and duche tongues, and to be published in
latin to the utility of the whole church) acknowledges a yet longer
universal continuance of our religion saying. Between the year of Christ
300. and 316. the Antichristian and papisticall reign began reigning
universally, and without any debateable contradictio^ 1260. years (after the
first edition, proposition 36. page 68. prope finem and after the other
edition page 90. fine) and the same so affirmed by him, not in regard of some
or other particular doctrine of our religion, but so generally concerning the
whole, that, says he, gods true church, most certainlye abode so long
latent: (edition. first. in c. 15. page 191. initio.) and invisible ( ibidem in
cap. 12. page 161. col. 3. circa med. and after the 2. edition page 201. fine.)
The pope and his clergy possessinge the outward visible church of
christians, even 1260. years: ( ibidem in c. 11. initio. edit. 1. page 145.
fine.) And master Brocard upon the revelations printed. 1572. fol. 110. a
circa med. affirms, that the church was trodden down and oppressed by the
papacy even from Siluesters time to these times, duringe (the said) 1260.
years: and see him further there fol. 123. b. Lastly master Brightman in his
apocalipsis apocalipseos, printed 1609. in his synopsis placed before the
beginning of the book in c. 11. and 14. says. Ecclesia a te^poribus
Constantini per mill ducentes sexaginta annos abscondita fuit etc. per mill
annos a Constantino, versante Ecclesia in abditissimis latebris fuit vna cum
Christo etc. and in Apocal. in c. 12. page 341. paulo ante med. he says.
Necessarijs argumentis euincimus, mulierem in solitudinem se recipisse etc. ad
illud tempus quando regnum inibat Constantinus. And in c. 11. page 283. circa
med. he says. Accedente Constantino ad regnum, capit Ecclesia se abdere in
occulto concedendo a mundi conspectu in quoddam interius penetrare; and page
577. circa med. he further says. Respondeo etc. non expectandam esse vllam
aliam cessationem publicae religionis quam quae extitit multis saeculis, a
Constantino magno in hunc vsque diem, quo omni te^pore regnauit Antichristus,
dum agebat quidem mulier in deserto.
then universally professed catholic faith: for seeinge it Math. 7.13.14.
is (not the broad but) the strait way that leads unto life, and that
accordingly it is evident by all examples and observation of former times, that
the lives of those were evermore not licentiouse or dissolute, but austere and
sanctified, whom God chose to be the reformers of his church, or first
publishers or restorers of religion, it cannot but afforde matter of singular
satisfaction to such as are but even of meanest understanding, if upon due
examination taken in this course it do fall out, that those who are now
pretended to have been for this last age the extraordinary reformers whereof
see cap. 7. sec. 5. fine. in the margin at S.
extraordinary reformers of the Christian world, have in such their
undertaken endeavor, behaved themselves as men of more then ordinary deformed
and wicked condition of life: for our Savior says, Math. 6.22.23.
the light of the body is the eye, and if this light be dark, how great
shall the darkness it self be? to which purpose he further forwarneth saying.
Mat. 7.15.16.17.
Beware of false prophets who come to you in sheep clothinge, but inwardly
are raueninge wolves, by their fruits you shall know them: do men gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? etc. a good tree yields good fruit
etc. from which permisses it necessarily follows (master Whites whereas
master White in his way to the true church, printed 1608. sec. 38. nu. 2. and
3. and page 211. and 212. alleges sundry testimonies to prove that the
argument is not good a moribus ad doctrinam: I answer thereto, that though the
argument thereof do not always hold, yett this lets not, but that in the
now special case of the first professors or reformers of religion yt should be
of force, according to the testimonies hear next before in that behalf
alleged: at b.c. and next hereafter at
allegation to the contrary notwithstanding) that if the now pretended
reformers of religion, were in such their action not sanctified, but of
flagitiouse and wicked life, then cannot they possible be the instruments
chosen by God to that work, nor (consequently) their doctrine so by them
revealed, be the eternal truth of the living God: An inference yet further
made good from the words of in so much as master Fox in apocalipsin printed
1597. in cap. 14. page 468. post med. intreatinge De Ecclesia qua vera fit qua
falsa, qua vera eius notae and proprietates, says. Ad fructus vitamque little
nos mittit Christus, ex fructibus inquit little cogn^scetis eos, and rursus
omnis arbor bona facit fructus bonos etc. and then concludes, page 469.
initio, saying. Ex morum igitur vera innocentia, vitaeque institutione
certissimum sumitur indicium etc. Osiander in centur. 16. lib. 3. cap. 65. page
814. initio says. Paulus Eberus Theologiae Doctor etc. in cathedram Lutheri
collocatus, euangelium docuit vir quidem doctissimus and pius:
docter Paulus Eberus successor to Luther in his chair at Wittemberge, who
forbore not to acknowledge, that Paulus Eberus in prefat. commentar. Philippi
in epist. ad Corinth. says, vniuersa nostra euangelica congregatio tot
Schismatibus and offendiculis scatet, vt nihil minus sit quam quod se esse
gloriatur etc. quae mala cum quisque proprijs oculis intuetur, merito dubitat
an noster euangelicus caetus vera sit ecclesia etc. in qua tot and tam enormia
vitia conspiciuntur:
the confessed wickedness so apparentlie then aboundinge in their own
evangelical congregation, mynistred matter of just doubt, whether the same
were the true church or not: which his assertion puts the matter out of
doubt, in case it fall out, that their very first and principal supposed
reformers of religion, be no less, but rather more discovered and chargeable
in that kind: for so much therefore as it is the constant assertion of our
learned adversaries, that (as master Jewel says) Master Jewel in his
defense of the apology, printed 1571. part. 4. cap. 4. diu. 2. page 426. prope
finem.
the truth was unknown at that time and unheard of when Martine Luther and
Vlricke Suinglius, first came unto the knowledge and preachinge of the
gospel, that also (as master Parkins says) we master Parkins in his
exposition of the Creed, printed 1596. page 400. and in the last edition of
his works, volum. 1. printed. 1608. page 310. a circa med.
say that before the days of Luther for the space of many hundredth years, an
universal apostasy ouerspred the whole face of the earth, and that our
church, was not then visible to the world, but lay hid under the chafe of
popery: that likewise (as Benedicte Morgensten a learned protestant says) so
says Benedicte Morgenstern. in tract. de Ecclesia. printed Francofurti 1598.
page 145.
it is manifest to the whole christian world, that before Luthers time, all
churches were overwhelmed with more then cimmeriane darkness (and that) Luther
was divinely raised up to discover the same and to restore the light of true
doctrine: whereto Daniel Chamierus (a learned adversary) adds, that as then,
Daniell Camierus in his epist. Iesuitic. part. altera, printed Geneuae 1601.
page 49. says. Arianorum renenum non portiunculam quandam, sed pene totum
orbem contaminauerat etc. in ea nos tempora denenimus qua etiam excedant Ariani
furoris confusionem: non portiunculam vnam aut alteram error occupauit, sed
totum corpus apostasia auertit a Christo.
error had possessed, not some or other little portion (of the church) but had
auerted the whole body from Christ: with much Caelius secundus curio in his
book de amplitudine regni Dei, printed 1554. page 212. post med. says.
Factum est vt per multos iam annos Ecclesia latuerit, ciuesque huius regni vix
ab alijs, ac ne vix quidem agnosci potuerit: and Calvin in his book of
epistles, printed. 1597. ep. 141. page 273. paulo post med. says hereof:
discessionem a ^ote mundo facere coacti sumus: And master Brightman. in
apocalips. in cap. 11. page 283. prope finem, answeringe our common demand,
where their church was before Luther, says thereto, Ecclesia nostra ante
Lutherum fuit in abdito Dei sacrario, other instance he gives none: also
Ioannes Regius in libro apologetico etc. printed in 4. Mulhusij 1603. page 176.
circa and post med. answeringe the same demand, says: The church was then
invisible and could not be showed. And master Dent upon the Revelations, in
cap. 14. page 199. ante med. answeringe to the same demand, says. Christ
(then) had his little flock in the wilderness etc. without further naminge
either place or person. In so much as Luther himself in respect of this known
want of any other original protestant then before in being, to join with him
at the time of his first begun pretended reformation, says as appears
next heareafter. cap. 1. sect. 1. in the margin at l.
more no less fully affirmed by other learned adversaries to the same purpose:
In so much as Bucer forbeareth not, hear upon to term Luther, Bucer. in
epistola ad Episcopum Hereford. extant in his scripta Anglicana printed. 1577.
page 675. ante med. says, Lutherum primum purioris Euangelij ad nos epistolam
honoris causa nomino.
the first Apostle to us of the reformed doctrine, as also master Jewel
calls Luther, Master Jewel in his defense of the apology printed. 1571.
part. 4. c. 4. diuis. 2. page 426. prope finem.
a most excellent man even sent of God to lighten the whole world: in the midst
of darkness. And master Fox likewise says, Master Foxact. mon. printed.
1563. page 400. a fine.
it pleased the lord to reform and reedifie the desolate ruynes of his
religion, by the industry of Martine Luther, sent and set up by the mighty
spirit of God: whereto is further added, that he was the sea in the foresaid
acts and monuments. page 416. a initio.
Helias conductor and chariot of Israel, to be reverenced Christus habet
primas, habeas tibi Paul secundas, at loca post illos, proxima Luther habet:
these verses ar commended for true and godly by Ciriacus Spangenbergius in his
Duche book against certain catholics, in the part thereof against Stephanus
Agricola: And see further hereafter. cap. 3. sect. 4. fine at. *.
next after Christ and Paul, so says, Andreas Musculus in presat. in
libellum germ. de diaboli tirannide. And see also Amsdorphius conc. 8. de
Luthero page 88.
greater then whom lived not since the apostles times so is Luther termed by
Co^radus Schlusselberge. catal. haeret. lib. 13. and vlt. printed. 1596. page
314. 316. 489. And Michaell Neander in his theologia christiana etc. e fontibus
etc. theandri Lutheri dictis and testimonijs illustrata, printed Lipsiae. M. D.
V C. page 333. says. Lutherus vir Dei fuit, and vere ille Angelus cum aeterno
euangelio volans per medium caeli. Apoc. 14.
the Angel and last trumpett of God, whose calling was Master Carthwright in
Master Whitguiftes defense, printed. 1574. tract. 4. cap. 1. diu. 2. page 217.
circa med. says. When the churches have been by Antichrist even razed from
the foundations, God has styrred up evangelists even immediately by his
spirit without any calling of men, to restore his churches again, of which
sort was etc. Luther and Swinglius
immediate and Master Parkins in his works printed. 1605. fol. 916. a post
med. and b. affirms that the calling of Wyclife, Husse, Luther, etc. was
extraordinary. And see this point further in Aretius in locis commun.
printed. 1589. loc. 63. de ministerio. page 198. circa med. and in Master
Fulkes Retentiue against Bristowes motives etc. printed, 1580. page 300. ante
med. and in Ioannes Lasciuius de Russorum Muscouitarum and Tartarorum
religione, printed. 1582. page 39. ante med. and in Daneus in Isagoges
Christiana. part. 4. printed. Geneuae. 1586. lib. 2. page 36. initio.
extraordinary, and his cominge especially Michael Neander next heretofore
at. p. and see this point further affirmed in the protestant book entitled,
Antichristus sieve prognostica finis mundi, printed at Basile per Petrum Pernam.
page 12. fine 13. fine 8. 86. fine. and in Mathias Hoe, in his tract. duo etc.
printed. 1603. part. 1. page 136. initio, and in Conradus Schlusselberge in his
catal. haeret. l. 13. and vlt. printed. 1596. page 314. and 316. post med.
foreshewed in the scriptures. Master Whitaker withal in such like respect
professinge for himself and his brethren, to reverence Luther as their
father. Master Whitaker in his answer to the ten reasons of Edmond Campian,
Englished and printed 1606. rat. 8. fine and page 259. prope initium, says.
We reverence Luther as a Father, and we embrace the Lutheranes and Suinglians
as very dear brethren in Christ.
In regard of these so evident premises, I will first begyne with Martine
Luther, as being, the root of that reformed alteracion in religion which is
as before mentioned and pretended, in which respect I will also entreat of him
more at large, with special reference in particular (as occasion is ministered)
to the first edition of his works concerning those points wherein the later
of Witemberge, or others, are now since his death confessedly confessedly
corrupted, for Theodosius Fabricius a learned Lutheran in his collection of
Luthers sayings entitled, loci communes Doct. Martini Lutheri etc. printed.
1594. in his preface prefixed thereto circa med. professes there to follow the
first edition of Iena, saying there further concerning the later edition of
Witemberge, cur ab editione Witembergensi discesserim causas habeo non
contemnendas. Hence it is that Westphalus (a learned Lutheran) in apol. contra
Calum. cap. 46. page 458. charge Calvin with most foul mutations and
corrup^ions made in certain of Luthers works translated into French and
printed at Geneua: and Luther himself in epist. ad Ioannem Heruagium
typographum argentinensem, charge Bucer with the corruptinge of his works:
and Co^radus Schlusselburge (a Lutheran of great note) l. 2. Theolog. Calvin.
printed 1594. fol. 56. b. charge the Caluinists with alteration of Luthers
works: and the zealouse Lutheranes in their Synod houlden at Altemburge,
do greatly complain of such confessed corruptinge of Luthers woorks, as
appareth in colloquio Altembergensi, printed. Anno 1570. in respons. ad excuss.
cor fol. 127. b. circa med. and in 2. collat. de Hypothesibus. fol. 353. b.
circa med. and in Hypothes. de libero arb. fol. 574. b. ante med. and 575. a.
post med. in so much as great contentions arose in Germany between the
rigid and soft Lutheranes, concerning the corrupt edition of Luthers
works, whereof see Walterus contra Aurifabrum, de corrupta editione operum
Lutheri, anno 1566.
corrupted by the Lutheranes or Caluinistes, as thereby either to conceall his
gross absurdities or otherwise, as in pretext of their own errors: after
which I will (though but more briefly) touch those other branches, who
yssuinge from Luther have next to him succeeded in the ministry of supposed
reformation, as namely Iacobus Andreas, Melancthon, Bucer, Bernardine, Ochine,
Carolostadius, Suinglius, Calvin and Beza, of all whom (in regard most of
them stand so priuileged with the applause and likinge of our present state) I
will (as no less then careful to avoid offense) speak but sparingly and
reseruedly purposely, forbearinge to affirm or report any thing of them as
from my self, only I undertake for to deliver what is confessed and reported
of them by our learned adversaries themselves. I do hereby once for all
profess neither to extenuat nor make good, but wholly to refer the same unto
the discretion and Judgment of each indifferent reader: to whom this my
ensuyinge discourse may perhaps afforde grater satisfaction, in that the
argument thereof being not concerning the truth or untruth of questions of
faith, but of only matter of fact, and the same also confessed by
protestants themselves, it cannot be either perverted into tropes, and so (as
in other points usually) euaded by figurative expositions, neither yet avoided
or excepted against, as delivered from the testimony of men to us
affectionate, or but so much as suspected: for the more ready effectinge and
perfittinge of all which, yt shall not seem greeuouse, but much ease and
saueinge of further labor unto me, for to transcribe and digeste into this one
ensuinge peculier tract, what I find said pertinente to this purpose, else
where more dispersedly, and as all obscured with confusion of other matter, the
recollected and enlarged substance whereof is briefly in order as follows.

The end of the Preface.
CHAPT. I.
MArtine Luther Osiander. centur. 15. printed. 1604. l. 4. c. 1. page 490.
initio, says. Natus est hoc anno 1483. encomparabilis vir Dei sanctae
memoriae D. D. Martinus Lutherus Islebiae in Saxonia, per quem Deus noster,
Germaniae Euangelij lucem restaurauit:
borne at Islabium in Saxony in the year of our Lord God 1483. was (as
appears by his own testimony) molested or haunted by the devil Luther in
his epistle to his father extant tom. 2. Witemberg. printed 1562. fol. 269. a.
circa med. says. Videtur mihi Sathanas a pueritia mea aliquid in me
praeuidisse eorum quae nunc patitur, ideo ad perdendum impediendumque me
insaniuit incredibilibus machinis.
from his child-hoode, in so much as haueinge emonge those many Melancthon. in
his preface to that 2. tom. of Luther. post initium. says. Hos terrores seu
acerrimos, sensit (Lutherus) eo animo cum sodalem nescio quo casu interfectum
amisisset.
terrors, his fellow companion suddenly slain (and as was thought by the
devil) Luther in his foresaid epistle to his father. extant tom. 2. Witemb.
fol. 269. a initio, says. Neque enim libens seu cupiens fiebam monachus etc.
sed terrore and agone mortis subitae circumualatus (upon the example of his
foresaid companion) voui necessarium and coactum votum:
in fear of such like sudden death he made himself a monk, about the year
of our lord. Luthers foresaid epistle to his father being dated in November.
1521. and himself as appears next hereafter at. h. haueinge been moncke for
almost sixtene years, then before, these. 16. years being deducted from anno
1521. his entry into monachisme appears to have been about anno 1524. and
so accordingly the protestante deuines, in colloquio Altemburgensi, printed.
1570. fol. 422. b. initio, say Lutherus anno aetatis vicesimo primo Erphordiae
monasterium ingressus est, which compared to his birth anno 1483. iumpeth
about the same time.
1505. Luther. to. 2. fol. 268. b. fine, says to his father: Memini enim
nimis praesenti memoria, cum iam placatus mecum loquereris, and ego de caelo
terroribus me vocatum assererem, etc. vtinam aiebas non sit illusio and
praestigium.
called thereto as himself in such respect affirms, by terrors from heaven:
which his careful old father thought to be no other but vt supra at. f.
Illusions ominouslie as it were (in his fatherly fear) fore shewinge, the
Luther. tom. 2. fol. 268. b. paulo post med. sai he. Annus ferme agitur decimus
sextus monachatus mei, quem te inuito and ignorance subini, met^ebas tu paterno
affectu imbecillitati meae etc. quod multis exemplis didiceras, hoc vitae genus
infeliciter quibusdam cecidisse.
unfortunate success of his sons monachisme: he was made doctor of divinity
at Witemberge in the 29. year of his age in the year of our Lord God. 1512.
Timotheus Kerthmerus (Luthers Scholar) in his thesaurus etc. printed. 1566. in
epist. nuncupat. versus finem, alleges Luthers words, to be, casu non
voluntate in istas turbas incid: Deum ipsum testor: and see these words in
Luther in his preface. in tom. 1. Witemberge. printed. 1582. post initium.
He protests of him self that he fell into the troubles or (as he terms
it) Luther in loc. com. printed. 1594. cla^s. 4. cap. 30. page. 58. paulo ante
medium. says. Initio Euangelij cum Deus in hanc (vt sic vocem) factionem
praeter meam voluntatem per mirabiles occasiones me inuolueret.
factions of controversies concerning religion, but casually and against his
will, not knowinge of any other then Luther in loc. commu. printed. 1594.
class. 4. cap. 30. page 51. fine, says. Tantam causam in me vnum recipicham,
vt mihi vni sustinendam auxilio diuino iudicabam, nec putabam fiducia aliorum
quippiam etc. and Luther. tom. 1. Witemberge printed. 1582. in prefat. paulo
post initium. says hereof, Solus primo eram, etc. and tom. 2. Witemb. fol.
63. a. circa med. he further says. Solus tum voluebam hoc saxum.
to join with him therein, and not so much as act. mon. printed. 1563. page
404. a. initio, and Simon de Voyon in his discourse upon the catalogue etc.
printed 1598. p. 182.
dreaminge or suspectinge any change that might happen: for as Sleydan
(Luthers own scholar) reports the story Sleydan in Engl. printed. 1560. l.
13. fol. 177. a. prope finem.
the cause and original of that business was by occasion of John Fecell a
Dominicke friar, Osiander in centur. 16. printed. 1602. l. 1. c. 17. page 35.
ante med.
who carried about pardons to sell, Luther himself in his preface in to. 1.
Witemb. printed 1582. fol. 1. b. ante med. says hereof. Igitur cu^ anno Dom.
1517. indulgentiae in his regionibus venderentur etc. ego tum etc. and Sleydan
in the places next hereafter cited places them, as under the year 1517.
against which Luther began to preach. Anno Dom. 1517. (not of any devotion,
zeal or Judgment, but says Sleydan) so reports Sleydan in English, l. 16.
fol. 232. b. fine.
as Luther himself confesses, when he knew not what the matter meant, for
(says Luther thereof) Luthers words in Sleydan. l. 13. fol. 177. b. paulo
post med.
I scarcely then understood what the name of Indulgences meant, and master
Fox does accordingly testify how that after this business so begun, act.
mon. printed. 1563. page 404. b. initio.
Luther was determined not to stir up any new debates, but rather coueted a
common quiet: whereunto he seemed then so enclininge, as he doubted not to
insinuate with the pope, makeinge even his Sleydan. l. 1. fol. 10. a. prope
initium, and Luther in appellatione prima ad Leonem decimum, extant. to. 1.
Witemb. printed. 1582. fol. 219. a. initio, says. Adhuc fateor solummodo me
disputasse, and omnia sub pedibus sanctissimi Domini nostri Leonis decimi
subiecisse, vt occidet, viuificet, reprobet, approbet, sicut placuerit, and
vocem eius vocem Christi in ipso praesidentis agnoscam.
appeall to him and Sleydan. l. 1. fol. 10. a. fine.
professinge (says Sleydan) his affection to the church of Rome, and that he
will attempt nothing against it: acknowledginge also (as confesses Sleydan)
Luther in Sleydan. vbi supra.
the power thereof to be so great, that Christ only excepted there is
nothing in this world more excellent: in so much as Anno 1518. he repents
himself of his (former) Luther tom. 1. Witemb. printed. Anno 1582. fol. 215.
b. post med. in his epistle Thomae Cardinali per Germaniam, dated Anno Dom.
1518. says to him. Reuerendissime in Christo pater, fateor me fuisse certe
nimis (vt dicunt) indiscretum, acrem and irreuerenrem in nomen summi
Pontificis, etc. de quo sincerissime doleo and veniam peto etc. daboque
deinceps operam, vt alius sim, and aliter loquar Deo miserante etc. and see
Luthers yet further like submission to the pope, tom. 1. Witemb. fol. 235. a.
propefinem b. in his epistle to Leo the tenth then pope, dated 3. Martij Anno
Dom. 1519. Where he terms the pope Christ's Vicar, and again there says.
Nunc beatissime pater, coram Deo testor, me neque voluisse, neque hodie velle,
Ecclesia Romanae ac beatitudinis tua potestatem vllo modo tangere: etc. (
whereof see Hospin. in histor. sacram. part. 2. fol. 4. a.) and tom. 2. Witemb.
fol. 44. b. and 45. a. in his epistle to the Archbishop of Mentz. dated. 4.
Febru. 1520. He obsequiouslie acknowledges the popes power.
indiscreete sharp and irreuerend writing against the pope, asking pardon
therefore: In which he persisted so forward that (says master Fox) act.
mon. page 404. a. fine. and Osiander centur. 16. l. 1. c. 23. page 61. fine,
says. Quod (Lutherus) in pontificem quaedam durius scripserit, aut dixerit,
id condonari sibi petit, promittens post hac maiorem modestiam, etc. modo
aduersarijs etiam suis silentium imponatur: and see further his like offer
there. page. 66. paulo post initium and in Sleydan. l. 1. fol. 10. b. initio.
yt is apparent that Luther promised Cardinal Caietaine to keep silence (with
this annexed condition of pride) provided also his adversaries would do the
like. And master Cowper (late protestant Bish. of Winchester.) reports
further that Master Cowper in his chronicle, printed. 1565. fol. 278. a paulo
post initium, and see also Luther. tom. 1. Witemb. fol. 215. b. post med.
Luther Anno Dom. 1520. by his letter submitted himself to the pope (with this
other like condition) so that he might not be compelled to recant: so
plainly as some hereupon do conceive, even his confessed and intolerable of
Luthers pride see hereafter, c. 3. sec. 1. throughout. Sleydan. l. 1. fol. 10.
a paulo post initium.
pride to be the only true cause of his further reuolte and apostasy: for if
his so often proffered submissio^s would have been accepted without his
recantacion, his further proceedings as against us, had been yet to begin. In
which respect yt is accordingly yett further testified by Sleydan, how that
for so much as Luther offered (as before is mentioned) most reasonable
conditions, he thought to have found some favor in the humanity of the Bushope
of Rome, and Sleydan. l. 13. fol. 177. b. fine.
that the bushope would assoyle him. Sleydan. l. 13. fol. 177. b. fine.
But lo (says Luther) whileste I look for a joyful sentence from Rome, I
am stricken with the thunderbolte of excommunication, and condemned for the
most wicked man alive: Sleydan. l. 13. fol. 178. a. initio.
then (says he) I began to defend my doings, setting forth many books
etc. and seeinge it is so, let them impute the fault to themselves that have
so excessiuelie handled the matter: in this sort (as Sleydan testifies)
Sleydan. l. 1. fol. 10. a paulo post initium, and see the same no less
plainly in Osiander. centur. 16. c. 25. initio. page 65. circa med.
Martine Luther his (foresaid) appellation to the pope being condemned, his
offers despised, lookinge for no more help nor health at the popes hands, was
through extreme necessity brought to appeal from the Bushope of Rome etc.
and so upon occasion of these his confessed and enforced proceedinges, he at
last fell into the open and oueruiolent current of his further ensueinge
apostasy, and the same (as himself confesses) not without great trouble of
remorce in his wounded and perplexed conscience therefore often accusinge him,
to which purpose him self complains saying, Luther. tom. 2. Witemb.
printed. 1562. fol. 244. b. ante med. says. Quoties mihi palpitauit tremulum
cor reprehendens obiecit eorum fortissimum and vnicum argumentum; tu solus
sapis? tot ne errant vniuersi? tanta saecula ignorauerunt? quid si tu erres and
tot tecum in errorem trahas damnandos aeternaliter?
how often did my trembling heart beat within me, and reprehendinge me,
obiecte against me that their strong argument: Art thou only wise? do so
many worlds err? were so many ages ignorant? what if thou errest and drawest
so many into error to be damned with thee eternally? with much see Luthers
like further saying in tom. 5. Witemb. printed. 1554. in 1. Galat. fol. 290.
a. versus finem, and in colloquijs mensal. fol. 273.
more elsewhere to the same effect: In so much as remaininge thereupon for
Master Parkins in his works volum. 1. printed. 1608. in his declaration of
spiritual desertions page 417. b. ante med. says. Luther confesses of him
self, that after his conversion, he lay three years in desperation:
three years after his reuolte from us, in (most fearful) desperation,
Luther in colloquijs mensal. fol. 158. b.
he often wished and desired that he had never begun this business, and that
Luther in prefat. in tom. Germ. Ien. And master Willet. in his Antilogie
printed. 1603. sect. 12. page 267. post med. says. Luther shows how he was
troubled etc. and sometimes with grief as yt were plunged in hell, that he
wished in his heart that he had never begun that trouble in the church, and
that his works were burned: and the divines of the count Palatine in their
admonitio Christiana de libro concordiae printed. 1581. page 207. circa med.
say, Constat Lutherum optasse vt omnes libri sui sunt aboliti, superstitibus
vel solis locis communibus Philippi.
his writings were burned and buried in eternal oblivion: Hitherto of Luthers
Apostasy from our Catholic Church, and of the confessed motives that
directed him therein, which whether they were proceedinge from heaven, or from
the spirit of pride and contradiction, I will not determine, but do without
all further inference, wholly refer the same to the equal consideration of
the indifferent and studiouse reader.

II.
LVther having thus begun his first See this showed next heretofore at n. o.
p. and see this at large in Luthers preface in tom. 1. Witemb. printed. 1582.
paulo post initium.
breach from us but with the matter of pardons, and some few such like which
happened in the year see next heretofore at. o.
1517. and kept him busied therein till Luther making several discourse in
his preface in 1. tom. Witemb. of his procedings for every several year in
particular from. Anno 1517. til. Anno 1521. makes no mention of his impugninge
the mass duringe that time, but in the end of that his prefat. says (rather
to the contrary) hactenus ad annum 1520. and 1521. processit res
indulgentiaria, post sequentur res sacramentariae: and see further next
hereafter in the margin at K.
about Anno 1520. or 1521. had not for the time written any thing against the
mass, but continewinge Osiander. centur. 16. l. 1. c. 36. page 97. fine,
says. Hoc anno (1524.) Lutherus monasticum habitum deposuit, and Hospinian. in
histor. sacram. part 2. fol. 4. b. ante med. reports. Lutherum etiam post
impugnatum papatum, aliquot annos se macerasse recitandis horis canonicis etc.
donec a Philippo admonitus, eam superstitionem abiecerit: And ibidem fol. 5.
ante med. He further says of Luther. Hinc factum est vt etiam post certamen
contra indulgentias, arcem Pontificij regni non inuaserit:
yet in his monckishe habit, and retayninge his former catholic opinion both
of the divines of count Palatine in their admonitio Christiana de libro
concordiae, printed. 1581. cap. 6. page 211. paulo post med. say of Luther.
Aliquot annis post caeptam oppugnationem papatus retinuit (Lutherus)
purgatorium, missam, circumgestationem panis theatricam etc. and see Dresserus
de di^bus festis page 192. and Sleydan. l. 5. fol. 65. a. fine, and Hospinian,
in his concordia discor. printed. 1607. fol. 99. b. ante med. Also it appears
next heretofore c. 1. sect. 1. next after. t. at. *. by his several
submissions, so then made to the Roman church, how far he yett then was
from impugninge the mass: which thing is yett more evident by Hospinian. in
histor. sacram. part. 2. fol. 188. a. fine, at. anno 1544. Where he alleges
Luther in paruae confessionis appendice, as then saying, factum est ante annos
viginti aut viginti duos, cum inciperem missam damnare etc. by all which
appears that Luthers first impugninge of the mass, was certain years after
his first apostasy, which happened Anno 1517. and so accordingly in tom. 1.
Witemb. in his resolutiones de indulgentijs, written Anno Dom. 1518. (as
appears there. fol. 141. a. fine,) he expresselie says of mass. Fateor id
verum a me credi (ibidem conclu.) 26. fol. 122. b. ante med.
mass, and sondrie other matters (whereof he so much Luther in his prefat. set
before. tom. 1. Witemb. (printed. 1582.) paulo post initium, says. Ante omnia
oro pium lectorem vt ista legate cum iudicio, immo cum multa miseratione, and
sciat me fuisse aliquando monachum etc. inuenies in istis scriptis meis
prioribus, quam multa and magna humillime concesserim papae, quae posterioribus
and istis temporibus pro summa blasphemia and abominatione habeo and execror:
dabis ergo hunc errorem pie lector, tempori and imperitiae meae, solus primo
eram, and certe ad res tantas tracta^das ineptissimus etc. this preface of
Luthers was by him dated. 5. Martij 1545
complains in his later writings) he withal continewed his accustomed
saying of mass, till that he was persuaded to the contrary by the devil, in
manner followinge. That foresaid wicked spirit which as before haunted and
affrighted Luther from his youth, and slew his fellow companion, does now
also after his apostasy (so as before begun) much more pursue and keep him
in chase, in so much as Johannes Manlius Luthers own scholar in his loci
communes printed at Basile, Anno 1562. does ingenuouslie confess, that
Manlius in his loci communes, printed Basile 1562. in the alphabeticall table
under the letter. l. has. Luthero saepius spectra apparuerunt.
spirits often appeared to Luther, and withal recites how that (says he)
Manlius in loc. commun. page 42. fine. and 43. initio, says. Cum Coburgi
subsisteret doctor Martinus Lutherus etc. accidit vt semper post apparitiones
nocturnarum facium, ipse graui capitis morbo agitaretur: Accidit autem vt cum
praecedente nocte tres eiusmodi volantes faces vidisset, fere incidisset in
syncopen, praesentiens autem morbum ministrum vocabat, is Amydalinum oleum
instillabat in aurem: Thus far Manlius who was a zealouse Lutherane, and
Luthers own physician, vt supra. at g.
usually after his nightlie apparitions in the (terrible) form of flyinge
fire brandes, Luther was evermore ill in his head, being at one time ready
thereupon to fall into a sound: in prevention whereof says Manlius, oil of
almondes was infused into his ear, and his feet rubbed with hot clothes: As
also Luther him self says to the Suenckfeldianes and Anabaptists who
bragged of revelations, that Luther 1. Centen. ad Senator. ciu. Ger. says Ego
quoque fui in spiritu, atque etiam vidi spiritus, si omnino de proprijs
gloriandum est, forte plusquam ipsi intra annum videbunt.
he himself had been in spirit (unworthily so imitatinge the Apostles
phrase) and that if he might glory of his own, he had seen spirittes more
perhaps, then they should see within a year: And that no man should so far
mistake yt, as to think that by these spirits he meante Angels, him self
affirms, saying most evidently to this purpose, Luther in hoc loc. commun.
printed. 1594. class. 4. c. 20. page 39. prope finem, says. Multas
apparitiones angelorum habeo, and ibidem. page 40. ante med. he further says.
Pactum feci cum Domino Deo meo, ne vel visiones, vel somnia, vel etiam angelos
mihi mittat:
I have no apparitions of angels, I have made a couenante with the Lord, that
he should not send to me visions (which are taken in good part) dreams, or
angels: Luther being thus haunted and troubled with the devils fearful and
affrightinge apparitions, and haueinge as before said, begun his first
breach from us but touching the matter of pardons, continewed yet still next
before in the margin. at. d.
(as before said) his accustomed, saying of mass, till that (as himself
sondrie years after, for whereas this book is thought to have been written.
Anno 1533. Luthers so special mentiotioninge next hereafter at. b. his
celebratinge mass for 15. years before this disputacion, conuinceth thereby
the disputacion to have been long before, Anno 1533. for if we take the
beginning of these 15. years from his first saying of mass, the which (as
witness Dresserus. l. de festis, and Balduinus de disput. Lutheri etc.
printed. 1605. cap. 8. page 124. circa med.) was Anno 1507. then does the
last of those said 15. years light in some part of. Anno 1521. or 1522. Or
if (as Baldwinus urges in his hyperaspist. page 81. and apud serarium de
Lutheri magistro l. 1. page 122. ante med.) we take the beginning of the
said 15. years from the common assertion of his first entry into monachisme
(as Baldwinus. l. de disput. Lutheri etc. c. 8. page 124. circamed. reports.)
Anno 1524. whereby he bound himself to attend the daily celebration of mass
then does the last of those said 15. years hapen about, Anno 1519. or 1520.
so either way, long before Luthers writtinge of his book thereof, Anno.
1533. see also further next heretofore in the margin. at. b.
sondrie years after reports the matter) Luther tom. 7. Witemb. printed. Anno
1558. l. de missa priuata etc. vnct. sacerd. fol. 228. a. fine, says,
Contigit me sub mediam noctem subit^ expergefieri, ibi satan mocum caepit
eiusmodi disputationem; Audi, inquit Luthers doctor perdocte, nosti te
quindecim annis celebrare missas priuatas pene quotidie, quid si tales missae
priuata, horrenda essent idolatria? quid si tibi non adfuisset corpus and
sanguis Christi, sed tantum panem and vinum adorasses? etc. cui ego respondi
sum vnctus sacerdos, accepi vnctione^ and consecrationem ab Episcopo and haec
o^nia feci, ex ma^dat^ and obedientia maioru^ quare non consecrassem? etc.
yt happened (says he) upon a certain time, that I was suddenly awaked about
midnight, then Satan began this disputation with me, saying, Harken right
learned doctor Luther. (Nosti te quindecim annis celebrasse missas priuatas
pene quotidie etc.) thou know that thou have celebrated private mass by the
space of fiftene years, almost every day, what if such mass were horrible
idolatry? what if Christ's body and blood were not present there, but that
thou only didste adore bread and wine? etc. Whereunto Luther being then as
yett not persuaded against the mass makes resistance, and justifies his
former celebration of mass in these words there next after followinge, Luther
vt supra at. l.
Cui ego respondi etc. I answered Satan, that I was an anointed priste
received unction and consecration from a Bushope, and did all these things as
from the commandemente and obedience of my elders, why then should I not
consecrate? etc. whereto the devil replyeth and frames many arguments
against the mass, by Luther there repeated and set down, such as namely
emonge other, in Luther vbi supra. fol. 228. b. circa med. the devil argues
saying to Luther. Missa abusus es contra mentem Christi instituentis: nam
Christus voluit sacramentum inter pios communicantes distribui etc. Sacerdos
enim verus est minister Ecclesiae, constitutus ad praedicandum verbum, and
perrigenda sacramenta, etc. vnde and a veteribus communio appellata est, quod
non solus sacerdos debeat vti sacramento, sed reliqui vna cum ipso: nunc annos
quindecim totos semper solus priuatim pro te in missa vsus es sacramento, and
non communicasti alijs, adeoque tibi interdictum erat ne porrigeres totum
sacramentum alijs. etc. cuiusmodi es tu sacerdos qui non pro Ecclesia, sed pro
te ipso ordinatus es? etc. tu vero missator priuatus in omnibus missis tuis, ne
semel quidem praedicasti etc. haeccine institutio Christi? institutio Christi
est vt sacramento communicent and alij Christiani, verum tu vnctus, non ad
distribeundum sacramentum, sed ad sacrificandum, and contra institutionem
Christi missa vsus es pro sacrificio, etc. and quod Christus instituit ad
edendum and bibendum pro tota Ecclesia, and porrigendum a sacerdote vna
communicantibus, etc. ex hoc tu facis sacrificium propitiatorium, o abominatio
super omnem abominationem, etc. nemini tecum communicas, and vt in more vobis
fuit, tanquam bonum opus propecunia vendis: and fol. 228. b. ante med. the
devil further argues saying to Luther. Confugiebatis ad Mariam and sanctos,
illi erant mediatores inter vos and Christum, sic erepta est gloria Christo: Is
not all this (with much more objected there by the devil) very protestant like?
the priests not preacheinge (but) receiueinge alone, against the institution
of Christ. His not communicatinge to the people in both kinds, that of a
Sacrament he made it a sacrifice: and made gain thereof Luther. ibidem. fol.
229. b. ante med.
(sicut tu facis in missa) as thou (says the devil to Luther) do in the
mass. Against which, Luther as yett perseuerant in the mass, fleethe unto
catholic answers, as him self there next after witnesses saying: Luther.
ibidem. fol. 229. b. post med. says. In his angustijs, in hoc agone contra
diabolum, volebam retundere hostem armis quibus assuetus eram sub papatu,
obijciebamque intentionem and fidem Ecclesiae celebrassem, etc in hoc recte
credidit and sensit Ecclesia: verum satan e contra fortius and vehementius
instans, age, inquit, pro nie vbi scriptum est etc. In respect of Luthers thus
iustifyinge to the devil his former saying of mass, the devil replieth upon
him saying: Quare ergo in missa priuata blaspheme contrauenis claris verbis
and ordinationi Christi, and postea tuo mendacio praeter is nomen and
intentionem Ecclesiae, and misero hoc fuco tuum ornas commentum? (Luther
ibidem. fol. 230. a. initio.) and again: En audaciam vestram, in tenebris
geritis haec and abutimini nomine Ecclesiae, ac deinde omnes abominationes
vultis defensas praetextu intentionis Ecclesiae: so plainly did Luther yet
hitherto defend his former saying of mass:
In his angustijs etc. in this agony I was wllinge to beat back the enemy
with those weapons whereto I was accustomed in the papacy, obiectinge the
intention and faith of the church, and that I celebrated mass in the
intention and faith of the church etc. and that the church did rightly
believe and think: but (says Luther) Satan replied more vehemently etc.
whereupon Luther forbearinge to continewe or mention any further defense of the
mass, in the end yields, and embraceinge the doctrine so delivered by satan,
does thereupon quite abandon the mass: In so much as his followers the deuines
of Wite^berge did accordingly see this in Hospinian. in his histor. sacram.
part. 2. printed. Tiguri. 1602. fol. 20. b. post med. Also Sethus Caluisius in
chronologia. printed. in 4. Lipsia. 1605. page 949. prope initium, says. Anno
1525. missa primum celebrata lingua vernacula Viteberga, die Octobris,
Dominica. 20. post Trinitat. Lutherus simul edidit librum de abhominatione
canonis Missae.
put down the mass at Witemberge, and (which is worthy the readers
observation) alleged and published to the world in behalf of their so
doyinge, the very same The deuines of Witemberg, publishinge their reasons of
abrogatinge mass, deliver emonge other saying. Missa quales body fiunt,
aperte pugnant cum institutione, etc. nunquam (...) priuatim seipsum
communicas^e legitur, etc. missa nequaquam est tale bonum opus, qu^ De^
reddamus aut offeramus aliquid placans Deum and satisfaciens pro nobis aut
alijs: etc. Hinc impuros sacrificulos occasion corradendae pecuniae and
faciendi quastus oblata, latari, and cupide talia missarum aucupia amplecti,
etc. Christum ipsum in prima cana multis verbis ante and post distributionem
Eucharistiae concionatum, etc. Vnde hanc postea fuisse Ecclesi^ consuetudinem,
vt quoties conuenisset populus primu^ pradicatumfit verbum Dei: etc. neque enim
videre se quo pacto illi excusari queant, qui alterutram tantum partem sumunt
aut porrigunt, cum nominatim Christus de calice loquatur, bibite ex hoc omn es,
etc. see this in Hospinian. vbi supra fol. 21. a. b. compare these with the
devils foresaid reasons made to Luther, and you shall discern the matter of
them both to be all one.
reasons and arguments which were by the devil (as heretofore) urged in his
said disputacion, had with Luther, as also Luther himself in this his now
alleged very book, written so many See next heretofore at. k.
years after the said disputacion, still urges and prosecuteth the very same
see in Luthers book his obiectinge of saying mass for money. ( tom. 2. fol.
236. a. circa med. and b. circamed. and 238. b. initio.) the priests not
preachinge but sacrificeinge. ( tom. 2. fol. 236. b. ante med. and 238. b.
prope initium.) the preistes not communicateinge to the people in both kinds:
(tom. 2. fol. 238. a. circa med.) the turninge of communion into private mass:
(ibidem. fol. 231. b. fine. and 238. a. fine.) and Luthers discourse against
the intencion and faith of the church. (ibidem. fol. 234. b. post med. and
235. a. and b. circa med.) all which (as appears next heretofore at. n. o.)
are the very same points which the devil affirmed and urged against Luther,
and are now in the places hear cited, urged by Luther against us, in allmoste
the very same words that the devil used in his disputation with Luther, as
may appear by conferinge of them both together.
arguments against the Mass.

III.
THe matter fallinge out to be in all appearance thus odiouse, sundry excuses
are pretended in answer thereto, which I will not conceall or dissemble, but
briefly examine, according to the truth of the story. First master Charke
and master Fulke do answer, that by Luthers foresaid discource of his
disputacion had with the devil, is meant, so says master Charke in his
reply to the censure. etc. printed. 1581. fol. D. 5. and D. 6. also master
Fulke in his treatise against the the defense of the censure, printed. by
Thomas Thomas. page 234. initio. answerethe saying hereof. Luthers confession
is only of a spiritual fight in mind, and no bodelie conference, as
master Charke answered at first.
only a spiritual fight in mind, and no bodelie conference: What? no
sensible or bodelie conference? with what face can they affirm this? does not
Lauather himself confess it to have been an see next hereafter in the
margin. at. d.
apparition he being awaked? do not the many other precedent and confessed
like fearful apparitions, hapninge to Luther likewise in the night, argue
this also to be of the like kind? does not Luther himself in his foresaid
treatise of this matter report, how the devil then Luther describinge there,
the sound of satan's voice speakinge to him, says. Haec illo dicente etc. the
devil speakinge thus to me, I burste forth all on sweat, and my heart began
to tremble and leap (voce forti and graui vtitur.) The devil has a base and
strong voice etc. and then I learned how it came to pass, that sometimes
early in the morninge men were found dead in their beds: which words the
rather to give color, to master Charkes pretended only spiritual
temptacion, and no bodily conference, are shamefullie falsified, as being
quite omitted by the divines of Witemberge in their later edition of Luthers
works, but never the less are yett still extant in the more ancient edition
of Luthers works. tom. 6. Ien. Germ. fol. 28. and (to the eternal discredit of
the divines of Witemberge, who in many other things have likewise most
shamefullie falsified him) are yett also acknowledged, and verbatim recited by
no meaner a protestant writer then Hospinian, in histor. sacram. part. 2. fol.
131. a. post med. and by him there alleged out of Luther. to. 6. Ien. fol. 81.
spoke to him in a base and great voice, (so fearful as) made Luther to
sweat and his heart to tremble? does he not also report (as before) that the
devil spoke sensibly unto him, calling him (according to the humor of his
pride) see next here before at l.
right learned doctor Luther? does he not there also yett further affirm how
that Luther tom. 7. Witemb. printed. 1558. de missa private. and vnct. sacerd.
fol. 230. a. post med. says. Ego plane persuasus sum Empserum and
Oecolampadium and similes, his ictibus horribilibus and qua stationibus subit^
extinct^s esse. See also these words confessed by master Fulke against the
defense of the censure. page 237. circa med. and Lauather (a learned Suinglian)
in his histor. sacramentaria. printed. Tiguri. 1563. fol. 24. a. prope finem,
acknowledginge the devil to have appeared to Luther, says. Scribit Lutherus
diabolum noctu aliquoties sibi apparuisse, secumque disputasse etc. postea
infert se credere quod Empserus and Oecolampad. and alij illis similes, ignitis
his sagittis and hastis diaboli tam subito expirauerunt.
Oecolampadius Empser, and others were slain with such horrible encounters?
This answer being therefore without all probability and though supposed for
true yett wholly Impertinent: for in either case the persuasion and arguments
(whereto Luther here yields) came confessedlie from the devil, and what
difference then is there-whether the devil, made them to Luther by sensible
conference, or inward suggestion?
impertinent. A second answer of master Sutlyffe is, that Luther in his
foresaid discource of this matter, only master Sutlife, de vera catholica
Christi Ecclesia, printed. 1592. l. 2. c. 4. page 298. post med. says. Quod
cum Luthero diabolum collocutum narrant, primum est mendacium, nam per somnum
tantum diabolum secum colloqui visum (vt est in libro) dicit: in what book of
Luther, master Sutlife is this found? you can allege none, and master
Sutlife, ibidem page 299. paulo ante med. further says hereof. Lutherus autem
nihil aliud peccauit, quam quod vt homo Germanus, and non ita pridem monachus,
qui has de diabolorum apparitionibus monasticas fabulas e mente adhuc non
eiecerat, somnium narrat crasso filo and monachis familiari: quare si nullum
aliud habeant huius calumnia fundamentum prater somnium, quod etiam ipsi male
detorquent, nihil est, etc. Did ever man use greater outfacinge boldness?
declared his dream: What? but his dream master Sutlyffe? is there in
Luthers wholle discource hereof, so much as but mention of any dream? does
not Luther as before most expresselie see next heretofore at. i.
disclayme in dreams? Are not also Luthers own foresaid words most
directly to the contrary, that he was first see next heretofore at. l.
suddenly awaked, and that then after satan began the disputation with him?
Again does not his foresaid affirminge of next heretofore at. d.
Empser and Oecolampadius to have been slain by such horrible encounters argue
more then a dream? are men I pray you slain by dreaminge? or rather was not
your self deeply dreaminge; when you thought to outface and delude us with an
answer so groslie untrue? and though we should suppose yt for true, yet no
less plainly Impertinent: for what difference is there (as in respect of the
doctrine) whether the devil seduced Luther sleepinge or wakinge?
impertinent: these foresaid answers of master D. Fulke, master Charke, and
master Sutliffe being so evidently untrue, Baldwinus betaketh himself to a
third evasion. And what says he? First directly against master Charke,
master Fulke, and master Sutliffe, he acknowledges the conference between
the devil and Luther, to have been not spiritual only, nor yett a dream,
but that it was a real truth, Baldwinus in his book de disputatione Lutheri
cum diabolo, printed. Islebij. 1605. c. 4. fine. and page 83. fine, says
hereof. Quapropter non est cur monachus miretur me fateri, disputationem illam
esse veram, and neque ioco, neque hyperbolica, sed serio and historice
scriptam: and again there, page 75. post med. he says. Historiam illam tam
prolixe, tam considerate Lutherus conscripserit, quod enim eam scripserit, and
quidem serio and historice, etiamnum and constanter fateor: and see further
there, page 76. fine.
written (says he) by Luther, not hyperbolicallie but seriously, and
according to the truth of the history: How then would he euade? the
contracted substance of his longer answer is, that Luther had before, and
then, quite abandoned the mass: that therefore the devil, intended no
disputacion with Luther, but only as by way of strong temptacion, see this
there, page 127. ante med.
to putt Luther in mind of his, (then acknowledged) oulde errors, and so
thereto to drive him to despair, vrginge to such purpos, such only known
truths and reasons against the mass, as Luther then and before knew to be
most true, and wherein Luther was allreadie satisfied: In regard whereof
(says he) the devil speaks always to Luther Semper enim in praeterito
loquitur Satan, etc. talis sacrificulus fuisti, etc. there. page 127. fine.
(in praeterito) as in the time past, thou saydste mass, thou haste done
this, and that, etc. But how extremlie false or impertinent is all this? first
as concerning the matter of despair, it is merely supposed and without so
much as the least mention of it, either by the devil or Luther, in any part of
all that continewed disputacion from the first line thereof, whereas some urge
how that Luther does here. tom. 7. fol. 230. b. post med. as in answer to
catholics who he saw would obiecte to him that the devil was a liar, labor
to prevent the same by shewinge that the devil did sometimes speak truly to
an evil purpose, alledginge there to that end, the example of Judas, whom the
devil tempted with vrginge to him that he betrayed the innocent blood and so
brought him to despair, with like alledginge also the example of Cayne: all
this though true, is yet impertinent, for it is no part of the conference
between the devil and Luther (in all which or any part^ thereof, is not any one
syllable but so much as pointinge, to despair) as also the conference is
fully ended before the cominge in of these now objected words, which are the
only words of Luther himself, by him used upon the occasion beforesayde,
many years after the said conference, the which happened long before Luthers
publishinge the same in writtinge, whereof see heretofore in the beginning of
this section, in the margin at. k.
to the last. Also the very contrary thereof is signified, in that
disputacion as where satan (quite against all pretense of despair) sets
forth the great mercies of Christ, Luther. tom. 2. Witemb. fol. 228. b.
paulo ante med. alleges the devil as saying to Luther. Nos spiritus reiecti
non fidimus illius misericordia, neque habemus eum pro mediat^re aut saluatore,
sed exhorrescimus vt saenum iudicem, eiusmodi fidem and non aliam and tu
habebat etc. ideo a Christo tanquam crudeli iudice confugiobatis ad S. Mariam
and sanctos, and illi erant mediatores inter ros and Christu^ sic erepta est
gloria Christo etc.
vrginge there the same, as a special argument against prayer to saints: and
no where in all that disputation extenuateth gods mercy: furthermore though
we should admit this pretense of despair for true, it is yet impertinent,
as making nothing to prove that the devil therefore did not instruct Luther
against the mass, for both of them may well stand together. Secondly as
concerning the the devils speakinge to Luther always in praeterito, as of
the time paste, it is egregiously false, for as in regard of his then former
saying of mass, the devil sometimes speaks to him as in the time paste, so
likewise in regard of Luthers present custom then continewed in saying
mass, he speaks also very often as in the time present, whereof In Luther
tom. 7. Witemb. the devil says to Luther. Sicut tu facis in missa etc. tua
autem missa contra institutionem Christi. (fol. 229. b. ante med.) tu solus in
angulo tacens and mutus, comedis solus, and bibis solus: etc. nemini tecum
communicas. (fol. 229. a. paulo p^st med.) Forsitan dices etiamsi alijs in
Ecclesia non portigam sacramentum, tamen ipse sumo, ipse mihi porrigo, etc.
(fol. 229. b prope initium.) and see next hereaf^^r. at. r. s. *.
diverse examples are evident. Thirdly as to the supposall of Luthers then
haueinge abandoned the mass. Whereof appears not so much as any one word
or syllable in all that long disputation set down by Luther, and the contrary
thereof is see heretofore. cap. 1. sect. 2. in the margin at. d.
(heretofore more specially signified) Yt is likewise but supposed and false,
as appears further most evidently and unanswerable by the many examples
heretofore alleged, not only of Luthers then foresaid iustifyinge against
the devil his then former saying of mass, as where he says to satan, see
next heretofore in the margin at. o. and see also Luthers like defense next
before in the margin at l. and in the text at m.
I celebrated mass in the intentention and faith of the church, and the
church did rightly believe etc. but also of the devils then therefore in
Luther. tom. 7. the devil replieth reprehendinge Luthers foresaid answer,
saying. Non est vt tu doceas me intentione^ Ecclesiae etc. (fo. 229 b. prope
fine^) tuae impietati praetexis nome^ and intentionem Ecclesiae, and misero hoc
fuco tuum ornas commentum etc. fol. 230. a. prope initium.
reprehendinge him, all which had been idle and improper if Luther him self
had bine then in deed allreadie persuaded against the mass: which foresaid
defense of the mass so then made as before by Luther, is in it self so
evident, that Baldwinus (as enforced) Balduinus de disput. Luthers cum diabolo
cap. 4.. 2. page 79. ante med. says. Disputanti diabolo, non scripture
argumentis, sed armis illis resistit Lutherus, quae tum maxim in Ecclesia
Romana fidei papisticae fulcra erant, qualia sunt intentio and fides Ecclesiae,
vnctio sacerdotalis etc.
confesses the same, betakinge himself therein to a most miserable and
desperate His evasion is in these words there next after following, viz. Quibus
experiri voluit Lutherus, number quid aduersario praecipua Romanae fidei capita
oppugnanti resistere valeat: as thereby pretendinge that Luther then made this
defense of the mass, not seriously and as himself then in deed believed, but
only experimentallie as but to see if the same would enhable him to resist
the devil: so he upon mere supposall, not haueinge any one word in Luther
to supporte the same. But how friuolouse is the evasion? for whereas yt
appears from Luthers own words, that he not only for very fear did
sweat and his heart tremble, but also that he was by others example made
affraide of being slain by the devil (next heretofore in the margin at. b.
d.) whereto Luther further adds saying. Nec enim humanum cor horrendum hunc
and ineffabilem impetum nisi Deus illi adsit perferre potest etc. ( Luther tom.
7. fol. 230. a. post med.) all which Baldwinus him self enlarges. ( l. de
disput. etc. cap. 10. page 159. 160. etc.) Is it now probable that Luther
being in this fear and agony, should dare so to trifle, as in trial of
conclusions with the devil, to use no other defense against him (as in very
deed throughout all that dispute he does not) then the
evasion, as also the devil in respect of Luthers then foresaid known
doctrine of mass, begins his first dispute with Luther, as only at first
but suggestinge, authority of the churches? as prouinge mass for good and the
same but dissemblinglie and contrary to his own then opinion had of the
mass, can any thing be supposed more enforced or improbable?
what if mass were horrible idolatry? what if Christ's body were not present
there? Furthermore this point appears yett further evident, by the devils
foresaid speakinge to Luther as in Luther. tom. 7. Witemb. de missa priuata
and vnct. sacerd. fol. 229. a. circa med. alleges the devil saying to him.
stas ibi solus, and putas (lo herby Luthers then present opinion) Christum
propter te instituisse sacramentum, and protenus in tua priuata missa te
conficere corpus and sa^guinem Domini?
the present tense, and emonge other as where he says to Luther (in full
discovery or proof of Luthers then judgment) thou do stand at the altar
alone and doste think (not hereby Luthers then present opinion) that Christ
ordained the sacrament for thee, and that in thy private mass thou do
consecrate the body and blood of our Lord: and again, Luther vbi supra. fol.
229. b.
a man cannot baptize him self, not confirm him self, nor make him self
priest etc. Luther. ibidem says. Haec enim sunt vestra septem sacramenta, si
nunc nullu^ ex sacramentis vestris, aliquis ipse pro seipso facera potest, qui
fit vt tibi soli hoc summu^ sacramentum facere velis?
if now a man cannot execute any of your seven sacraments for himself, why
then will thou celebrate this chief sacrament only for thy self? whereby yt
very clearlie appears, that whenever this his disputation with the devil
happened, or how soever him self was then before (according to this confessed
See hereafter. cap. 3. sect. 3.
inconstancy) altered or changed in opinion (which yet in this point appears
not) that yet notwithstanding, at the time of this dispute, he did affirm and
defend both the mass, and all the seven sacraments: Fourthlie as concerning
the last main point, which is, that the devil hereby intended no
disputation with Luther, but only a temptation upon evident truths by Luther
then before known and confessed: yt is of all other most false, as appears
by Luther him self, who both in the beginning and end thereof expresselie
terms it, a for the devils beginning thereof see heretofore. sect. 2. at.
l and Luther. himself, tom. 7. Witemb. fol. 230. a. ante med. Having ended
his own report of his said disputation with the devil, says thereupon.
Haec fere erat disputationis summa: whereto do but add, that this conference
between the devil and Luther being so confessedlie a disputation, argues the
matter so then houlden disputable, to have been at the beginning of that
dispute not agreed upon between them, but in controversy, whereas withal yt
appears by the whole passage of their conference, that the same nothing
concerns despair or the just judgments of God (for thereof not any one
word passes between them in that whole discource, but only the lawfulnes or
vnlaufulnes of the mass; so evidently was yt the point in controversy, and
then disputed of:
disputacion. Also by the many long protesta^t-like See heretofore. sect. 2.
atn.
arguments at large there by the deull begun and prosecuted (and by Luther
him self so many years after see heretofore. sect. 2. at r. s.
urged) purposely to give color against the mass: and most evidently by
example of As for example satan there endeauoreth to persuade Luther, that he
being a wicked man could not consecrate the Sacrament, saying to that end
unto Luther. Non consecrasse in Missa tua, sed obtulisse and adorasse tantum
panem and vinum and alijs adorandum proposuisse: hic vides in tua missa primum
deesse personam quae consecrare possit, nempe Christianum hominem, etc. cum
igitur tu non sis persona quae consecrare possit, etc. sic vt tu nec sis verus
sacerdos nec panis verum corpus Christi. (fol. 229. a. circa med.) and again.
Age pro me vbi scriptum est quod homo impius incredulus, possit assistere
altari Christi ac consecrare and conficere in fide Ecclesiae? (ibidem fol. 229.
b. post med.
other like points alleged in the margin, whereto the devil in like sort
then endeauored to persuade Luther, but could could not prevail, for that all
this was most clerelie contrary to Luthers opinion, see hereafter, cap. 2.
sect. 8. and in Balduinus de disput. Lutheri cum diabolo, printed ^slebij Anno
1603. cap. 18. page 280. initio, and in Hospin. in histor. sacram. part. 2.
fol. 14. b. circa med. Who both allege to this end, Luthers sayings taken
from this his very foresaid book, de missa priuata and unction sacerdotum:
and see also Hospinian most clerelie in histor. sacram. part. 2. fol. 82. a.
paulo ante med. and Luther in libro contra Anabaptistas, says. Nos fatemur
etc. We confess that there is in the papacy most of the christian good etc.
true scripture, true baptism, the true sacrament of the altar, the true keys
unto remission of sins: etc. see this saying of Luthers mentioned and
acknowledged by master Whitaker de Ecclesia. printed. 1599. contrau. 2.
quaest. 5. page 369. ante med. and Luther. in loc. commu. printed. 1594. class
5. cap. 55. page 109. fine, says. Papistae qui per se blasphemi sunt, tamen
quando baptizant, communicant, absoluant, etc. valet ministerium ipsorum; so
far was Luther from acknowledging for errors, those points which were for such
objected to him by satan.
not prevail: so far then was the devil from only temptinge Luther to
despair upon evident truths then before by him known and confessed: an
evasion so untrue, that master D. Sutlife (had but any show of truth been
therein) would never have so as before, betaken him self to the other
foresaid improbabilitie of Luthers pretended See next heretofore at. e. f. g.
dream. The last of whom I find any mention to offer help in relief of
Luther from this so known scandal, is master D. Moreton, who as all
dispayringe of the other former answers, betaketh him self to a new evasion,
and what is that? He takes no exceptions to satan's sensible conference had
with Luther, nor to his persuadinge him against the mass, but in steed of
answer, obiecteth master Moreton in his apologia catholica. part. 1. printed.
Londini. 1605. l. 2. cap. 21. page 351. ante med. says. Apud Surium liquet
diabolum in specie angelica apparuisse, and statim abbatem vt missam celebraret
hortabatur, alledginge there in his margin. Delrius Ies. l. 4. de magia. c. 1.
qu. 3.. 5.
Delrius (a Jesuit) affirminge that the devil appeared to an Abbot in the
form of an Angel, and persuaded him to say mass: supposinge this for the
truth, and the whole truth of Delrius his report, how unapt yet is the
example thereof? for here is no long and labored disputacion to prove the
mass good, nor did the party here assent to the devil, nor did the mass
thereupon first begin to be public, as in the other example we charge the
devil with long framed disputacion, and many protestant like arguments
against the mass, and Luther as overcome therewith, to have abandoned the
mass, then and many ages before generally Danaeus de Antichristo, printed.
Geneuae 1576. page 101. initio, says. Anno a Christo passo 666 palam and
public constitutum est in Dei Ecclesia blasphemum illud Antichristi regnum
etc. certe hoc godem tempore and anno missa illa and execrabilis and papistica,
vere mortis Christi abolitio passim latin celebrari caepit: and the centurie
writers cent. 6. cap. 6. col. 336. lin. 34. recitinge the doctrine of Gregorius
Turonensis who flourished An. dom. 570. say. Meminit (Gregorius Turonensis)
and Catonem presbiterum Auernorum lue grassante in eo loco mansisse and missas
dixisse, vt intelligas missarum nunc solennia passim loca omnia compleuisse:
and Lutherus (Doctor and public professor in the university of Witemb.) de
sacrificio missatico, printed. 1604. page 377. fine, says. Libenter concedo
Idolomaniam pontificiam cuius neruus est sacrificium missaticum, totum paene
terrarum orbem inuasisse praesertim superiore proximo millenario: thus much for
the generality of mass duringe the last thousand years: And for the
generality thereof at Luthers first impugninge the same. Luther de captiu.
Babil. cap. 1. extant. tom. 2. Witemb. fol. 68. a. circa med. says of his own
then writing against the mass. Rem arduam, and quam forte sit impossible
conuelli, aggredior, vt quae tanto saeculorum vsu firmata, omniumque consensu
probata sic insederit, vt necesse sit etc. paene vniuersam Ecclesiarum faciem
tolli and mutari etc. sed Christus meus viuit etc.
received throughout the Christian world, and that in this manner now in this
last age began the new appearinge doctrine of Luther, and so many of his
followers in impugninge of mass: neither is this all, for master Moreton has
in his report hereof (besides his this making the party to be an Abbot,
makes yt more probable that he was then a priest:
misnameinge the abbot for the moncke) committed as yet (to think the best)
further negligence, in omitting both which is there next precedent and
followinge in his author, as namely, that the words of Delrius (in the place
cited by master Moreton, vttred upon occasion to show how the devil often
goes about to deceive us by persuadinge us to do things of them selves good,
but in an evil manner, whereof he there gives many examples) are as
follows; Item si demon suadeat contra canones etc. hoc iudicio B. Simeon
monachus Triueriensis eum deprehendit, narratur historia ab Eneruino Abbate
(apud Sur. 1. Iunij) in verticem Sinai iussu superiorum cum missus fuisset ibi
habitaturus, nocturnis horis, illi specie Angelica demon apparuit, and vt
missam celebrat hortatur: ipse nec plane dormiens nec perfect vigila^s,
contradicit non debere sine praesbiterij ordine aliquem hoc ministerium
implere: contra inimicus instat: etc. whereby it appears that the devil did
not make this persuasion to the Abbot (for the Abbot whom Surius alleges is
but there porter thereof) but to Simeon a moncke, who as there afterward more
fully yet appears, being not as yet priest but deacon, refused to say mass
the devil uses to persuade against the canons etc. and that accordingly the
party whom the devil here so persuaded to say mass, vt supra at. b.
was not yett priest, a persuasion I confess fittinge for the devil, and but
answerable to Luthers known see hereafter, cap. 2. sec. 8.
doctrine: as for master D. Moretons repairinge of this breach by his other
alleged example of master Moreton. in his apolog. cathol. part. 2. printed.
1606. in his animaduersions in the end of that book in l. 2. c. 21. says.
Hanc rimulam nouo exemplo resarciam, etc. and then alleges as is here in the
text.
the devils commandinge to buy a bell and to bestow yt upon a poor church,
whereby the faithful might be every sunday called to divine service, besides
that it is impertinent: for hereupon were not bells first brought in as upon the
other (mass) then before general, became then first contradicted: neither was
here any point of doctrine disputed or examined, only master Moretons
alleged author there reportinge how spiritts will couennante to attend and
become servants unto men for a certain term; after report made in this
kind of the spirits that thus became servants to the earl of Foitz
(mentioned by Froisard) and to Cornelius Agrippa, he then alleges a reported
example of a spirit, who upon like couenante demanded five shillings wages,
which he gave to buy a Bell etc. as intendinge (says the author) by such
hipocriticall deceit, the greater gain and assurance of the parties soul:
Delrius disquis. magic. lib. 2. qu. 30. sect. 3. fine. What resemblance now or
coulor has this, whereby to excuse Luthers foresaid instruction from the
devil against the mass, and Luthers thereupon then puttinge down of mass?
impertinent, it is also (no less then is master Moretons other foresaid
answer) though admitted for true and not mistaken, most clearly avoided by
master Moreton him self: for whereas these are alleged as in excuse of the
devils persuadinge and instructinge Luther against the mass, and as supposinge
the same for true, master D. Moreton to the contrary professes, that (these
notwithstanding) he did. so says master Moreton in his direct answer unto
etc. Theophilus Higgons etc. printed. in 4. London. by Edmond Weauer. 1609.
page 5. post med.
Seriously enquire into Luthers confession hereof, with a purpose that if any
such thing should (says he) sensibly appear to me, then utterly to abhor
his name, and suspect all his doctrine: so little confidence, did master
Moreton repose in this his last devised answer.

IIII.
HItherto concerning our learned adversaries endeavor, in excuse of Luther
from the now objected scandal, whose several answers thereunto, being more
variable and emonge themselves, disagreeinge, then were the dissentinge Daniel.
13.54.55.58.
answers of those two elders, that were examined, concerning Susanna, and
thereby, and otherwise sufficiently as before said discovered; I will now
conclude this point with the answerable acknouledgment in so clear a case, of
our learned adversaries themselves. First then, Hospinianus (a See Gualters
testimony of Hospinian in his epistle to him, placed in Simlerus. orat. de
vita and obitu Petri martyris, printed. 1563. fol. 48.
prime man emonge the forreyne Caluinistes) who acknowledges Luther for
Hospinian. in histor. sacram. part. 2. in his prolegem. prope finem, says, of
Luther, Suinglius, and Calvin, hos tres viros nosco a Deo ornatos fuisse
multis excellentibus donis and virtutibus, ingenio luce doctrinae caelestis
etc. zelo gloriae Dei etc. diuinitusque formatos and excitatos, ad Ecclesiam
Christi his postremis temporibus, tyrannide ac tenebris Antichristi
horribiliter oppressam, in libertatem and lucem euangelij vindicantem, etc.
a man adorned with excellent guyftes, with the light of heavenly knowledge,
zeal of gods glory, and as diuinelie raised up to restore the ghospels light
etc. confesses (as enforced) in the very same book, most plainly in the
question saying. Hospinian. in histor. sacram. part. 2. fol. 131. a. recitinge
out of Luthers works a part of the foresaid disputacion between the devil
and Luther, adds his own conceit thereof saying. De hac disputatione
narrat Lutherus plura, quorum summa est, se a diabolo edoctum esse, quod missa
priuata imprimis sit res mala, and rationibus diaboli conuictum aboleuisse eam:
In so much as Hospinian yet further in his first alphabetical table set before
his book, under the letter. c. and at the word colloquium, emonge the many
other colloquies had emonge Protestants by him there set down, does place
there emonge other this colloque between the devil and Luther, in these
words. Colloquium Luthericum diabolo in quo instituitur de erroribus missae:
and Hospinian. ibidem. fol. 26. a. versus finem, further says. An nescit,
quae Lutherus scribat. tom. 6. Ger. Ienensi. fol. 83. non de Angelo, sed de
ipsomet diabolo, qui noctu cum eo colloquium habuerit, cumque de multis
abusibus missae pontificiae edocuerit?
Luther reports many things of his disputacion had with the devil, the
substance whereof is, that him self was instructed by the devil, that the
mass was wicked, and that being overcome with satan's arguments, he did
(thereupo^) aba^don the mass: In like manner David Parens (the great
Caluiniste divine of Heydelberghe) acknowledge that Paraeus in catechristicarum
praelectionum libro 5. c. 17. page 257. says. In isto papistico enthymemate,
Lutherus seipso test, ex atro spiritu diaboli didicit rations cur damnanda
sit missa priuata and sacerdotum chrisma, ergo diaboli discipulus suit: In
isto, inquam papistico enthymemate, antecedens negare non possunt Lutherani:
Luther learned his reasons against private mass from the devil: and Erasmus
(whom our adversaries esteem as indifferently Hereof see master Fox act.
mon. printed. 1563 page 404. a. fine.
affected toward Luther) affirms that Erasmus contra epistolam Lutheri non
sabriam:
Luther brings in, the disputacion of the devil in his book de missa
angulari, and ascribes to the devil such strong arguments, as he says; He
could not answer: affirminge further from Luthers words, that ibidem.
the devil did impugn Luthers mind about mass with strong weapons: In
which respect the Caluiniste divines of Zuriche do term Luther In their
confession. page 25. 26. 127.
the minister of satan, affirminge there further that, he wrote his books
(impulsu spiritus satanae, cum quo disputationem instituit, quique vt videtur
Lutherum disputando superauit) by the suggestion of satan with whom he
disputed, and was therein by satan overcome; to forbear Luthers own further
assertion, of one or two of his deuiles hauntinge him whom he terms Luther.
in colloqu. mensal. Germ. edit. fol. 275. talkinge of the great familiarity
he had with diverse devils in so much as he walked with them diverse times in
his dormitory, adds, that he had. Vnum atque alterum m^rabilem d^abolum a
quibus diligenter atque admodum intenti obseruatur, affirming then further,
that these were: Non vulgares sed magni daemones, imo doctores Theologiae inter
diabolos: and see further there. fol. 281.
great divines. Johannes Regius a learned Lutherane, and of great esteem
discerninge no probable excuse left remaininge for Luther, forbeareth not in
these extreemes to defend and justify Luthers foresaid confessed instruction
from the devil, saying thus perplexedlie thereof. Johannes Regius in his book
entitled liber Apologeticus etc. contra Bellarminum, printed M^lhusij Thuring.
in quarto. under the title consideratio censurae, page 123. circa med. says
of Luthers instruction from the devil: Quid hoc ad ministerium seu doctrinam
verbi diuini per Lutherum restauratum euertendum, aut ad missae etiam veritatem
stabiliendam? and vnde constat tibi malum ipsum fuisse spiritum, qui (Luthero)
hoc dixerit? and p^sito licet malus spiritus fuisset, non sequitur tamen mox
eum mentitum fuisse, quia and vera interdum diaboli loquuntur, quando dicunt id
cuius scriptura testis est:
What is this either to overthrow the ministry and doctrine of Luther, or to
establish the truth of the mass? How does yt appear that it was an evil
spirit that thus informed Luther? and if it were an evil spirit, yet follows
it not that therefore he should lie, for the devils sometimes speak truly,
as when they say that whereof the scripture is witness: Hitherto of Luthers
reported instruction from the devil against the mass, which being then
before, the general See next heretofore. cap. 1. sect. 3. in the margin at z.
fine.
received doctrine of the Christian world, and for such confessed duringe (at
the least) the last ibidem. in the margin at z. initio.
nine hundredth years precedent to Luthers foresaid conference with the devil,
was thereupon by Luthers persuasion and doctrine, abrogated and quite put down
in diverse contries: of which foresaid conference between the devil and
Luther, as our adversaries may not make so very strange, if they but rember
the like revelations confessedlie pretended by see hereafter, cap. 4. sect. 4.
at d. e. l. m. q.
Carolostadius master Fox. act. mon. printed. 1596. page 90. b. circa med.
and also in apoclypsin, printed 1596. page 364. and 365. initio. affirms that
he was instructed to understand by the 42. months mentioned, apocal. 13.5.
the 294. years of the primitive churches first persecution, reportinge ( in
Apocal. page 365.) how that the exposition hereof, was delivered to him as it
were by divine inspiration, namely (to use his own words) arcano quodam
admonitionis sibilo, sine voce tamen, etc. Which his exposition is now sithence
rejected, and instead thereof, is by the said. 42. months understood the
last 1260. years before Luther, by master Naper, master Brocard, master
Gifforde, and master Brightman (with many others) in their several
commentaries upon the apocalips. 11.2.3. and 12.6. and 13.5.
Suinglius, (q) master Fox, and the many other late concerning the many
like pretended revelations of other late nouellistes, see the protestant
treatise thereof specially made entitled, Apocalypsis insignium aliquot
haeresiarcharum, qua visiones and insomnia ipsis per somnia patefactae,
blasphemias puta mauditas, ac deliramenta enthesiastica reuelantur etc. printed
Lugouni Batauorum. M.D.C.VIII.
nouellistes spronge from Luther, so yet also is it (all pretended answers to
the contrary notwithstanding) of such confessed importance, that our learned
adversary master D. Moreton (as before said) professes that (says he) See
master D. Moretons words heretofore, cap. 1. sect. 3. fine at. g.
if any such thing should sensibly appear to me, then utterly to abhor
Luthers name, and suspecte all his doctrine: to his answerable performance
whereof even from my heart I say Amen: referringe the final event unto the
graciouse providence of him, Sapientia, 8.1.
qui attingit a fine ad finem fortiter, and disponit omnia suauiter: And thus
much briefly concerning satan's arguments against Luther and the mass (which
arguments of satan says Balduinus were Balduinus de disput. Lutheri etc. cap.
17. page 252. sets down the title of that. 17. cap. in these words. Ea
qua satan B. Luthero obiecerat cum SS. scriptura and communi praxi congruere.
consonante with the scriptures) and concerning also Luthers confessed
instruction had from the devil, against (which I will conclude in Origens
words: so says. Origin. Homil. 3. in Exodum ante med.
Orandum nobis est, vt dignetur Dominus aperire os nostrum, vt possimus and
contradicentes reuincere, and obturare os quod diabolus aperuit: referringe
withal to the judgment of our English Caluinistes them selves, whether now
they may safely profess (as they do) to so says master Whitaker in his
answer to the ten reasons of Campion Englished, and printed. 1606. reason 8.
fine, and page 259. prope initium.
reverence Luther for their father so says master Fox in his act. mon.
printed. 1563. page 400. a. fine.
by the industry of whom, it pleased the Lord to reform and reedifie the
desolate ruin of (their) religion.

CHAPT. II.
LVther haueinge thus abandoned the mass and entered into familiarity with the
devil, what dare he not now adventure? he venteth forth and obtrudeth to the
world sondrie strange and nouel opinions, all of them tendinge to liberty of
life and doctrine, some of which we will recite in order as follows: As
first. 1. in behalf of the people he says, Luther. tom. 2. Witemb. fol. 375.
a. initio, says. Qui volunt perhiberi rectores Ecclesiarum and pa^tores ouium
Christ, habent quidem potestatem docendi, sed oues debent far iudicium, vtrum
illi vocem Christi vel alienorum proponant, etc. quapropter decernant,
constituant, ordinen^ papa, ep^scopi co^cilia etc. quicquid velint, non
impediemus, sed penes nos qui oues Christi sumus, and vocem eius audimus, erit
iudicium, vtrum vera and consentanea voci pastoris nostri, proponant vel non,
ac ipsi nobis cedere, nostrae censurae ac sententiae subscribere and
obtemperare debent: and next before there, in fol. 374. b. fine, he says.
Christus adimit episcopis, doctoribus and concilijs tum ius, tum potestatem
iudicandi de doctrina, ac tradit illa omnibus Christianis in genere.
The governors of churches and pastors of Christ's sheep, have power indeed to
teach, but the sheep ought to give Judgment etc. wherefore let the people,
bushops, and counsels, decree what they please, we will not let yt, but we
who are Christ's sheep and hear his voice, are to judge whether those
things be true which they propound or no, and they ought to give place and
subscribe to our censure and Judgment etc. is this the saying of a sheep or
of a woolfe?

II.
Secondly he taught to the gteate danger of christendom, that In Luther.
tom. 2. Witemb. assert. damnat. per Leonem decimum. art. 34. fol. 10. b. the
said. 34. article. so specially condemned, was, praeliari aduersus Turcas est
repugnare Deo visitanti iniquitates nostras per illos: and in his further
explication there. fol. 111. a. of that article, he not retracteth or
qualifieth it, but professinge to defend it, says (emonge his much other
defense thereof) Sicut Michaeas qui and ipse odiosus erat, quia non prophetabat
nisi malum, dicam and ipso meo Achab, ite praeliamini contra Turcas, and
resistatis virgae Dei, and cadatis sicut and Achab cecidit:
to war against the Turks, was to resist God visitinge our sins by them,
the which opinion he did afterward more at large defend concludeinge and
saying he Luther. ibidem. fol. 111. a. paulo post med.
that has ears to hear, let him hear and abstain from the Turkishe
wars, whiles the popes name remains under heaven: I have said:
Insinuatinge his yett further dissuasion from Luther. in loc. commu. printed
1594. class. 4. cap. 46. page 84. initio, says. Impia and inanis fiducia est
in munitionibus, vallis, bombardis: etsi quando Deo ita fuerit visum, vt Turca
grassetur in Germaniam, non tuebuntur nos aggeres isti, etc. quando genua
flectimus and clamamus ad creatorem nostrum, is poterit igneos muros nobis
circumdare, ego odi molem istam vallorum and munitionum quia nihil aliud est
quam perditio pecunia and ostentatio extremae stultitiae: id potius agendum est
vt firmiter statuamus nos esse in manu creatorit, and non tantum nos, sedetiam
hosts, and diabolos etc. thus advises he that neglectinge ordinary means,
we should depend upon miraculouse help immediately from God:
fortifications to be made against the Turk which his doctrine (master Fulkes
vain whereas master D. Fulke in his apology against Frarine, page 31.
initio, excuses Luthers sayings, as meante of those christianes which live
under the turks dominions, besides that Luther him self after the
condemnation of his foresaid. 34. article, alleges no such qualified sense
in excuse thereof, but professedlie defends it, his also further mencioninge
of the pope, and of God visitinge, our sins by the Turk, and likewise the
further wholle scope and passage of his discource, directly crosses master
Fulkes enforced excuse: in so much as Roffensis did purposelie write against
Luthers doctrine thereof, in confut. Assert. Luther. printed. 1523. art. 34.
and Luther him self in his book de bello contra Turcas, affirms further,
that the devil by gods permission did govern, and hinder the counsels and
assemblies of the princes of Germany, for no other cause but that his article
of not warringe against the Turk might remain in force and incondemned: also
Luther in epistola contra duo mandata imperialia, purposelie crosses the
emperors aid against the Turk saying. Oro cunctos pios Christianos ne vllo
modo sequantur vel in militiam ire vel dare aliquid contra Turcas: etc. and
L^the^. in determine. doctorum paris. impres. Norimberg. 1525. says. Vt libere
animu^ meum aperiam, hoc aperte de me pradico, quod tam inuitus Turcam gladio
impeterem, quam Christianum fracrem.
excuse thereof notwithstanding) was See Belforest. in cosmogra. l. 2. c. 7.
col. 579.
so grateful to the Turk, that (as Luthers own scholar reports) the sea
this thus plainly reported by Manlius in loc. commu. page 636. fine.
turkishe Emperor (to the great shame of Luther hearing thereof) demanded
our Christian Ambassador, how oulde Luther was, and wished him younger,
promisinge to be his good Lord: this point was so apparentlie reproueable, in
Luther, that our learned adversary master Haruie says, so says master
Haruey in his theological discource, printed at London. 159^. page 115. initio.
the gospel is dispersed in most parts of the earth, as much and more then
the (Turks) Alcoran, howsoever Luther in a furiouse imitation of Micheas rapte
out etc. as if he desired rather the name of a prophet emonge infidels, then a
friend to Christians.

III.
Thirdly, as concerning the canonical scriptures, if it be true which master
Fulke in his co^futation of purgatory, printed. 1577. page 214. circa med.
Fulke says, that whosoever denies the authority of the holy scriptures,
thereby bewrays himself to be an heretic, what is then to be thought of
Luther, who denied sondrie parts thereof, and in in such respect taxed by
master see master D. Filde of the church l. 4. c. 24. fine, and page 252.
initio. a. in the text and margin at. *.
D. Feilde? Concerning the apocalips Bullinger gives testimony saying: D.
Bullinger upon the apocalips Englished. 1573. cap. 1. sermon. 1. fol. 2. a. post
med.
Martine Luther has as yt were sticked this book, by a sharp preface set
before his first edition of the new testament in duche, for which his
judgment, good and learned men were offended with him: and concerning the
epistle of S. James Luther says, so says Luther. in praefat. in epist.
Iacobi, in editione Ienense, how Luthers works have been after his death
corrupted and altered herein, is declared in the preface to the reader after..
at *.
the epistle of James is contentiouse, swellinge, dry, strawye, and unworthy
an apostolic spirit: which his judgment is confessed and defended by Luthers
own scholar Flaccus, Illiricus in his preface upon Saint James epistle,
says, Luther in his prefac. upon this epistle of James gives great reasons
why this epistle ought in no case to be accounted for a writtinge of
apostolic authority, unto which reasons I think every godly man ought to
yield:
Illiricus, whom master Thomas Beltearmeth, so says: master Bell. in his
regiment of the church, printed. 1606. page 28. fine.
a very famous writer and most worthy defender of the christian truth.
Also Luther says of the book of ecclesiastes, that it so says Luther. In
sermonibus conuiuialibus titulo de libris veteris and noui test. Rabenstocke.
l. 2. colloqu. latin. Lutheri cap. de vet. test.
has never a perfect sentence, and that the author of it had neither boots
nor spurs, but rode on a long stick, or in begginge shoes, as him self
did when he was a Friar: In like manner concerning S. Paul's epistle to the
Hebreues, Luthers impugninge thereof was so evident, that Oecola^padius. in
epistolam ad Hebreos, printed. in 8. Argentorat. 1534. in praefat. fol. 4. a.
initio. says. Lutherus in praefatione sua inquit, mihi videtur epistolam hanc
esse consutitiam ex multis, and non eandem rem ordinate tractare, addit etiam,
quod non ponit fundamentum fidei: etc. To which opinion of Luther,
Oecolampadius opposes saying there next after. Verum vindicabimus (hanc)
epistolam. ab vtraque hac nota.
Oecolampadius does therefore reprehende him therein: whereto might be added
(as in further explication of Luthers answerable opinion) the known judgment
of the Lutheranes yett to this day see this in Chemnitius his Enchiridion,
printed. 1590. page 63. and in Chemnitius his examen. Council. Trid. printed.
1578. part. 1. page 55. and 56. b. initio, and in Adamus Francisci in his
margarita Theolog. printed. Witemb. 1602. page 448. a. and see also in master
Whitaker against master William Raynoldes printed Anno 1590. in the book,
cap. 2. page 35. post med. his acknowledgment hereof.
reiectinge the epistles to the Hebrews, and of James, and Jude, the 2. epistle
of Peter, the 2. and 3. of John, and the Apocalips. As touching Luthers
translatinge of the scriptures, (wherein not to insiste upon many particulers)
how boulde was he in quyte omitting this excellent sentence, of this see next
hereafter sect. 10. at. m. n.
there are three that bear record in heaven the father the word and the
holy Ghost, and these three be one, as also in addinge else where to the text
the word, alone? so as where the Apostle says Romans 3.28.
we account a man to be justified by faith without the works of the law,
Luther to color his doctrine of only faith, translateth in steed thereof,
justified by faith alone: so translateth Luther in his duche bibles:
and being admonished of his thus adding to the text the word, alone, he
ragethe thereat, openly Luther. tom. 5. Germ. fol. 141. and 144. answers to
the objection thereof saying: Sic volo sic iubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas,
etc. Lutherus ita vult, and ait se esse doctorem super omnes doctores in toto
papatu, and concludes lastly, propterea debet (vox sola) in meo nouo
testamento manner, etia^ si omnes papasini ad insaniam redigantur, tamen non
eam inde tollent, paenitet me quod non addiderim and illas duas voces omnibus
and omnium, vid. sine omnibus operibus omnium legum:
repentinge himself, that he had not translated yt worse: this bouldnes in
Luther was so evident, that Suinglius therefore says to him Suinglius tom. 2.
in respons. ad Lutheri librum de sacramento, fol. 412. b. circa med. and 413.
a. post med. says. Verbum Dei corrump^s and adulteras Luthere etc. vt omnium
oculis expositus manifestus and publicus scripturae sacrae corruptor and
adulterator esse conspiciaris, quod coram nulla creatura vnquam poteris negare:
quo inquam pudore nos confundimur qui citra omnem modum magnifice de te
sensimus, nunc vero te talem experimus?
thou doste corrupt (Luther) the word of God etc. thou art seen to be a
manifest and common corrupter and peruerter of the holy scriptures, how much
are we ashamed of thee who have esteemed thee beyond all measure, and now
find thee to be such a man? and Keckermannus (a learned Caluiniste) in like
sort confesses that, Keckermannus in System. SS. Theolog. printed Anno 1602.
l. 1. page 188. circa med. says. Lutheri versio germanica in vet. test.
praesertius in Job and prophetis, naeuos suos habet non exiguos:
Luthers duche translation especially of Job, and the prophets, has no small
errors: and the like is yet further confessed of Luther by Bucer in dialog.
contra Melancthonem, says. In vertendis certe and explanandis scripturis
manifesti sunt, neque pauci Lutheri lapsus:
Martin Bucer, besides this denial and mi-stranslatinge of the scriptures,
Luther was not abashed to charge with errors such very Luther. tom. 2. Witemb.
printed. 1562. de captiu. Babylon. cap, de extrem. vnct. fol. 86. b. ante med.
answers to Saint James his saying (Jacob. 5.14.15.) Si vspiam deliratum est,
hoc loco (Iacobi) praecipue deliratum est, etc. tamen si etiam esset (epistola)
Iacobi Apostoli, dicerem non licere Apostolum sua authoritate sacramentum
instituere etc. Hoc enim ad solum Christum pertinet: so he before he had fully
denied S. James epistle, and as yet admittinge the same for his epistle.
writings and Luther. tom. 7. Witemb. fol. 231. b. circa med. says. Non
moramur si clamitent, ecclesia, ecclesia, patres, patres, etc. scimus enim
ipsos prophetas vt Dauidem and Nathan lapsos esse, adeoque ipsos etiam
Apostolos, sicut Petrus Galat. 2. satis grauiter lapsus est in re maxima
pertinente ad ipsam doctrina^ and libertatem euangelij etc. vnum autem and
solum Christum audimus etc. verbo Christi iudicamus apostolos, ecclesiam,
adeoque ipsos angelos; audimus apostolos and ecclesiam quatenus afferunt verbum
Christi etc. si verbum Christi and signu^ non adserunt, non audimus etc. and
see further hereafter, cap. 3. sect. 4. at. z.
doctrine as him self then acknowledged for apostolic, not forbearing under
the pretexte of gods word to vt sup. at the figure. 9.
make him self thereby judge of both: and yett further to say (which
Suinglius disliketh) Suinglius tom. 2. ad Lutheri confess. respons. fol. 478.
a. ante med. says. Cum Lutherus in verborum sensu misere fallitur and errat,
Dei est vt ipsum excuset, etc. si seductus and falsus sum (inquit) Deus me
seduxit and fefellit, nam huius verbo me totum commiseram, interim vero non
animaduertit quod and Romanus Pontifex, and omnis aliorum haereticorum turba,
idem illud dicere possent etc.
if I be deceived, God has deceived me, etc.

IIII.
FOurthelie as concerning faith, Luther depends so much thereon, that he
reproves such protestants as houlde that, Luther upon the Galathians
Englished; 1575. in c. 2. fol. 67. b. post med.
neither can faith be true faith without charity, and those likewise who
teach, Luther. ibid. fol. 67. circamed.
though my faith be never so perfect, yet if this faith be without charity,
I am not justified, tearminge it Luther ibidem. fol. 68 b. prope finem, and
fol. 126. b. and see Luther in his sermons englished. 1578. page 204. circa med.
impiety to affirm that faith except it be adorned with charity justifies
not: nay he proceeded so far as he doubted not to say. Luther tom. 1. prop. 3.
Fides nisi sit sine etc. faith unless yt be without, even the least good
works, does not justify, nay, yt is no faith, which saying of his
master, D. Couel specially acknowledges and recites, tearminge yt master
Couel. in his defense of master Hoker, printed. 1603. page 42. ante med.
harshe, and master Couel. ibid
justly called in question by the church of Rome: he also further taught that
a Luther. tom. 2. Witemb. de captiu. Babil. fol. 74. a^ post med. says. Ita
v^des quam dives sit homo Christianus sieve baptisatus, qui etiam volens non
potest perdere salutem suam quantiscunque peccatis, nisi nolit credere: nulla
enim peccata possunt eumdamnare nisi sola incredulitas, and master Whitaker,
de Ecclesia contra Bellarmin. printed. 1599. controu. 2. quaest. 5. page 301.
circa med. says. Nos dicimus si quis actum fidei habeat ei peccata non
nocere, id quidem Lutherus affirmat, id nos omnes dicimus.
christian or baptized persons is so rich, that all though he were willinge
thereto, yet he could not lose his salvation by any sin how great so ever,
unless he would not believe: whereof he gives his reason else where saying.
Luther. in loc. commu. class. 5. cap. 27. page 68. initio. ^aithe. Non personam
sacit malam nisi incredulitas, vt nihil iustificat nisi fides, ita nihil peccat
nisi incredulitas.
As nothing justifies but faith, so nothing sins but vnbeleeffe.

V.
FIuethlie as concerning good works, Luther taught that Luther. in his
sermons Englished 15^8. page 147. ante med.
works take their goodness of the woorker: and that Luther. ibidem. page 276.
ante med.
no work is dissallowed of God, unless the author thereof be dissallowed
before, saying thereof further, Luther. ibidem. page 278. ante med.
such a one works nothing but good works, neither can yt be but good,
which he being good before shall do: so as by his doctrine, good works make
not a man good, nor evil works make not a man wicked, but all depends upon
the haueinge or want of faith, the Luther. to. 1. Witemb. fol. 67. a. circa
med. says. Hanc (fidem) qui habet etiam si peccet non damnatur. etc. Hic est
enim filius delicatus qui non potest offendere quicquid fecerit.
which (says he) who so ever has, is gods (delicate) or wannton son, who
cannot offend whatsoever he do: He did proceed so far against good works,
that he and his dearest scholar Dresserus in millenar. sext^, printed. 1598.
page 187. post med. says. Nicolaus Amsdorphius Witembergae primum, cum
^uthero and Philippo theologiae studia coluit, postea episcopatui Mumburgico a
Frederico electore praefectus est, and a Luthero inauguratus, and see the same
further affirmed by master Cowper in his chronicle, fol. 314. a. circa med. by
Osiander. centur. 16. page 338. initio, and Luther tom. 2. Witemb. fol. 487. b.
initio. writes specially to Amsdorphius, tearminge him optime vir: and
Osiander. iucentur. 15. l. 14. c. 1. page 490. initio, says, Natus est hoc
Anno Dom. Nicolaus Amsdorphius bonus and sincerus theologus.
Amsdorphius (who ever the divines of Wi^emb. in their preface set before the
book entitled. Acta theologorum Witembergensium and Patriarchae Constantinop.
printed. Anno 1584. fol. 7. a. initio, says. Inter Lutherum Bre^tium
Amsdorphium Sarcerium etc. summus semper fuit consensus, summa animorum
co^iunctio etc.
agreed with Luther in doctrine and of whom Luther said, in Hospinian. in
concord. discord. printed. 1607. fol. 120. b. fine, yt is said. Is fecit
mentionem Amsdorphij de quo Lutherus dixisset, spiritus meus requiescit in
Amsdorphio, and Wellerus, nemo tantum hausit de spiritu Lutheri ac Amsdorphius:
see this also in Bale his examen recitationum Selnecer. page 92. post med.
printed. 1582.
my spirit shall rest upon Amsdorphius) affirmed that, see Nicholaus
Amsdorphius his book entitled. Quod bona opera sunt perniciosa ad salutem,
see also Osiander. cent. 16. l. 3. cap. 31. page 669. circa med. reprehendinge
Amsdorphius herein: and see further hereof, acta colloquij Aldeburgens.
printed. 1570. page 120. sect. 11. initio, and page 443. paulo post initium,
and page 29^. paulo ante med. Where it is said: Scripsit Amsdorphius and post
eum, vel per eum Flaccius, non solum necessaria sed perniciosa, esse opera ad
salutem: and see Luther alleged in prooffe of this opinion in act. 15.
colloqu. Aldeburg. page 205 post med. and fine: and see Amsdorphius further
reprehended herein by John Bale, in his examen recitationum Selneceri, printed.
M.IC.XXCII. page 92. prope finem. the more boulde therefore was master D.
Willet, to term our report hereof an impudent Slander: in his Antilogiae,
printed. 1603. page 19. post med.
good works are not only not necessary to salvation, but also hurtful to
yt: and the same not in any qualified sense, Amsdorphius piae memoriae, so
called in act. colloqu. Aldeburge. page 206. circa med.
but so grossly and intolerable, that sondrie protestant writers, who
acknowledge Amsdorphius for ibidem. page 205. fine and 206. initio, yt is said
hereof. Nos quidem ipsos (Lutherum and Amsdorphium) inter se commitumus, hanc
propositionem non vsurpari:
a man (otherwise) of godly memory, do yett in this profess to Luther. in
sermon. de Moyse, and see Luther. tom. 3. Witemb. printed. 1583. fol. 6. b.
initio. and prope finem, and fol. 7. a. initio. he says: In promulgatione
decalogi Exodus 20. Cum inquit ego sum Dominus Deus tuus qui eduxi te etc. ad
nos and reliquas gentes non pertinent quae hic dicuntur etc. falso ergo
phanatici lege Moysi nos onerant. etc. Luther was so reproueable herein, that
the divines of the count Palatine in their, admonitio christiana de libro
concordiae, printed. 1581. page 209. fine, say. Non difficile est ex libris
Lutheri, proferre non pauca in quibus ballucinatio tam est manifesta etc. and
then. page 211. initio. they allege emonge other this saying of Luther. Sicut
non curat ius Saxonicum, sic nec ingeratur nobis Moses, nos in nouo testamento
Moses, nec videre, nec audire volumus: etc. at quomodo conueniunt haec cum
toties repetius seuerissimis Dei praeceptis, Exodus 20. numer. 33. etc. and
Hospinian. in his concordia discor. printed. 1607. fol. 225. a. circa med.
says, of Luthers errors. Similia multa ex Lutheri scriptis adduci possunt,
veluti quod scribit, nos in nouo testamento Mosem, nec videre, nec audire
volumus: and Luther himself, in colloqu. mensal. Germ. fol. 125. and 135. yet
further says: Ad Iudaeos pertinet lex Moysis, neque nos ligat deinceps: cum
quispiam Moysen tibi proponit cum suis praeceptis, teque cogere vult vt ea
observes, tum dic, abi ad Iudaeos cum tuo Moyse, etc. Moysen cum sua lege non
volo ego habere, est enim Christi Domini hostis.
leave both him and Luther to themselves: Hereto might be further added Luthers
known doctrine against the decalogue or ten commandments as (s) not
apertaininge (in his opinion) to christianes, wherein he is censured as
unworthy by protestants them selves.

VI.
SIxtlie concerning marriage and divorce, Luther teaches saying, Luther.
sermon. de matrimonio.
si nolit vxor aut non possit, veniat ancilla: if the wife will not, or (by
reason of infirmity) cannot come, let the maid come; a saying so absurd,
that master Whitaker thus recitinge the same and answeringe thereto, that
Luther hereby meant first, to divorce from the wife, and then after to marrye
the maid, is yet enforced to Whitaker. contr. Camp. printed. 1604. rat. 8.
recitinge these next foresaid objected words, page 112. fine, does
afterward. page 150 circa med. not denyinge any part of the said words,
say as in answer thereto, Lutheri autem istam de hoc diuortij genere
sententiam ego minime defendo.
to disclaim in defendinge Luther therein: also Luther further advises the
wife to say unto her infirm husband, says Luther in sermo de matrim. in tom.
5. Witemb. printed. 1554. fol. 120. a. initio, and ibidem. fol, 120. b. versus
finem, he says, Quod si frater absque harede ex hac vita migrarit, oportebat
vxorem proximo mariti sui consanguineo nubere: etc. quod vt iam non est
praeceptum, sic nec vetitum: and the like he says of Polygamie next hereafter
at. n.
Ecce mi marite etc. Behoulde husband you cannot perform the frendshipe you
owe me, you have deceived my youthful body, be content I pray you that I
bargain a secret marriage with your brother, or some next of your kenred, in
such sort as you may still bear the name, and your goods may not pass to
strangers etc. this council I gave when I was yett in fear of the pope, but
now my mind should be to give other (worser) council, namely that layinge my
hands upon the locks of such a husband etc. I would shake him as the
proverb is and that vehemently (till he assented:) a saying so absurd and
without all defense, that the protestant author in his answer for the time, to
the defense of the Censure printed. 1583. coming by course to make answer to
this their objected saying; only says. Why should Luthers opinion in some
one point or other not What no so great importance for the wife to make
secreete marriage with her husbands brother?
of so great importance be laid to our charge? etc. men had their errors, in
the said English treatise, fol. 68. b. post med.
etc. also Luyet further teaches saying, see these words of Luther in
master Fulkes treatise against the defense of the Censure. page 213. prope
finem, and in Luther. tom. 5. Witemb. in 1. Cor. 7. fol. 113. a. initio. and
ibidem. fol. 111. b. ante med. He further says. Si alter cum altero in
gratia^ redire nolit, sed simpliciter seperatus esse velit, and alter continere
non valens comparem habere coniugem cogatur, quid illi faciendum? poteritne cum
alio contrahere? respondeo procul dubio poterit:
we cannot stop Paul's mouth etc. His words are plain that a brother or
sister are free from the law of wedlock, if the one depart or do not assent
to dwell with the other, neither does he say that this may be done once
only, but leaves it free so often as the cause shall require etc. In which
case as he signifies a see this in master Fulkes foresaid treatise against
the defense of the censure. page 213. paulo post med. and in Luther. tom. 5.
Witemb. fol. 112. b. fine. Where it is said hereof. Vt docem vel plures adhuc
viuentes transfugas haberet.
man may have ten wives or more fledd from him, and yett liueinge: nay he
doubts not in case of adultery committed by a married man or woman, to give
liberty even to the offendinge adulterer in aliam profugere terram Maechus
potest, ibique si continere nequeat, vxorem ducere rursum: ( Luther. to. 5.
Witemb. fol. 123 a. initio.)
to fly into another country and marry again: so dangerously does he
incline to polygamie affirminge thereof, that Luther in propositionibus de
Bigamia Episcoporu^. edit. An. 1528. propositio. 62. 65. 66. and see further,
Luther* in explicatione Geneseos, in comment, c, 16. edit. 1525.
poligamie is no more abrogated then is the rest of Moses law, and that it is
free, as being neither commanded nor forbiden: In respect whereof he
signifies that Luther vbi supr. in Genesis c. 16.
he will neither bring in Poligamie nor condemn it: which his opinion in
behalf of Polygamie, is more fully and in plain terms defended by his
dearest concerning Melancthon see hereafter cap. 4. sect. 1. at. o.
Melancthon, Concerning Ochine see hereafter. cap. 4. sect. 3. in the margin.
at. q.
Bernardine Ochine, and others: In so much as Wicelius in method. concord.
Eccles. printed. in 8. 1537. initio, says. Reducat ad calculum Lutheri factio
and retractet quae portenta, and quam non pudice admodum scripta ediderit, de
coniugio de diuortijs, de iterando post diuortia, de gradibus, de Polyginecia
populi etc. this man was so impartial, as that in the same treatise, c. 1.
etc. 5. and 20. He writes against our catholic doctrines of mass, prayer to
sanctes, images, communion under one kind, etc.
Wicelius a then living learned adversary, confesses and rejects Luthers
foresaid doctrines of divorce and Poligamie, wherein Luther is yett also
further reprehended by other the protestant Lantgraue in his published writing
penned by his divines says. Lutherus de coniugio quaedam and alia, haud
quaquam probanda scripsit (see this in Hospinians concordi. discor. printed.
1607. fol. 99. b. ante med.
protestant writers.

VII.
SEuentethly as concerning magistracy; Luther teaceth saying So says
Luther. Seculari potestate, tom. 6. Germ. see this in master Jewels defens.
of the apol. of 1571. page 429. and master Jewels strange evasion, page 430.
ante med. consistinge upon comparinge of unlike phrazes, as where Saint Paul
says, there is neither, Jew nor grecian, bound nor free in Christ, Galat.
3.28. and Colloss. 3.11. whereby is only meant that with Christ there is no
respect of persons, Collos. 3.25. but what is this as in excuse of Luthers so
unlike saying?
emonge Christianes no man can or ought to be magistrate, but each one is to
other equally subject etc. Emonge Christian men, none is superior save one and
only Christ: and again he says so says Luther in his sermons Englished
1578. page 97. fine, and in tom. 7. Witemb. printed. 1558. sermon. de oue perdita
fol. 327. b. paulo post med.
therefore is Christ our Lord, that he may make us such as him self is, and
as he cannot suffer him self to be tied and bound by laws, etc. so also
ought not the conscience of a christian to suffer them: and as it were to
explain his other sayings where he prescribes obedience, that yet he does
the same as in regard of outward policy and not of conscience, he further
says, so says Luther in his said sermons Englished, page 261. circa med.
we admonish hence concerning the civil magistrate, when he coma^deth or
requires any thing, yea if he compel thereto we must obey, for there
comes thereby no loss of faith or Christian liberty, for so much as they
do not contend that those things are necessary to salvation which they
ordeyne or require, but only to mantayne outward rule, public
tranquillity and government, and so the conscience remains free, etc.
Howebeit if any should contend that those commandments of the civil
magistrate be necessary to salvation, (as doubtelesse all their lawful
commandments be, in respect that they bind us even in conscience and to break
them were sin) then as is said of the traditions of the papists, the
contrary rather were to be done: hence it is that he professes that in the
course of his pretended reformation. In Lutheri loc. commu. class. 4. c. 30.
page 55. ante med. it is said. Vehemens epistola ad Spalatinum scripta, inter
caetera sic: non feram quod ais, non passuru^ princepem scribi in Moguntinum,
nec quod publicam pacem perturbare possit: potius te and principem ipsum perdam
and omnem creaturam, si enim creatori eius Papae restiti, cur cadam eius
creatura* (in so much as in the marginall note thereupon is set down, Lutherus
etiam a principe suo non vult impediri) and immediately thereafter, Luther
further says. Pulchre vero non turbandam pacem publicam arbitraris, and
turbandam pacem aternam Dei, etc. non sic Spalatine, non sic princeps etc. (and
again a little hereafter) Videor mihi videre Germaniam in sanguine natare etc.
He will not be stayed by his prince, with much more to the like purpose,
whereupon followed the so many known open See Luthers ominouse prediction of
these rebellions, vt supra at. x. and see many examples thereof alleged in the
protest. apol. in the preface. sect. 9. and 16.
rebellions of the Lutheranes in Germany against the Emperor to the much
effusion of Christian blood, whereat he insulteth saying, Luther. tom. 4.
Ien. fol. 97. says. Euangelium tumultuari debet, quod si non faciat, verum non
est Euangelium: and Luther, in loc. commu. class. 5, c. 17. page 57. ante med,
says. Tu quareris quod per Euangelium nostrum mundus tumultuatur, respondetur
Deo gratias, haec volui fieri, and o me miserum, si non fierent talia.
thou complainest that by our gospel the world is become tumultuouse, I
answer God be (therefore) thanked, these things I would have to be, and o me
miserable if such things were not he proceeded so far in this course that in
his book entitled: Aduersus falso nominatum ordinem episcoporum, (written
That this book was written toward the end of. 1522. see Sleyda^, at that
year. l. 3. fol. 36. b. prope finem, and Osiander. centur. 16. l. 1. cap. 33.
initio. page 87. circa med.
anno 1522.) he publishes his bloody Luther. to. Ien. Germ. fol. 132. (in
libro aduersus falso nom. ord. episc.) says. Nunc attendite vos episcopi, imo
laruae diaboli, doctor Lutherus vult vobis bullam, and reformationem legere
quae vobis non been sonabit: doctoris Lutheri bulla and reformatio, quicumque
opem ferunt, corpus bona and famam in hoc impendunt vt episcopatus deuastentur,
and episcoporum regimen extinguatur, hi sunt dilecti filij Dei etc. contra vero
quicumque manutenent episcoporum regimen, eisque obediunt voluntaria
obedientia, hi sunt diaboliministri etc. see also. tom. 2. Witemb. fol. 320. b.
post med.
bull of reformation whereby to stir up the people to the spoil of
bushoprickes and puttinge down of catholic bushopes, which took such
effect, as the bores of Germany thereupon took Sleydan Eglished. l. at. Anno
1525. fol. 53. post med. says, in the beginning of the spring time began a
new commotion etc. of the vulgar people, against the prelates of the church,
pretendinge cause as though they would defend the gospel: see this also in
Osiander. centur. 16. l. 1. c. 37. initio. page 100. post med.
arms to suppress the bushopes and other clergy, according to the prescript
of Luthers foresaid bulle vt supra at c. see this also further testified next
hereafter at. h. and in Sleydan Englished. l. 5. fol. 59. b. fine etc.
pretendinge their cause to be the defense of the gospel, in which respect
they in Osiander centur. 16. l. 1. c. 36. page 102. circa med. it is said. Ad
Lutheri iudicium rustici prouocauerunt,
appealed to Luthers judgment: At what time Luther discerninge them to be but
naked men and unable to prevail, to avoid the scandal of their rebellion,
contradicts them (as in like sort he see hereafter. cap. 4. sect. 1. in the
margin at. s.
did the Antinomi, whose error him self first see there in the margin at. s.
set abroache) and preaches to them obedience: And when as they being
assembled in troops, and not apt to be pacified, made war not only
against the clergy, but also Osiander. cent. 16. lib. 1. cap. 38. initio. page
103. post med. says. Rustici non pontificijs modo, sed nobilitati quoque
bellum faciunt: tum Lutherus ali^ euulgat^ scripto hortatur and instigat omnes
vt velut ad commune restinguendum iucendium accurrant etc. and page 104.
initio. He further alleges Luther as affirminge, rustices professes initio,
quasi disceptationem causae far possent, and admonitionem quoque si meliora
quis adferret, itaque (observe this well) se non ansum fuisse tum illos
condemnare, nunc autem etc. vertendum sibi fuisse orationis stilum etc. monet
igitur vt in eos non secus ac in effrenatas belluas impetus promiscue ab
omnibus etc. rustici ad arma se venisse iactabant etc. vt Euangelij doctrina
celebretur and augescat: see also this in Sleydan Englished. l. 5. fol. 64. b.
fine, and 65. a. initio.
against the nobility (who joined in aid of their clergy) Luther as
foreseing thereupon their ruin, turns fully against them, and publishinge an
other bulle appoints vt supr. at. h. and Luther in mensal. colloqu. page 150.
says. Ego Martinus Lutherus in seditione omnes trucidaui rusticos, meo enim
iussu occisi sunt, ac proinde omnis ipsorum sanguis super ceruicem meam, etc.
them to be all slain as wild beasts etc. which being accordingly
performed (the miserable men then being as Osiander. centur. 16. page 108.
initio. says. Ibi vero miseri homines velut attonitineque se defendebant,
neque suga salutem petebant.
al astonished and unable to defend or save themselves by flight) Luther as
it were to celebrate their funeral, immediately thereupon Osiander. centur.
16. l. 1. cap. 40 page 109. circa med. says as next in order after the
premises. Hoc Anno 1525. Lutherus vxorem duxit Catharinam a Bora quae antea
monacha fuerat: and Sleydan Englished. l. 5 at Anno 1525. fol. 65. b. post med.
says accordingly (as next in order after the other) in those days Luther
married a nun where he gave occasion to his adversaries to speak evil of
him:
marieth Katherine Bore the nun, not see hereafter, cap. 3. sect. 6. ante
med. in the margin at. c.
regardinge (as confesses and thereat complayneth Melancthon) the evils then
present before his eyes.

VIII.
AS concerning the administracion of the word and sacraments, Luther makes
the right and power thereof common to lay men with the clergy, saying to this
end, directly so says Luther tom. 2. Witemb. De ministris ecclesiae
instituend. fol. 368. a. b. and 369. a. b. and see further. tom. 2. fol. 249.
a. b. and see Hospinian. histor. sacram. part. 2. fol. 14. circa med. reporting
Luthers confessed opinion hereof,
the first office of a priest is to preach the word etc. but this is common to
all: the next is to baptize, and this also may all do even women etc. the
third is to consecrate bread and wine, but this is common to all no less then
priests etc. if then that which is greater then all, be given indifferently
to all men and women, I mean the word and baptism, then that which is less,
I mean to consecrate the supper is also given to them: and the like doctrine
does he affirm in other Luther. in assert. damnat. in tom. 2. Witemberge.
fol. 103. b fine, says. Quod absente sacerdote, etiam puer aut mulier and
quilibet Christianus absoluere potest, Math. 18: clare patet: also Luther. tom.
2. Witemb. de abroganda missa priuata, fol. 249. b. ante med. says. Mulieres
prohibet Paulus loqui, non simpliciter sed in ecclesia, nempe vbi sunt viri
potentes loqui etc. ordo itaque and honestas est, vt viris loquentibus in
ecclesia, tacent mulieres, nullis autem loquentibus viris, necesse est vt
loquantur mulieres:
his writings, being (as master D. Couel confesses) see this affirmed and
confessed of Luther by D. Couel, in his defense of master Hooker* printed.
1603. art. 15. page 101. post med. and by Hospinian. in histor. sacram. part.
2. fol. 14. b. circa med. and see Luther. tom. 2. Witemb. fol. 243. b. circa
med.
not affrayde to affirm, that sacraments are effectual, though administered by
satan him self.

IX.
AS concerning the sufficiency of our redemption by our Sauiors passion in
his humane nature upon the cross, Luther taught that See this saying
confessed and reprehended in Luther by Suinglius. tom* 2. printed. 1581 fol.
458. a. initio. where he infers thereupon, Lutherus Christum saluatorem
abnegat. and by Hospinian. in histor. sacram. part. 2. fol. 57. b. post med.
and 76. b. ante med. Luthers saying hereof, is in confessione maiore de can.
where he says. Cum credo quod sola humana natura pro me passa est, Christus
ille vilis nec magni praetij saluator est, immo ipse quoque saluatore opus
habet:
not only the humane nature of Christ suffered for us, for (says he) in
affirminge but so much, Luther vt supra,
Christ is a savior of vile and small account and needs him self also a
savior, but also that Luther. de consilijs part. 2. says of the
Suinglianes. Pertinacissime contra me pugnabant, quod diuinitas Christi pati
non posset: see also this opinion confessed and reprehended in Luther by
Hospinian. in his concord. discord. in praefat. fol. 4. b. initio. and in the
hook, fol. 186. b. initio. And yett against all this, master D. Abbot is not
abashed to give D. bushope the lie for his saying that Luther affirmed the
Godhead yt self to suffer: (D. Abbot. in his 3. part. of the defense, etc.
page 240. paulo ante med. And see Luthers scholars further reprehended for
this their opinion by Simlerus, de praesentia Christi in terris, printed.
1574. fol. 98. b. post med. And by Beza in respons. ad aucta colloqui.
Montpelga^. part. 1. page 82. and 92. versus finem.
the divinity of Christ did suffer, which his of this old condemned error in
Apollinaris and Eutycles, see Barnes in Act. Roman. Pontific. (printed at
Basile) page 46. fine, and Beza, in respons. ad acta colloqu. Mont. Belg.
printed. 1589. part. 1. page 82 prope finem.
old condemned error of the God head suffering, is confessed and condemned in
him and sondrie his followers by Suinglius vt supr. at. d.
Suinglius, See Beza. in his epist. theolog. printed. 1573. directly
reprehendinge herein Andreas Musculus, and Islebius Luthers scholars, epist.
60. initio, page 285.
Beza and others: hereto also is not improper Luthers confessed further
doctrine of Luther. tom. 3. Witemb. printed. 1583. in Psalm. 16. fol. 279. a
post med. says. Christus cum summo dolor mortuus est, ita videtur, and
dolores post mortem in inferno sustinuisse vt omnia nobis superaret: In so
much as master Parkes against master Willet, page 114. in the text and
margin at. b. (and in regard of the printers misfiguringe the, page fol.
11.1. prope finem) affirms that Luther, Illiricus, Lessius, Hemingius,
Wellerus, and Latymer, held that Christ descended into hell both in body and
soul, and there suffered torments after his death.
Christ's discendinge into hell, there also to suffer torments in soul after
his death.

X.
AS concerning the blessed and holy Trinity, Luther taught thus far to the
contrary, as that Suinglius tom. 2. in respons. ad confess. Lutheri. fol. 474.
b. fine, confesses and reprehendeth this in Luther saying. Nec enim hunc
Lutheri sermone^ immodestius vel ferocius exagitabo, quo sic, inquit, hic de
sola and vnica diuinitate dicitur, quod illa triplex vel trium sit generum,
quemadmodum and tres personae etc. in quibus verbis grauissimi errores latitant
etc. tam impure etc. de Deo and sacris omnibus disputat Lutherus:
the divinity is three foulde even as the persons be, etc. and the same so
grosle as he is therein specially accused and condemned by Suinglius vt supra.
Suinglius: and upon this ground perhapes yt was, that where the scripture
says, 1. John. 5.7.
there be three which give witness in heaven, the father, the word, and the
holy ghost, and these three be one: this being a most evident place in
behalf of the Trinity, is nevertheless quite, omitted in Luthers duche
Bibles:
omitted by Luther in his translation of the new testament: As also Luther
(whom Calvin therein imitateth) did likewise putt Vide enchir. prec. Anni
1543. and Calvin imitating Luther herein, says. Pracatio vulgo trita est,
sancta Trinitas vnus Deus miserere nostri, mihi non placet, ac omnino barbariem
sapit: ( Calvin in tract. theologic. printed. 1597. page 796. a. paulo ante
med.
forth of the lytanie this ensueinge verse, holy Trinity one very God have
mercy upon us, affirminge that Luther. in postil. maiore (printed) Basileae
apud Heruagium in enarrat. Dominic. Trinit. and see Luthers foresaid words
alleged at large by Vlembergius in his graves and iustae causae etc. printed.
1589. page 534. out of the 2. part. of Luthers postil. printed. 1537. fol. 158.
b.
the word Trinity, is but an humane invention and sounds couldlie: and
concludes that his Luther. in libro contra Iacobum Latomum. tom. 2. Witemb.
latin edit. Anno. 1551. says. Animae mea odit (...), and optime exegerunt
Ariani, ne vocem illam prophanam and nouam regulis fidei statui licere. I know
Luthers later editions to be altered and corrupted herein (of which like
corruption see more heretofore in the preface, to the reader in the margin
after t. at.*.) for which cause I provoke to the first edition.
soul hates the word homousion.

XI.
AS concerning God being the author of our sin. Luther teaches thus
dangerously saying, Luther. in assertionibus damnatis per Leonem decimum art.
36. says. Quomodo potest sese ad bonum praeparare, cum nec in potestate sit
suas vias malas facere, nam and mala opera in impijs Deus operatur, vt Proverb.
18. dicitur, omnia propter seipsum operatus est Dominus, etiam impium ad diem
malum: thus stand Luthers words to this day in the more ancient edition of
his works at Witemb. and also at Basil. Anno 1521. and are so recited by
Roffensis in his answer thereto entitled. Confutatio assertionis Lutheranae,
printed. at Antwerp. 1523. art. 36. fol. 204. a. fine. whereas in the later
edition of Witemb. tom. 2. Anno 1562. fol. 112. a fine, Luthers scholars (as
ashamed of his doctrine) did after Luthers death, quite against the sense and
coherence of Luthers own words, in stead of operatur foiste in regit.
How can man prepare himself to good, saying yt is not (so much as) in his
power to make his ways evil? for God works the wicked work in the wicked
etc. And again, Luther vbi sup. art. 36. says. Nulli est in manu quippiam
cogitare mali aut boni, sed omnia (vt Wicleui articulus Constantiae damnatus
recte docet) de necessitate absoluta eueniunt, quod and poeta voluit quando
dixit, certa stant omnia lege: this saying thus extant in Roffensis, and the
other more aunciente editions before mentioned, are likewise corrupted, and
altered in the said last edition of Witemberge. tom. 2. fol. 112. b. fine.
it is not in man's power to think good or evil, but all things (as Wicliffes
Article condemned at Constance does rightly teach) proceed from absolute
necessity etc. yett more, Luther. de seruo arbitrio, cap. 32. says.
Christiani non libero arbitrio, sed spiritu Dei aguntur, Romans 8. agi vere non
agere, sed rapi quemadmodum serra aut securis a Fabro agitur, and hic nequis
dubitet Lutherum tam absurd dicere verba eius recitat Diatribe quae save
agnosco, fateor enim articulum illum Wicleui (omnia necessitate fieri) esse
false damnatum Constantiensi conciliabulo, etc. these words of Luther being
extant in the editions of Luthers life time, and so apparantlye his known
words that they are yett accordingly verbatim extant in this very treatise
of Luthers de seruo arbitrio, set fourth by that prime Caluiniste Iacobus
Kimedontins, and printed but now lately, viz. Anno 1603. Neustadij in
Palinata. fol. 195. circa med. are yet nevertheless most shamefully altered
(since Luthers death) in tom. 2. Witemb. of Anno 1562. fol. 455. a. post med.
and see Luthers like further doctrine in his foresaid book published by
Kimedoncius, page 32.
I do confess Wicliffes opinion (of all things cominge to pass by absolute
necessity) to have been falslye condemned, in the conuenticle at Constance:
this doctrine taking place, all exhortations and laws are in vain, and so
likewise threatninge of punishment, and promise of reward, so often testified
by the scriptures: Hereto is also apertayninge Luthers strange affirminge, that
Luther in libro de seruo arbitrio, says. Deus indignos coronat, immerites
damnat, qu^modo hoc iustum sit, incomprehensibile est modo, videbimus antem cum
illic venerimus: see also those words of Luther thus cited and alleged by the
learned caluiniste Mathias Martinius in his doctrine Christianae su^ma capita
etc. printed. 1603. page 288. post med.
God crowns the unworthy, and damneth those that have not deserved yt: which
foresaid opinion of Luther concerning Gods being the author of sin, is
made as yett more evident, by the like answearable doctrine of Johannes
Brentius (Luthers great disciple) whom master Jewel terms Master Jewel
in his defense etc. printed. 1567. page 473.
a grave and learned father, and who (says Osiander) was Osiander. centur.
16. lib. 3. cap. 66. page 819. ante med. says. Ioannes Brentius Theologus
eximius etc. a. D. D. Luthero in magno honor habitus est, proximus certe a
Luthero inter fides and praestantes Christi seruos numerandus:
an excellent divine, had in great honor by Luther, and ranked next unto him,
this man forbeared not to affirm, that, Brentius upon Amos. printed in 8.
Hagonae, 1530. in cap. 3. says. Omnia a Deo potenti manu and efficaci fiunt,
sieve mala culpae, sieve mala poenae, etc.
the evil, wheither of fault or of punishment, is wroughte by the mighty
workinge hand of God.

XII.
AS concerning chastity and single life. Luther (against the whole current of
Iouinian was by the ancient fathers condemned of error for his affirminge that
marriage and virginity were (eiusdem meriti) of equal merit, confessed by
Pantaleon in chronographi printed. Anno 1568. page 32. col. 1. circa med. and
by the centurie writers, cent. 5. cap. 4. col. 518. fine, and by master Wotton
in his defense of master Parkins, printed. 1606. page 500. circa med.
Antiquity) makes it simply inferior unto marriage, saying; De Luther. to. 5.
Witemb. print. 1554. in 1. Cor. c. 7. fol. 107. b. post med. says. de vsu vel
abusu statuum in praesenti nihil disserimus, caterum de condition and natura
statuum in sese, ac concludimus matrimonium esse velut aurum, spiritualem vero
statum vti stercus:
vsu vel abusu etc. of the use or abuse of those states (of life) at this
present we will say nothing but of their condition, and nature in them
selves, and do conclude that matrimony is as goulde, and the spiritual state
(of single life) is as dunge, Luther. de votis: see this saying acknowledged
and defended by master Whitaker. contra Camp. printed. 1604. rat. 8. page 151.
ante med. Where he concludes saying thereof. Haec certe Lutheri propria non
sunt, ea enim omnes boni agnoscunt and defendunt.
matrimony is much more excellent then virginity, Christ and his apostles
did diswade Christianes from virginity: concludinge further and saying.
Luther. tom. 5. Wite^b. sermon. de matrimonio. fol. 119. a versus finem, says.
Vt non est in meis viribus vt vir non sim, tam non est mei iuris vt absque
muliere sim: rursum vt in tua manu non est vt foemina non sis, sic nec in te
est vt absque viro degas etc. non est nostrarum virium vel vt impediatur, vel
omittatur, sed tam est necessarium quam vt masculus sim, magisque necessarium,
quam edere, bibere, purgare, mucum emungere etc.
As it is not in my power that I should be no man, so is it not in my power
that I should be without a woman, it is not in our power that it should be
either stayed or omitted, but is as necessary as that I should be a man, and
more necessary, then to eat, drink, purge, make clean the nose, etc. from
whence proceeded that scandalouse condition of life, confessedlie frequent
Siluester Czecanorius de corruptis moribus etc. bewayleth the estate of
Germany saying; never was lust so frequented in every sex or age as in
these our times: for this doctrine of Luther is now every where houlden for
sacred, that no man can contain, no more then not to spitte, and that a man
can be no more without a woman, nor a woman, without a man then without meat
and drink, etc. do we not daily see in these times young men to go
openly a whoringe etc? also young damsells when they become wanton and
immodeste as well these as men stubbornly to pretend this doctrine of Luther,
that none is hable to live chaste, seeinge that venerie is as necessary as
meat and drink? etc.
emonge the Lutherane professors.

XIII.
AS concerning the souls immortality, Luther was in the end so
obstinately bente against purgatory and prayer to saints, that to Luther.
tom. 4. Witemb. 1574. in ecclesiasten c. 9. says. Solomon sentire vi^^^tur
mortu^s sic dormire vt prorsus nihil sciant: and plane credo non esse in
scriptura locum fortiorem pro mortuis dormientibus, etc. Contra sanctorum
inuocationem and purgatorij fictionem, fol. 36. b. circa med. And see Sleydans
further report hereof concerning Luther. lib. 9. Anno 1534. fol. 116. a
initio, after the English translation, but read the latin:
preuente them, he affirmed the soul to sleep or die together with the body,
to this end saying: Luther. tom. 4. Witemb. fol. 37. b. ante med. says.
Sensit ergo Solomon, m^rtuos omnius dormire, and nihil prorsus sentire, iacent
ibi mortui non numerantes dies vel annos etc. anima abit in locum suum, vt
intelligas infernum dici vbi continentur animae, and quasi quoddam sepulchrum
animae extra hunc corporalem mundum, sicut terra est sepulchrum corporis.
The dead sleep etc. they altogether sleep, and feel nothing, they lie
there dead neither numbringe days nor years, etc. with much more to the same
purpose. Whereto a scholar of his adds, that The Anonimus author of the
theses published. 1568. sets down his tenthe thesis thus. Negamus aliquam
animam post mortem manner, sed illud dicimus excogitatum ab Antichristo ad
statuendam suam culinam per fictum purgatorium and inuocationem sanctorum.
the souls immortality was devised by Antichriste, to establishe his feigned
purgatory and prayer to saints: In which respect Luther forbeareth not to
place and rank the doctrine of the souls immortality, emonge those See this
hereafter. cap. 3. sect. 5, after h. in the margin at the figure. 2.
infinite monsters which are (says he) contained in the Roman dungehill of
decrees: to which opinion his dearest Illiricus (whom master Bell terms a
so says master Bell in his regiment of the church etc. printed. 1606. page
28. fine.
very famous writer, and most worthy defender of the Christian truth) was
so furthringe, that Beza says of him Beza in epistolis Theologic. printed.
1573. epist. 5. page 55.
that Ismael Illiricus etc. manifestly lays the foundation of the doctrine
of the souls mortality: a doctrine (as Calvin confesses) not ungrateful
for the time, to certain Calvin in prefac. in psychopamychiam. extant. in his
tractat. theologic. printed. 1597. page 459. initio, says hereof. Scio non
nullos bonos viros quibus de hoc summo aliquid in animum ins^^^^atum fuerit,
vel nimia credendi facilitate, vel ignorantia scripturae qua ad resistendum pro
tempore non fuerint satis armati etc.
good men (so he terms them, of his own profession) and in the end taken up
and defended see in Calvin treatise next above said throughout, and see in
Caluins instructio aduersus libertinos, cap. 11. and 22.
by the libertines, who proceeded thereupon yett further to deny, vbi supra
at. h.
the hope of our resurrection, and souls immortality.

XIV.
AS concerning local hell. Luther at the last proceeded for to deny that
there is any such before the judgment day, saying, Luther. tom. 4. Witemb.
printed. 1574. in cap. 2. Ionae. fol. 4. 18. b. ante (...) says. Quod cortus
locus sit vbi damm^^orum anima inclusa torqu^antur quemadmodum pictores pi^gunt
and frugunt, and concionatores quidam contendunt, non anfim affirmare: nunc
diaboli (...) sunt in inferne, etc. non autem regerent in munde impios, nec sic
luderent and illuderent munde, nec tot damna darent, si certo loco incarcerati
torquerentur, aeterni illi damnationis cruciatus non sinerent eos sic esse
etiesos:
I dare not affirm that there is a certain place (before the last judgment
day) in which the souls of the damned are now imprisoned, and punished as
the paynters feign, and preachers do affirm: vt supra, at. k.
the devils are not as yett in hell etc. for they could not so play and
illude the world, if being imprisoned in a certain place they suffered
punishment: those torments of eternal damnation would not suffer them to be
so idle, etc. Whereto Calvin enclineth teachinge, that hell is not material,
or a place of sensible punishment, but only of stinge, and torment of
conscience, to which purpose he affirms, that the scriptures mencioninge of
fire in hell, is but a Calvin in his Harmomonia, printed. 1595. in Math. cap.
3. verse. 12. page 54. b. ante med. says. De igne aterna etc. ex pluribus
scripturae locit colligere lic^t, metaphoricam esse locutionem, nam si ign^m
realem vel materialem vt vocant statuere libet, simul addendum etit sulphur and
stabellum etc. nec certe alia est ignis quam vermis ratio, quod si in vermis
nomine metaphora omnium consensu recipitur, idem and de igne senti^ndum:
metaphorical location, Calvin. institut. lib. 3. cap. 25.. 12. says. (...)
tormenta and exuciatus nobis figurantur, nempe per tenebras, fletum, ignom,
vermem etc.
and that there is vt supra, at. in.
no more material fire in hell, then there is a material worm etc. that
therefore the scripture (o) figureth to us by things corporal, as namely by
darkness, weepinge, fire, etc. the other vexation and torment of conscience:
which foresaid very doctrine of Calvin, being defended by master see
master Jacobs words hereof recited by master Bilson in his survey of
Christ's sufferinges etc. printed. 1604. page 54 an^^ m^^ and 46. post med.
Jacob, and master Doctor see master Doct. Raynoldes, in his censura libr^rum
apocriph^rum, etc. in his table set before the beginning of his book at the
^enerall title^ of his prelections, pralect. 51. and 54. and 56. etc.
Raynoldes, and condemned Hierom ad Ani^^^ seems do^^ne this for one of his
Origens errors: Ig^es quoq^^ge (...) quo scriptura sancta peccatoribus
comminatur, non ponit in supplicijs, sed^^ conscientia peccatorum etc. and see
Hierom thus and to this purpose, alleged by master Bilson in his foresaid
Survey etc. page 51. paulo post med.
of oulde in Origin, is specially confuted by master Bilson in his foresaid
survey etc. page 49. 50. 51. etc. and by Musculus and Zanchius alleged there.
page 50. circa and post med.
confuted for erroneouse by the now protestant bushope master D. Bilson, and
also by Musculus and Hierom Zanchius: Hitherto of Luthers doctrines, which
whether they be more preparinge, to the strayte Math. 7.13.14.
way that leads unto life, or to the broad way which leads to perdicion,
let the indifferent reader in gods name judge.

CHAPT. III.
FRom Luthers doctrine, we will now make our next passage into the
examination of his external behavior and deportment.

I.
First as concerning his pride, he was holden therein for so vainelie
conceyted, that he Suinglius. tom. 2. ad Lutheri confess. respons. fol. 441. a.
paulo post med. says. Sunt profecto qui constanter asserant (quamuis ipse
fidem illis habendam esse nunquam crediderim) Lutherum aliquando non sine
iactabunda quadam ostentatione dixisse, si papatum totum facile instauraturam
esse denuo, si ipsi libuerit: etc.
thought it in his power to restore or putt down popery at his pleasure, etc.
and further imagined him self to be the Luther. in tom. 2. Witemb. of 1562.
fol. 269. a. post. med. says. Videtur mihi satanas a paerit^^ (...) aliquid
in me praendisse^^rum qua nunc patitur, ideo ad perdendum impe^^^damqui ne
insaniuit incredibilibus machines, vt sapius fuerim admirat^r; agens solus
esse^ inter mortales quem poteres.
only one of mortal men, whom satan foresawe to be hurtful to him:
frameinge his words, as though in his opinion, religion had been in Luther.
in epist. ad arge^tinenses, Anno 1525. says. Christum a nobis primo vulgatum
andemus gloriari, a^ huius negatione iam traducit nos Suinglius.
begin and Luther. in loc. commun. class. 2. loc. 16. page 83. fine, says.
Nobis adhuc viuentibus etc. perpauci sunt etiam inter illos qui pij videri
volunt, and nobiscum profitentur euangelium, qui ista recte teneant, quid
futurum putatis nobis ablatis? ad class. 5. cap. 13. page 40. initio. He
further says. Time^ quod ista doctrina nobis extinctionerum obscurabitur: and
again there, post med. he says. Si nostra ecclesia subuerteretur vt me
amplius doctorem suum agnoscere non vellet, id quod aliquando fiet, si non
vinentibus nobis, tamen sublatis nobis: and ibidem. page 43. post med. he
says. Quantum sectarum excitauit satan nobis viuentibus? etc. Quid futurum
est nobis mortuis?
dye with him: In which respect Conradus Regius (no vulgar adversary) says,
Conradus Regius in libro Germ. contr. Ioannem Hessum decan. Dom. says. Deuteronomy
propter peccatum superbiae qua sese Lutherus extulit (quemadmodum plo^^quo
scripta testantur) verum illi spiritum abstulit:
for the sin of pride, wherein Luther extolled him self, as many his
writtinges show, God withdrewe his true spiritte from him: And Suinglius
charge Luther, with Suinglius tom. 2. in respons. ad confess. Lutheri. fol.
478. a. ante med. charge Luther with arroganti verborum fastu, and minis
plusquam turgidis:
great arrogancy, and pride of words. Also the Tigurine divines say the
Tigurines in their answer to Luthers book against Suinglius say. Propheta
and Apostoli Dei gloriae non private honori, non sua pertinaciae and superbiae
studebunt, Lutherus autem sua quaerit, pertina^ est, insolantia nimia effertur.
the Apostles and Prophets studied gods glory, not their own private honor,
pertinacie and pride, Luther seeks his own things, he is obstinate, and
elated with too much insolency: In like sort Oecolampadius says,
Oecolampadius in respons. ad confess. Lutheri apud Suinglius tom. 2. fol. 520.
b. ante med. says, that Luther was, arrogantiae and superbia affectu inflatus:
Luther was puffed up with arrogancy and pride: and in like plain manner is
his reported intolerable pride confessed and reprehended by diverse see the
like affirmed by Simon Lythus in respons. altera ad alteram Gretzeri apolog.
printed. M.D.CIII. page 333. paulo ante med. and in Schlusselberg. in Theolog.
Caluinist. printed. 1^94. l. 2. fol. 131. a. post med. and 126. a. post med.
And Hospi^an who re^^^^eth Luther appears heretofore, cap. 1. sect. 4. a^.
c.) i^ his hift* sacramen^^^. part. ^. fol. (...), says Nec tamen his omnibus
tembe^^^^ etc. Lutherus; (...) quae (...) in honesti, and unjust nimis egit,
quasi obsignauit, and omnem saum immodestiam qua etc. debachatus est saeoius
etc. omnibus spectandum proposuit: and fol. 188. a. post med. He further says
of Luther. Ira, odio, and inuidia tandem abreptus fuit Lutherus: such was
Luthers confessed condition but some year, or there aboutes before his death,
for whereas Luther died. Anno 1546. (as witness Sleydan Englished. lib. 16. fol.
232. a. fine. And Hospinian. vbi supra. fol. 200. b. ante med.) Hospinian
reports these last premises, as apertayninge to Anno 1544. And see there
further in Hospinian touching Luthers like intemperance, fol. 40. b. prope
initium, and 88. b. circa med.
other learned protestants.

II.
AS concerning his contentiouse spirit, and most intemperate and
scurrillouse raylinge. As touching the first, yt was so aboundinge in him,
that for fear of being idle, and to keep him self a-woorke in that kind,
he contracted with Carolostadius, and giuinge him a Hospinian. in his histor.
sacrament. part. 2. at. Anno 1524. fol. 32. b. ante med. says Lutherus
Carolostadium vt co^tra se public scribat, aureum nummum extractum ex pera
ipsi offert, inquiens: en accipe and quantum potes animose contra me dimica
etc. cumque aureum nummu^ marsupio suo recondisset Carolostadius, Luthero manum
in sponsionem pactae and susceptae contentionis porrexit, pro cuius
confirmatione Lutherus ipsi vicissim haustum vini propinauit, adhortans eum ne
sibi parceret, sed quanto vehementius and animosius contra se ageret, tanto
illum sibi chariorem futurum: see also Lauather hereof, in histor. sacram. fol.
2. a. post med.
piece of goulde to write against him, he upon Carolostadius his acceptance
thereof, gave to Carolostadius his hand upon the bargayne, and thereupon
drunk to him in a cupp of wine, exhorting Carolostadius not to spare him, but
to deal roundlye and vehemently with him, whereupon ensued their most
contentiouse and inuectiue wrytinges: this fact of Luther was so scandalouse
that Hospinian though fauoringe of Hospinians reverence to Luther see
heretofore, cap. 1. sect. 4. at. c.
Luther, yett signifies from Hospinian. vbi supra. fol. 32. b. circa med.
says of Luthers foresaid bargain with Carolostadius: Haec Christiana lector
fuerunt infelicissimi istius certaminis (quod ex pacto and sponsione susceptum
totiam annis ecclesiam grauissime exercuit) infausta auspicia, quae si quis
diligenter apud se animo sepositis affectibus expendat, ex quo spiritu fuerint
profecta tanto rectius etc. est iudicaturus etc. and Daniel Tossanus, in lib.
consolatorio. cap. 127. says, that Luther did proceed. contra Carolostadium
instinctu maligni spiritus.
what spirit the same proceeded. As touching the second and therein to
begin with his own followers the Suinglianes, he says as against them
Luther. tom. 7. Witemb. of. 1558. fol. 382. b. ante med.
cursed be the charity and concord (of the Sacramentaries) forever and ever
to all eternity: and the Tygurine divines signifies their complainte hereat
saying, so say the Tygurine divines. tract. 3. contra supremam Lutheri
confessionem, page 61. which words being acknowledged by master Fulke in his
treatise against the defense of the Ce^sure (printed by Thomas Thomas) he
does thereupo^ charge Luther with (to use his own words) Breach of al
Christian modesty, ( page 155. circa med.) Even far beyond the bounds of
charity, page 101. ante med. And the Tygurine diuiuines, in confessione
germanica (printed Tiguri. 1544. in 8. fol. 3. say. Superioribus diebus edidit
Martinus Lutherus librum, quem inscripsit, Breuis confessio de sacramento etc.)
liber plenus est demonis, plenus impudicis dicterijs scatet tracundia and
furore etc.
Luther calls us a damnable and execrable sect etc. He says that the devil
dwells now, and ever in the Suinglianes, and that they have a blasphemouse
breaste insathanished, supersathanished, and persathanished, and that they have
besides a most vain mouth over which satan bears rule, being infused,
perfused and transfused into the same: did ever man hear such speches pass
from the furiouse devil him self? thus far the Tygurines: in respect hereof
Conradus Gesnerus (a famous learned protestante) says Gesnerus in universally
bibliotheca, says. Illud non est dissimulandum, Lutherum virum esse
vehementis ingenij, impatientem, and qui nisi per omnia sibi consentientes
far nesciat, etc. Dominus faxit, ne quid contentione and impudentia eris
obsit ecclesia, cuius ^lim crepundia tam feliciter promouit.
yt may not be denied, but that Luther is a man of a vehemente spirit and
impatient etc. God grant, that by his contencion, and (oris impudentia)
impudency of mouth; he hurt not the church, whose swadlinge bands in times
paste he so fortunatly enlarged. And master D. Fulke charge Luther herein,
With the vt supra at. i.
breach of all Christian modesty (even) far beyond the bounds of
charity: As concerning the pope, Luthers inuectiue railinge against him is
infinite, and his unworthy Sleydan Englished. lib. 16. at. Anno 1545. fol.
222. b. ante and circa med.
picture of him so scurrillous, as I am ashamed in particular to rehearce yt,
but do refer the same to the readers search and perusal in Sleydan the
reporter thereof: As concerning great princes, let but the example of our
late King Henry the eight suffice; against whom he ragethe, and acts the
part of Hercules Fureus, tearminge him Luther. in l. contra Rege^ Angliae in
praesat. and inde tom. 2. Witemb. printed. 1562. fol. 333. 334. 335. etc.
an enuiouse mad fool, bableinge with much spyte in his mouth, a damnable
rotten worm, a basiliske, and progeny of an adder, a lyinge scurrill covered
with the title of a king, a clounishe wit, a doltishe head, most wicked
foolish and impudent Henry, and saying yet further, Non modo mentitur sicut
scurra leuissimus, sed and^. nequissimum nebulonem si non superat certe egregie
aequat. ( Luther. ibidem. fol. 338. a. post med.
he does not only lie like a most vain scurre, but equaleth if not
exceeds, a most wicked knawe, Recte in caput tuum mentiris rex stolide and
sacrilege. (ibidem. fol. 340. b. prope finem.) foedissimum sane sit quamuis
sordidam meretricem tam impudenti front sic mentiri. (ibidem. sol. 333. b.
paulo ante med.) aperte dico regem Angliae Henricum istum plane mentiri, and
scurram leuissimum mendacijs suis magis refer quam regem, etc. facessat mihi
in hac re maiestas regia, eum mendace scurra loquor, etc. cur mihi non pulchrum
sit, mendacia sua rursus in os eius regerere? (ibidem. fol. 335. a. ante med.)
thou lieste in thy throat foolish and sacrilegiouse king: whereunto might
be added his exceedinge many other like despitefull speeches used against his
majesty, some of them being so immodestlye base, Ius mihi erit pro Rege meo,
maiestatem Anglicam luto suo and stercore conspergere. (Luther. ibidem. fol.
333. a. circa med) Satis apparet Thomisticum regem scripsisse, etc. morbo
virulentissimi animi sui, quo cum inferius non possit conceptum virus and pus
inuidiae egerere, nec digerere, superius per os puditum cuomendi occasionem
inueniret. (fol. 333. b. ante med.) and see further there. fol. 337. a post med.
as I am ashamed to English them. This intemperat carriage of Luther against
many great states and princes was in him so evident, that he was therefore
specially reprehended, not only by the protestant The protestant Lantgraue in
his public writing penned by his divines says. Lutherus non tantum
magnorum regum principum and dominoru^ vtriusque nostrum cognatorum,
quemadmodum etiam priuatorum quorundam hominum honestam famam dicacitate quadam
sua arrosit, and grauissimis quibusdam accusationibus indecenter traduxit, quo
vel vno nomine adducti Lutheri scripta absque omni exceptione nullo plane modo
probare volumus, etc. verum etiam etc. see this in Hospinians concord. discord.
printed. 1607. fol. 99. b. antemed.
Lantgraue in his published writing thereof penned by his divines, but also
by the protestant deuines the divines of the count Palatine in their
admonitio Christiana de libro concord printed. 1581. page 233. fine, and 234.
initio. do object against Luther. Conuitia hyperbolice praeter pietatem and
modestiam confidenter and arroganter dicta, scurriles in rebus serijs lusus,
quam multa acerbe and iniuriose scripta, non tantum in Christi insignes
ecclesias etc. sed etiam in magnos principes.
of the count Palatine: and by other master Stafford, in his Niobe, printed.
1611. page 139. circa med. says hott spirited Luther (though otherwise a
stout soldier in Christ's church) is not to be excused for his vnreuerent
speches of Henry the eight of England, etc. unlimited Luther, thou verities
chief Champion, I am altogether unable to Censure the etc.
domesticke testimony, in so much as Luther himself was enforced to
acknowledge the worlds opinion herein hadd of him, saying, Luther. in loc.
commun. class. 4. fol. 35. b. ante med. says. Video ab omnibus in me peri
modestiam. and there. fine. He further says. Omnes ferme in me damnant
mordacitatem.
all men I perceive require modesty at my hands, allmoste all men condemn me
of sharpenes in words: And yett against all these so evident premises, some
of our adversaries are not abashed to defend Luthers foresaid intemperate
raylinge, as proceedinge In the protestant book entitled the profane schism
of the Brounistes etc. printed. 1622. page 67. fine, and 68. initio. it is thus
said of master Robinson, and master Johnson excusinge one of their brethrens
there objected intemperat raylinge: Master Robinson says, that he knew not by
what particular motion of the spirit, he was guided to write in those phrazes:
but master Johnson justifies further etc. addinge these words viz.
especially consideringe with what fire and zeal the lord has furnished such
his servants at all times as as he had stirred up for special reformation:
let the example of Luther alone suffice, whom into what terms his zeal
carried him, his writtinges do testify. etc.
from the motion of gods holy spirit.

III.
AS concerning Luthers great inconstancy in doctrine, Suinglius confesses
and reprehendeth the same saying, Suinglius tom. 2. printed. 1581. in respons.
ad confess. Lutheri. fol. 458. a. circa med. says. Lutherus nunc hoc nunc
illud de eadem repronuncias, nec vsquam sibi constat, haud dubie ca
inconstantia and leuitate Dei verbo vtendum esse existimat, quae effrictae
frontis scurrae, inter aleam vti consueuerunt:
Luther pronounces now this, now that, of one and the same thing, nor is
he, at any time constante to him self, but questionelesse thinks that he may
use that inconstancy, and lightness in the word of God, which impudent
scurrilouse fellows do use at their gaminge: And (to forbear the the divines
of the count Palatine in their admonitio christiana de libro concordiae.
printed. 1581. page 225. paulo post med. say. In caena vero Domini tam est
varius and sibi dissimilis Lutherus, vt in scriptis ipsius tres vel quatuor de
illa sententias reperiamus:
divines of the count Palatine) Hospinian a learned Caluiniste, (who as
before greatly honoreth and commends Luther) in his alphabeticall table, set
before the beginning of his book, at the letter. l. under the word Lutheri,
mencioneth (as him self confesses even against his will, and as no less then
Hospinian in histor. sacram. part. 2. fol. 4. b. post med. says. Mallemus
equidem istam tanti viri inconstantiam grauemque lapsum perpetuo occulcare,
nisi causae grauissimae nos haec adscribendum impellerent:
enforced thereto for great causes) Luthers wonderful inconstancy in doctrine,
with particular reference to his contrary doctrines, there by him in that
book at large alleged, in which course is by him set down see this in the
alphabeticall table set before Hospinians. histor. sacrament. part. 2.
printed. 1602.
Lutheri inconstancia etc. Luthers inconstancy in doctrine fol. 4. b. the
causes of his inconstancy and errors: fol. 5. his first opinion of the lords
supper. fol. 5. b. his second opinion, fol. 7. b. his third opinion, fol. 8.
his fourth opinion, fol. 12. his fiueth opinion, ibidem. Sturmius his
testimony of his inconstancy in the lords supper. fol. 12. a. his
inconstancy touching communion under one or both kinds, fol. 12. b. 13. his
inconstancy touching the communion of the wicked. fol. 13. b his inco^stancie
touching concomitancie, fol. 13. b. his inco^stancie touching the elevation of
the sacrament. fol. 13. b. 14. his inco^stancie touching, the adoration of the
sacrament. fol. 14. with much more there set down in this kind, and in the
book exemplified at large from Luthers own alleged inconstant and contrary
writings, according to the figures of direction here as before mentioned:
Whereto might be added like further testimony, from Suinglius tom. 2. in his
Responsiones duae etc. fol. 417. a. paulo ante med. says. Lutherus temere
quiduis arripit, si forte aliquid se offerat quod ipsum iuuet, and mox sui
quodammodo oblitus, vel quomodo negauit affirmat, vel quomodo ab ipso
affirmatum vel concessum est denuo pernegat, etc. pristinam doctrinam suam
suspectam facit etc. cum etc. ad eos dumtaxat libros quae intra quatuor aut
quinque ab hinc Annos conscripserit, lectorem relegat: quis enim his vel
lectis, vel auditis, non dicturus est, si alios annos quinque expectauerimus,
haud dubiae his elapsis, illos quoque libros quos intra annos hosce quinque
modo elapsos conscripserit, in dubium vocabit. Atque hoc illud est quod plus
nobis dolet: And see the very same repeated there again, fol. 449. b. fine.
Also Erasmus. l. 3. de libero arbitrio, says. Luther him self has changed
his opinion so often, and yett new paradoxes are springinge from him daily
etc.
Suinglius and Erasmus.

IV.
Notwithstanding this his shameful inconstancy, he was not yet abashed to
pretend him self most certain, of his doctrine, not forbearinge also to
prefer him self before all the modern and ancient wr^ters: to this end he
says, See this heretofore. cap. 2. sect. 3. fine, in the margin at the
figures 11.
if I be deceived God has deceived me. etc. Luther. tom. 2. Witemb. fol. 333.
a. fine. says. Certus enim su^ mea dogmata habere me de caelo, etc. dogmata
mea stabunt:
I am certain that I have my opinions from heaven etc. they shall continewe:
yett more. Luther. aduersus falso nominatum ecclesiasticum statum, he says.
Scire vos volo quod in posterum non amplius vos hoc honor dignabor vt finam
vel vos, vel ipsos angelos de caelo de mea doctrina iudicare, nec volo meam
doctrinam a quoquam iudicari etc. cum enim certus de ea sim, per eam quoque and
vester, and angelorum iudex esse volo: see also the words as ^hey yett stand.
in Luther. tom. 2. Witemb. fol. 309. a fine, also Luther. tom 2. Witemb. de
seruo arbitrio. fine, fol. 486. b. fine, says. Ego vero hoc libro, non
contuli, sed asserui and assero, ac penes nullum volo esse iudicium, sed
omnibus suadeo vt praestent obsequium.
I would have you know, that I will not hereafter vouchsaufe you so much
honor, as to suffer either you or the angels of heaven, to judge of my
doctrine etc. for seeinge I am certain of yt, I will in respect of it, judge
both of you and of Angels: and where he affirms So says Luther. tom. 2.
Wite^b. of Anno 1551. l de seruo arbitrio. page 4 4. and see further Luthers
book de seruo arbitrio. printed in 8. Anno 1603. page 72. 73. 276. and 337.
the fathers of so many ages to have been plainly blind, and most ignorante
in the scriptures, to have erred all their life time, and that unless they
were amended before their deaths, they were neither saints nor pertayninge
to the church: and concerning the fathers in particular he says, so says
Lu^her. in colloquijs mensalibus, cap. de patribus ecclesiae
In the writings of Hierom, there is not a word of true faith in Christ and
sound religion: Tertulian is very superstitiouse: I have houlden Origin long
since accursed: of Chrisostom I make no account: Basile is of no worth, he is
wholly a moncke, I way him not of a hair: Ciprian is a weak divine, etc. In
so much as he forbeareth not to prefer his own collected sense of the
scriptures, before all the fathers expositions, saying, Luther. tom. 2. witemb.
l. contra Regem Angliae, fol. 344. b. ante med. says. Diuina maiestas mecum
facit, vt nihil curem si mill Augustini, mill Cipriani, mill ecclesiae
Henricianae contra me starent, etc. Augustinus and Ciprianus, sicut omnes
electi errare potuerunt and errauerunt etc.
The divine majesty makes for me, so as I care not, if a thousand Austines, a
thousand Ciprians, a thousand king Henry churches stood against me: and
concludes saying. Luther. tom. 2. Witemb. printed. 1554. fol. 290. b. paulo
post initium, says. Esto sane Ecclesia Augustinus and alij doctores. Item,
Petrus, Apollo, imo etiam Angelus e caelo diuersum doceat, tamen mea doctrina
est eiusmodi quae solius Dei gratiam and gloriam illustrat etc. Petrus
Apostolorum summus viuebat and docebat extra verbum Dei: so insulteth he under
pretexte of attributinge his doctrines unto God who (says he) cannot be
deceived, which is the common brag of all nouelistes no less then of Luther.
Be it that the church, Austine, and other Doctors, also Peter, Apollo, yea
an angel from heaven teach otherwise, yet is my doctrine such as sets
forth Gods only glory etc. Peter the cheeffe of the apostles did live and
teach (extra verbum Dei) besides the word of God: with many like further
sayings, as yet more comparatiue and odiouse wherein his own scholars so
smoothed his known humor, that (says one of them) since so says, Andreas
Musculus in prafat. in libellum Germ. de diaboli tyrannide.
the apostles times there lived not in the world a greater then Luther, etc.
there is as great difference between the ancient doctors, and Luther, as
between the sun and the moon, etc. Whereto Alberus contra Carolostadianos,
l. 7. says. I doubt not but if that Austine were now lyueinge, he would not
be ashamed to profess him self Martin Luthers scholar, and Luther, tom. 7.
Witemb. printed. 1558. fol. 271. a. circa med. says, of his doctrine then
preached, in Germany. Euangelium tam opulenter pradicatum est, vt apostolorum
tempore ea claritate non fuit: What profane Arrogancy was this?
others of his like flatteringe scholars do assent; the divines of Witemberge
the divines of Witemb. in the seventh leaf, a. circa med. of their prefat. set
before the book entitled. Acta Theologorum Witembergensium and patriarchae
Constantinop. printed. Witebergae. 1584. say. Non dubitamus Lutherum non solum
huius saeculi doctoribus omnibus, sed omnium temporum post apostolos praferre:
and see further heretofore in the preface to the reader, at. n. o.
not doubtinge (in plain terms) to prefer Luther not only before all the
doctors of this age, but also of all former ages since the apostles.

V.
AS concerning Luthers reported obstinate frowardnes often times against his
own conscience (which is reputed for no less then sin against the holy
ghost.) Suinglius says, Suinglius tom. 2. printed. 1581. in respons. ad
Lutheri. confess. says. Lutherus obstinato and deuoto animo conceptam semel
opinionem persequi and obtinere conatur, nec multum curare solet, quodcunque
tandem de re quauis pronunciet, etiamsi vel sibi ipsi, vel diuini verbi
oraculis contradicere deprehendatur: see these words of Suinglius also in
Schlusselburg. in Theolog. Caluinist. l. 2. fol. 122. a. fine. after the
edition of 1594. And Suinglius ^om. 2. in resp. ad Luther. confess. fol. 519.
b. ante and circa med. says of Luther. Manifesta desperatione non carere
certis ac solidis rationibus demo^strabimus: primo enim ipsi causae diffidens
de illa desperate, etc. de scipso desperate Lutherus, praeter id enim quod ipsa
verba timorem and formididinem ipsius arguunt, certis argumentis hanc
desperabundam arrogantiam esse docebimus etc.
Luther with an obstinate devoted mind, endeuoreth to prosecute and make good
his once conceived opinion, neither does he much care what he affirm of any
matter, allthough yt be contrary either to him self or to the scriptures: and
Luther him self says accordingly of communion under boths kinds, Luther.
de formula m^ssae: and whereas master Jewel in his reply etc. printed. 1566.
act. 2. page 107. post med. acknowledges this for Luthers saying, only
answeringe thereto, that Luther only meante that gods truth should not hang
on the authority of man: to forbear that this is master Iuels devise and no
words in all that passage of Luther, to explain his meaning for only such,
can yet this evasion though admitted enhable Luther to teach, that in despite
of the council we should use either but one kind or ney^her? which last were
directly against Christ's institution: In which respect this very saying of
Luther is recited, and disliked by Hospinian. in histor. sacram. part. 2. fol
13. a paulo post med.
if the council should in any case decree this, least of all then would we
use both kinds, yea rather in despite of the council and that decree, we
would use either but one kind only, or neither, but in no case both. Of like
nature is it where he teaches, that if so says Luther. tom. 2. Germ. fol. 214
the council should grant church men liberty to marrye, he would think that
man more in gods grace, who duringe his life kept three whores then ^ who
married according to the counsels decree, and that he would command under
pain of damnation, that no man should marrye by permission of such a council,
but should either live chaste, or if that were impossible, then not despair
though he kept a whore. Hereto also is not improper, Luthers first reuolte
from our church, with such confessed see this heretofore cap. 1. sec. 1.
prope finem, at. e. see there after. f. at. *.
trouble of conscience as increased even to most fearful desperation, for
three years after his said reuolte: Also his like confessed endeavor to
Luther. tom. 7. Witemb. printed. 1558. in his Farrago epistola. in epist.
amicis and Christianis Argentinae, fol. 502. a. fine, says. Hoc diffiteri nec
possum, nec volo, quod si Carolostaedius aut alius quispiam ante quinquennium
mihi perfuadere potuisset in sacramento praeter panem and vinum esse nihil,
ille magno beneficio me sibi deuinctum reddidisset, etc. omnibus neruis
extensis me extricare and expedire conatus sum, cum probe perspiciebam hac
repapatui cum primis me valde incommodare posse, etc. verum ego me captum video
nulla elabendi via relicta: and he says there next after of his willingness
against the real presence. Sum enim proh dolor plus aequo in hanc partem
propensus, see also this saying in master Fulkes treatise against the
defense of the Censure, page 99. fine.
persuade him self against the known truth of the real presence, only
thereby the more to displeasure the pope: and his like impugninge even of
Luther. tom. 2. Witemb. in assert. etc. art. 27. fol. 107. b. post med. says.
Permitto tamen quod Papa condat articulos fidei and suis fidelibus, quales
sunt, panem and vinum transubstantiari etc. se esse imperatorem mu^di etc.
Animam esse immortalem, and omnia illa infinita portenta in Romano sterquilinio
etc.
the souls immortality as To prevent. as appears heretofore, c. 2. sec. 13.
at. a. c.
to prevent purgatory and prayer to saints: And lastly his often see this
heretofore. cap. 1. sec. 1. at. u. x.
offerr of submittinge to the pope, and of suppressinge of his new doctrine,
so that he might not be compelled to recante, which argues or rather
conuinceth his willinge readiness of proceedinge against his conscience, either
in his then former preachinge of his new doctrine knowinge it to be false, or
else in his now offer to suppress the same when he thought yt to be true:
Whereto likewise might be added some other like further matter of this kind
reported by our see in further example, epitome colloquij Mulbruua instituti
per Witembergensis, printed. in 4. Heidelbergae, Anno 1566. page 153. and see
Hospinian. histor. sacram. part. 2. at. Anno 1544. fol. 195. a. ante med. where
is recited how Luther answered, non sine rubore: and see further Hospiniane.
in his concord. discord. fol. 104. a. ante med. and the divines of the count
Palatine in their admonitio Christiana de libro concord. printed. 2581. page
217. post med. and Vrsinus in his commonefactio cuiusdam Theologi etc. printed.
1583. page 288.
learned adversaries: only I will conclude with the elevation of the
sacrament, whereof Luther says, I did know the elevation of the sacrament
to be Idolatricall (as making for sacrifice) yett never the less I did
retain it in the church at Witemberge, to the end I might despite the devil
Carolostadius: A saying and practice so confessedlie gross that Amandus
Polanus (the Caluiniste) professor Luther. in parua confessione, says,
Eleuationem sacramenti sci^bam esse idolatricam, sed tamen iam retinebam in
templo Witembergensi, vt aegre sacere^ diabolo Carolostadio, and see Luther.
to. 3. Germ. fol. 55. and colloqu. mensal. Germ. fol. 210.
at Basile, specially recites, and Polanus in syllogethesium theolo. printed.
1597. page 464. ante med.
reproves the same: saying yett further Polanus ibidem, says. Sed nolo
plura absurd dicta Lutheri recensere, quae multa sunt, quae tegenda potius
quam exagitanda etc. And Hospinian. in hist. sacram. part. 2. fol. 14. a.
initio. recites this foresaid saying of Luther, tearminge it. Minime profecto
conueniens oration Christiano theologo, and magna infirmitas in Luthero, and see
further there. fol. 188. b. ante med.
I will not recite more of Luthers absurd sayings which are many, and ar
rather to be covered, then much spoken of: In respect of all which premises,
how apthe now may we profess with Suinglius to Suinglius tomo 2. printed.
1581. in respons. ad Luthers confess. fol. 454. a. ante med. sai h. Non possum
non mirari, number aliquid hominis aut rationis humanae habeant, qui isto Lutheri
scripto sese duci and doceri patiuntur.
marvel that any of sense or humane understanding should (ever) suffer them
selves to be taught and carried away by Luthers writing.

VI.
Lastly as concerning Luthers other conversation of life and manners, yt is
confessed that before his reuolte from our catholic church, he duringe that
time was a young Luther. tom. 2. Witemb. fol. 233. a. initio. says of himself.
Eram enim iunenis and monachus pietatis studiosus.
man, a moncke, and studyinge of godliness, and lived in so says Simon de
Voyon upon the catalogue of the doctors printed. 1598. in Eglish, page 180. and
Luther upon the Galathians Englished. in c. 1. verse. 14. fol. 35. a.
his monastery, punishinge his body with watchinge, fasting, and prayer, see
Luthers own words hereof, upon the Galathians Englished. in c. 1. fol. 35. a.
honored the pope of mere conscience, Luther. ibidem. fol. 35. a.
kept chastetie, poverty, and obedience, and Luther. ibidem fol. 35 a.
whatsoever (says he) I did, I did yt with a single heart, of good zeal, and
for the glory of God, fearinge greeuouslie the last day, and desirouse to be
saved from the bottom of my heart. In so much also as for some small time
after his reuolte, there remained yet in him some relics or steps of former
sanctimonie. Whereof Erasmus in epist. ad Thomam Cardinalem Eboransen.
Erasmus affords him not vncommendable testimony: whereas afterward upon
his further defection from our church, he at last became much altered, and was
so far transported from his former course of observed chastity, that he
now professes and says to the contratie, Luther. in Proverb. 31. verse. 1.
adds this amarouse ryme for a marginall gloss: Nichtliebers ift aufferden,
Den frawn lieb. Wems Tanwerden; importinge in English as is there alleged in
the text;
Nothing is more sweet or loving upon earth then is the love of a woman, if a
man can obtain it: And again Luther. tom. 7. Witemb. in epist. ad Wolfaugum
fol. 505. a. circa med. says. Qui (...) manner statuit ille nomen hominis a
se deponat, planum faciens se angelum esse aut spiritum, homini enim a Deo
nullo modo conceditur.
he that resolves to be without a woman, let him lay aside from him the name
of a man, makeinge himself a plain angel or spirit: yett more, see this
heretofore. cap. 2. sect. 12. fine, at. y. And Luther. in colloquijs Germ. cap.
de matrimonio, further says. Vt nemo potest cibo vel potu carere, sic fieri
nequit, vt aliquis, a muliere abstineas, etc. causa haec est, quia in vtero
mulierum concepti, ea aliti, inde nati, lactati and educati sumus, and vt caro
nostra maiore ex part mulieris caro sit, and sic planefieri nequit vt ab ijs
separeremur: And tom. 2. Witemb. fol. 328. b. post med. he says. Puella in
qua non est sublime hoc donum continentia, nibilo facilius carere potest
marito, quamcibo, aut potu, somno, etc.
as it is not in my power that I should be no man, so is it not in my power
that I should be without a woman etc. it is more necessary then to eat,
drink, purge, make clean the nose, etc. in so much as he acknowledges him
self to have been Luther. in colloquijs mensal. fol. 526. a. and vide fol.
400. a.
allmoste madd through the rage of lust, and desire of women: exclayminge out
yett further and saying, Luther. tom. 1. epistolarum latinarum. fol. 334. ad
Philippum.
I am burned with the great flame of my untamed flesh, etc. eight days are
now paste, wherein I neither write, pray, nor study, being vexed partly
with temtations of the flesh, partly with other trouble; but says he, Luther.
vbi supra fol. 345.
yt suffices that we have known the riches of the glory of God, the lamb
which takes away the sins of the world, from him sin cannot draw us,
although we should commit fornication, or kill a thousand times in one
day: And being in this case, he laboreth not to preserve his former kept
chastetie by his foresaid punishinge of his body, with watchinge fasting and
prayer, before time continewed by him in his monastery, when he was a
catholic (which course of resistance by prayer, the blessed Apostle being
so assaulted, instantly 2. Cor. 12.7.
used and thereby prevailed:) but confessinge him self, as now made more
delicate, and Luther. tom. 6. Witemb. printed. 1580. in Genesis c. 49. fol. 665.
a. ante med. says. Ego non possum far labores, vigilias, and macerationes
ilias quas olim monachus sustinui.
unable to endure his former austeritie of life, and as all unmindful of his
former vow, and forbearinge as before, prayer for next before at. q.
eighte days together, at the last (haueinge cast Osiander. centur. 16. c.
36. page 97. fine, says. Hoc Anno 1524. Lutherus monasticum habitum deposuit.
off his religiouse habit. Anno 1524.) he did in speadie accomplishment of his
longinge desire, see this reported by Melancthon, in his epistola. ad Ioac.
Camer. de D. Lutheri coniugio: yt is extant, in Melancthons consilia
Theologica, printed. 1600 part. 1. page 37.
marry even upon the sudden Katherine Bore the (runegate) nun, without any
communication before had thereof with any of his freindes, but haueinge in the
eueninge (so impatient was he of delay, as not to forbear but for that
present night, till the usual time of marriage in the day time, next
ensuynge) invited to supper, Pomeran, Luke the painter, and Apelles the lawyer,
he then so finished the espousals, for which by the most ancient and
imperial laws, next after the time of Constantine the great, Zozomen.
histor. lib. 6. cap. 3. fine, affirms, how that the Christian Emperor
Iouinian, published an edicte. Vt qui sacrat^m virginem vel ad nuptias
contrahendas pellicere conaeretur, etc. capitis supplicio mulctaretur: this
Iouinian was in course the third Emperor after Constantine the great: and the
foresaid law is yett extant. cod. lib. de Episcopis and clericis. Where yt is
said. Si quis non dicam rapere, sed tentare tantum, iungendi causa matrimonij
sacratissimas virgins ausus fuerit, capitali poena feriatur.
he should have lost his head: A thing at that time houlden so scandalouse,
by report of his scholar Sleydan Englished. l. 5. An. 25. fol. 65. b. paulo
post med. says. In those days Luther married a nun, whereby he gave occasion
to his adversaries to speak evil of him: and Luther him self, in colloquijs
latinis, tom. 2. de coniugio, says thereof. Nisi ego clam celebrassem
nuptias, omnes impedissent, quia omnes amicissimi clamabant, no^ illam sed
aliam.
Sleydan and others, that Luther him self Melancthon in consil. Theolog. page
38. paulo ante med. says. Quoniam Lutheru^ quoda^modo tristiorem cerno and
perturbatu^ ob vitae mutationem, omni studio ac beneuolentia consolari eum
conor.
became grieved and ashamed thereat, and his deareste Melancthon did therefore
Specially, vt sup. at. x.
specially and Melancthon in consil. theolog. in the end of that foresaid
epistle. page 39. ante med. says. Ista ad te exposui verbosus ne euentus
in^pinatus te perturbaret and tristitia aff^^^et, etc.
speedily write to a freinde of his in excuse thereof, wherein nevertheless
him self cannot but houlde it Melancthon vbi supra, says. Ac possit
fortassis aliquis mirari illum hoc infeliei tempore, bonis and honestis viris
vbique grauiter laborantibus, non modo non affici simul dolor, sed videri
prope modum nihil panitus curare ea mala quae ante oculos versantur, and see
next heretofore, cap. 2. sect. 7. from. a. to. m.
meruailouse, that Luther should be so regardelesse, and little touched with
grief at the calamity then present, as to undertake that marriage: only he
excuses it with Luthers Melancthon vbi supra, says. Atque ego rem hanc sic
gestam esse arbitror: est vir iste nequaquam ex ijs qui homines oderunt and
congressus fugiunt, quotidiana autem vitae illius vsum non ignoras, vnde
cogitarete catera quam me scribere melius vt opinor fuit:
sociable condition of life, and other vt supra. at. d. what daily use of
life, and professed concealment of other matters more convenient, to be
imagined then written, can these be, but such as had then been opened, had
touched Luther in his reputation:
matters (thereupon dependinge, such as are not to be vttred) which (says
Melancthon) ar more convenient for you to imagine, then me to write: for
(says he yett further) Melancthon ibide^. page 38. initio. says. Ego
naturam Lutherum arbitrer coegisse vt fieret maritus:
I am persuaded that Luther was a man enforced to marrye by nature; Hereunto I
add how that Calvin him self was enforced to confess of Luther that
(magnis vitijs laborat) he see Caluines words alleged by Schlusselburg. in
theol. Caluinae. l. 2. fol. 126. a. post med.
was subject to great vices. In respect whereof he earnestly Vtinam
recognoscendis suis vitijs plus operae dedisset: (Calvin apud Schlusselburge.
vbi supra.)
wishes that Luther had been more careful in reknowledginge his vices: whereto
I do likewise further annexe, that Luther lyinge thus open, acknowledged his
see this in Sleydans, commentar. in English. l. 3. An. 21. fol. 29. b. initio.
profession not to be of life or manners, but of doctrine Sleydan. ^bidem. at.
Anno 20. fo. 22. a. circa med.
wishinge that he were removed from the office of preachinge, because his
manners and life did not answer to his profession: wherein he was so censured
even by protestants them selves, that as appears by their own report,
Benedict Morgenstern. in tract. de Ecclesia. printed. Francofurti 1598. page
221. circa med. says of the Caluinistes. Si quando volunt iudulgere genio,
non verentur inter se dicere, body Lutheranice viue^uns.
if at any time they would give assent to the provocation of nature, they
blushe not to say emonge themselves (hodie Lutheranice viuemus) to day we will
live Lutheran like; which corruption into worse of life and manners in Luther
upon his foresaid defection from our church, was not peculier to him self,
but so propagated (as it were ex radice) from him to those his followers by
him withdrawn from our church and religion, that him self (not as by way of
amplification usual with preachers, when they make their complainte generally
for the offenses only of some few, but as speakeinge more respectiuelie and
directly to the point of comparison now touched) forbeareth not with great
grief to exclaim and say, Luther. in postilla super Euangel. Dominicae primae
Aduentus.
mundus etc. the world grows daily worse, men are now more reuengfull,
couetouse, licentiouse, then they were before in the papacy: And again says
Luther. Dominica 26. post Trinitatem.
he, before time when we were seduced by the pope, every man did willingly
follow good works, and now every man neither says nor knows any thing,
but how to get all to him self, by exaction, pillage, theft, lyinge, usury
etc. and yett more to the confessed obloquie of his own doctrine, he further
says, So says Luther. in sermonibus conuiuialibus Germ. fol. 55.
It is a wonderful thing and full of scandal, that from the time in which
the pure doctrine of the gospel, was first recalled to light, the world
should daily grow worse, etc. Whereto assenteth Wolfangus Musculus saying
etc. Musculus in locis commu. printed. Basileae 1537. in cap. de decall. in
explanat. 3. praecepti page 62. circa med says. Vt quod verum est fatear,
timeo hic admodum illis qui nostro saeculo veritatem euangelij Christi and
cognosce^tes and confitentes, vilius and contemptius se erga virtutem illius
gerunt, quam ij qui in erroribus papisticis versantur etc. imo sibi ipsis vsque
adeo facti sunt dissimiles, vt cum papatu fuerint in erroribus ac superstitione
religiosi, in luce veritatis agnitae sint ipsis saeculi huius filijs
profaniores, leuiores, temerariores, ac vaniores.
To confess the truth they are become so unlike themselves, that whereas in
the papacy they were religiouse in their error and superstition, now in the
light of the known truth, they are more profane etc. then the very sons
of this world: to all which Erasmus (a man houlden indifferently or rather
well see this in master Fox. Act. mon. printed. 1563. page 404. a. fine.
affected toward Luther) adds saying: Erasmus in epistola ad Vulturium
neocomum (written by him. Anno 1529.) says. Circumspice populum istum
euangelicum, etc. profer mihi quem istud euangelium ex commessatora sobrium,
etc. ex impudico reddiderit verecundum, ego tibi multos ostendam qui facti sunt
sespsis deteriores: see this saying of Erasmus mentioned by Sleydan in
English. at. Anno 1529. l. 6. fol. 83. b. fine, and see Erasmus in spongia
aduersus Huttenum.
Facti sunt seipsis deteriores, they exceed even them selves in wickedness,
whereof says he Erasmus in epist. ad fratres inferioris Germaniae, says.
Quos antea noueram puros, candidos, and fuci ignaros, eosdem vidi vbi se secta
(euangelica) dedissent, loqui capisse de puellis, etc. abiecisse preces,
impatientissimos, and ranos, viperinos in moribus, ac prorsus hominem exuisse,
expertus loquor: and he says yet further there. Noui monachum qui pro vna
duxerit tres etc. I knew a moncke who in steed of one wife married three, and
I know a priest, that after he had married a wife, found out that she was
married to another before. And many other like examples are here related of the
marragies of monckes and nuns, who do leave one another after marriage, by
the same law or right whereby they married them. I will not name to you a
certain priest whipte hear at Basile about the streets for his wickedness,
being of the same profession with these ghospellers etc. He testified
publicly that after he had once addicted him self to that sect, he ran into
all kind of wickedness: I will not say what he told of the whole sect, etc.
Hitherto Erasmus one of master Fox his Confessors in his acts and monuments:
expertus loquor: I affirm this of experience, in so much as their great
professor Paulus Eberus, successor to Luther in Witemberge, affirmed as in
respect hereof, that See this heretofore in the preface to the reader, next
before d. at..
men did justly doubt whether their euangelical congregation were the true
church or no: Hitherto but of the primitive church of protestants, when as,
primitiae spiritus, the first fruictes of their spirit not then yet
degenerated, should (as usually ever more in the primitive times) have given
testimony to the world of their more then ordinary zeal, virtue, and
godliness: And here now I but offer to the indifferent consideration of al
understanding readers, whether that this fore-mencioned licentiousenesse of
life, fatallie as it were fore-signified unto the world to be then
approachinge, especially in religiouse apostates, by ominouse and uncouth
sight of Osiander. in epitom. and centur. 16. page 90. ante med. reports,
how that toward the latter end of Anno 1523. Triburgiae in Misnia natus est
vitulus qui monachi curullati formam gerebat, and Hallae Saxoniae porcas e
scropha prodijt, qui sacerdotis caput habebat.
monstrouse byrthes, whereof one resembled a moncke (and as Suinglius Whereas
some nouellistes did missaply these mo^sters to the Roman clergy, Suinglius.
tom. 2. ad Lutheri conses. respons. printed. 1581. fol. 44. 1. a. post med.
immediatlye after a long inuectiue against Luther says as to Luther. Quantum
ipse videre possum curullati illius vituli, qui non multis abhinc annis in
Saxonia monstroso partu in lucem aeditus est, verum misterium and propria
significatio, nondum plene excussa est ab ijs, qui illud interpretari conati
fuerunt, etc.
insinuates) points principally to Luther; And another resembled a priest,
poyntinge likewise (as others conceived) principally to Suinglius, and the
same hapninge in Germany even the very year, See this of Suinglius hereafter,
cap. 5. sect. 3. at d. e. g. as hapninge Anno 1522.
next after that Suinglius with so many his fellow apostate priests
exclaimed publikly for wives, and the year next before, that Luther cast
Osiander. vbi supra. lib. 1. cap. 36. page 97. fine, says. Hoc Anno 1524.
Lutherus monasticum habitum deposuit.
off his religiouse habit, Osiander. Centur. 16. lib. 1. cap. 40. page 109.
circa med. says. Hoc Anno. 1525. Lutherus vxorem duxit Catharinam a Bora quae
monacha fuerat.
marryinge him self (presently after) to a professed nun, and in the very
same year that Osiander. vbi supra l. 1. c. 3. c. 33. page 90. circa med.
says. Leonardus Koppen septimo Aprilis die 1523. noueni moniales genere
nobiles ex monasterio Nixmisen extractas, Witebergum adduxit, inter quas fuit
Catharina a Bora quae postea Luthero nupsit:
Leonard Koppen (to begin the dance) withdrewe at once Katerine Bore (who
married Luther) and eight other renegate nuns from one monastery; was not in
all probability, the true and principal motive of the apostasy and first
reuolte of so many others, as at the time of Luthers innovation, joined with
him in reuoltinge from our catholic church: for as Luther, though
confessedly living in the bebinninge of his section, at. i.
chaste before his reuolte, did presently afterward affirm, that yt next
heretofore, at. o.
was not in his power to be without a woman, whereupon he accomplished his
foresaid scandalouse marriage, so likewise John Bale, Bernardine Ochine,
Conrade Pelicome, Melancthon, Peter Martyr, Bucer, Oecolampadius, Suinglius,
and so many other of his colleagues, who as inflamed all with lust see this
hereafter, cap. 5. sect. 3. throughoute.
exclamed out for wives, and all the rest, that so then revolted from our
catholic church, began the same likewise with breach of their then
undertaken vowed chastetie, and with pretended marriage thereupon ensuyinge,
the which many of them, as namelye Peter Martyr, Ochine, and Bucer, did
likewise most scandalously accomplish even with Peter Martyr being a reguler
chanon of the order of S. Austine, married at Stratsburge dame Catherine the
loose nun that ran out of her cloister at Metz in Loraine: Whereof see D.
Hardinge in his detection. printed. 1568. fol. 36. b. and of Bucers like
marriage see Melancthon, in consil. Theolog. page 569. For Ochine, see in the
three conuersions etc. part. 3. c. 16. fol. 350. b. initio.
vowed nuns: so in like manner the late Osiander. centur. 16. l. 4. c. 18.
page 948. paulo ante med. says. Interea Archiepiscopus Coloniensis elector
Gobardus Baro Truchesius, reformationem religionis meditabatur, and matrimonium
Agneti quae monialis fuerat, promisit, camque tandem in vxorem duxit: and see
further there, page 953. post med.
Archbushop of Cullen, began likewise his pretended reformation of religion
with marriage, and the same also to a professed nun. And such like
Vow-breakers were the revolted revolted votaries, as namely the protestant
bushops ensuying, Hooper of Worcester: Barlowe of Chichester, Downham of
Westchester: Scorie of Hereforde: Barkelye of Bathe and Wels: Couerdall of
Exceter: and diverse others, who all of them were professed monckes, to whom
might be added Cra^mer of Canterbury, Sands of York, with diverse others all
of them formerlie catholic priests,
votaries, who upon the like motive and occasion began the alteracion of
religion which happened in our own contrie of England: Hitherto of Luthers
reported licentiouse life, as for his answerable sudden death, (whereof
further strange circumstancies are constantly delivered by our Catholic
writers, whom I do purposelie forbear) I refer that to the credible
testimony of Chitraeus in orat. funebri Christophori ducis Megapolitani,
recitinge certain examples of improuided and sudden death says, Ioannes
Mathesius, etc. tribus post concionem horis, apoplexia subito extinctus
expirauit: Lutherus ipse vesperi mensae assidens, paucis post mediam noctem
horis decessit: Hieronymum Velleru^ mane in lecto mortuum domestici inuenerunt:
David Chitraeus, a prime Lutherane: referringe now lastly to equal
consideration, what small reason master White had, to say of Luther, so
says master White in his way to the church, printed. 1608. page 428.
this was the end of that good man, whose memory shall be pretiouse in the
church for ever, and florishinge as the rod of Aaron, laid up in the
tabernacle; And thus much breiflye concerning Luther Whereupon I do without
al in infering or further urging upon my part, refer over to the readers
own iudgmente, whether we are to join with our learned adversaries, in
esteeminge and tearminge him master Gabriell Powell in his consideration of
the papists supplication, printed. 1604 page 70. prope initium, says of him.
Holy saint Luther says etc. and see Luther for such Rubricated in master
Fox his calander.
Holy saint Luther, a see these other ensuyinge titles heretofore in the
preface to the christian reader, at. n. o. p. q. r. s.
man sent of God to lighten the world, the Helias, conductor and chariote of
Israel, to be reverenced next after Christ and Paul; greater then whom lived
not since the apostles times, with diverse other like hyperbolicall titles: or
rather, that (in regard of so many plain alleged premises, taken from the
writings and evident confession of Luther and learned protestants them
selves) we are to think, the so general opinion had of him, to be (as in
part or type) that foretoulde 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
efficacy of error wherewith God (beholdinge in his just judgment that deluge
of sin, which so ouerflowed in former catholic times) suffered the northren
parts of the world, to have been at Luthers cominge (as were the eastren
parts thereof, of Mahomets) over groslye deluded.

VII.
TO this discourse thus severally made of Luther, I will only annexe (as in
attendance upon him) Iacobus Andreas termed also Schmidlin, Luthers prime
scholar, and the greatest enlarger of his doctrine, who being Osiander.
centur. 16. l. 1. cap. 7. page 13. ante med. says. Felicem operam suam
praestitit clarissimus vir D. D. Iacobus andrea praepositus and cancellarius
Academiae Tubigensis.
chaunclor in the university of Tubinge, was no less Osia^der. centur. 16.
lib. 4. cap. 43. page 1084. post med. and 1085. says. Anno 1590. ex hac
mortali vita in patriam caelestem euocatus est vir clarissimus d^ctor Iacobus
Andreas, praepositus and cancellarius Academiae Tubigensis etc. fuit latin,
grace, and hebraite, doctus in philosophia theologia, and in artibus dicendi
ita exercitatus, vt disputando nulli cederet, etc. Illustrissimus Dux
Witembergicus eum Ecclesiae Goppingensi praefecit, quo in loco etiam generalis
superattendentis officium illi commissum est, etc. multas ecclesias pie
reformauit, etc. multis colloquijs theologicis interfuit, and collocutorem
magna dexteritate praestitit, lectiones etiam theologicas in vniuersitate
Tubingensi and Lipsensi, cum admiratione and profectu auditorum dedit, etc.
multas and magnas profectiones etc. suscepit and quidem in longinquas regiones,
nam and Daniam, Saxoniam, Misriam, Turingiam, Pranconiam, and Sueuiam
perlustrauit, quinetiam in Galliam vsque legatus eo missus penetrauit, etc.
sepultus est Tub^^^^ honorificentissime multis cum piorum lachrimis.
famous and honored in Germany, then ever was Calvin or Beza at Geneua; in
so much at the special appointed colloquie, at Mompelgar, he publicly
encountered and Hereof see Osianders report at large, in centur. 16. lib. 4.
cap. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. and see there, page 1040. circa
med. and Antonie Faius, de vita and obitu Beza, printed Geneuae, 1606. page 54.
initio, confesses of the protestant divines of Witemberg. saying. Cum
Mompelgardo abirent Witembergici, eorumquae literae volitarent emissae per
plaerasque longinquissimas Germania oras ad suos, qui deinde in Gynetaeis and
aulis quorundam principum, Iacobi Andrea de Beza triumphum ebuccinabant etc.
ouermatched Beza. To speak but briefly of this man, Hospinianus (a learned
protestant writer) reports his great pride Hospinian. in histor. sacram.
printed. 1602. Anno 1509 fol. 389. a. post med. says. Iacobus Andreae in tota
vita sua manifestissima fraud deprehensus nunquam tamen erubuit, doctrinam and
sententiam suam de relig^onis capitibus mutauit saepius, vnde Anhaldini etc.
promittunt se ex eius autographis demonstrare posse ipsum octidui spacio ter
suam de controuersis capitibus fidem and confessionem mutasse: etc. couuitijs,
calumnijs, mendacijs, sarcasmis impudentibus, etc. certauit, de se ipso
magnifice sensit, reliquos omnes prae se contempsit,
and inconstancy, and discoursinge further of his life, from the testimony of
the learned Lutheranes them selves, alleges them, chargeinge him, that he
Hospinian. vbi supra. fol. 389. b. initio, alleges Selnecerus (the Lutheran)
who was companion with Andreas in his (fore mentioned) travails in these
words: Selnecerus peregrinationum (Iacobae Andreae) indiuisus comes and
socius, de ipso saepe coram multis bonis fideque dignis viris dixisse fertur:
quod nullum omnino habeat Deum, si Mammonem and Bachum excipias, nam se nunquam
audiuisse, vel coniectura aliqua saltem animaduertere potuisse, etc. quod vel
cubitum iturus, vel de lecto surrecturus, aut orationem Dominicam recitauerit,
aut vllam Dei mentionem fecerit; in reliqua vero vita, dictis, factis,
consilijs, nullam pietatis scintillam, summam vero leuitatem semper
deprehendisse: eundem Selnecerus and Andreas Musculus nominarunt erronem,
leuissimum scurram, qui vt ex dictis and factis eius cognoscatur, neque
religionem vllam habeat etc.
had no God except Mammon and Bacchus, that he never prayed goinge to bed, nor
rysinge from thence, that in the residue of his life, he showed no spark of
godliness, but great lightness in his words, deeds and councels: And he
alleges further Sturmius (a learned Caluiniste) charginge him with
Hospinian. ibidem. fol. 389. b. versus finem, says. Sturmius in sua
apologetica contra Schmidelinum sic scribit, virgae furibus inuentae sunt
contra auaritiae crimen, and lapidationes adulteris, si ab his duobus
criminibus Iacobus Andreas solutus est, non est quod metuat, ego facile fero
quod celatum est occultum esse, neque ipsum scruter etc. quid secum diuitiarum
e Saxonia and Misnia abstulit, scio id pauperum esse debere, and ad pauperem
fiscum redigi etc. and tam magnum esse ipsius sacrilegium, quam magnae opes
sunt quas secum deportasse dicitur.
the crimes of covetousness, adultery, robbinge of the poor, and sacrilege:
Besides much ibidem. fol. 389. b. and 390. a.
more there further alleged: in so much as Lauather (a learned adversary)
confesses and writes for news unto Zanchius how that this In Zanchius in
his epistles, printed. 1609. lib. 2. page 340. Lauather. writes to Zanchius
saying: Schmidelinum (alias Iacobum Andream) fertur apud nos in adulterio cum
ancilla deprehensum, magnum odium etc. incurrisse etc.
Andreas was taken in public adultery, recitinge with all certain ibidem.
paulo post.
verses thereupon then made thereof, by the Caluinistes.

MELANCTHON. CHAPT. IV.
AS concerning Philipp Melancthon, a man of such eminent In Pezelius in his
argument and objection mentioned, next hereafter at. h. part. 1. in epist.
dedic. fol. B. ij. initio. it is said of Melanctho^ co^mendantur scripta
Philippea hoc nomine, quia sunt ab huiusmodi doctore quem omnes pij facti sunt
and adhuc fatentur singular fuisse spiritus sancti organum, tot donis
illustratum test Luthero, quot Deus in nullum alium hominem in hoc terrarum
orb viuentem illa aetate contulit.
rank in the protestants church, as that he was reputed fellow the
Protestante divines in colloquio Altenburgensi, printed. 1570. in 3. respons.
electoral. ad obiectas hypothes. fol. 420. b. post med. say. Prouidentia (Dei)
singulari factum est, vt huic delecto repurgatori and illustratori doctrinae
caelestis Luthero, socius ac (...) fidelis adiungeretur reuerendus and memoria
aeterna ipse quoque dignissimus D. Philippus Melancthon.
labourer with Luther in the the^ pretended course of reformation, and
accordingly thereupon termed. Philippus Melancthon Lutheri fidus Achates
fuit. Hospinian. in concord. discord. fol. 118. a fine,
Lutheri fidus Achates, in regard of whose supposed worth see heretofore,
cap. 1. sect. 1. fine, in the margin at. h.
Luther wished that all his own writings were burned, Melancthons book of
common places only safe, and preserved: affirminge yet further so says
Luther. in colloquijs mensalibus c. de patribus ecclesiae.
that the apology of Philip Melancthon, does far excel all the doctors of
the church, and exceed even Austine him self: To allege somewhat briefly of
this so great a man, yt appears from his own writings that he begun his
reformation with seditiouse doctrine against the state, to that end in plain
words enhablinge see this in Melancthons consilia theol^gica. part. 1. page
314. circa and post med.
the inferior magistrates to (reform or) alter religion, and to overthrow
idolatry against the (contrary) edictes of the superior etc. Wherein as he
joined with of Luther see heretofore, cap. 2. sec. 7. throughout.
Luther and of Suinglius see hereafter, cap. 5. sect. 2. prope finem, at. r. s.
sect. 4. throughout.
Suinglius (men no less forward in this course then him self) so likewise
did he no less then they, pretend Lauather. de spectris printed Geneuae.
1570. part. 1. cap. 15. page 85 circa med. says. Melancthon scribit in libro
suo de Anima, quod ipse quaeda^ spectra viderit, etc.
apparitions: As concerning his doctrine of the Trinity, he writes
suspiciouslie, in affirminge that Melancthon in loc. commun. of Anno 1545. in
so much as he is for this doctrine reprehended by Stancarus, l. 4. de Trinitate.
there are three diuinities, as there are three persons, and in his further
answerable teachinge that the Pezelius in libro Argume^torum and obiectionum de
praecipuis articulis etc. quae passim extant in scriptis reuerendi viri
Melancthonis, printed Geneuae. Anno. 588. part. prima. de tribus personis) page
74. post med. delivers Melancthons doctrine hereof to be that: Cum dicimus
tres esse personas in diuinitate, etc. nomen personae, hoc loco collocandum est
in praedicamento substantiae.
name of person, is to be placed (in praedicamento substantiae) in the
predicament of substance, whereupon does follow according to his fore said
doctrine, that as there are three distinct persons, so likewise three
distinct substances: he also further taught that Melancthon in loc. commun.
Anno 1558. page 40. in epistola ad electorem. Torgae da^. 3. Octobris. Anno
1552. Melancthon in loc. commun. of Anno 1561. page 41. initio, says. Natura
diuina fuit obediens patri, quieuit, cessit irae aeterni patris aduersus
peccatum.
the son according to his divinity, resisted his fathers wrath against
our sins: that even the Pelargus in his admonitio de Arianis, printed. 1605.
page 43. confesses that Melancthon wrote thus in epistola ad lectorem
Brandeburge. Anno 53. and 12. Ian. whereof he there in vain goethe about to
excuse Melancthon: As also there page 45. he confesses that Melancthon further
says, the Son makes intercession, is his fathers minister, priest, and
mediator, answeringe in excuse thereof, that he meante the same. Potissimum de
humana natura, implyinge so thereby, that he meant yt also (though not so
principally) of his divine nature.
divine nature of the son according to his divinity, requesteth glory to
be given to him. In so much as Stancarus (though in most things else a
Caluiniste) said to Calvin (who erred herein with Melancthon) so says
Stancarus contra Calvin. k. 4. and see him also, in libro de Trinitate.
what devil o Calvin has seduced thee to speak with Arius against the son
of God, that thou mighst show him to be deprived of his glory, and now to
ask it given him, as though he had not always had it? that Antichriste of
the north whom thou doste impudentlie adore, Melancthon the grammarian has
done this: Furthermore as concerning marriage, Melancthon was to licentiouse
in his doctrine thereof, for he not only teaches that in case of so says
Melancthon, in consil. theologic. part. 1. page 648. affirminge also there
further, this to be the doctrine of Luther and Pomera^: and see also there
further. page 650.
divorce, and dismission upon adultery, the very offendinge party whether
man or woman may marry again, but also did (no less then of Luther see
heretofore, cap. 2. sect. 6. at. m. n.
Luther) openly affirm and defend Melancthon. in his concilia theologica.
printed. Anno 160. page 134. prop^ initium. advises in behalf of king. H. 8.
(whose divorce from his first wife he thought unlawful) saying. Respo^deo si
vult rex successioni prospicere, quanto satius est id facere sine infamia
prioris coniugij. Ac potest id fieri sine vllo periculo conscientiae cuiusquam
aut famae, per polygamiam etc. quia polygamia non est res omnino inusitata,
habuerunt multas coniuges, Abraham, David, and alij sancti viri, vnde apparet
polygamiam non esse contra ius diuinum.
polygamie or plurality of wives, not forbearinge by his published writing,
to propounde the same to vt supra.
our late sovereign king H. 8. fittinge and necessary to have been by him
observed and put in practice: In respect of which his licentiousenes in
doctrine, I cannot but commend to indifferent construction, as well the
complainte of those his own protestant brethren that in Hospinians Concordia.
discor. fol. 86. b. circa med. it is said. Quod autem ad comparationem
Philippi cum Salomone attinet, qui in gratiam concubinarum suarum idolatra
factus sit vt nesciri possit saluus ne an non factus sit, qua comparatione
nuper Lipsiae, Zuittauiae, and alibi locorum vsi sunt etc.
compared Melancthon unto Solomon, who in likinge of his concubines became an
idolater, as also the like further accusation of Andreas Osiander, who
(though him self a learned Lutherane, and by master D. Field and other,
defended for see Andreas Osiander by master Field. of the church. printed.
Anno 1606. lib. 3. c. 42. page 170. ante med. and by Luc. Osi^nders, centur.
16. l. 3. c. 1. page 554. and 555. and 556.
orthodoxall) affirmed that see this reported by Sleydan Englished. lib. 22.
at. Anno 1550 fol. 3. 59. a. post med.
Luther and Melancthon had compyled a divinity etc. which sauoreth more of the
flesh the^ of the spirit: hereto also is not improper that whereas from Luthers
foresaid see heretofore, cap. 2. sect. 5. at. d.
reported doctrine concerning Moses, and the ten commandementes, did arise
the libertine sect of the Antinomi, the protestant divines of Mansfield, in
confessione Mansfeldensium ministrorum, tit. de Antinomico, fol. 89. and 90.
report the doctrine of the Antinomi to be: Si scortus es, si scortator, si
adulter vel alioquin peccator, creed and in via salutis ambulas; cum in
peccatis demersus es ad summum vsque si credis in mea beatitudine versaris:
omnes qui circa Moysen (hoc est december praecepta) versantur, ad diabolum
pertinent: ad patibulum cum Moyse, see heretofore, c. 2. sect. 5. at. d.
Luthers confessed opinion, and compare it with this of the Antinomi, and then
judge of their agreement: this springinge of the Antinomi from Luthers was so
certain, that Sleydan Luthers scholar says thereof. This year spronge up
the sect of the Antinomi, etc. these do affirm that repentance is not to be
taught by the ten commandementes etc. and again (agreeable to Luthers
doctrine mentioned heretofore, cap. 2. sect. 4. at. s.) they determine that
whatsoever a man's life be, were it never so sinful, yet is he justified if he
believe only the promises of the gospel; the chief of them was Islebius.
Sleydan, l 12. at. Anno 1538. fol. 162. b. post med. and Osiander in centur.
16. l. 2. cap. 39. page 311. circa med. says. Docuit Islebius decalogum non
esse docendum in Ecclesia, sed petinere in curiam: and page 312. ante med. he
says of Islebius: errorem suum Antinomi cum publicis scriptis disseminauit,
and in errorem suum viros aliquot doctos pertraxit, videtur erroris occasionem
sumpsisse ex scriptis Lutheri non recte intellectis: This their springinge
from Luther, was in regard of the fludgate of sin thereby opened, such a
scandal to him, that to clear him self he was at last though to late,
enforced to repair his creditt with reprehension of them.
who accordingly rejected Moses, and the ten commandments, teachinge with
all further that, vt supra. in the margin at. s. and see in Osiander. centur.
16. page 311. post med.
if thou be an adulterer or other sinner, do but believe and thou art in way
of salvation: whose monstrouse error though openinge a fludgate to al sin
and wickedness was never the less defended by the Hutterus public professor
at Witeberg. in his libri concordiae explicatio, printed. Anno 1608. art. 5. c.
1. page 478. post med. says. Sed neque intra angustos terminos mansit iste
error (Antinomicus) quin mox sumptis viribus latius serpsit, etc. ita quidem vt
Melancthon in postrema editione locorum communium, errorem istum haud obscure
interpolauerit, etc. Quid? quod Anno 59. recentiores Antinomi, qui sese
scholasticos Witsbergenses nominaru^t, erroris istius defensionem public and
in co^spectu totius ecclesiae susceperunt, quinimo eousque furor iste
Antinomicus creuit vt Anno etiam 70. in hac ipsa Witeberg nostra, nonnulli
theologia candidati, pro consequendo gradu in theologia summo etc. istum
errorem public proposuerint, ac defendere conati sint, quemadmodum patet ex
dispurationibus illius thesi. 38. and 39.
divines of Witemberge, by In actis colloquij Aldeburgensis, printed Lipsiae
1570. page 94. circa med. the protestante divines do charge Islebius saying:
Islebio cum in aula potens esset acerrime de suggestu pro liberate Antinomica
dimicante etc.
Islebius (a learned Lutherane and of great esteem) also by in Actis colloqu.
Aldeberg. page 94. post med. yt is said. Post mortem autem Lutheri cum
Flaccius, Illiricus, and multi alij illius accomplices factiosi sordes illas
Antinomicas etc. resumeret, and cum non paruo applausu multitudinis etc. late
spargeret etc.
Illiricus chief of the centurie writers, (whom master Bell terms a so
says master Bell, in his regiment of the church, page 28. fine.
very famous writer and most worthy defensor of the Christian truth)
Melancthon emonge the rest afforded also his like answerable help herein, not
forbearinge (as is confessed) even see next heretofore, at. u.
in the last edition of his common places, not obscurelie to renew this error:
As concerning his much noted inconstancy in doctrine after his reuolte from
our church, the same is no less then evident (to omit other examples) in the
only question of the real presence, in defense whereof he says most
co^fidentlie to Oecolampadius. I in libro epistolarum Oecolampadij and
Suinglij, printed. 1592. lib. 3. page 603. Melancthon in his epistle thereto
Oecolampadius says hereof. Non modo cogitaui ipse quid in vtramque partem
dici possit, sed inquisiui etiam veterum ea de re sententias, etc. cum omnia
quae in vtraque part firmissima videntur expendi, dicam pace tua non tamen eo
in sententiam tuam, nullam enim firmam rationem inuenio, quae conscientiae
discedenti a proprietate verborum Christi satisfaciat, etc.
have not only my self thought what may be said on either part, but have
also searched out the judgments of the ancient fathers in this matter etc.
and haueinge considered of all things which seem most strong on either
part, I must by your leave tell you, that yett I am not of your opinion, for
I cannot find any firm reason, which may satisfy my conscience to depart
from the propriety of Christ's words etc so he, with much See there further,
page 618. and 644. post med. and in Hospinians hist. sacram. part. 2. fol. 68.
b. initio.
more full and vehement discourse further had of this matter, and yett how
Melancthon afterward altered his opinion hereof, and embraced Caluinisme,
Osiander. ce^tur. 16. page 615. initio, and Hospinian. in his histor. sacram.
part. 2 fol. 115. a. circa med. says hereof. Philippus sequentibus Annis
long aliter de hac ipsa causa and sensit, and scripsit.
is sufficiently testified by (g) Osiander and Hospinian. vt supra at. d.
Hospinian: neither did his inconstancy appear in this only point, but so
remarkable in many more, that he was therefore taxed by such as otherwise much
honored him, in so much as the protestante divines in the colloquie at
Altemberge, though acknowledginge Melancthon for the protestants in colloquio
Altemburgensi, printed. in 4. Anno 1570 fol. 510. b. paulo post med. do there
term Melancthon. Optimum and sanctismum virum etc. and yet in regard of his
known inconstancy it is there, fol. 377. b. circa med. said of Melancthon.
Illud saltem de locis Philippi paucis and modeste addimus, primum constare
Philippum toties eos mutasse, and rebus and verbis, vt quibus sit fides
adhibenda in dubio est: Lutherum istam crebram mutationem improbasse ex fide
dignis accepimus; and ibidem. in epilog. collat. Saxonic. theolog. fol. 404. a.
prope finem, they further say. Quam saepe suos libros variarit and mutarit
(Melancthon) nimis vere pontificij nobis obijciunt, etc.
a most good and holy man, do yett further confess saying thus see next
heretofore at. *. And see further acta colloquij Alteburg. page 326. prope
finem.
Much we add breflie, and modestly, concerning in Hospinians concordia
discor. fol. 109. b. post med. says. It is thus reported of Melancthon. Sic
enim ille scribit tam de confessione quam apologia loquens: Vellem percurrisses
articulos fidei, in quibus si nihil putaueris esse vitij reliqua vtrumque
tractabimus: subinde enim mutandi sunt, atque ad occasiones accommodandi, and
see Melancthon. ep. 2. ad Lutherum, where he says. In apologia quetidie multa
mutamus, subinde enim mutanda sunt, and ad occasiones acco^modanda.
Philippe Melancthons common places, how it is evident that he has so often
almost changed them, both in substance and words, that is now doubtful
which of them a man should believe, and we are credibly informed, that Luther
reproved in Melancthon, this often changinge: the papists do over truly
obiecte to us his often altringe, and changinge of his Books: Hitherto the
divines in the colloquie of Altemberge, whereto is not wantinge Melan^thons
own testimony, wherein he affirms his change (and temporisinge) according
to the occasion of the time. In so much as he would have assented to
acknowledge the in the book entitled. centuria epistolarum theologicarum etc.
printed. 1597. epist. 74. quae est Melancthonis, page 244. post med. Melancthon
says. Quemadmodu^ sunt aliqui Episcopi qui praesunt pluribus ecclesijs, itae
Romanus pontifex praest omnibus episcopis, hanc canonicam politiam vt ego
existimo nemo prudens improbat, neque improbare debet, etc. quare quod ad hunc
articulum attinet de superioritate pontificia etc. non est dissensio etc.
facile potest constitui concordia in hoc articulo, si de caeteris articulis
conuenire possent:
popes primacie, and to have houlden both religions for indifferent, or such
as might be compounded in all points Melancthon. ibidem page 250. circa med.
says. In caeteris articulis omnibus iniri ratio concordiae sine magna
difficultate potest, sed nodus de missa valde inexplicabilis est: and ibidem.
page 257. poss med. he further says. Meo iudicio nullus est articulus
difficilis praeter vnam missa causam.
sauinge the mass. Lastly concerning such points of doctrine as Melancthon
was resolved of, he would not yett deliver his opinion of them plainly and
sincerely, but with doubtful the protestant divines in colloquio
Altemburgensi, printed. 1570. in epilog. collat. Saxonic. theolog. fol. 403. b.
initio, say. Multa sunt in ijs libellis (Philippi Melancthonis) in corpus
illud congestis etc. quae ita concinnata sunt art mirabili, vt tum male tum
recte sentientes, pro sese interpretari valiant:
equivocation, and the same so scandalouse, that Osiander. in centur. 16. l.
3. c. 17. page 614. circa med. says. Caluinus crebris ad Melancthonem literis
datis, hortatus est cum vt aperte and perspicue, sententiam suam de caena
Domini profiteretur, etc. sed Philippus neque apertam and ab omnibus
ambiguitatibus alienam confessionem sibi extorqueri passus est: and see further
there. page 615. initio, and l. 3. c. 30. page 667. post med. where he
exemplifieth Melancthons equivocation.
Calvin therefore persuaded him by letters to profess his opinion plainly
and perspicuouselie, but (as is confessed) could vt supra at. k.
not therein prevail: in respect of which premises doctor Ioachim. Morlinus
(a learned Lutheran divine of the city of Brumswicke, and scholar to Philipp
Melancthon) speakinge at one time in his public lecture of Melancthons well
deserving of the church, yet withal said, as in regard of his other bad
deserving, Morlinus in public. lect. see this reeported by the protestant
writer Schlusselburge. in his theolog. Caluinist. l. 2. art. 10.
in his (Philippe) laudet te diabobolus and non ego: in these points let the
devil praise thee Philippe, and not I: and as all doubtful or rather
dispayringe of his salvation, further said unto his hearers. see Schlusserburg.
ibidem.
Si possem ego redimere salutem Philippi nostri praeceptoris etc. if I could
redeem the salvation of our master Philipp Melancthon with the peril of my
life, I would do it, but he is taken out of this world, and carried to the
judgment of the horrible tribunal of God to plead his cause there etc. and
thus much breefly of Melancthon, who is pretended to have been the sea next
heretofore, cap. 4. sect. 1. initio. in the margin. at. *.
most singular instrument of the holy ghost that lived in this age: the Beza
in Iconibus, printed. 1580. fol. D. 11. says. Quis te Melancthon Luthero
diuinitus succenturiatum pro dignitate celebrauerit, singular nostri saeculi
ornamentum etc.
most singular ornament of our age: Peter Martyr in his defensio etc. aduersus
Gardinerum etc. printed. 1581. in dialog. de praesentia corporis Christi, loc.
6. and page 109. prope finem, says. Philippus Melancthon veteribus patribus
aetate solum est inferior, eruditione vero ac pietate non item* and cum doctore
Martino Luthero conferri potest, nam illum sanitate, scriptis, ac doctrina and
scholasticis laboribus adaequarit saltem si non vicit, etc.
equal at the least if not superior to Luther in goodlines learning and
pains: vt supra. at. 3.
inferior to the ancient fathers only in time, but not in learning and
piety etc. the so say. Ministri Pinzoniensis, etc. apud Sta^carum fol. m. 8.
and see heretofore. cap. 4. sect. 1. initio. at.. Luther preferinge Melancthon
before S. Austine, and the other Fathers.
doctor of doctors, the divine of divines, who being one, is better then a
hundredth Austines.

BVCER. II.
TO entreat now somewhat next after Melancthon, of Martine Bucer, a man of
so great account with our adversaries, that Simon Grinaeus See these words
of Grinaeus in Bucers scripta Anglioma, printed. 1577. before the bebinninge of
the book under the title thereof. Iudicia doctissimoru^ aliquot de Martino
Bucero.
grants to him the palm of pre-eminence in holy writ: that Calvin
likewise terms him See Caluines words alleged. ibidem.
the most faithful doctor of Christ's church, above whom is almost none:
that Sir John Cheek acknowledges him for their Sr. John Cheek alleged
ibidem, says of Bucers death, magistre orbati sumus, quo maiorem vix
vniuersus orbis caperet:
master, greater then whom the universal world scarf had, and that See
this in the letter of the university, extant in Bucers scripta Anglicana, page
944. post med. where they term Bucer, sanctissimum hominem atque plane diuinum.
the whole university of Cambridge commended him for a man most holy and
plainly divine: with much more like, from other Peter Martyr in his epistles
annexed to his common places in English. epist. 48. page 148. a. post med.
says. Bucer the most excellent divine of our age. And master Whitguifte in
his defense etc. page 522. circa med. terms Bucer, a reverend learned,
painful and sound father.
protestante writers; This man was before his reuolte from our church a
Osiander. centur. 16. l. 1. cap. 33. page 88. initio, says. Multi monachi and
in his Bucerus lect^ libello Lutheri de votis monasticis, monasterio
deseruerunt, and doctrinam a Luther^ repurgatam amplexi sunt.
a professed moncke, and upon his vt supra at. q.
readinge of Luthers book of vows gave over his monastery, and took a see
this in Melancthons confilia theolog. page 569.
wife: and whereas the Archbushop of Cullen made as then pretense of reforminge
religion (whose successor under like pretexte broke his vow and married
Osiander. centur. 16. l. 4. c. 18. page 988. paulo ante med. says. Interea
archiepiscopus Coloniensis reformationem religionis meditabatur, and
matrimonium Agneti qua monialis fuerat promisit, eamque tandem aperte vxorem
duxit.
him self (as did Bucer) even to a professed nun) the said Archbushopp sent
see this in Osiander. centur. 16. l. 1. c. 48. page 344. circa med.
for Bucer unto Bonna the place of the episcopal sea, and made choice of him,
as of a fit instrument for the publishinge of such his then intended
reformation: As in like manner he was for the like purpose afterward sent for
into England, and placed divinity see Bucers scripta Anglicana, page 885. post
med.
reader at Cambridge, whereupon ensued the alteration of religion in our
contrie: As concerning his novel and libertine doctrines by him published, he
taught that when Bucer. in enarrat in epist. ad Romanos, printed. 1536 in c. 9.
page 396. paulo post med. says. Testatus est Dominus, ego indurabo cor eius
and non dimittet populum meum, Exodus 4. Atqui Dominus loquitur quam
simplicissime, non agit cum suis qui vn^iot (infantes) sunt anigmatis, pater
filios suos docet plane; ergo poscit ratio pietatis, ^t quae Dominus tam in hac
historiae quam alibi in eandem sententiam de iudicijs suis disserit,
intelligamus simpliciter: and page 397. a. circa med. he says. Non disputant
sancti cur iubeat vocare Deus, quos tamen non vult venire, imo quos indurat ne
veniant: and ibidem. page 394. b. fine. He further says. Voluit Deus
Pharaonem iussui suo non obtemperare, imo vt ei repugnaret ipse in eo effecit:
fecit itaque Pharo, quod Deus eum volebat facere, imo quod ipse Deus faciebat
in eo, nec potuit aliquid: etc.
God said of Pharo I will harden his heart, he spoke most simply, without
figure. That accordingly vt supra at. y.
God willed that Pharo should not obey his commandment, yea he wrought in
him that he should resist it: also that vt supra at. y.
God calls some whom he would not have to come, but hardneth them least
they should come: concludinge and saying in plain terms. Bucer. in epist.
ad Romanos in c. 1. page 94. b. ante med. says. Quomodo intelligam Deum non
velle peccatum meum, esseque eius authorem? si quis videat cacum impingentem,
nec posse non cadere si ei manum suam non porrigat, eumque regat, nolit autem
ille manum suam caeco praebere and patiatur eum cadere, obsecro quis non dicat
eum casum caci huius voluisse, eiusque fuisse causam? Iam Deus hoc amplius mei
peccati causa est etc. quia Deus in vtero matris mea, me cum hac peruersitate
ingenij mei atque peccandi necessitate condidit atque formanuit: and see him
furthere there, page 95. b. circa and post med.
How should I think that God would not my sin, and is author thereof? if
one see a blind man stumblinge who cannot but fall unless he houlde the
blind man by the hand, which he does not but suffers him to fall, who
will not say, that he willed the blind man's fall, and was cause thereof? but
God is much more the cause of my sins etc. because he created me in my
mothers womb, with this peruersenes of my disposition and necessity of
sinninge etc. A saying so direct and less destitute of all true excuse, that
it is for such specially recited and rejected, by the protestant author
Albertus see this saying so recited by Grawerus, in his absurda absurdorum
etc. cap. 5. de (...) fol. 3. 4.
Grawerus, rector of the university of Issebium: thus taught Bucer with much
more to the same purpose, so plain and euidente, that D. (...) in Bucers (...)
Anglicana, page 931. ante med.
Pearne therefo^^ charg^^ Bucer with houldinge directly that God i^ the ^uthor
of sin: then which opinion was never heresy more execrable: As concerning
his doctrine of marriage and divorce, the same was so licentiouse or rather
dissolute, that he forbeared not to allow, and defend liberty of divorce, and
marriage again in case of the sea Bucer in his scripta Anglicana, de regn^
Christi, lib. 2. cap. 26. page 114. etc. 4. 1. page 12^ ante med. Where he
admits marriage again in case of either parties voluntary absence for one
year: vel vnum annum vol^ns absit etc.
ones departure from the other, in case also of see this there. l. 2. c. 37.
page 115. post med. and cap. 40. initio.
Homicide or theft, or but Bucer. ibidem. lib. 2. cap. 37. page 115. ante med.
and cap. 40. page 120. post med.
repayringe to the company or banquets of immodest persons: likewise in case
of Bucer. ibid. c. 42. page 123. prope fine^. and 124. circa med.
incurable infirmity of the woman by child birth, or of the man by lunacie
or otherwise, whereby either party is become unable to render marriage
right, in these and many other such like cases he yett further generally
Bucer. ibidem. c. 42. page 124. prope finem. see also the marginal note there
where is set down. Conclusio de eo quod and alijs qua^ fornicationis ac causis
concedenda sine legitima diuortia, nonaque mire connubia: And in the text
there yt is said: hac adferenda putaui ad eam explicanda^ quastionem, number
co^cedi etc. possit diuertiu^ facere and adulteras transire nuptias, alijs quam
fornicationis and stupri de causis: ex quibus omnibus si rite and ex verbo Dei
ponderentur, satis liquebit nominem nec virum, nec mulier^^, cui opus sit ad
been beateque viuendum coniuge, ac coninge cohabitante, aut coningij necessaria
officia faciente, prohiberi debere, quin vir talem quarat vxorem and habeat,
and mulier talem virum si deprehensum and euictum sit, vel viru^ cui pia mulier
nupta fuit, vel mulierem quam vir pius vxorem duxit praestare necessaria
coningij officia aut obstinate nolle, aut eiusmodi commisisse scelera vt
propter turpitudinem suam non possit, aut denique incurabili impediri
impotentia, quo minus per corporis viret illa valeat coningij offici^
persolueri:
concludes, the lawfulnes of divorce and marriage again; and that the same is
Bucer. ibidem. lib. 2. cap. 42. page 124. versus finem.
verbo Dei consentiens, a greable to the word of God: and all this even in
that very book of his de regno Christi, which was by him at his death
commended Humfredus, in vita Iuelli printed. 1573. page 261. circa med. says
of Bucer. Meriturus librum suum (...) regno Christi, Eduardo Regi and regno
Anglia commendat, vt hic apud nos locum aliquando habeat.
to the church of England, and is now by our learned adversaries so highly
Nic^laus Carre in epistola de obitu Buceri ad Ioannem Checum (extant in Bucers
scripta Anglicana) page 873. fine, says. Liber Buceri de regno Christi
editus, continebat absolutissimam and perfectissimam totius christiana doctrina
effigiem.
magnified: in which book and else where, he proceeded yet further even to the
renewinge of the Deuteron. 24.1.
lybell of divorce Mat. 19.8
permitted by Moses for the hardness of the peoples hearts, not forbearinge to
teach thereof, that Bucer in sacra quatuor euangelia, printed. 1553. in Math.
c. 19. fol. 147. post med. says. Vt aqua est hodie cordiu^ duritia, ita non
minus miseris vxoribus per magistratum eportebat consuli qua^ etim. etc. vt
cumque propter duritiam cordium malorum lex repudijs data fuit Iudais,
salutaris tamen hactenus fuit, etc. quare cum gratia Dei, ea and hodie
magistratus and posset and deberet vti, etc. neque credendum quod quicquam
Christus damnarit eorum qua pater praecepit, iam duris cord ille praecepit, si
nollent maritali aquitate vxores tractare, vt libertatem illis facerent libello
repudij nubendi alijs etc. And see in the other edition of Anno 1536. page 390.
fine, and 391. prope initium.
as there is at this day like hardness of hearts, so the distressed wives
ought to be relieved no less now then in the time paste, for (says he) the
magistrate now has no less authority in this matter the^ Moses had, and
at this day ought to use the same. Saying yett further (as in proffe of the
continuance thereof) vt supra. at. n.
neither is it to be believed, that Christ would forbid any thing of that
which his father commanded: but he commanded the hard of heart, that if they
would not entreat their wives with nuptial equity, they should then procure
them liberty by a libell of divorce to marry again etc. Hitherto breiflye of
Bucers doctrines, whereto might be added his confessed other master
Carthwrighte in master Whitguiftes defense etc. tract. 9. page 522. prope
initium, charge Bucer with gross absurdities:
gross absurdities: As it therefore appeared that Luther and Melancthon, were
after their reuolte from our church, wonderfully of Luther see heretofore
cap. 3. sect. 3. and of Melancthon see heretofore, cap. 4. sect. 1. versus
finem. at. f.
inconstante (as likewise was (...) loc. (...) 3. printed (...) ^pist. de ca^a
Domini fine, and fol. 222. b. post med. says. Pudenda s^^^ est Beza
inconstanti^ etc.
(...) ^nion now (...) the same without al stay or meas^^^, (a (...)
wherewith our other adversaries as wantings, are notably all certain grounds
of faith Bra^ded: to this end master Parker in his book entitled against
symbolizinge with Antichriste, printed. 1607. part. 2. cap. 6. sect. 3. page
46. prop^ finem, says, Certain weak men of our breth^en are so offended
with our inconstancy, yea ^^e weakened and cast down, that they are in a
murmeringe whether the doctrine be true or no, which heretofore we have
preached to them: Also yt appears by Beza in his epistola theologica,
printed. 1573. epist. 1. ad (...), that Beza haueinge there acknowledged
Duditius for a most (...), (page 1. initio, and 23. fine.) and obseruantlie
beloved of Beza for his piety learning and elegante wytt. page 23. circa med.
and by Beza saluted with the title, of, mifrater. r^peateth Du^itius his words
saying. Et si (inqu^^) multa eaque horrenda propugnantur in Romana Ecclesia
qua infirm^ and putrid^ fundamento nituntur, tamen non ita multis
dissentionibus sci^^^^^ etc. h^c tu de (...): ^t nostri quales tan^^^ sunt?
palantes (inquis) omni doctrina venet agitati and in altum sublati, mod^ ad
hanc, modo ad illam partem deferuntur. Hocum quasit hodie de religione
sententia, scire fortasse possis, sed qua cras de eadem futura sit opinio,
neque ille neque tu certo affimure queas etc. Hac tu in nos (...) Du^^^ tatid^m
verbis: page 13. circa med. de Ariani^ scripsit Hilarious, fidem eos (...), id
de nostri^ ena^gelitis etc. page 3. fine, see this Duditius yett further
commended by Zanchius in libro epistolarum, printed. lib. 1. page 147. propt
finem, and 14^. propt finem. and l. 2. page 327. fine, and 328. ante med.
^^anded to the confessed obloquie of their relig^^^) so is the same no less
then (...) remarkable in Bucer, as appears by the only example of his often
change in one and the same question of the real presence concerning^ which it
is plain, that after his see heretofore, cap. 4. sect. 2. paulo post initium.
at. q.
defection from our cathotholicke doctrine of transubstantiation and sacrifice,
he made his first change into of Bucers professinge upon his first reuolte,
Luthers doctrine. See heretofore, cap. 4. sect. 2. post in^^^^, at. q. and
next hereafter at. u.
Luthers adverse doctrine of consubstantiation, from which he made a second
change into of Bucers first change from L^th^^^^isme into Suinglianisme him
self gives testimony in Epist. ad Noremb. and Esse^^ge^set; and it is
further signified by Lauathers testimony next hereafter at. z.
Suinglianisme, whereof he affirmed, that so says Bucer, in epistola ad
Norembergens. and in his other epistle to those of Eislinga he calls the
Lutheranes, fanaticos, snyrmeros, furiosos, etc.
the doctrine of Suinglius was sent from heaven; and that the doctrine of
Luther was new, and quite opposite to the scriptures: in which respect Luther
termed him Fabricius in Lutheri locis commun. printed Maldeburgi. 1594. class.
5. c. 15. page 50. ante med. says. Quaeritur Lutherus de Buceri perfidia in
epistola ad Ioannem Secerium typographum. Anno 27. fol. 348. b. and see also
in Lauathers, historia sacramentaria, Pomeran. (a learned Lutheran.) accusans
Bucerum perfidiae eo quod de Eucharistia quaedam adiecerat. at. Anno 1527. fol.
12. a. prope initium.
perfidiouse: and from that also against the forewarninge in that behalf of
the Hospinian. in histor. sacram. at. Anno 1530. fol. 127. ante med. says.
Rescribunt Tigurini Bucero, eumque hortantur, ne a manifesta veritate qua^ tot
concionibus, praelectionibus, publicis disputationibus and scriptis
propugnarit, iam demum ad Lutheri dogma de corporali praesentia Christi in
caena deflectat.
Tigurines, made a third change whereby professinge Of Bucers return. Anno
1536. from Suinglianisme to Lutheranisme see Conradus Schlusselburg. in
theologia Caluinist. lib. 2. fol. 17. b. ante med. and 129. a. post med. and b.
circa med. Also Martinus Crusius (Bucers scholar) p. 3. Annal. Sueu. lib. 11.
cap. 25. says. Defunctus est Bucerus etc. Bucer died at Cambridge in the year
1551. He having been of the opinion of Suinglius about the supper of Christ,
did in the year 1536. yield to the sentence of Luther etc. and subscribed with
his own hand, he was my master and singular benefactor etc. so he forbearing
(for very shame) to mention his final change at Cambridge.
again Luthers doctrine see Bucers askinge pardon in the first edition of his
commentaries in John. 6. and Math. 26. and see also Bucer. in sacra quatuor
euang. printed. 1536. in John. cap. 6. page 686. circa med.
he asked pardon of God and the church (quod multos Suinglij haeresi
fascinauerat,) for his haueinge bewitched many with the heresy of Suinglius;
thereupon Lauather. in histor. sacramentar. printed. 1563. fol. 31. b. initio.
at Anno. 1538. says. Bucerus non parum abalienatus a Tigurinis esse visus
est, quos ante and amarat plurimum, and singulari quadam pictate coluerat etc.
Bucerus in Euangelium Mathai and Ioannis doctrinam de caena, ante defensam in
gratiam Lutheri retractarat.
estrangeinge him self from the Tigurine Suinglianes, whom he before so much
honored: after all which he lastly made a fourth, change which was his
return again to Suingliani^^^, the which he finally professed and defen^^^
(...) concerning (...) fourth (...) all this into Suinglianisme at Cambridge
yt is known to all, and testified by Lauather. in histor. sa^^^ fol. 37. b. in
so much as the learned Lutheran Schlusselburg. in theolog. Calvin. l. 2. fol.
b. fine, says. Idem tamen (...) 1551. C^^^beigia in Anglia iterum ad
Suinglian^rum haresim defecit: so thereby signifyinge, that he changed twyce
into Suinglianisme: and for (...) further there fol. 17. b. circa med. and see
Peter Martyr in his (...) of the (...) supper anne^ed to his common places in
English. page 138. a. fine.
at C^^bridge: hereto now I but add his known confesse^ equiuocatinge in
matter of religion, and the same so gross and evident, as his own freindes
therefore Symlerus (Bucers dearest friend) in his oration of the life and
death of Peter, annexed to the end of his common places in English fol. r. q.
on the. a. fide paul^ post initi^^, reports that many learned (Caluinistes)
did in explication of the sacrament, use a certain affected obscurity: that
accordingly Bucer oftentimes exhorted Peter Martyr, that in the question of the
lords supper, he would use some certain obscure and doutfull kind of
speakinge: that also thereupon Peter Martyr gave place to Bucer, and used the
self same forms of doubtful speakinge, that Bucer did: hereof see also
further. Lauather. in histor. sacram. fol. 30. b. post med. and 31. b. ante
med. and Hospinian. in histor. sacram. p^rt. 2. fol. 210. a. fine, and b.
initio: in so much as Bucer is therein reprehended by Schlusselburg. in
theolog. Caluinist. lib. 2. fol. 129. a. post med. and by Luther apud Osiandrum
centur. 16. lib. 2. cap. 35. page 249. initio.
reprehended him: And thus much briefly of Bucer.

BERNARDINE OCHINE III.
Next unto Bucer I place in this rank Bernardine Ochine, who likewise came
over Symlerus. de vita and obitu Petri martyrit, printed. Tigur. 1563. fol. 13.
a. post med. says. Petrus Martyr ab Archiepiscop^ Cantuariensi de v^l^^tate
regis vocatus est, itaque (...) in Angliam discossit comitante eum Bernardino
Ochino, qui and ipse quoque ab (...) ^^^^^piscope ^eatus fu^rat.
sent for into our contrie as fellow Osiander centur. 16. lib. 2. cap. 67.
page 423. fine, says. Hoc tempore Ecclesia in Anglia ad formam Caluinisticam
opera Petri Martyris ^lor^^^^, and Bernardi Ochini S^^^sit reformatae sunt: and
see the like in Symlerus de vita and obit^ Martyris, printed Tiguri. Anno 1603.
fol. 13. a. post med.
labourer with Bucer and Peter Martyr, in that alteration of religion which was
thereupon, here begun and effected; from whence he is said to have again
Bullinger in his preface to Symlerus book, De filio Dei, printed. Anno 1568.
fol. 4. a. fine, says. De Bernardino Ochino hoc dicimus, habicasse illum
aliquot annis apud nos Tiguri, posteaquam redijsset ex Anglia Ecclesiaru^,
doctorumque praecellentium ornatus testimonij etc.
returned, commended with the testimonies of very excellent men and churches
etc. Sleydan says of him, so says Sleydan. lib. 9. at. Anno 1547. fol.
297. b. post med.
Bernardine Ochine being had in great estimation emonge the Italianes for
his eloquence and virtue, forsakinge the monastical life, gave him self to
the doctrine of the gospel, and coming to Geneua, and after to Auspurg, set
fourth certain sermons in printe etc. entitled fourtene sermons of
Bernardine Ochine co^cerninge the predestination and election of God:
translated and Englished by A. C. and printed without year of printe,
fourtene of which his sermons, were for their supposed worth translated into
English: this man (says Hallerus to Zanchius) in Zanchius his epistles,
printed. 1609. page 44. prope finem. Hallerus in his epistle there to Zanchius
says. D. Ocbinus Italicam quoque, ne doctrina verbi Dei careret docebat
Ecclesiam, etc. non terrenas, sed caelestes opes quarere contentus:
instructed the Italian church in the word of God, as seekinge not earthly
but heavenly riches: he also (as Lauather reports) Lauather. in histor.
sacram. fol. 41. a. circa med. says. Bernardin^s Ochinus Locarnensium
Ecclesia pastor Tiguri contra Westphali libellos, vera doctrinae de cana Domini
defensionem conscripsit and edidit.
defended Caluines doctrine of the sacrament against the Lutheranes, and
Lauather. ibidem. fol. 50. a. post med. says. Basileae editus est Bernardini
Ochini Senensis liber etc. in quo tractat de missa origin atque erroribus item
de conciliatione controuersia inter reformatas ecclesias, etc.
wrote likewise against the Mass: in so much as Doctor Raynoldes
undertakes at large see this in D. Raynoldes, his censura librorum
apocriphorum, tom, alter, in the table of contents set before there, at number.
161. and 575. and 176.
to defend him against Bellarmine: Josias Symlerus terms him Sim^^^^, i^
^rat. de vita and obi^u Martyris (printed. 1563.) fol. 10. a. circa med. says
of Martyr. Reperit ibi virum optimum and doctissimum Bernardin^^ Ochinum etc.
that most good and learned man Bernardine Ochine etc. John ^ale likewise
says of him, ^ale. in praefat. in Act. ^om. pontific. printed. 1558. folio.
*. *. 4. initio. says to the Tigurines: Deum immortalem? quales illi duo
senes peregrini, quos in vrbem vestram recepictis, D. Petrus Martyr and
Bernardinus Ochinus? quae duo luminaria? quarum alterum si alia haberent
ecclesia, magno thesauro and orname^to ditata and beatae vider^^tur: faelix
Anglia dum hac paria habuit, misera quae amisit, etc.
O you Tygurines, you have received into Tygure Peter Martyr, and Bernardine
Ochine (quae duo luminaria?) What two lights? etc happy England whiles yt had
these, miserable what yt lost them: As also Calvin demands Calvin. de
scandalis exta^t in his tract. theologic. etc. printed. 1597. page 111. b.
fine, says. Quos hac nostra aetate monaches habuit Germania qui vel doctrina
vel sanctitate cum Luthero, Bucero, Oecolampadio and sim^libus confer se nisi
nimis impudenter audeant? quos Itali Bernardino Ochino and Petro Vermilio
opponent?
whom can Italy oppose against Peter Martyr, and Bernardine Ochine? To
entreat now somewhat briefly of this so excellent learned and virtuouse
Bernardine, whom all Italy could not match, of this so great light whose
presence is said to have made England happy, and his absence to have made yt
miserable, yt appears from his own writings, that he more then inclined to
licentiousenes of doctrine, to this end does he join with the barbarouse le
heretofore. cap. 4. sect. 1. at. t.
Antinomi, teachinge (even in those his sermons, which were as before said
translated into English) that, says he, so says Ochine, in his forsayde
fourteen sermons Englished etc. sermon. 3. paulo post initium.
they which in this life do believe lively in Christ, yea were yt but for a
moment of time, shall be saved, they are elect, and may be sure of their
salvation etc. allthoughe they (as much as in them lies) were continually
prompted to all evil, etc. Neither did the deceived man here make stay, but
proceedinge as yett to further liberty of doctrine, he forbore not to teach
(as before did Luther, see heretofore, cap. 2. sect. 6. at. m. n.
and Melancthon) see heretofore, cap. 4. sect. 1. at. o. in the margin.
Polygamie or plurality of wives, in pretended prooffe whereof, he made a
special book Beza de Poligamia, printed. 1587. page 4. initio. says.
Poligamiam nemo vnquam callidius vel impudentius defendit, quam impurus ille
apostata Bernardinus Ochinus; quibusdam dialogis a bono illo viro Sebastiano
Castalione latin co^uersis.
of dialogues, which were says Beza vt supra. at. q.
translated into latin by that good man Sebastian Castalio, a Osiander. in
centur. 16. lib. 3. c. 53. fine, and page 753. initio, says of him.
Sebastianus Castalio vir appriuie doctus, Caluinista tamen linguarum
peritissimus, etc.
very learned Caluiniste, who is more then ordinarily commended or rather
magnified by D. see Castalio commended by D. Humfrey, de rat. interpret. lib.
1. page 62. 63. and 189. and by Gesnerus, in bibliotheca Castalionis, and by
Fredericus Furius, alleged in Sebast. Castal. defens. suarum translat.
printed. at Basil. page 236. And see also before the beginning of Castalioes
great bible, printed. at Basile. 1573. the further commendacion given of him by
Hiperius, Melancthon, and master Carlisle, who gives testimony of like
commendacion given by Sr. John Cheek, and Bucer,
Humfrey, Gesnerus, and Fredericus Furius, also by vt supra, at. s.
Andreas Hiperius, Melancthon, master Carlisle, Sr. John Cheek, and Martine
Bucer, master D. Humfredus in vita Iuelli, printed. Londini. 1573. page 265.
rankethe Castalio with Luther, Melancthon Suinglius, Oecolampadius, etc.
Humfrey. And Pantaleon in his chronographia, printed. 1568. page 125. places
Castalio in his catalogue of the fathers, and lights of the church: saying
further that for such, Guilielmus Farellus, Petrus Viretus, and Sebastianus
Castalio agnoscuntur: vt supra, at. q.
Pantaleon, not forbearinge to place him in their catalogue of the fathers and
lights of the church:) nether was this opinion of Polygamie (though to
Christian ears over absurd and gross) the greatest error which Ochine
published, for he proceeded yet further to the abnegation of the blessed
trinity, and finally became an impure apostata against the divinity of
Christ: In which respect, he is specially written against by (x) Hierom
Zanchius: And thus much briefly of Bernardine see also further testimony of
Ochines abnegation of the Trinity in Zanchius his book, de tribus Elohim,
printed. 1597. lib. 5. cap. 9. the title thereof being, ( page 715. b.)
Responsio ad Ochini blasphemiam: etc. and see him further in the Alphabeticall
table there under the letter, o. at the word Ochinus: and see also Conradus
Schlusselburge, in theologia Calvin. lib. 1. fol. 9. b. ante med.
Ochine, who as is (...) see next heretofore, cap. 4. sect. 3. (...). at. r.
said, was specially sent for, and employed in the alteration of religion
England. To whom I could not vnaptlie here annexe the further examples of
those other, who were chief agents in the then intended reformation of
Scotland, and also of England. As namely John (...), who (...) in Scotland
with confessed see this confessed and reported by master D. Bancrofte late
archebushop, etc. in his book entitled dangerouse positio^s, etc. printed.
1595. page 15. ante med.
^^^deringe of the Cardinal of S. Andrews in his ^ad chamber: also with his
own actual vide ibidem, page 12. and see Hollinheads story of Scotland,
printed. 1587. page 366. b. ante med.
rebellion in open feilde, and puttinge the Queen to flight, and further so
reportethe master Bancrofte from Knoxe his cronicle: in his dangerouse
positions, etc. page 13. initio, and see master D. Sutli^^ in his answer to a
lybell supplicatorie, printed. 1592. page 193. prope finem.
depriueinge her from all regiment by for^^ll act penned by (him the said)
Kno^e in defense whereof he published and taught (as reports master
Bancrofte in his dangerouse positions etc. page 14. 15.
master Bancrofte from Kno^e his alleged writings) that Knoxe appell. fol.
25.
noble (...) religion, if the king will not that Knoxe to the communaltie,
fol. 49. 50
reformation of religion belong^^^ to the (...): that Knoxe hist. page 371.
princes for in^^^ causes may be deposed: and that if Knoxe to England and
Scotland, fol. 76.
princes be tyrants against God and his truth, their (...) their Oathe of
obedience: In like manner Bucanan (an other of those reformers in Scotland,
taught) as master Bancrofte likewise master Bancrofte in his dangerouse
positions, page 15.
alleges from his writings, Bucanan. de iure regni. page 13.
that the people have right to bestow the crown at their pleasure: that
Bucanan. ibidem. page 40. and see master D. Dove in his defense of the church
government, printed. 1606. page 5. fine.
it were good that rewards were appointed by the people for such as kyl
tyra^tes, as comonlie there is for those that kill wolves: Bucanan. de iure
regni, page 62.
that the people may arrainge their prince: with much see this much more
concerning both Knoxe and Bucanan reported by master Bancrofte, vbi supr.
page 15. 16. 17. and by master Dove, vbi supra. page 4. 5. 6. 7. and in
master Sutlyues answer to a lybell supplicatory. page 65. ante med.
more of that kind, in so much as the protestant Bish. of Rochester
therefore, termed Knoxe and Bucanan, Rochester in his sermon at Paul's cross
the 10. of November, printed 1606. the last page
the two fiery spirits of that church and nation: And Adam Blackwood a
catholic of that contrie, was provoked to write a special See Ada^
Blackwood, his apologia pro regibus aduersus Bucanani dialogum de iure regni
etc. printed in 8. Parisijs, 1588.
apology for kings, in confutacion of Bucanans foresaid seditiouse
writings: and yett are these two men Knoxe and Bucanan, commended for so
termed by Calvin in epist. and respons. printed. 1567. epist. 305. fine, and
page 565. fine. Where in the conclusion of that epistle being written to
Knoxe, he says. Vale eximie vir, and ex animo colende frater. And Beza in his
epistle theolog. printed. 1573. epist. 74. page 333. writes that epistle:
Joan. Knoxe Euangelij Dei apud Scotas instauratori fratri and symmista
obseruando: and Beza. ibidem. ep. 78. page 343. writes that epistle, Georgio
Bucano viro praestantissimo etc. and Conr^dus Vorstius in his Antibellarminus,
printed. 1610. page 179. initio, says. De Joan. Knoxo praecipuo Scotia
reformatore etc.
excellent and see Calvin and Beza, vbi supra.
reverend men; see Beza, vbi supra.
valiant laborers in Christ's church, and see Vortius next before at n. and
Beza, ibidem. so says Beza Iconibus. fol. v. e. iij.
restorers of the ghospel in Scotland. Knoxe being also yett further termed
by Beza: Magnus ille Ioannes Knoxus Scotorum in vero Dei cultu instaurando
velut Apostolus. In like manner concerning the like intended reformation of
England, might be added the further known example of Crammer, whose see this
in master Fox. Act. Mon. printed 1596. page 1282. a. line. 32.
spreadinge abroad of seditiouse libels, was openly discovered in the star
chamber: where he was publiquelye heard, and thereupon Act. mon. ibidem.
committed to the tower, and afterward see this in Hollinsheads great
cronicle the last edition volume 3. page 1093. a. line. 18. And master Stowe
in his Annalls, printed. 1592. page 1045. circa med.
arreyned, and attainted of high treason, for aydinge the duke of
Northumberlande with horse and men etc. and haueinge Hollinshead in his great
cronicle the last edition, page 1131. b. line. 30. says. In hope of life and
pardon, Crammer subscribed to a recantation, wherein he submitted him self
wholly to the church of Rome, and continewed in the same mind to outward
appearance, until he was brought out of prison to go to the fire etc.
recanted his protestante religion, in safety (as he hoped) of his life, he
would gladly have continewed therein so he might have lived, and accordingly
vt sup. at. t.
did continewe therein even till, that (all contrary to his own expectation)
he was goinge to the fire to be burned, at what time saying him self deprived
of all hope of life, and no means left to escape present death, he then
discovered his former dissimulation, and so returned to his first vomit. In
like sort concerning Goodman, whom Calvin acknowledges for an so termed
by Calvin, in epist. and respons. printed. 1597. epist. 306. page 566.
excellent man, and his reverend brother, and the Calvin. ibidem. says to
Goodman. Non vulgar solatium est quod te adiutorem fidelissimum and apprime
idoneum nactus est frater noster Knoxus:
most faithful assistante to John Knoxe, in what seditiouse sort he behaved
him self in queen Mary's time, appearethe even from his own book entitled,
printed. at Geneua, by John Crispin. Anno. 1558.
how to obey, wherein he says, Goodman. ibidem. page 96. initio.
That wicked woman Marie whom you untruly make your queen, etc. ibidem. page
96. ante med.
God has not given an hypocrite only to reign over you, but an idolatresse
also, not a man but a woman, which his law forbideth, and nature abhors,
whose reign was never counted lawefull by the law of God etc. ibidem. page
98. ante med.
this ungodly serpent Marie, ibidem. page 100. initio.
has joined her self to adulterouse Philippe etc. Again he further says,
ibidem. page 118. fine, and 119. initio, and ibidem. page 185. post med. he
further says. When the magistrates and other officers cease to do their
duty, the people are as yt were without officers etc. then God gives the
sword into the peoples hand, and he him self is become immediately their
head: etc. And again page 139. post med. he says. When kings become
blasphemers, oppressors etc. then ought they to be accounted no more for
kings, but as private men to be examined, accused, condemned etc.
If princes and magistrates transgress Gods law them selves, and command
others to do the like, then have they lost that honor and obedience, which
otherwise their subjects did owe to them, and ought noe more to be taken for
magistrates, but punished etc. And he yett further affirms that ibidem. page
204. post med.
Wyat did but his duty, and that ibidem.
al such were traitors as deceived him, and took not his part etc. ibid. page
210. post med.
O London London, remember how thou for sookest that godly captain etc. with
much much more for the title of his ix. chapter his answers to objections
taken from the new testament (beginning at. page 106.) and the title of his x.
chapter (beginning at. page 123.) his objections out of the oulde testamente
and answers to the same: throughout both which chapters, he pretends answer
to the scriptures usually alleged in confutacion of all violent resistance or
rebellion against kings: in so much as this very book of his, is
specially alleged and condemned for seditiouse by master Bancrofte in his
dangerouse positions, page 35. 36. 37. and 38. and by master Sutlyue in his
answer to a certain libell supplicatorie etc. page 70. and 71. and 193.
more of like nature unworthy of recital: of all which forenamed persons and
some some others, for master Bancrofte in his dangerouse positions etc. page
62. ante med. reportethe saying Goodman, Wittingham, Gilbie, the author of the
book of obedience, with the rest of the Geneua accomplices in queen Mary's
days, urged all states by degrees rather to take arms and to reform religion
them selves, then to suffer such idolatry and supersticion to remain in the
land: And see further there, page 64. initio. Where it is said that, Goodman,
Wittingham, Gilbie, and the rest, resolved against queen Marie concerning
her deposinge. etc.
others who began their then intended reformation of these two nations,
much other strange matter is reported, in the particular and more ample
discourse whereof, I fear to have my words and meaning depraved or
misconceyued, for which cause I do purposelie pass the same over with
respective silence.

CAROLOSTADIVS. IV.
THe Melancthon in epist. ad Frideric. Miconium Scotl. Carolostadius primus
excitauit hunc tumultum, homo ferus sine ingenio, fine doctrina, sine sensu,
communi, etc. tantum abest vt in eo significatio aliqua spiritus sancti
animaduersa sit, imo extant manifesta signa impietatis etc. see this also in
Hospinians, histor. sacram. part. 2. fol. 114. b. circa med. and in libro
epistolag. Oecolampadij and Suinglij, printed at Basile. 1592. lib. 3. page
620. prope finem.
first that after Luther impugned the real presence of Christ's body in the
sacrament, was Carolostadius. And whereas he utterly misliked (or rather not
so much as once dreamed of) Suinglius his figurative exposition, as being no
less then wholly improbable: he therefore as acknowledginge that Christ's
words ought to be taken literallie, devised this conceited sense, namely that
Christ at the pronouncinge of his words, Sleydan Englished. lib. 5. b. initio.
and Suinglius says hereof. Carolostadius vult vt cum dixerit (Christus) Hoc
est corpus meum: istud pronomen hoc, non in panem direxerit, sed in scipsum
etc. ego vt ingenue dicam hominis laudo industriam and de fide gratulor etc.
sensit pius homo etc. hanc Carolostadij sententiam qui probauerit nos minime
offendet: see this in libro epistolarum Oecolampadij and Suinglij lib. 3. page
543. initio. and 544. initio, and in Suinglius Works tom. 2. printed. 1581.
fol. 155. b. prope finem.
pointed not to bread, but (as it were with his finger) to his own body there
present, saying, this is my body which shall be given for you, for which
Suinglius commends him, and vt supra. at. b.
rejoices at such his profession of faith, the which was so greedelie then
thirsted after by the revolted nouellistes of those times, that (as reports
Suinglius) Suinglius, tom. 2. in subsid. de euchar. paulo post initium, and
fol. 244. b. prope initium, says. At vbi Carolostadij expositionem viderunt,
iam Basiliam ipsi volabant, ac libros eius suis humeris asportantes, eis non
modo vrbes, opida, pagosqua verum etiam villas ferme omnes opplebant:
they came postinge to Basile (where Carolostadius his books were printed) and
caryinge away his books on their shoulders, they replenished there with
almost every city, town, village, and hamlet: in so much as Vrbanus
Regius (Luthers fellow labourer) complayneth, saying, Vrbanus Regius in 1.
part oper. in epist. ad Billican fol. 5. says. A verbo per nos praedicato
abhorrent, hoc vno nomine quod Carolostadianus non sum, quasi vero
Carolostadiani soli mysticum Christi corpus absoluant, pro quo Christus sit
mortuus.
they will not be present at our preachinge, in this only respect, that we are
not Carolostadianes, as though the Carolastadianes only, were that mystical
body of Christ, for which Christ died; this doctrine of Carolostadius was
for the time so applauded, and him self therein so confident, that ^e ((...)
witnesses C^^^^nitius) was so says. Ch^nitius in libe^o de c^^^ Dom. page
214.
accustomed to ^^^ste, that the ^^position hereof came to him by revelation
whereas to the contrary Luther says so says. Luther tom. 3. Ienensi, fol.
68. and Luther. in loc. commu. class. 5. cap. 15. page 47. paulo post med.
says. Carolostadius traditus est in sensum reprobum etc. puto non ruo diabolo
obsessum fuisse miserabilem illum hominem, Deus misereatur eius peccati quo
peccat ad mortem: and Luther tom. 3. Ienens. fol. 61. b. further says. Quod
diabolum (...) nem^ miretur, nam de Carolosta^^o nihil ad m^ ^^^^et, ego ad
ill^m non respicio, sed ad eum a quo (...) est: and Alberus contra
Carolostadianos, 2. 4. page 1. and y. 2. page 2. a^^irmeth that the devil
possessed Carolostadius corporally.
Carolostadius had his exposition from the devil: he was Hospinian (a learned
Caluiniste) in histor. sacrament. part. 2. Anno 1524. fol. 31. b. ante med.
says. Andreas Carolostadius archidiaconus cathedralis templi Witemberga, non
solum pure docebat verbum Dei, sed etiam plures errores papisticas abrogabat.
arch^d^acon of Whiteberge and of so great esteem ^^th protestants, that
(besides the public place^^^^ of his picture emonge the printed pictures of
the other pretended reformed, and the same so common as almost in every house)
Hospinian says of him. vt supra. at. f. Hospinian. in hist. sacram. at Anno
1530. fol. 119. b. circa med. says. Hoc Anno Carolostadius etc. vitam finiuit
in vera innocatione filij Dei,
Andreas Carolostadius archedeaco^ of the ^^^hedrall church of Witemberge,
taught purelye the word of God: and dyed in the true invocation of the Son
of God. Anno 1530. Concerning his condition of life, Osiander and Dresserus
(both of them learned protestants) do w^tnesse, that Osiander. centur. 16. l.
1. cap. 32. page 85. post med. says. Carolostadius etc. turbas in Ecclesia
mouet, statuas sanctorum per concitatam plebem e templis ciecit, (...) ci^ile
Romanum e rebus publicis Christianis eliminandum, and secundum leges Mosayens
in causis ciuibus pronunciandum esse contendit etc. and page ^6. post med. he
says. Istos fanaticos homines Carolostadium and Enthasiastas excitauit
diabolus. and Dresserus in millinar. 6. printed. Anno 1598. page 60. post med.
says. Witemberge Carolostadius multa tumultuose molitus est etc. non ex iure
Romano, sed ex lege Moysi pronunciandum esse contendit, reuelationes arcanas,
and motus spiritus sancti adeo exp^ctari iussit, vastauit scholar, literarum
cultum abiecit: and Melancthon in epist. ad F^^der. Micon. Corfant. in libro
epist. Occolampad. and Suinglij, printed, 1592. page 620. fine. and 621. says
of Carolostadius: in tota doctrina solebat (...) damnabat omnes leges ab
ethnicis conditas, contendebat in fere ius ex Moyse dicendum esse etc. totam
illam fanaticam anabaptistarum doctinam statim. (...) amplectebatur etc. Hac de
Carolostadio scripsi propter vicinos nostros, vt si quid authoritatis est in
nostro testimonio, admoniti caueant ab ipso portente.
he tumultuouselie stirred up the people to cast images out of the church,
and Melancthon and Brentius do report that Hospinian. in his histor. sacram.
part. 2. at Anno 1530. fol. 104. b. ante med. alle^geth the letters of
Melancthon and Brentius in which they say of Carolostadius by name and others
there also named: Quiescere non possunt, sed assiduis practicis in eo
laborant, vt per factiones, and vim si aliter non possint, errores suos
tueantur and propagent, vnde non folum cruenta and horribilia bella: etc.
he with others labored by daily practices, to defend and propagate their
errors by force and factions if otherwise they could not, from whence bloody
horrible wars were like to ensue etc. He also taught that the vt supra at. i.
people ought to be governed by the law of Moses, and not by the civil, or
imperial laws. see Dresserus vt supra. at. i.
He commanded the people to expecte revelations from God, and (as says
Sleydan of him) kept Sleydan Englished l. 5. Anno 1525. fol. 65. a. prope
finem.
familiarity with those secret teachers that feigned them selves to see
visions, and to have talk with God, for which the dukes of saxony had
banished him etc. he was so forward in his course of pretended reformation
that (says Sleydan) Sleydan. ibidem.
he set for the books against Luther and his fellows, calling them new
flatterers of the Romish Bushop. To forbear that Luther terms next before
at. e.
Carolostadius, a man given over into a reprobate sense, that also Melancthon
terms him that see next before at. a.
Barbarouse fellow Carolostadius etc. in whom is no sign of the holy
ghost, but manifest tokens of impiety. Our English writers as enforced do
confess and say of him see this thus affirmed in the book entitled,
Conspiracy for pretended reformation, printed 1592. page 83. initio.
Carolostadius a preacher professinge the ghosp^ll etc. attributed much to
cabinet teachers in private conuenticles, and unto visions, and pretended
conference with God: and again, so says the author of an answer for the
time unto the defense of the Censure. printed. 1583. fol. 106. a. initio.
Carolostadius being indeed an heretic, was a man so corrupt and evil in
religion, etc. Whereto but lastly add as in full discovery of his carnalitie,
master D. Fulke, who therefore terms him so says master Fulke in his
Reioinder to Bristowes reply etc. printed. 1581. page 420. circa med. and in
his treatise against the defense of the Censure, he further terms him, a
vain tumultuouse fellow, page 100. post med.
that Epicurian ghospeller Carolostadius: And thus much briefly concerning
Carolostadius.

SVINGLIVS. CHAPT. V.
AS concerning Suinglius (whom Bullinger terms So says Bul^inger in his
sermons upon the Apocalips in English, printed. 1573. sermon. 1. fol. 2. b. ante
med.
Doctor Huldericke Suinglius my worshipful master) he was borne in so
reports Hospinian. in hist. sacram. fol. 22. a post med.
Heluetia in the year 1487. within four see before, cap. 1. initio. at. a.
years of the same time with Luther, and having taken Hospin. vbi supra. in
histor. sacram. fol. 22. a fine.
degree of schools in the university of Basile, he was made priest, and
afterward preached publicly at Hospin. ibidem. fol. 22. b. ante med.
Tygure in the year 1519. in which year he begun his reuolte from the
catholic church, taking occasion thereof (as did Luther against see
heretofore, cap. 1. sect. 1. at. n. o.
Tecel the Dominikcan Anno 1517) upon Hospinian in histor. sacram part. 2. fol.
22. b paulo ante med. and Osiander. ce^tur. 16. page 68. fine.
a Franciscans then cominge into Heluetia, with public preacheinge in behalf
of the popes pardons, whom Suinglius therein contradicted: And as did Luther,
afterward begin his further reuolte, with impugninge of the mass, by
confessed instruction heretofore, cap. 1. sect. 2. at. l.
had therein from the devil, as (likewise did heretofore, cap. 4. sect. 4. at.
d. e.
Carolostadius) so in like manner was Suinglius thought to do: for it
appears by Suinglius his own words, confessed by see these words in
master Fulkes treatise against the defense of the censure page 49. and 250.
master Fulke, that Suinglius haueinge begun about the year. 1523. see
Osia^der, centur. 16. l. 1. c. 33. p. 89. post initium. and Hospinian in hist.
sacram. part. 2. fol. 25. a prope initium.
or 1524. to labor the abolishing of the mass at Zurich, against a certain
scribe that had opposed him self (in argument) against Suinglius. tom 2. in
subsid. de Eucharistia, printed. 1581. reports saying: Cum ergo duodecimo
die Aprilis die ad senatum rediremus, atque vt missa in vniuersum aboleretur
ageremus, prodijt denuo scriba etc. fol. 248. b. ante med. restabat adhuc
minimus conatus quo scilicet exempla proderemus quae nulla cum parabola
coniuncta forent: caepimus ergo cogitare omnia, omnia reuoluere, attamen aliud
nihil exemplorum occurrebat etc. cum vero tredecima dies adpeteret (vera narro,
adeoque vera vt caelare volentem conscientia cogat effundere quod Dominus
impertijt etc.) cum inquam tredecima Aprilis lux adpeteret, visus s^m mihi in
somno, multo cum taedio denuo contendere cum aduersario scriba, sicque
obmutuisse vt quod verum scirem negante lingua beneficium suum proloqui non
possem; (nihil enim altius quam somnium narramus quod adnos attinet, tametsi
leave quod per somnium didicimus, gratia Deo in cuius solius gloriam ista
prodimus etc.) ibi (...) visus est monitor adesse, ater fuerit an albus nihil
memini etc. qui diceret, quin ignaue respondes e^ quod Exodus 22. scribitur, est
enim phase, hoc est transitus Domini: protinus vt hoc phasma visum est simul
expergefio, and e lecto exilio locum apud septuaginta primum vndique
circumspicio, ac de eo coram tota concione pro virili dissero, qui sermo vbi
acceptus est, etc. omnem nebulam discussit: fol. 249. a. circa med.
Suinglius, in that disputation, Suinglius was provoked to master Fulke, vbi
supra. at. h. and Suinglius, vbi supra. at. i.
bring fourth examples which were joined with no parable, vbi supra.
therefore we began (say the Suinglius) to think of all we could, but yett
no example came to mind etc. but when the 13. day of April drew near (I tell
truth, and my conscience compels me to utter what the Lord bestowed upon me)
me thought (as I was a sleep) that I was again disputinge with the scribe,
and my mouth so stopped, that I was not able to speak etc. and sodaynlie
there seemed an admonisher to be present with me, (ater fuerit an albus nihil
memini) whether he were black or white I remember not etc. which said to me,
why do thou not answer him that which is written Exodus 12. for yt is the
paschall which is the passover of the Lord etc. whereupon (says he) I
considered of the place, and thereof before the wholle congregation ^eached,
which sermon when yt was heard, drove away all miste: etc. In so much as
Suinglius hereupon doubted not to alter the very words of Christ,
translatinge in his printed bibles in steed of, this is my body, see next
hereafter. at. k. l.
this signifies my body. Thus were Suinglius his endeavors against the mass
furthered by nightlie instruction from an admonisher, whether black or white
he remembers not, whereof though he made great account, affirminge yt to be
no vbi supra.
light matter, which, says he, I learned by this dream thanks be to God etc.
(as also Hospinian thinks yt to be a Hospinian. hist. sacram. part. 2. fol.
26 b. ante med. says. Quod aute^ Suinglius somnium illud pro reuelatione
diuina etc. habuit, iustissimis ex causis id fecit.
divine revelation) yett is the same specially answered and confuted by
Luther. tom. 7. Witemb. in defens. verborum canae, page 386. a. fine. and 387.
b. initio. says. Sic nec illud quod Moses dicit, commedite festinanter
passali enim Domini est, Suinglius euincere potest quod agnum paschalem
significet, nam facile respondere potest hanc phrasim commedite festinanter,
passali enim Domini est, similem esse nostrati cum dicimus, commede carnem dies
enim Dominica est: bibe aquam dies veneris est, hinc nemo facile extorquebit,
quod caro significet diem dominicum aut aqua diem veneris, ita hic dicitur
commedite festinanter, est enim passali Domini, hoc est dies ille est quod Deus
in Aegypto transibat etc. and but some little there before he says as of
Suinglius dream. Quomodo fieri possit nisi per operationem diaboli, vt tam
eruditi viri adeo cacutiant, vt tam inepta consilia iactent, and mundo
obtrudant pro firmissimis argumentis. ibidem. fol. 386. a. paulo post med.
Luther, and the doctrine thereof disliked by Calvin, Calvin reprehendeth by
name this doctrine of Suinglius, in lib. de caena Domini edit. Anno 1540.
gallice, and Anno 1545. latin, and Calvin. in tract. theologic. printed. 1597,
page 12. a. circa med. says of Oecolampadius and Suinglius. Quam praesentiam
Christi in caena credere debeanius etc. dicere omittebant: etc. habemus itaque
qua in re impegerit Lutherus in qua etiam Oecolampadius and Suinglius etc.
vtrique profecto in culpa fuerunt, etc. and Calvin. in institut. l. 4. c. 17..
10. says. Nec est quod obijciat quispiam figuratam esse locutionem qua
signata rei nomen signo deferatur etc. and see Calvin. ibidem. l. 4. c. 15.
sect. 1. though couentlie without naminge of Suinglius reprehendinge his like
doctrine of baptism, and the protestante divines in thei^e solida refutatio
compilationis Anglicanae, printed Tubuigae. 1584. cap. 7. page 524. ante med.
do accordingly testify saying: Interpretationem verborum coenae Domini a
Zuinglio in Ecclesiam inuectam: Hoc est corpus meum, hoc est, significat corpus
meum, aperte reprehendit and damnauit Caluinus, etc. and see Suinglius his
doctrine of the Euchariste further reprehended by master Hooker in his Eccles.
policy, l 5. printed. 1597. sect. 67. page 174. ante med. Where he names
Suinglius: and page 177. post med. says. We are not so to interpret the
words of Christ, as if the name of his body did but importe the figure of
his body, and to be, were only to signify:
and master Hooker, and the thing it self derided for a mere illusion of
Satan, by diverse of Suinglius his Brethren, as namely Giesekenius de veritate
corp. Christi in cana, printed Francofurti. 1598. page 64.
Gerardus Giesekenius, Morgenster. tract. de ecclesia. printed. 1598. page 68.
Benedict-Morgenstern, Heilbrunerus in Swenkfeldio Caluinismo, printed. 1597.
in praefac. ante med.
Iacobus Heilbrunerus, and others, Iacobus Andreas in confut. disput. Joan.
Iacobi Gr^^ai, page 120. circa med. and 254. post med. and 304. circa med.
Conradus Schlusselburge (a protestante divine of of great note, for it
appears by the ti^le of this his book that he was, di^casees Raseburgensis
superintendens, and coniunctarum Megapolensium ecclesiarum generalis inspector.
great note) concludeinge and saying thereof Conrad. Schiusselburg. in his
theologia Caluinistap^. printed 1594. in pr^oem. versus finem, says. Sole
meridian^ clarius est, non Deum verum, sed diabolum ipsissimum, Suinglio per
somnium, suam haresim sacramentariam inspirasse.
yt is more clear then the sun, (non Deum verum, sed ipsissimum diabolum,
etc.) that not God, but the very devil him self inspired the sacramentarie
heresy into Suinglius by a dream: And yett was this, that which in some
contries prevailed to the present puttinge down of mass, and the thereupon
then establishinge of Suinglius his doctrine, as at Tigure see this in
Hospinian, in histor. sacram. part. 1. in epist. dedic. fol. 6. b. circa med.
and in Osiander. centur. 16. l. 1. cap. vlt. fine, page 110. ante m^d.
and see this in Sleydan. Englished. l. 4. fine. fol. 54. b. fine.
and Zuriche about Anno 1525. no less then prevailed Luthers like other
foresaid apparition, to the puttinge down of mass, and the thereupon then
establishment of his Lutherane communion in Witemberge, see this in Osia^der.
centur. 16. l. 1. cap 31 page 83. ante med. and in Hospinians. hist. sacram.
part. 2. fol. 20. b. post med.
and saying, about. Anno 1522 to this pretended revelation so so much
insisted upon by Suinglius; I will but now add, his like vain conceipte
whereby he would needs take upon him to prophetie (but how falselie the event
showed) that Suinglius in his epistle ad Andream Osia^drum dated in May 1527.
and extant in libro epistolarum Oecolampadij and Suinglij, printed. 1592. page
589. paulo ante med. says. Non praeteribunt tres anni, quin Italia, Gallia,
Hispania, Germania, pedibus in nostram ierint sententiam: quo se tunc vertent,
qui etc.
within three years, Italy, France, Spain, and Germanye, should become of
his opinion: As in like manner did Luther vaynlie take upon him to see this
prophecy of Luther, recited and acknowledged by master D. Field of the
church, lib. 3. cap. 49. page 186. prope finem.
prophecy, that if he continewed but two years in preachinge, the kingdom of
the pope should be overthrown: strongly were both these men herein deluded,
with the spirit (not of divine revelation, but) of gross and palpable error.

II.
SVinglius haueinge thus revolted from the catholic church, begins to
deliver paradoxes strange, all of them tendinge to liberty of life or
doctrine: As first to our great discourragment in good works, he teaches,
that the promises of eternal life made to them in the scriptures, are but
Suinglius tonf. 1. printed. 1581. de prouidentia Dei, fol. 137. a. versus
finem. says. Sed contra, ista sunt hiper^chae atque hyperbolae, si vis ad
vitam ingredi, serua mandata, etc. and quac^^que alia promissa nostris operibus
facta sunt.
hiperbolical: wherein he concurreth with the libertine The Lutheranes in
colloquio Altemburgensi, printed. 1570. in respons. ad excus. corrupt. de
corrup. viij. fol. 190. a. circa and post med. say. Qicunque pro bonis
operibus docet dari vitam aeternam, is a verbo Dei deuiat, etc. Christus
tisbuit fidei vitam aeternam, nusqua^ legis pro bonis operibus dari vitam
aternam, quia hac doctrina Christi beneficium delet:
Lutherans. Secondly co^cerninge the baptisinge of infantes, he with
Oecolampadius teaches, that it is but a matter of indifferency, and such
Suinglius tom. 2. lib. de baptismo. fol. 96. a. circa med. says. Nu^ enim
tanti moment^ res haecest, vt tantas turbas and dissidia propter hanc excitare
conueniat, etiamsi par^^lorum baptismus nullis omnino scripturarumtestimonijs
inniteretur; externum quiddam est and ceremoniale, quo vt alijs rebus externis,
Ecclesia digne and honest vti potest, vel omittere; and rite tollere, etc. And
Oecolampadius in libro epistolar. Oecolamp. and Suinglij, lib. 2. page 363.
post med. says, of infantes baptism: Cogitare illos decebat rem externam
esse, quae charitatis lege dispensabilis est ad aedificationem proximi, fatemur
non esse legem baptisandi pueros, sed etiam non est lex quae arceat pueros:
the church may worthelie and honestelie use, or else omit, and rightly
take away: Thirdly concerning original sin, he taught that yt is but a
Suinglius tom. 2. lib. de Baptismo, fol. 89. b. circa med. says. Peccatum
ergo originale damnationem non meretur, si modo quis parents fideles nactus
fuerit: and fol. 90. a post med. He says of original sin. Qui enim fieri
potest, vt quod morbus and contagio est peccati nomen mereatur, vel peccatum
reuera sit etc. Morbus enim hic damnationem nobis afferre nequit, And, page 90.
b. ante med. he says. Ea quoque Pauli verba considerabimus, quibus theologi
nostri abusi, originalem illum morbum peccatum esse dixerunt, etc. sed toto
cal^ errant: and tom. 2. fol. 115. b. paulo post med. and in libro epist.
Oecolamp. and Suinglij. l. 1. page 252. paulo ante med. he says. Quid enim
breuius dici potuit quam originale peccatum non esse peccatum sed morbum, and
Christianorum liberos propter istum morbum non adici aterno supplicio:
disease which of yt self is not culpable, neither can bring the pain of
damnation: that Suinglius in tom. 2. de peccat. orig. declar. fol. 116. a. post
med. says. Hec ipsum v^lo, culpam originalem non vere, sed metronomice a
primo parentis admiss^ culpam vocari. And in libro epistolarum Oecolampadij and
Suinglij. l. 1. page 258. fine, he says. Est ergo ista ad peccandum amore sui
propensio, peccatum originale, qua quidem propensi^ non est proprio peccatum,
sed fons etc. and to. 2. ad Carol. imp. fid. rat. fol. 539. b. initio. he
says. Velimus igitur, nolimus admittere cogi^^ur, peccatum originale vt est in
filijs Ada, non proprie peccatum esse, etc. non est facinus contra legem,
morbus est proprie.
yt is not truly called sin, sed metonomie, but figuratively, concludinge
that the sea next before. at. x. and see Suinglius his words hereof recited in
Schlusselburg. in theolog. Calu. l. 1. fol. 65. a. fine. and b. initio. and see
next hereafter. at. a.
offense and fault of Adam, cannot condemn infantes and young children:
thinkinge Suinglius, tom. 2. lib. de Baptismo, fol. 90. a. post med. says.
Vbi l^gis cognitie nulla est, ibi nec peccati cognitio non est, ibi nec
pranaticatio, adeoque nec damnatio etc. omnibus constat fidelium liberos
propter originalem illum and haereditarium morbum damnationem subire nullam
quoad legem and legis sententiam ignorant: de ijs autem loquor, qui per aetatem
legis cognitionem habere non possunt, non de ijs qui vel scire nolunt, vel
etiam nescientes nesciunt: And see the like tom. 2. fol. 118. a. paulo post
med. and tom. 1. fol. 372. b. initio.
original sin only damnable in those that be of years, and discretion when
in them yt bursteth fourth into action: and all this so grosselye, as his own
brethren do therefore so in Suinglius reprehended herein by Schlusselburg in
theolog. Caluinist. lib. 1. fol. 65. a. fine. and b. initio. and by Huncius in
papism. Calvin. papism. 21. sect. 132. 133. And Suinglius, tom. 2. de pecc.
orig. declar. initio. and fol. 115. b. paulo post initium, says hereof to
Vrbanus Regius. Nec enim solus insolite nos putas de humanae generationis
contagione, tum sentire, tum scribere, sunt enim and alia magna nomina qui idem
existimant, etc.
reprehend him, Amicis cauent ne in ruinam se a nobis trahi patiantur, ibidem.
fol. 115. b. circa med.
giuinge warninge to their friends least, they suffer them selves to be
drawn into ruin by his damnable opinion: fourthly concerning salvation and
the way to heaven, he doethe therein no less then gentilize, makeinge yt so
easy and open, that he doubts not to affirm the salvation even of the
heathen Suinglius. in libro epist. Oecol. and Suingl l. 1. page 39. a. circa
med. says. Aetnicus si piam mentem domi fouerat, Christianus est etiamsi
Christum ignoret: and see Suinglius. tom. 2. fol. 118. a. circa med. and 559.
b. circa med. Where he affirms the now being in heaven of Adam, Abel,
Enoch, etc. Hercules, Theseus, Socrates, etc.
who never believed in Christ, as Hercules, Theseus, Socrates, etc.
attributinge also salvation to the young Suinglius. in libro epist. Oecolamp.
and Suinglij lib. 2. page 513. ante med. says. Gentilium liberos nulla lex
damnat: and tom. 2. page 540. ante med. he says. Hoc certe adseueramus etc.
praeter rem pronunciare qui gentiliuminsantes aeternae maledictioni addicunt
etc.
dyinge children of the heathen, in which his opinion Echarius (a learned
protestant writer) in his sasciculus controuersiarum, printed. Lipsiae. Anno
1609. cap. 19. page 427. circa med. says. Quod Socrates, Aristides, Numa
Camillus, Hercules, Scipiones, Catonis, and alij gentiles comparticipes sint
vitae aeternae, scribit quidem Suinglius ad regem Galliae quem defendunt
Tigurini, Bullingerus, Gualterus, Hardenburgius, etc. and see Osiander. centur.
16. l. 3. cap. 25. page 649. circa med.
defended nevertheless by see Gualter defending Suinglius his opinion in
apologia pro Suinglio, and operibus eius praefix. 1. tom. operum Suinglij, fol.
27. a. b. 28. a. b. 29. a. b.
Gualter Simlerus and so Simlerus in vita Bullingeri, and Bullinger in
Germani. confess. eccles. Tigue. and see further ( in Suinglius his 2. tom.
fol. 550. b. initio.) Bullingers preface of allowance to Suinglius his
exposition. fidei ad regem: in which at. fol. 559. b. Suinglius affirms as
before, the salvation of Hercules, Theseus, etc. of which book of Suinglius,
Bullinger in that preface says. Hoc vero libello sese veluti superant de vera
fide nescio quid cygneum, vicina morte cantauit.
Bullinger, he is so unworthy, that soundrie other reproved by Hunnius, in
papismis Calvin. part. 1. papism. 18. 115. 117 by Benedict Margenstern. tract.
de eccles. page 72. by Lobechius. in disp. theolog. printed. M. D. IC. page
163. initio. and by Luther. tom. Witemberg. printed. 1580. in Genesis c. 47. fol.
633. a. fine. and see next heretofore at. *. next before. b.
protestant writers do therefore reprove him: fiuethlie concerning the
scriptures and the Apostles sacred assurance of their writings, let his
judgment of them all, appear in the only example of S. Paul, of whom he
affirms that though he for his part would not, but that S. Paul's
writings, should be now houlden for canonical, yet (says he) We Suingl.
tom. 2. Struth. contr. catabapt. fol. 10. b. circa med. says. Ignorantia
vestra est quod putatis cum Paulus haec scriberet Euangelistarum commentarios
and apostolae epistolas, iam in manibus apostolorum, atque authoritate fuisse,
quasi vero Paulus epistolis suis tantum tribuerit, vt quicquid in eis
contineretur sacrosanctum esset, non quod ipse velim non esse sacrosancta quae
illius sunt, sed quod nolim apostolis imputari immoderatum arrogantiam.
ought not to think that Paul did then attribute so much to his epistles,
that whatsoever was in them, was sacred, least that in thinkinge so, we
should (says he) vt supr. at. h.
impute immoderate arrogancy to the Apostle: nay he proceeded so far in
contempt of the Evangelists and of S. Paul, that whereas they do
uniformly recite the words of Christ to have been Math. 26.26. Marc. 14.22.
Luc. 22.19. and 1. Cor. 11.24.
this is my body etc. Suinglius to supply their supposed defect herein, does
(as in mayntenance of his own opinion) publishe inprinte his new testament in
latin, and the same does dedicate to the then french king, yt being printed
at Tigure in March. Anno 1525. and does also further publishe his bible in
duche, in both which by his their wilful mistranslatinge of the said
Evangelists and of S. Paul, he does set down in the very text, in steed
of their foresaid words, these other of his own devise, viz. Co^radus
Schlusselburg, (of whose great esteem see next heretofore at. F.) in theolog.
Calvin. l. 2. art. 6. fol. 43. b. fine. says hereof. Nec potest hoc scelus
Suinglij vllo color excusarires est manifestissima, in graeco textu non
habetur significat, sed est, etc. And. fol. 44. a. he speaks to the
Suinglianes saying. Nec potestis rem inficiari aut occultare, quia exe^plaria
Francisco Regi Galliae a Suinglio dedicatae, sunt in plurimorum hominum
manibus, excusa Tiguri. Anno 1525. in mense Martij in octauo etc. and yet more
of the duche Bible of Suinglianes, he there says. Ego in Saxonia opido
Mundera. Anno 60. apud scholae, rectorem Humbertum, vidi exemplar Germanicorum
bibliorum quae Tiguri erant impressa, vbi non sine insigni admiratione and
animi perturbatione, verba filij Dei, ad imitationem Suinglij. somniatoris
deprauata esse deprehendi, nam in omnibus illis quatuor locis. Math. 26. Mar.
14. Luc. 22. and 1. Cor. 11. vbi verba institutionis testamenti filij Dei
recensentur, hoc est corpus meum, hic est sanguis meus, in hunc modum textus
erat falsatus, hoc significat corpus meum, hic significat sanguinem meum: Also
Suinglius, tom. 2. lib. de vera and falsa relig. fol. 210. a. ante med. thus
alleges and cites the text: Sic ergo habet Lucas: and accepta pane gratias
egit, fregit, and dedit eis dicens: Hoc significat corpus meum.
this signifies my body: this signifies my blood: which his allmoste
incredible boldness in so peruertinge Christ's own words, whether yt were
wicked and sacrilegiouse or no, let the reader judge: Sixtlie concerning our
committinge of sin, he lays the same upon God as author thereof, affirminge
of God, that he Suinglius. tom. 1. de prouidentia Dei. printed. Anno 1581. fol.
366. a. ante med. says. Mouet ergo latronem ad occidendum.
moves the thief to kill: that the thief kills, God procuringe him, that
Deo impulsore occidit. ibidem paulo post. and again, Mouet and impellit Deus
vsque dum ille occisur est, ibidem. fol. 366. a. circa med.
God, moves and enforces till the party be slain: that At inquies, coactus
est ad peccandum, permitto inquam coactum esse: ibidem. fol. 366. a. ante med.
the thief is enforced to sin. In so much that in our sinninge against
the law, we are in legem enim peccarunt, non quasi authors, sed quasi
instrumenta quibus Deus liberius pro sua voluntate vti potest, quam pater
familiae aut aquam bibere, aut humi effundere: ibidem. fol. 366. a. initio.
not, says he, authors (of the sin) but as, Gods instruments: that even one
and the same Idem ergo factum quod Deo authore and impulsore sit, illi
honorificum est, at homini crimen ac nefas, ibidem. fol. 366. a. initio.
fact which has God for the author and impulsor, is in God honorable and in
man sin, that Adulterium Da^^^ quod ad Deum authorem pertinet no^ magis Deo
fit peccatum, quam cum tanrus totum Armentum inscendit and implet, sua enim
sunt vniuersa, etc. vnde sub lege non est: ibidem. fol. 365. b. fine.
David's adultery pertayned to God as author thereof, and concludes, that
though adultery, Vnum igitur atque idem facinus puta adulterium aut
homicidium, quantum Dei est authoris, motoris, ac impulsoris, opus est, crimen
non est, quantum autem hominis est, crimen ac scelus est, ille enim lege non
tenotur, hic autem lege damnatur: ibidem. fol. 365. b. post med.
and murder be not sin in God because he is bound by no law, yett says
he, they be the work of God, as the author, the mouer, and enforcer: makeinge
so most evidently God to be the author, though not of sin in him self,
because he is subject to no law, yett most cleerelie of sin in us, and the
same so plainly and wickedly, as he is therein reproved by his other Grawerus
(Rector of the protestante university of Islebium) in his absurda absurdorum,
etc. printed. Anno 1606. cap. 5. de pradestin. fol. 3. 4. condemns and
exemplifieth this point very specially and atlarge, from the there recited
several sayings of Suinglius:
protestante brethren: Seauenthlie as concerning the civil magistrate in case
he impugned Suinglius his religion, his published doctrine was, that in such
case even Suinglius, tom. 1. in explan. Art. 42. fol. 84. a. teaches, that.
Quando perfide and extra regulam Christi egerint (Principes) possunt cum Deo
deponi: and page 85. a. initio. he says. Cum vero consensu and suffragijs
totius aut certe potioris partis multitudinis tyrannus tollitur, Deo fit
auspice: and in libro epist. Oecolamp. and Suingl. l. 4. page 868. post med. and
869. Suinglius says. Promittendum est Caesari officium debittum si modo sedem
nobis permittat illibatam, etc. Romanum imperium, imo quodque imperium vbi
religionem sinceram opprimere caeperit, and nos illud negligentes patimur, iam
negatae aut contemptae religionis non minus rei erimus, quam illi ipsi
oppressores, exemplum est apud Hierem. 15. vbi etc.
kings are to be deposed: saying yett further, vt supra. at. r.
due loyalty is to be promised to Caesar, if so that he permit to us our
religion inviolable, etc. (otherwise) if the Roman Empire or what other
sovereign soever, should oppress the sincere religion, and we negligentlie
suffer the same, we shall be charged with contempt no less then the oppressors
thereof them selves, whereof (says he, abusinge the scripture most groslie)
we have an example in the 15. of Jeremy, where the destruction of the people
is prophesied, for that they suffered their king Manasses, being ungodly to
be unpunished: so he, with all aduiseinge to have this doctrine priuatlie, and
with respect Suinglius, ibidem. page 869. post med. says. Prudenter igitur ac
paulatim agenda sunt huiusmodi, atque cum paucis quibus credere poss^s quae
ardua sunt.
communicated unto certain choice persons of credit: Hitherto of Suinglius
his doctrines tendinge to liberty, whereto I only add, that Suinglius upon
his first apostasy from our church, delivered his nouel doctrine
distrustfully, as not without Lauather (o learned Suinglime) in his historia
sacrament. printed. Tiguri, 156^. fol. 2. b. post med. s^ithe. Suinglius
epistolam scripsit ad Matheum Alberum Rutlingensium ecclesiasten etc. in qua
suam sententiam de Eucharist^a explicat, etc. in calce epistolae cum adiurat,
ne cuiquam mortalium eam communicet, praeterquam ei quem constat in fide IESV
sincerum esse, and see further the like, next heretofore at. t. and see
further in Suinglius. tom. 2. in responsione ad libellum Struthionis, fol. 303.
a. post med.
adiuringe not to communicate yt to any other of a contrary opinion: and did
also afterward further proceed therein, as likewise did Luther, of Luther
see heretofore, cap. 3. sect. 3.
after an inconstante and strayinge kind of temporisinge liberty, professinge
to Suinglius tom. 2. de vera and falsa relig. fol. 202. b. initio. says.
Retractamus igitur hic quae illic diximus, tali lege, vt quae hic damus Anno
^tatis nostrae 42. propendeant eis quae quadragesimo dederamus, quando vt
diximus tempori potius scripsimus quam rei, etc. ne inter initia canes and
porci nos rumpant.
retracte here, what he said there, preferringe his writings published in
the 42. year of his age, before those other which he published in the 40. year,
when (says he) tempori potius scripsimus, quam rei, we wrote so as fitted
the time, rather then the cause:

III.
AS concerning Suinglius his other behavior of life, I will make description
thereof from his own writings, whereby yt appears that The direction or
title of this writing, is; ^^etate and prude^tia insigni Helnetiorum reipub.
Huldericus Suinglius, alisque euang^li^ae doctrinae ministri gratiam and pacem
a Deo, etc. tom. 1. fol. 110. a. initio.
Suinglius and certain other ministers of the evangelical doctrine, who
haueinge ben before votarie see there fol. 119. a. paulo ante med.
priests, joined with him in admonition to the Heluetian common wealth, after
some vndertakinge see Suinglius. ibidem. fol. 113 a. post med.
to imparte to it the evangelical doctrine, for which they take yt greeuouslye
to be cum odiosis and in visis penes omnes nominibus eos infames reddunt, qui
euangelium veritatem bona fide praedicant, Lutheranos, Hussitas, and haereticos
illos nominando. ibidem. fol. 113. b. initio.
called Lutheranes and heretics, do first make peticion for wives saying:
We earnestlye request, that the use of marriage be not denied to us, who
feelinge the infirmity of our flesh, perceive that the love of chastity is
not given us by God: for if we consider the words of Paul, we shall find
with him no other cause of marriage (a carnal saying) then for (to satisfy)
the lustefull desires of the flesh, which to burn in us we may not deny,
se^^nge that by means thereof we are made infamouse before the congregation:
And to set forth his carnalitie as yet more fully, by his own explayninge
what he here means by the foresaid burninge desire of the flesh, Hoc vero
summis precibus contendimus, ne matrimonij vsus nobis denegetur, qui carnis
nostrae infirmitatem experti, castitatis studium nobis a Deo non concessum esse
sentimus: si enim Pauli verba co^sideremus, non aliam apud hunc matrimoniorum
causam quam carnis ad libidinem calentem astum reperire licet, quem in nobis
feruere negare no^ possumus, cum huius ipsius opera, nos coram ecclesijs
infames reddiderunt, aestum vero libidinis cas carnis cupiditates and affectus
intelligimus, quibus homo tantum non accensus carnis libidinosae studia animo
suo versat, vt carnis furori satisfaciat, in his solis omnes cogitationes suas
insumit, haec meditatur, totusque in hoc est vt carnis furori satis faciat.
ibid. fol. 115. a. ante med.
wherewith he professes himself, and his said brethren to be as before
troubled, he expresses the same in these plain words there next followinge,
saying Suinglius. vt supra. at. a.
By the burninge desires of the flesh, we understand those desires of the
flesh, wherewith a man being allmoste inflamed, tosseth in his mind the
studies of the lustefull flesh, in these only he spends all his thoughts,
upon these he meditateth, and is wholly busied in this, that he may satisfy
the fury of the flesh: This being the confessed then present carnal
disposition, of Suinglius and his foresaid brethren, he signifies yett
further their answearable behauior before time duringe their remayninge so
unmarried, saying, Si carnis licentiam quaerere animus esset, quis non videt
quam commodius feret si vt hactenus a matrimoniorum legibus abstineremus etc.
nouimus quam facilis in hoc statu nostro soluto and libero, mulieru^ quarum nos
capit satietas, permutatio fieri solet, quare non carnis libidine, sed
castitatis and animarum nobis commissarum amore permoti hoc petimus, ne hae
exemplo nostrae libidinis diutius offe^dantur: ibidem. fol. 119. a. ante med.
if we respected the liberty of the flesh, who sees not how much more
commodiouse it were for us, that we should forbear the laws of marriage as
hitherto we have done etc. for we have known (for shame did you so?) how
easelie in this free and loose estate, being glutted with satietie (of one)
we might change: wherefore for the love not of lust but of chastity and
the souls to us committed, we desire marriage, lest that the souls
committed to our charge, by example of our sensuality (diutius offendantur)
should be any longer offended etc. we have proved that the weakness of our
flesh, has been (o for grief) cause of our often fallinge etc. And in
another epistle written to the Bushop of Constance This appears by the title
thereof. ibidem fol. 120. a. initio. and by the date in the end thereof. fol.
123. initio.
Anno 1522. and subscribed unto by See their names subscribed. fol. 123. b.
initio.
Suinglius, Leo, Jude, Erasmus, Fabricius, and eight other ministers there
named, who all exclame and cry out for wives, after some intimation made of
ibidem. fol. 120. circa med.
the heavenly doctrine so long (before) hidden, and then lately restored, he
further confesses and says. Hactenus experti hoc donum nobis esse negatum.
ibidem. fol. 121. a. fine.
Hitherto we have tried, that this guifte of chastetie had been denied to us
etc. Arsimus proh pudor tantopere vt multa indecore gesserimus: ibidem. fol.
122. a. post med.
We have burned, o for shame, so greatly, that we have committed many
things vnseeminglie: vt citra iactantiam libere loquamur, vsque adeo in
ciuilibus moribus sumus, vt vllum ob flagitium male audiamus apud gregem nobis
creditum, hoc vno excepto. ibidem. fol. 123. a. prope initium.
To speak freely without boastinge, we are not otherwise of such uncivil
manners, that we should be evil spoken of emonge the people to us committed
for any wickedness. Hoc vno excepto, this one point only excepted. Was this
the spirit of the Apostles and ancient fathers, or was this doctrine fit, or
safe, to be by him thus diuulged to the modeste thoughts of innocent young men
and damsels, who wantinge means of marriage, were in danger hence to suck
poison?

IIII.
Lastly as concerning Suinglius his tumultuarie and seditiouse courses, in
excuse whereof it was usual with him to say Bullinger. in his preface, in
Simlerum de filio Dei, printed. 1568. fol. b. 7. paulo post initium,
acknowledges the objection hereof saying. Addit his Suinglij bellatis hominis
sententiam hanc, euangelium sitit sanguinem: and afterward there. fol. y. on
the. a. side fine. he confesses saying. Dixit sateor, euangelium sitit
sanguinem, and then excuses yt with our saviors saying: Non veni pacem
mittere sed gladium: as though our savior had used those words, not as of
persecution to be patiently suffered, but as in excuse of any his own or his
apostles then like intended tumultuarie practices:
the gospel did thirste after blood: they are reported for so gross and
evident, that certain protestants who acknowledge of Gualter. in apolog. pro
Suinglio and operibus eius (before the 1. tom of Suinglius works) fol. 18. a.
ante med. confesses and alleges them saying. Suinglium licet quaedam been
docuerit, in multis tamen alijs errauisse contendunt: and fol. 18. b. prope
initium Christi inquiunt dilectam sponsam ecclesiam a pontificia superstitionis
luxu and sordibus, non iusta and legitima verbi praedicatione. repurgauit, sed
tumultuario and fanatico spiritu, per omnia temere grassatus est, etc.
violenter arma and a Christo prohibitum gladium corripuit, vt nimirum in suam
sententiam sibi contradicentes compulsurus: thus confesses Gualter, as
enforced, the protestants opinion had of Suinglius his sedition, which Gualter
there auoideth nor, otherwise then as thinkinge the same lawful in Suinglius.
Suinglius that he taught some things well, and that he repurged the church
of Christ, from the excess and filthe of popish superstition, do yett
withal say (as confessethe Gualter, who yett excuses Suinglius all he can)
that he performed the same vt supra. at. k.
not by just and lawful preachinge of the word, but rashely, making havoc
of all things by a tumultuarie and fanaticall spirit, etc. violently
assuminge arms, and the sword prohibited by Christ, that so he might by
force compel his adversaries to his opinion: In so much as he is charged to
have stirred up his contrye men the Zuitzers to civil wars, by reason
whereof those of Tigure and Berne, who followed his doctrine, are reported to
have made war upon their neighbors the other five towns, exactinge of them
upon proffred conditions of peace, that Osiander. in centur. 16, l. 2. cap. 20.
page 203.
they should receive again those whom they had banished, for the (other)
religion, and should not forbid the readinge of the scriptures etc. to which,
the said five towns disdaining to be so compelled, and being also
ther^upon brought to Osiander. ibide^. and in Gualters forsaide apology. fol.
30. a. circa med. yt appears that they termed Suinglius Iniquissimum belli
authorem etc. vt qui superbia and crudelitate impulsus, Tigurinis noui and
exquisiti facinoris contra socios audendi author fuerit, victos inopia and
famis necessitate eos in suas parts concedere cogeret:
famine, as being forestald of victuals by those of Tigure and Berne, the
war was renewed, and Suinglius him self was thereupon Osiander. cent. 16.
page 203. ante med.
slain, not as a preacher, Gualter. in apolog. fol. 31. b. fine, says. Obijt
in bello Suinglius, and armatus obijt: and Oecolampadius. in libro epist.
Oecolamp. and Suinglij, page 980. post med. says. Suinglius vt seculares
alias arts, ita and militarem non mediocriter edoctus erat. O peacible divine?
but as a warrier armed in the field: whereupon his dearest Oecolampadius that
dyed for Hospinian. in histor sacram. part. 2. at Anno 1531. fol. 126. a. post.
med. says. Oecolampadius in lethalem morbum incidit etc. morbum non parum
auxisse and mortem promouisse creditur maeror quem accepit ex caede Suinglij,
cum quo coniunctissime vixerat, and see the like in Lauathers histor. sacram.
fol. 21. a. post med.
grief after his death, though al excusinge, yet withal Oecolampadius in
libro epistolarum Oecolampadij and Suinglij l. 4. page 789. post med. take the
notice how that Suinglius his death happened, quanto cum tripudio mundi,
quantoque cum offendiculo pusillorum: and, ibidem. page 981. prope initium,
though excusinge Suinglius all he can, he languisheth therein saying. Fretus
ego consuetudine nostra semel atque iterum dehortabar, ne se ingereret,
negocijs parum euangelicis, etc. iam esto, zelus ille immoderatior fuerit, and
parum decorus, cur non etc.
reprehendeth him, as also those foresaid other Gualter. ibidem. fol. 31. b.
prope finem. terms them saying. Nostri illi perquam egregie censores, ipsum
(Suinglium) (...)
censures mentioned (...) thereof, (...) ^^xte h^r^t^f^^^ ^t. k.
Gualter. in apolog. f^l. 30. a. prope (...) says hereof. (...) contra (...)
^ires (...), etc. sunt (...) pr^^^^^.
(...) of (...) (...). q.
(...) (though^ a (...) hereup^^ ((...)) to ch^r^e the G^^lter. in (...) fol.
30. a. (...)* reprehendeth C^^^^n for that (...) a^cuse^, (...) sediti^n^^
(...) ^^dolph^^^ (...)
Tig^^^^^^ (...) ^^^ulphe king of (...)

V.
HI^^^^^ of (...) of (...) co^^icio^, that (...) S^^l^^^elburge (...) him
Schluffelburge. in th^^log. Cal^^^. (...) ^ersu^ f^^^m. (...) Suingli^^, (...)
(...) and Luther profe^^^d (...) Luther (...) etc. toto (...). see this in
Hospinian^ (...) part. 2 ^t Anno 1544. f^l. 1^7. a. (...).
(...) and (...) him with all his (...) Hospinian. vb^ s^pr^ says. Luth^^us
dicit Suingli^^ ^^serr^^^t (...) a papistis i^terfectu^ ide^q^^ i^ (...) esse:
and again some little thereafter. Lutherus se de animae Suinglij salute omnino
desperare dicit:
disp^^^^^g^ of (...) s^lu^tion: these tw^ (...), were in Gods permiss^^^
r^^s^d vp^ (by (...) I lean to ind^ i^d^eme^^) against our Roman cath^lic^e
c^^^c^e, they ^^^^ne both ^^oute one time, they p^^c^^ded a like in one course,
of breakinge th^^^^ ^o^^^y me^^^^ouse marriage, of stirring^ up (...) the
st^^^, and of recey^ing^ (...) agai^^^e the mass by nyghtlye app^^i^^^^, (...)
they c^^demned ^ch in other for the ill^^^^^^ (...), they mo^^e bitterly
maligned (...) o^^^r, agreeinge in nothing but against the pope: the (...)
catholic religion flourished and contineued universally professed, as is
confessed, by protestants them selves, from the year of Christ as some
grante. see in the preface to the Christian reader. initio. in the margin at.
a.
605. as others grante. see there also.
316. until somewhat after the beginning of the last sixtenthe expired age;
in or about the 17. year whereof these two men (whom as some conceive God
designed as it were for fatale, by ominouse and fearful sight of monstrouse
byrthes heretofore see heretofore cap. 3. sect. 6. post med. at. k. *.. l.
mentioned) began both of them in Germany to oppose them selves against yt:
Wherein as they are by some affirmed to have by their life and doctrine (as
the Apostle says of greeuouse sinners) Haebr. 6.6.
crucified again to themselves the Son of God, so God him self, to give
(as some conceived) an answerable prognosticke or fore-warninge of the great
alteration both in life and doctrine thence presently to ensue, in this last
sextenthe centurie, to the thereby like crucifyinge again of Christ, did in
the very first year of that fatal centurie visit even Germany yt self,
with most fearful shows and apparitions In Osia^der. centur. 16. l. 1. cap.
3. page 4. is thus reported. Anno. 1501. Miranda sane, horrenda, and in audita
ostendit Deus hominibus; a festis paschalibus singulis diebus in vno vel alio
loco diocesis Leodiensis apparuit public, and inopinate, aliquando in
ecclesijs, aliquando in plateis, aliquando in domibus, and in ipsis etiam
cubiculis, signum Dominica crucis perfectum etc. apparent autem vt plurimum
super capitibus mulierum and maxim puellarum, in earum peplis supremo vertice,
etc. and page 5. circa med. is further said. Post hac non solum signum crucis
apparuit, quin vt velut hasta quaedam, ac desuper nonnulli characteres, cruenta
quidem omnia, concludebantur in circulo viridi totum contingente caput,
protulitque inde acumina ad modum spinarum, etc. mox erupit in ipsius
pepliparte anteriori, sanguinis tanta copia vt confestim in extremam vsque
fimbriam, ad vnius digiti longitudinem and prope duorum latitudinem deflueret;
vnde adeo conspicientes sunt atteniti, vt e canonicis protinus vnus cad^ret,
etc. With much more there very fearful and ominouse:
of crosses, spear, and crown of thorns compassinge the head, and all of
them bloody, and imprinted upon the shirtes and lynnins of the common people,
with real moisture, and defluxion of blood; the known evident truth whereof,
is confessed and at large reported by the protestante writer Osiander, to whom
we referr she reader: only in regard of so many confessed praemisses
concerning both Luther and Suinglius, we now lastly referr to the readers
equal judgment, whether we may safely join with the apology of the church
of England, in acknowledginge, so says the Apology of the church of
England, in master Jewels defense, printed. 1571 page 426. post med.
Luther and Suinglius, for most exc^ll^nte men, even sent of God to give
light to the whole world, when in the mydste of the darkness of that age, the
truth was unknown and unheard of: or else with Zanchius in affirminge them to
be, so affirms Zanchius, de redempt. in explicat. 4. praecepti quaest. de
vocat. ad minister, etc.
the two witnesses (of God) mentioned in the Apocalips.

CALVINE. CHAPT. VI.
AS concerning John Calvin borne In the answer for the time to the defense
of the censure: printed. 1583. fol. 85. a. prope finem.
at Noyon in Picardie. Anno. 1509. against whom is objected (how truly or
untruly, I do now for some reasons purposelie forbear hereby to affirm)
that he forged letters under the names of Galasius and others as by them
written in his praise, and his then sendinge them to Petrus Viretus mynister of
Lausanna to be disperced: his reported further see this in Bolseck. in vita
Caluini, cap. 13. Where he reports that Calvin attempted to restore to life
this Brule (comitatus magna caterua amicorum) in the presence of a great number
of his friends: see also, in dialog. Alani C^pi. l. 6. c. 29. Like report of a
protestante preacher in Polande. Who Anno 1558. practiced the like upon one
Matthew publicly in the open church at Biethage a town near Cracouia, at
what time the said Mathewe being found dead in deed, the confederacy was
thereupo^ there openly discovered by his wife. In like manner does Gregorius
Turonensis in hist. lib. 2. c. 3. report how that Cirola an Arian heretic,
practiced in like sort with one to counterfaite blindness and to request
miraculouse help from this Cirola, which being accordingly so do^ne, the
party was in deed strocke^ blind, whereupon he excl^^med and revealed the
practice: in which like respect Tertullian, in libro de prascript. not
vnaptlie says of heretics. Agnosco maximam virtutem eorum, qua Apostolos in
peruersum aemulantur: illi enim de mortuis suscitabant, isti de viuis mortuos
faciunt.
practice with one called Brule and his wife, that he should feign him self
dead, whereupon Calvin should in confirmation of his doctrine, undertake in
the presence of many to revive him, which when Calvin did, Brule was in Gods
judgment found dead indeed, whereupon his wife exclamed publickely against
Calvin, and discovered the practice: his like reported incontinencie with the
gentlewoman of Mongis, who steallinge from her husband at Lausanna, made
aboade at Geneua with Calvin: his like reported adulterouse attemptinge at
Geneua of the lady Iollande of Bredrode, wife to a sickly noble man called
James Burgongue lord of Fallaise, in so much as she persuaded her husband
to leave Geneua, and go to Lausanna where she revealed the wholle matter:
also his extraordinary curiouse and exquisite diet, such as the lords of
Berne (though protestants) were thereat greatly offended. All which and
many other no less heynouse imputations set down in particular, though they
were published by Bol^ecks book of Caluines life was by him dedicated to
monsieur of Epinac Archb^shop and Earl of Lions. 1577.
Hierom Bolseck doctor of physic (who lived with Calvin at Geneua) in his
special book written of the life and death of John Calvin. Anno 1577.
wherein Bolsecke protests saying so protests he in the beginning of his
laid book.
I protest before God, and all the holy court of heaven, before all the
world and the holy ghost it self, that neither anger nor envy, nor evil
will, has made me speak or write any one thing against the truth, and my
conscience: for so much yett as Bolsecke being scandalized with Caluines
life, became catholic, and so (as I take it was) at his writing hereof, I
will therefore (according to my other undertaken method) as all sparinge to
insiste upon the probability of so many alleged particulers which could
not be then fa^ned without known discovery in the nonce of all ^^n, by
whollye forbearinge to affirm or urge the same: only I cannot but allege and
urge the public testimony of that learned lutherane Conradus Schlusselburge
(a man of principal See heretofore. cap. 5. sect. 1. at. r.
estimation in the protestants church, and no less l^^^n^d and enemy to the
pope then was Calvin him self) who reports of Calvin saying,
Schlusselburg. in theolog. Calvin. printed. 1594. l. 2. fol. 72 a. circa and
post med. says. Deus manu sua pote^ti adeo hunc haereticum percussit, vt
desperata salute. demonibus inn^tatis, iurans, execrans, and blasphemans
miserrime animam malignam exhalarit, obijt autem Caluinus morb^ pediculari
vermibus circa pudenda in apostomate seu vlcere fatentissimo crescentibus, ita
vt nullus ass^stentium fatorem ^^^plius far posset: Hac publicis scriptis
Caluino obijciuntur (in quibus etiam de ipsius aselgia, varijs stagitijs, and
libidinibus, ob quas stigma far candenes dorso Caluini impressum fuerit a
magistratis sub quorum vixit horrenda narrantur) ad qua non vide^ solidam and
inc^lentam aliquam refutationem, etc. scio and leg^ ^e^am aliter de vna moribus
and ob tu Calvin scribere, cum ver^ Beza eadem hares^, and eodem form peccate
nobilitatus sit, vt historia de Candida eius ^^retricula testatur, nomo ipsi in
hac part fidem habere potest:
(e) God in the rod of his fury visitinge Calvin, did horribly punish him
before the fearful hour of his unhappy death, for so he stroke this
heretic (so he ^earmeth him in regard of his doctrine concerning the
sacrament, and God being the author of sin) with his mighty hand, that
being in despair, and calling upon the devil, he gave up his wicked soul,
swearinge, cursinge and blaspheminge: he dyed of the disease of lyce and worms
(a kind of death wherewith God 2. Machab. 9.5.9.10. and A^t^^. 12.23.
strykethe the wicked) encreasinge in a most loathsome ulcer about his privy
parts, so as none present could endure the stenche: these things are
objected to Calvin by public so credible unto ^chlusselburge was B^lset^^
foresaid book houlden, wherein these things are written.
writing, in which also horrible things are declared concerning his
lasciuiousnes, his sondrie abominable vices, and so domiticall lusts, for
which (last) he was by the magistrate (at Noyon) under whom he (then) lived,
Whereas Bolsecke in his foresaid book reports that the city of Noyon in
Picardie (in which Calvin was borne and lived, and from which says Bolsecke
upon his forsaide punishment of Brandinge fled) did testify this forsaide
offense and punishment of Calvin unto monsieur Bertelier Secretaire of the
council of Geneua, under the hand of a public and sworn notarie, which
testimony (says Bolsecke) ya yett extant, and has been seen to himself
and many others: now such seeminge known circumstances wherein he was so
notably discouerable, and to be thereupon discredited, even in the knowledge of
the wholle city of Noyon (a place not remote) but in the very same
kingedome, and also in the like knowledge of diverse of Geneua, I will not
determine, but refer to indifferente judgment: only I add besides the
foresaid testimony of Schlusselburge, who (being as learned and no less
enemy to the pope then Calvin) reporttethe the same for true, that whereas. F.
Campion in rat. does obiecte this against Calvin, as a matter known and
public, tearminge him therefore stigmaticus perfuga, a branded fugitive:
master Whitaker in his answer thereto, printed. 1604. page 50. initio. not
denies, but says. Si stigmaticus fuit Caluinus, fuit etiam Paulus, fuerunt
alij etc. And being told by Dureus contra Whitakerum, printed. 1582. fol. 37.
b. that he was profane in so comparinge Caluines brandes for wickedness, with
Paul's brandes for Christ, master Whitaker ( in respons. contra Duraeum,
printed. 1583. page 280. answeringe to that foresaid very. fol. 73. of
Duraeus) does quite pass over in silence, all that matter, so thereby
forbearinge all further mention or defense.
Branded on the shoulder with a hot burninge Iron, unto which yett I see not
any sound and clear refutation: etc. thus fare Schlusselburge of Calvin:
whereto also assenteth as yett further testifyinge Caluines filthy
dispayringe death, (upon the disease of lyce and worms encreasinge in an
ulcer about his priuye parts) the protestante writer Johannes Harennius, who
being himself an earnest Caluiniste, and then continewinge student at Geneua,
affirms (in his published Ioannes Herennius (a Caluinist preacher) in libello
de vita Caluini) says. Caluinus in desperatione finie^s vitam, obijt
turpissimo and fatidissimo morbo, quem Deus rebellibus and maledictis
comminatus est, prius excruciatus and consumptus, quod ego verissime attestari
audeo, qui funestum and tragicum illius exitum, his meis oculis praesens aspexi.
writtinge) himself to have been present and eye witness thereof.

II.
AS concerning Caluines doctrine tendinge to liberty of life, what more
dangerouse herein then where he teaches, that Calvin. instit. l. 3. c 23.. 6.
says. Consilio nutuque suo ita ordinat vt inter homines nascantur ab vtero
certa morti deuoti, qui sua perditione ipsius nomen glorificent.
God does ordain by his counsel and decree, that emonge men some be borne
destined to certain damnation from their mothers womb, who by their
destruction may glorify God, and that the decree of God in this behalf is
master D. Willet upon the Romans. printed. 1611. in cap. 9. page 442. post
med. says. Bucer, Calvin, and Zanchius do affirm, that God by his absolute
will, has reprobated and rejected some without respect unto their sins:
from which doctrine master Willet there, and page 443. circa med. professes
to dissent:
absolute, only because yt so pleases him, vt supra at. h.
without any respect had to their works either good or evil. In so much
as he affirms, that God did not only foresee, but also will, and Calvin.
instit. lib. 3. cap. 23.. 7. says. Decretum quidem horribile fateor,
inficiari tamen nemo poterit, quin praesciuerit Deus quem exitum habiturus
esset homo antequam ipsum conderet, and ideo praesciuit quia decreto suo sic
ordinarat, etc. nec enim absurdum videri debet quod dico, Deum non modo primi
hominis casum, and in eo posterorum ruinam praeuidisse, sed arbitrio quoque suo
sic dispensasse.
decree even the very sin and fall of Adam: that also God does will and
Calvin. institut. l. 3. c. 23. sect. 6. fine. says. Cum non alia ratione qua
futura sunt prauideat Deus, nisi quia vt ita fierent decreuit, frustra de
praescientia lis mouetur, vbi constat ordinatione potius and nutu omnia euenire
and l. 1. cap. 18. sect. 3. He further says. Satis aperte ostendi Deum vocari
eorum omnium authorem, qua isti censores volunt otiose tantum eius permissu
contingere: this admitted, how is not God the author of sin:
decree whatsoever he does foresee, which Schafmanus (a learned protestant
writer) in libro de peccatorum causis, printed. Francofurti. 1597. page 27.
paulo post med. says of his brethren. Scribunt Deum nihil prascire, nisi quod
ex decreto facturus sit, etc. whereto he says. At ipsam actionum (...), seu
peccatum praeuidet Deus, ergo sequitur Deus ipsius peccati authorem esse: And
Hemingius (though a learned Caluiniste) says. (as making the same
inference) hac sententia Deum authorem peccati statuit, lib. de universally
gratia, printed. 1591. page 109. circa med.
extends yt self a like, to make God the decreer and author, not only of
that which is material and positive in the sinful action, (which grant is
proceedinge from God Act. 17.28.
in whom we live and move, but also of the sin and deformity thereof, of
which in particular Calvin professedlie Calvin. institut. l. 2. c. 4. sect.
2. says. Omitto hic vniuersalem Dei motionem vnde creaturae omnes vt
sustinentur, ita efficaciam quid vis agendi ducunt; de illa speciali act^one
tantum l^quor, quae in vnoquoque facinore apparet, etc.
signifies his meaning to be, concludinge that the Calvin. l. 1. instit.
cap. 18. sect. 2 says. Dicitur Satan excacare infidelium mentes, sed vnde hoc
nisi quod a Deo ipso manat efficacia erroris?
very efficacy of error, proceeds from God him self, who (says he)
makes Calvin. ibid. lib. 3. cap. 24. sect. 13. says. Vocem ad eos dirigit,
sed vt magis obsurdescant; lumen accendit, sed vt redduntur caeciores;
doctrinam profert, s^d qua magis obstupescant; remedium adhibet, sed ne
sanentur.
offer of salvation (to the reprobate) but with no intencion of their haueinge
yt. A doctrine so directly crossinge all admonition to good life, that the
professors thereof, so says master Willet, upon the Romans, in c. 9. page
442. post med.
would not have yt handled, either in schools or before the people, and
sondrie protestants do in respect thereof, reprehend and so are the
Caluinistes charged by Hemingius (him self otherwise a Caluiniste) in l^bro de
vn^uersali gratia, printed 1591. page 109. and by Grawerus Rector of the
university of Islebium, in his absurda absurdorum etc. under the fronti^pice
of the first leaf and title of the book: and by Osiander in his Enchirid.
controu. etc. page 104.
charge Calvin, as teachinge that God is the author of our sin. In so much
as the magistrates of Berne Vide literas Senatus Bernensis, Anno 1555.
(though otherwise Caluinistes) made yt penal by their laws, for any of
their territories, to preach Caluins doctrine thereof, or for their people to
read any of his books conteyninge the same.

III.
AS concerning Caluines doctrine touching the divinity of Christ, and the
blessed Trinity. Although he profess not directly to impugn the same, how
covertly yet he may be thought to have prepared way unto the new Arianes,
we refer unto indifferent judgment, upon consideration had of that which
follows. For whereas yt is the received opinion of all orthodoxall divines (to
which master Abbot, master Hooker etc. Master Abbot. in his third part. of
the defense of the reformed catholic, printed. 1609. page 38. ante med.
says. We steadfastly believe and teach, that the second person of the
Trinity receives his God head from the first etc. and see there. page 36.
ante med. and Zanchius de tribus Elohim. printed. 1597. part. 1. l. 5. c. 7.
arg. 4. pa. 322. b. post med. says. Quid est filius ex patre genitus, nisi
Deus de Deo, vt patres in Niceno concilio ex verbo Dei definierunt? a patre
igitur suam habet essentiam and quicquid est; and see the like in master
Hooker, lib. 5. printed. 1597. sect. 54. page 113. initio. and in master Doct.
Couel in his defense of master Hooker, printed. 1603. page 17. initio. and 121.
do subscribe) that although the essence of the God head be of yt self,
yett the son has it not of him self, but from the father, and is in that
respect, Zanchius. vt supra. at the figure. 2. and master D. Couel, in his
defense etc. page 18. ante med.
Deus de Deo, God of God; the contrary opinion whereof in affirminge that the
father is God of him self, and that the son also is God of him self,
argues them to be two several gods, and not one consubstantiall: Whitaker. in
his responsio ad rations Campiani, printed. 1604. rat. 8. page 121. circa med.
says. Vtcunque patres illi (Niceni) dixerint Christum esse Deum de Deo, tamen
firmissime tene^dum esse confirmat Caluinus, Christum ex sese habere vt Deus
sit, nisi Christum volumus sua diuinitate spoliare:
Calvin nevertheless (as striking at the divinity of Christ) teaches (against
the doctrine herein of the Nicen council) that Christ is not, Deus de Deo,
very God of very God, which he rejects for Danaeus contra Bellarmin. part.
1. printed. 1596. ad controu. 2. etc. 19. page 121. fine, says. Hanc phrasim
Deus de Deo, vere sensit and scripsit Caluinus, impropriam esse ac barbariem
redolere: And where is master Moreton. in apol. cath. part. 1. printed. 1605.
page 154. initio. alleges Bellarmin. l. de Christo, c. 19.. sed quanquam, as
excuseinge Calvin herein, see this prevented in the protest. apolog. printed.
1608. page 419. at.. and also by Keckermannus (a learned Caluinist.) Who in
his System. theolog. printed. 1602. page 63. fine. reproves Bellarmine for his
reprehe^dinge Caluines doctrine hereof in the very same foresaid book and
chapter cited by master Moreto^.
barbarouse, he, and sondrie his followers affirminge also yet further,
Calvin. institut. l 1. c. 13.. 23. says, of Christ: Quomodo creator qui
omnibus esse dat, non erit ex se pso sed essentiam aliunde mutuabitur? And in
his explicat. perfid. Valent. gentil. extant in his tract. theologic. printed.
15^7. page 774. a. circa med. he further says. Hoc modo videmus precariam
fieri eius diuinitatem, cui datum est esse: and ib them. page 774. a. ante med.
He says. Iam tibi responsum fuit, non posse Deum esse filij sui patrem nisi
personae respectu, quia alioqui vel partibilis esset Dei essentia, vel filius
ipse Deus non esset. And master D. Willet in his Sinopsis, printed. 1592.
controu. 19. page 610. prope finem, says. As the Son is God, he is of him
self, neither takes he his essence, but person only of his father.
that Christ has not his essence from his father, but from him self; and
(which is most fearful) that Calvin. in explicat. perfid. Valent. etc. vbi
supra. page 771. b. ante med. says. Si essentiam, communicauit pater cum
filio, vel in solidum, vel ex part co^municauit si ex part dimidium nobis
Deu^ fabricas etc. add quod hoc modo nimis sceleste ac faede laceratur Dei
essentia; and ibidem. page 772. a. ante med. He further adds. Si ex part
pater suam diuinitatem in filium transfudet, iam lacere erit diuinitas: si in
totum, ergo diuinitas quae ante fuerat penes patrem in filium conuersa, in ipso
patre euanuit:
the father can neither wholly, nor by part, communicate his essence to
Christ, but must withal be deprived thereof him self, etc. which very
assertion being the proper Polanus in Syntagma theolog. printed. 1610. l. 3.
c. 4 page 1807. ante med. recites the Antitrinitaries argument to be: Si Deus
genuit filium ex sua essentia, aut totam essentiam, aut partem eius filio
dedit, si totam ipse eam non retinuit, sin partem est compositus, ergo Deus non
genuit filium ex sua essentia: and see their like argument recited by
Symlerus de filio Dei, printed. 1568. l. 3. c. 2. object. 11. fol. 233. b. ante
med. and by Iunius in his examen argumentationum, quas Gratianus Prosper etc.
adduxit, etc. printed. Lugduni Batauorum. 1596. sect. 29. page 45. circa med.
argument of the now Antitrinitaries, is for such specially recited and see
this recited and confuted by Polanus, Simlerus, and Iunius, in their places
last before cited.
confuted by Symlerus, Polanus, and others, all of them learned Caluinistes:
And yett all this notwithstanding, Calvin doubted not most vnchristianlie to
say, Calvin. in admonit. ad Polonos, extant in tract. theol. printed. 1597.
page 739. b. fine, says. Apertius dicam, si pater suum esse habet a seipso,
filius suum esse a patre, spiritus ab vtroque, an non tres essentiae emergunt?
If the father have his essence, of him self, the son his essence of the
father, and the spirit from them both, do not then three essences hereupon
arise? Also Calvin proceeds yet further, teaching that Calvin. in tract.
theologic. printed. 1597. page 791. b. fine, says. Absurdum nullum est etc.
si secundum diuinitatem apud patrem intercedat Christus:
Christ according to his divinity makes intercession to God the father,
that the Calvin. in tractat. theolog. page 784. a. says. Ingenue tradimus
(...) Dei nomen proprie patri ascribi:
name of God is properly attributed to the father by way of excellency:
insinuatinge so thereby, that the name of God is attributed to the son and
the holy ghost, but improperlie and as yt were after a secondarie respect: In
so much as he forbeareth not to term Christ, Calvin. in harmonia in Math.
26. verse. 64. fine, says. Dicitur autem Christus sedere ad dextram patris
quia summus rex co^stitutus quasi secundam ab eo honoris and imperij sedem
obtinet: sedet ergo Christus ad patris dextram, quia eius est Vicarius, etc.
the Vicar of God, occupyinge the second degree of honor: concludinge that this
saying of our savior objected usually by the Arianes, the Calvin. in tract.
theolog. page 794. b initio. says. Sententia Christi pater mayor me est,
restricta fuit ad humanam eius naturam, ego vero non dubito ad totum complexum
extendere, and see also, page 792. a* initio.
father is greater then I, is not to be restrained to the humane nature, but to
Christ as God and man: In respect of which premises, Stancarus, though in
most other things a Caluiniste, doubts not yett to Stancarus contra
ministros Geneuenses and Tigurinos, says. Conclusum est, o Calvin, doctrinam
tuam de filio Dei esse plane Arianam, aqua resilias, quamprimum te or^ atque
obsecre: Vide ibidem. page 94. 95. ^18. 123.
charge Calvin with Arianisme: A thing as yett more suspiciouse, in that
Calvin (who right well knew that words are but as the vessels of things)
professes to myslike (as see heretofore. cap. 2. sect. 10. at. o. p. q.
likewise did Luther) our usual prayinge to the trinity as Calvin. in tract.
theolog. page 796. a* paulo ante med. says. Precatio vulgo trita est, sancta
Trinitas vnus Deus, miserere nostri, mihi non placet, ac omnino barbariem sapit.
being displeasant to him and barbarouse And as Calvin thus makes way in
strengtheninge the Arianes pretended prooffes against the divinity of
Christ, so does he also yet further seem to advance their cause in
extenuatinge the force of such textes of scripture as are usually alleged
against the Arianes in the behalf of Christ's divinity, as for example:
fi^ste concerning this known text, I John. 10 30.
and the father are (vnum) one (thing) which Zanchius de tribus Elohim. part.
2. l. 5. c. 3. terms argumentum firmum. Calvin auoideth yt saying; The
Calvin. in John. 10.30. says. Abusi sunt hoc loco veteres vt probarent
Christu^ esse patri (...) neque enim Christus de vnitate substantiae disputat,
sed de consensu etc.
fathers abused this place, to prove Christ to be of the same substance with
his father, for Christ speaks not of the unity of substance, but of
consent: which being the very answer of the Arianes, is in them specially
confuted by See this in Zanchius de tribus Elohim, printed. 1597. l. 5 cap. 5.
page 689. a. ante med.
Zanchius. Secondly concerning the word Eloim in Genesis, master D. Willet
confesses saying, Wi^let upon Genesis. printed. 1605. in cap. 1. page 19.
fine. and 20. initio.
Against the Jews that deny the Trinity we have euidente prooffe in Genesis,
cap. 1. verse. 1. where the word Elohim etc. and in like manner is this place
understood and urged by see Zanchius alleged in Hu^nius Anparaeus etc. page
16. and 17.
Zanchius, Peter martyr alleged. ibidem. page 14.
Peter martyr, and others, yett is Calvin so boulde as to avoid the same,
saying. They Calvin. in Gen c. 1. says. Ex verbo Elohim colligere solent hic
notari in Deo tres personas, sed quia mihi parum solida videtur tantae rei
probatio, ego in voce non insistam, qum potius mouendi sunt lectores, vt sibi a
violentis eiusmodi glossis caueant.
are accustomed to collect from the word Elohim, that thereby are noted three
persons in God, but because the prooffe of so great a matter seems to me
unsound, I will not rest upon the word, but will rather admonish the
readers to beware of such violent glosses: Thirdly as concerning Genesis
where yt is said, Genesis 19.24.
the lord rayned upon Sodom, fire from the lord etc. whereof master D.
Willet says, master Willet in Genesis. c. 19. verse. 24. page 214. paulo ante
med.
this place is well urged by the fathers to prove the eternity of Christ,
Calvin to the contrary says. Calvin. in Genesis c. 19. says. Quod veteres,
Christi diuinitatem hoc testimonio probare conati sunt, minime firmum est, etc.
and see Calvin. in tract. theol. page 793. b. ante med.
Whereas the fathers labored to prove Christ's divinity by this testimony, yt
is nothing firm: etc. Fourthelie where yt is said, Psalm. 2.7.
thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee, which to omit the fathers,
the Haebr. 1.5.
Apostle alleges as in prooffe of Christ's divinity, as Symlerus (a learned
Caluiniste) does See Simlerus de filio Dei, printed. 1568. l. 1. fol. 19. b.
ante med. and fol. 21. a. initio.
confess and urge, Calvin says to the contrary thereof, Calvin. in Psalm.
2. says. Scio hunc locum de aeterna Christi generatione a multis fuisse
expositum, qui and in verbo (hodie) argute philosophati su^t, sed etc. and
again in Heb. c. 1. verse. 5. he further says. Friuola Augustini argutia est
qui hodie aeternum and continuum fingit Christus, certe aeternus est, etc. sed
hoc nihil ad praesentem locum.
I know this place to be expounded by many, of Christ's eternal generation,
who have philosophically argued from the word, hodie, this day, but etc. and
again, vt supra, at. f.
the reason of Austine is friuolouse, who by the word (hodie) this day,
fayneth eternity: surely Christ is eternal, but that is nothing to this
present place: Fifthlie where yt is said, Psalm. 33.6.
by the word of the lord the heavens were made, and all the host of them by
the spirit of his mouth, a text to this purpose specially alleged and urged
by urged by Zanchius. de tribus Elohim. part. 1. lib. 7. cap. 1. loc. 1. page
381. a. post med.
Zanchius, Calvin rejects the fathers exposition hereof in behalf of the
Trinity, saying, Calvin. institut. l. 1. cap. 13.. 15. says. Sciens
volensque supersedeo a multis testimonijs quibus vsi sunt veteres, plausibile
illis visum est citare ex Dauide Psalm. 33. etc. vt probarent spiritus sancti
diuinitatem, sed illa ratio infirma fuit:
I do knowinglie and willingly forbear diverse testimonies which the ancient
fathers used: yt seemed plausible unto them, to allege from David. Psalm. 33.
etc. to prove the divinity of the holy ghost, but that reason (or proffe)
was infirm: Sixthlie, where yt is said 1. John. 5.7.
there be three that give testimony in heaven, the father, the word, and the
holy ghost, and these three be one, a text so conuincinge that yt is for
such urged by Zanchius de tribus Elohim. part. 2. lib. 5. cap. 3. page 668. a.
post med.
Zanchius; Calvin upon this so known a place says, Calvin. in 1. ep. John.
cap. 5. verse. 7. says. Quod dicit tres esse vnum, ad essentiam non refertur,
sed ad consensum potius.
Where yt says that they three are one, yt is to be referred not to essence,
but rather to consent: the further expositions of Calvin in this kind are
so exceedinge many, as would grow to a great volume. And are for such
accordingly collected and digested into Three treatises one of them entitled
Caluinus Iudaizans, hoc est Iudaicae glossae and corruptelae quibus Ioannes
Caluinus Illustrissima scripturae sacrae loca and testimonia de gloriosa
Trinitate etc. detestandum in modum corrumpere non exhorruit, etc. per Aegidium
Hunn^um S. Theol. doctorem, and professorem in Academia Witemberge^si. 1595.
Another of the^ entitled. Antiparaeus etc. printed. Witembergae. 1603. and the
third entitled. Antiparans alter, printed. vt supra. And see like collection
and observation of sondrie scriptures (depraved as before by Calvin) made in
Schlusselburge. in theolog Calvin. l. 2. fol. 38. 39. 40. 41. 42. and in
Pel^rgus his admonitio de Arianis page 50 51. etc.
three several treatises or volumes, not by us, but by that famouslie learned
protestant writer Aegidius Hunnius vt supra at. m.
doctor and public professor in the university of Witemberge, and chosen see
colloquium Ratisbonae habitum anno 1601. excusum ^auingae 1^02. throughout all
which conference Hunnius bears the ch^efest part:
chief disputante upon the protestante party, in the late public
disputation had at Ratisbone between catholics and protestants: this point
was so obseruable and evident Calvin, that the new Arianes of Transiluania,
do usually avoid with like or rather the very same evasion as does Calvin,
the textes of scripture comonlye objected against them in prooffe of Christ's
divinity. Whereof Hunnius giuinge example says Hunuius in his Caluinus
Iudaizans. p^g. 44. says hereof. Hanc glossam etc. (...) excipiunt,
amplexantur and exosculantur Franciscus David, Blandrata, caeterique
iuratissimi perfidissimique hosts adorandae Trinitatis.
This gloss (or exposition) is willingly received and embraced by Franciscus
David, Blandrata, and other the wyked enemies of the honored Trinity: and
Pelargus an other protestante writer of great note says ^ikewise thereof,
^elargus in his admonitio de Arianis etc. page 45. ante med. says. Non hic
Caluinum in plurimis scripturae expositionibus, (...), non Caluinianos, in
praecipus de diuinitate Christi locis (...) laboriose ostendam, etc. ex ipsis
Arianorum libris vbi sua posuerunt latibula, vbi parata sibi cognoscant
receptacula paucis refer^^.
I will not hear labor to show that Calvin does Iudaize in his many
expositions of scripture, nor that the Caluinistes do Arianize in the chief
places (of scripture) which concern the divinity of Christ etc. I will (but)
allege some few (examples) out of the very books of the Arianes them
selves, where they have placed their hoales and lurkinge places, whereupon he
alleges the many see Pelargus. ibidem. page 51. and 52
answers of the Arianes, wherein they do imitate Calvin in answeringe and
auoidinge as he does, the many textes of scripture usually objected in
prooffe of the Trinity. In so much as he also alleges further the Arianes
own ibidem. page 50.
words, wherein they do profess to answer and avoid under the express
alleged name and authority of Calvin, certain of the scriptures which are
as before specially recited, and the like is done by Albertus Albertus
Grawerus in his absurda absurdorum, etc. printed. Anno 1606. fol. c. 3. on the
first side, ante med. says. Aperte igitur Caluinus Arianizat, quare and
Ariani ad cum prouocant, in prooffe whereof he there next after cites
verbatim, the several sayings of Franciscus David, Georgius Blandrata, and
Obsterrodus (all of them new Arianes) in which they allege the very words,
name and authority of Caluines exposition as in answer to many scriptures
objected against the^ in prooffe of Christ's divinity: wherein to avoid all
doubts, this author not only so alleges their foresaid sayings, but
also the titles of their books, and the very leaf wherein every such
saying is to be found:
Grawerus this appears in the first page under title of the book.
Rector of the protestante university of Islebium: that therefore Calvin
professed externallie the doctrine of the Trinity seems unto some but
suspected and verbal, seeinge he reallie euadeth so very many of those
cheifest textes of scripture, which be usually alleged in behalf of the
Trinity, and by such his evasion, directs the Arianes how to avoid the
rest, in that the very same kind of evasion or answer, is no less strong
against the other, then against these: which suspicion so had of Caluines
spirit, appears to many much more probable, in that the several troops of
Arianes now raginge in Beza in epist. theolog. printed. 1573. epist. 81. page
363. paulo post med. says hereof. Hinc illud incendium, quod iam tota vastata
Polonia, in Transiluaniam quoque peruasit, and ep. 16. page 122. post med. He
says hereof. Poloniam totam and Transiluaniam in hunc miserrimum statum
redactum vides:
Transiluania, Poland and Hungary, are but as Colonies sent from Geneua, all
the principal chieftaines of these new Arianes, haueinge been at first see
next hereafter at. b. and Iacobus Andreas (of whose great praises see
heretofore, cap. 3. sect. 7. in the margin at. y. z.) in prafat. refut.
apolog. Danai, says. Minime mirandum est, and ex Caluinianis in Polonia,
Transiluania and Hungaria, alijsque in locis quam plurimos ad Arianismum,
quosdam etiam ad Mahometismum accessisse, quorum impietati haec Caluiniana
doctrina iter parat. and see further also Schlusselburge. in theolog. Calvin.
lib. 2. act. 2. fol. 9. a. and Hunnius in his Antiparaeus page 97. initio,
says. Tot celebres Antitrinitarij ex Caluinianorum scholis and ecclesijs
prodierunt: and Pelargus in his admonitio etc. page 45. says. Non hic etc.
Adami Neuseri, non Blandratae, non Pauli Alciati, Francisci Dauidis, Gentilis,
Gribaldi, Siluani and aliorum facilem e Caluini scholae ad Arianos lapsum and
progressum commemorabo: and see like further acknowledgement of this point in
master Hooker, of eccles. policy, printed. 1597. lib. 5. sect. 42. page 89.
post med.
Caluinistes, and so in most other Yt appears by the book set forth by
Gratianus Prosper a learned antitrinitarie entitled Instrumentum doctrinarum
etc. printed. Loschi. Anno 1586. that the only points therein propounded
wherein they dissent from the purer Caluinistes, are their doctrines against
the Trinity, and the baptism of infantes, till they be of years of beleeffe:
points do yet to this present continewe, reputinge them selves to be the
most pure reformed Caluinistes in respect of their abnegation of the
Trinity, which they reiecte as being the Osiander, centur. 16. lib. 2. cap.
22. page 209. fine. says of them. Antitrinitarij asserunt Deum vnum esse in
essentia, trinum in personis esse commentum Antichristi, triplicem Cerberum etc.
three headed Cerberus, the device of Antichriste, and the master Hooker, in
his eccles. policy. the first edition. lib. 4. sect. 8. page 183. fine,
says. The Arianes in the reformed churches of Poland, think the very
beleeffe of the Trinity, to be a part of Antichristiane corruption, etc. And
that the pope should be famous for his triple crown, a sensible mark whereby
the world might know him to be mystical beast spoken of in the revelation,
the great Antichriste, in no one respect so much as in this, that he
maintayneth the doctrine of the Trinity.
cheeffe part of popish and Christian corruption; from which known
foundation of the Arianes doctrine yt was that Adam Nauserus (a learned
Caluiniste) and see Osiander. centur. 16. lib. 3. cap. 66. page 818. fine, and
Schlusselburge. in theolog. Calvin. lib. 1. art. 2. fol. 9. b. fine, says.
Adam Neuserus ^lim Heidelbergensis Ecclesiae primarius pastor.
cheeffe pastor at Heydelberge, (who revolted into Arianisme and from thence
to) the next thereto adioyninge step of Mahometisme) did Osiander. centur.
16. lib. 2. cap. 22. page 208. fine, says. Adam Neuserus hac sequentia verba
Constantinop. sua manu ad D. D. Stephanum Gerlachium. Anno. 1574. die 2. Iulij
scripsit, nullus nostro tempore mihi notus, factus est Arianus qui non ante
fuerit Caluinista, Seruetus, Blandrata, Paulus Alciatus, Franciscus Dauidis,
Gentilis, Gribaldus, Siluanus, and alij. Igitur qui sibi timet, ne incidet in
Arianismum, caveat Caluinismum: and hoc (...) Adam Neuseri socum Tubinga habet
doctor Gerlachius.
write to D. Gerlachius (a protestante preacher) from Constantinople the 2. of
Iulie. 1574. saying, none is known to me in our time made an Ariane, who was
not first a Caluiniste, (as) Seruetus, Blandrata, Paulus Alciatus, Franciscus
David, Gentilis, Gribaldus, Siluanus, and others, (all of them Caluinistes
revolted into Arianisme) therefore who so fears to fall in Arianisme, let
him take heed of Caluinisme: thus far Neuserus.

IV.
AS concerning Caluins translatinge of the scriptures, observe (but once for
all) his licentiouse bouldenesse in behalf of his doctrine: for whereas S.
Matthew mencioneth the Math. 27.55.
many (devout) women which had followed Jesus from Galelie ministringe to
him, of which sort diverse afterward attended in ministringe in like manner to
the Apostles, S Luke reportinge with the same the same greek word which is
Mat. 27.55. (...), is in Act. 1.14. (the case but altered) (...):
greek word, how the apostles continewed in prayer with these women, Calvin
(whom Beza follows) does without all forehead translate, that they Calvin.
in Act. 1.14. print. 1573. translateth. Hi omnes perseuerabant vnanimiter in
oratione and precatione cum vxoribus: and Beza in his new testament of ^587.
and in ^he other of 1588 translated likewise cum vxoribus.
were perseueringe with one mind in prayer with their wives: as though the
apostles had then kept wives: wherein he and Beza are refuted by our English
see the english bibles. of 1576. and 1580. and the last. of 1611. in all which
(as not aduenturing with Calvin and Beza to alter the text) is translated (as
we do) they continewed with one accord in prayer and supplication with the
women.
translators: the further examples that might be alleged in this kind are
over many, and not fittinge, for this short intended discourse, only
therefore I will but put the reader in remembrance, how that Molineus (a
learned protestante writer) says, Carolus Molineus in sua translat. testam.
noui. part. 12. f. 110. says. Caluinus in sua harmonia, textum euangelicum
desultare facit sursum versum, vt res ipsa indicat, vim infert literae
euangelica, and illa^ multis in locis transponit, and insuperaddit litera:
Calvin in his Harmony, makes the text of the gospel to leap up and
down, he uses violence to the letter of the gospel, and besides this,
adds to the text: furthermore whereas the scriptures do frequentlie refer
the sufficient price of our redemtio^ unto Ro^. 5.9. and Ephesians. 1.7. and Colos.
1.20.22 and Haebr. 9.14. and 1. Petr. 1.19. and 2.24. and 4.1. and Actor.
20.28. and 1. John. 1.7. and revel. 5.9.
the blood of Christ: (whereof says master Greneham so says master
Greneham in his works, printed. Anno 1601. page 319. paulo post med.
twoe only drops hadd been sufficient etc.) Calvin affirms to the
contrary, that Calvin. institut. l. 2. c. 16. 10. says. Nihil actum erat si
corporea tantum morte defunctus fuisset Christus etc. vnde etiam eum oportuit
cum inferorum copijs, aeternaque mortis horrore, quasi consertis manibus
luctari, etc. quibus significat in locum sceleratorum sponsorem, vadem atque
instar rei submissum, qui dependeret ac persolueret omnes quae ab illis
expetenda erant poenas, vno hoc duntaxat excepto, quod doloribus mortis non
poterat detineri: ergo si ad inferos descendisse dicitur, nihil mirum est, quum
eam mortem pertulerit quae sceleratis ab irato Deo infligitur, etc. diros in
anima cruciatus damnati ac perditi hominis pertulit:
nothing had been done, if Christ had only dyed a corporal death.
Whereto his disciple master D. Willet adds, that master Willet in his
Synopsis, printed. 1600. page 985. ante med. and vide. page 897. initio. Where
he further says, Christ's sufferinges in his flesh only, wroughte not our
redemption,
the bodelie sufferinge of Christ, was not, in respect of Gods justice the
full price of our redemption: that also in master Willet in his Antilogie,
printed. 1603. page 5. initio.
regard of Gods justice, God could not otherwise have been satisfied, if
Christ hadd not both in his body, and soul sustained the wholle punishment
due to us: therefore says Calvin Calvin. vt supra. at. 4.
Christ suffered (also) in soul, the horrible torments of a damned and wicked
man, see Calvin. vt supra. at 4. and in Harmonia. in Matthew. 27. verse. 46.
he not only offered his body in price, but also suffered in soul the pains
due to us even Calvin. vt supr. at. 4.
that death which ye inflicted upon the wicked by God in his ^^ger: and vt
supra. at. 4.
all the pains for which the damned stand^ answerable, only excepted that he
could not be deteyned therein: from whence also ens^^th according to Calvin
that Calvin. in Math. 26. verse. 39. and see Whitaker contra Durau^. printed.
1583. l. 8. page 566 circa med. and Marloret. in Math. 26.
he was in great horror with the feelinge of eternal damnation, Calvin. vt
sup. at the figure. 4.
and did strive with the horror of eternal damnation: Calui. in Harmon. in
Math. 26. verse. 37. and 39. and see in master Bilso^s survey etc. printed.
1604. page 387. ante med.
feared more then his bodelie death, and was for the time in Calvin. in Math.
27. verse. 46. says. Sed absurdum videtur Christo elapsam esse desperationis
vocem: solutio facilis est etc. ad ibidem. in verse. 47. he says. Sic videmus
omni ex part vexatum, vt desperatione obrutus ab inuocando Deo absisteret,
quod erat saluti renunciare: and see further Marloret. in Mat. 26.
despair, and as being Calvin. vt supra. at. 14.
ouerhelmed with desperation, gave over prayer: wherein he formerlie behaved him
self as Calvin. in harm. in Math. 26. ver. 38.39. says. Hac ratio est cur
mortem deprecatus mox sibi franum inijciat patrisque imperio se subijcie^s,
votum illud subit^ elapsum castiget ac reuocet, etc. non fuit igitur haec
meditata Christi oration, sed vis and impetus doloris subitam ei vocem extorsit,
cui statim addita fuit correctio: eadem vehementia prasentem calestis docreti
memoriam illi abstulit, etc. certe in primo voto non apparet placida illa
moderatio quam dixi, quia mediatoris officio quantum in se est renuit ac
detractat, and see this doctrine more fully in Marloret. in Math. cap. 26.
unadvised or distempered. Whereto (forbearinge Hemingius a learned Caluiniste
and others) Latimer (the English Caluiniste martyr) adds, that so says
Latimer in his sermons, printed. 1548. serm^. 7. post med. fol. D.d.viij.
being the leaf last but six. and see this confessed of Latimer by master
Fulke in his defense of the English translations, etc. printed. 1583. cap. 7.
page 204. and concerning Hemingius and others, see further confessed
heretofore, cap. 2. sect. 9. next after 1. in the margin. at. *.
our savior (after his death) did not only descend into hell, but also suffered
in hell such pains as the damned spirits did suffer for ever, etc. He would
not (says Latimer) suffer only bodelie in the gardine, and upon the cross,
but also in his soul when yt was from the body, etc. which foresaid
doctrine, whether of Calvin or Latimer, is so unworthy and iniuriouse to our
full redemption wrought by Christ's corporal death, that yt is for such
specially and largely confuted by master D. Bilson confuted by master Bilson
in his book of the full redemption of mankind by the death and blood of
Christ, printed. 1599. and in his Survey of Christ's sufferinges, etc.
printed. 1604.
the now protestante Bishop of Winchester.

V.
AS concerning Caluines peremtorie reiectinge of the aunciente fathers in the
several points of our catholic faith, which suffices at once to justify
us, and to convince him of nouuellisme: first concerning the blessed
Trinity, not one but many examples are heretofore, cap. 6. sect. 3.
throughout.
heretofore alleged of his so reiectinge the consentinge expositions of the
ancient fathers. Secondly concerning freewill he affirms of the ancient
fathers, that even Calvin. institut. l. 2. c. 2.. 4. says. Nimis ergo
philosophice de hac re loquuti sunt qui se Christi iactabant esse discipulos,
etc. semper apud latinos liberi arbitrij nome^ extitit, graecos vero non puduit
multo arroga^tius, vsurpare vocabulum, siquidem (...) dixerunt, ac si potestas
sui ipsius penes hominem fuisset, and see further reprehending herein,
Chrysostom, Hierom, etc lib. 2. cap. 5.. 2.
those who gloriously affirmed them selves to be the disciples of Christ,
spoke thereof over philosophicallye etc. that the latin fathers ever used the
name of freewill, and that the greek fathers were not ashamed much more
arrogantlye to usurp the word (...), as though unto man were left
remaininge a liberty of him self: Thirdly concerning the merit of works,
Calvin says, to Calvin. institut. lib. 3. cap. 15.. 2. says. Quorsum enim
obsecro opus fuit inuebi nomen meriti etc? certe vt est fastuosissimum, nihil
quam obscurare Dei gratiam potest, vti sunt fateor passim vetustae Ecclesiae
scriptores, atque vtinam voculae vnius abusu, erroris materiam posteris non
praebuissent.
what end I pray you was the name of merit brought in, certainly yt is a
proud word obscuringe the grace of Christ: the ancient writers of the
Curche did I confess comonlie use yt, and would to God that with the abuse of
the word, they had not left to posterity matter of error: so he of freewill
and merit of works, whom his follower. D. Humfrey therein defends saying
Humfredus in Iesuitismi. part. 2. printed. 1584. rat. 5. page 530. ante med.
says. Liberum arbitrium and bonorum operum merita percenset Duraeus, and sane
eas opiniones, Ireneum, Clementem, and alios quos vocant Apostolicos alicubi
parum apostolice suis libris immiscuisse non est negandum etc.
yt may not be denied but that Ireneus, Clement, and others called
apostolical (in respect of the time wherein they lived) have nothing
apostolicallie in their writings in the opinions of freewill and merit of
works: and the like is affirmed by master Whitguifte of master Whytguifte in
his defense, etc. printed. 1574. tract. 8. page 472. fine, and 473. prope
initium, says, the doctrine taught and professed by our Bishops at this day
is much more perfect and sounder, then yt comonlie was in any age after the
apostles times, for etc. how greatly were allmoste all the bishops and learned
writers of the greek church and latyns also for the most part, spotted with
doctrines of free Will, merits, invocation of saints, and such like (other
points of popery) etc.
all the doctors of the greek church, and latins also for the most part
that lived in any age after the apostles times: also as concerning grace and
justification Calvin says, Calvin. institut. l. 3. c. 11.. 15. fine, and 16.
says. Ac ne quidem Augustini sententia vel saltem loquendi ratio per omnia
recipienda est: tametsi enim egregie hominem omni iustitiae laud spoliat, ac
totam Dei gratia transcribit, gratiam tamen ad sanctificationem refert; qua in
vita nouitatem per spiritum regeneramur, scriptura autem cum de fidei iustitia
loquitur long alio nos ducit, etc.
Not the opinion even of Austine, or at least not the manner of his speakinge
is to be wholly allowed, for although he do commendablie bereave man of all
praise of justice, and ascribes all to the grace of God, yett does he refer
grace to sanctification whereby we are renewed by the spirit into newnes of
life, whereas the scripture leads us a far other course etc. wherein Calvin
see Calvin defended herein against S. Austine by D. Feilde of the church.
lib. 3. cap. 15. page 92. fine, and 93. initio, printed. Anno 1606.
is defended as opposite to S. Austine by master D. Feilde. Fourthelie
concerning Limbus patrum, Calvin says thereof Calvin. institut. l. 2. c.
16.. 9. says hereof. Nescio qui factum sit, vt posteritas putaret locum esse
subterraneum cui affinxi^ nomen lymbi, sed h^c fabula tametsi magnos authors
habet etc. nihil tamen quam fabula est:
although yt have many great authors, yet it is nothing else but a fable: and
our English writers acknowledge the like doctrine of the fathers, master D.
Barlowe for the Bishops says. so says master D. Barlowe (now Bishop of
Lincoln) in his defense of the articles of the protestants religion. printed.
1601. page 173. post med.
This passes most rife emonge the fathers, who takeinge inferi for Abrhames
bosom, expound it that Christ went thither to convey the fathers deceased
before his resurrection, into the place where now they are: and master Jacob
(a prime man emonge the puritanes) says, so says master Jacob, see his
words cited in master Bilsons book of the full redemption of ma^kinde,
printed. 1599 page 188. fine. And see master Jacob further in his defense of
the treatise of Christ's sufferinges, page 199. paulo post med. and 200 ante
med.
All the fathers with one co^sente affirm, that Christ delivered the souls
of the patriarchs out of hell at his cominge thither, etc. Fiuethlie, as
concerning prayer for the dead, Calvin affirms that Calvin. institut. l. 3.
c. 5.. 10. says. Quum ergo mihi obijciunt aduersarij ante mill and
trescentos annos vsu receptum fuisse, vt precationes fierent pro defunctis, eos
vicissim interrogo quo de verbo, qua reuelatione, quo exemplo factum? etc. ipsi
veteres qui praeces fundebant pro mortuis, and mandato Dei, and legitimo
exemplo hic se destitui videbant: ergo audeo dicere in eo aliquid humani passos
etc. abrepti fateor in errorem fuerunt, etc.
above a thousand and three hundredth years (before the then writing of his
book, published. 1536. as appears by the same date of the preface unto
Francis the French king: set before his book of Institucions,
published 1536.) yt was usual to pray for the dead, and that the aunciente
fathers were destitute of Gods commandment and all lawful example, and erred
therein: which assertion of Calvin is made good by master Gifforde (no
vulgarre adversary) who says, The so says master Gifforde, in his
demonstration that Brownists be full Donatistes, printed. 1590. page 38.
corruption of prayinge for the dead, was general in in the church long
before the days of Austine: etc. yt was the practice of the church in
general, and the corruption so ancient, that Tertulian says yt was observed
by tradicion from the Apostles: Sixtlie as concerning the fast of lent
Calvin says, Calvin. institut. l. 4. c. 12.. 19. and 20. says. Non in
totum excusare audeo ve^^^, qui^ and (...) quada^ (...), and occasionem
pr^bu^rint tyrannidi qua postea exorta est: and tunc passim inual^^rat
superstitiosa quadragosima obseruatio:
I dare not excuse the anciente fathers, but that they laid certain seeds of
superstition and gave occasion to the tyranny that ensued etc. then the
superstitiouse observation of lent prevailed every where etc. and Chemnitius
confesses likewise that Chemnitius in his examen Co^c. Trid. printed. 1578.
part. 1. page 89. b. ante med. says. Quadragesima^ enim Ambrosius Maximus,
Taurinensis, Theophilus, Hieronimus, and alij affirmant esse traditionem
apostolicam.
Ambrose, Maximus, Taurinensis, Theophilus, Hierom, and others do affirm the
fast of lent to be an apostolical tradicion, which point is yett further
confessed by Shroderus. in his opusculum theologicum, printed. Anno 1605. cap.
1. sect. 3. page 71. circa med. says. Ambrosius, Theophilus, Hieronimus, and
alij ex apostolica traditione quadragesimam descendisse statuunt,
Shroderus: In so much as Abraham Scultetus (Caluines disciple) affirmethe
that the so says Abraham Scultetus in his medulla theologiae patrum,
printed. 1598. page 440. prope initium. To which purpose he there also
alleges, and for such acknowledges the undoubted epistle of Ignatius, the
which (being ad Philippenses) is likewise for such cyted and acknowledged by
master Whitguifte in his defense etc. tract. 2. page 102. ante med. and by
master Cartwrighte cited there. page 99. fine, and by master Hooker in his
ecclesiastical policy. lib. 5. printed 1597. sect. 72. page 209. circa med.
Who there preuenteth an usual objection against it: and so likewise does
master Whitguifte in his defense etc. page 102.
superstition of lent and fasting was allowed and commanded by Ignatius,
master Whitguifte, vbi sup. tract. 8. page 408. ante med. says. Ignatius
who was S. John's scholar and lived in Christ's time, in his epistle ad
Trallianos speaks thus etc.
who was scholar to S. John: Seauentlie as concerning the grace conferred by
our sacraments, and the difference in this kind between the several baptismes
of Christ, and John, Calvin says, Calvin. instit. lib. 4. cap. 15. 7.
says. Neminem perturbet quod alterum ab altero discernere veteres contendunt,
quorum non tanti nobis debet esse calculus vt scriptura certitudienm
quatefaciat etc. nec recipienda est illa Augustini argutia, in spe dimissa
fuisse peccata baptism Ioannis, Christi baptism de re ipsa dimitti.
Let yt trouble no man, that the ancient fathers endeavor to distinguishe the
one from the other etc. neither is this subtilitie of Austine to be received,
that in John's baptism, sins were forgiven in hope, but in Christ's baptism
in very deed etc. whereof also Musculus says, Musculus, in loc. commun.
printed. 1573. page 299. post med.
Inconsiderate dictum est ad Augustino, which Suinglius makes good, affirminge
that Suinglius. tom. 2. printed. 1581. de baptismo. fol. 70. b. ante med.
says. Hic enim plerique doctorum illi ipsi materiali and externae baptismi
aquae plus quam par erat tribuerunt.
most of the doctors attributed to much unto the external water of baptism
etc. Calvin him self not forbearinge their yett further Calvin. institut. l.
4. c. 14.. 14. initio. says, of sacraments conferringe grace. Quae sententia
dici non potest quam exitialis and pestilens, eoque magis quod multis ante
seculis magna ecclesiae iactura in bona orbis part obtinuit: and. 17. he
further says. Cauendum etc. ne in errorem nos abducant quae ad amplificandam
sacramentorum dignitatem paulo magnificentius a veteribus scripta sunt, vt
scilicet arbitremur latentem aliquam virtutem sacramentis annexam affixamque
esse: etc. and see further,. 26. initio. Also Calvin in Harmonia in John.
Euang. c. 3. verse. 5. says. Chrisostomus cui mayor pars subscribit, aqua
nomen ad baptismum refert, ita sensus esset nos per baptismum ingredi in regnum
Dei, etc. Hinc factum est vt praecisa baptismi necessitas statueretur: etc. in
prevention whereof says he yet further. Quantum vero ad hunc locum attinet,
nullo modo adducor, vt Christum de baptismo verbo facere credam. Hoc enim
fuisset intempestiuum.
reprehension in this behalf: Eightlie as as concerning the necessity of
baptism, Calvin confesses that in respect thereof the fathers doubted not
Calvin. lib. 4. c. 15.. 20. says. Quod multis ab hinc saeculis adeoque ab
ipso fere ecclesiae exordio vsu receptum fuit, vt in periculo mortis laici
baptizarent si minister in tempore non adesset, non video quam firma ratione
defendi queat.
many ages since, allmoste from the very beginning of the church, to use
the baptism of lay persons in danger of death, which (says he) I see not
how yt can be defended etc Whereto diverse D. Bilson Bishop of Winchester, in
the conference at Hampton court, printed. 1604. page 18. intio. says. The
denyinge of private persons to baptize in case of necessity, were to cross
all antiquity etc.
other protestante writers do assente: Nynethlye as concerning the ceremonies
of baptism and other sacraments, Calvin says. Calvin. institut. l. 4. cap.
15.. 19. says. Inuenta est benedictio vel potius incantatio aquae, etc.
additus postea cereus cum chrismate, exsufflatio etc. Etsi autem me non latet
quam vetusta sit aduentitiae huius farraginis origo, respuere tamen mihi and
pijs omnibus fas est etc. insinuatinge there next afterward, Satan to have
brought in these, fere inter ipsa euangelij exordia.
Yt is not unknown to me, how ancient are the consecration of the water of
baptism, the waxen candle, chrisme, and exufflation: and again he further
says (if any man would defend such inventions by antiquity I am not
ignorant, how ancient was the use of chrisme and exufflation in baptism, how
not long after the apostles age, the supper of our Lord was defiled with rust:
Calvin. instit. l. 4. c. 17.. 33. says. Si quis vetustate tueri huiusmodi
inuentiones velit, nec ipse ignoro quam vetustus sit chrismatis and
exufflationis in baptismo vsus, quam non long ab aetate apostolorum, caena
Domini tacta rubigine fuerit.
whereto assenteth Zepperus in politia ecclesiastica, printed. M.D.CVII l. 1.
c. 12. haueinge mentioned holy water, salt, oil, exorcisme, spitle, etc.
used in baptism, says thereof. Antiquiores sunt fateor in ecclesia hae
superstitiosa ceremoniae, nec multis post apostolorum tempora seculis, etc.
page 123. circa med.
Zepperus a learned Caluiniste, and also Beza, saying, I Beza in epist.
theolog. printed. 1573. epist. 8. page 79. initio. says. Totum illum
apparatum quo vetustissimi illi, baptismum and caenam Domini se exornare posse
putarunt, non satis mirari possum etc.
cannot sufficiently wonder at all that deckinge furniture, wherewith the
most ancient fathers adorned baptism and the lords supper etc. and haueinge
recited sondrye of those ceremonies he terms them. ibidem. page 80. prope
initium, saying there further. Plerique ex vetustissinus illis Christianorum
sacra non aliter quam cereris misteria quaedam occultanda censuerunt, etc. and
totam illam actionem in (...) quaedam and ne ipsis quidem mistis plerisque
intellecta, sacra transformarunt:
Histrionicas ineptias, stagelyke fooleries. Tenthlie as concerning
concupiscence remayninge after baptism not to be sin: Calvin says
thereof, Calvin. instit. l. 3. c. 3.. 10. says. Neque opus est multum
inuestigando laborare quid hic veteres senserint, quando vnus Augustinus ad id
sufficere potest, qui fideliter magnaque diligentia omnium sententias collegit:
ex illo igitur sumant lectores si quid de antiquitatis sensu habere certi
volent: porro inter illum and nos hoc discriminis videri potest interesse, quod
ipse quidem etc. eum morbum, peccatum vocare non audet; sed ad illum
designandum infirmitatis nomine contentus, tunc demum fieri peccatum docet, vbi
vel opus vel consensus, ad conceptionem vel apprehensionem accedit, etc. nos
autem illud ipsum pro peccato habemus etc. and Luther. tom. 2. Witemb. fol.
229. b. circa med. says. Patres excusatos habeo, qui vel tentatione vel
necessitate adacti, fortiter negauerunt peccatum post baptismum remanere.
We shall not here need much to enquire what the ancient fathers thought
hereof, seeinge only Austine, who very diligently collected the sayings
of all (the ancient fathers) may suffice thereto, of him therefore let the
readers receive the certain sense of antiquity, yet between him and us is
this difference, that etc. he dares not to call that disease sin, but
contented to use the name of infirmity, he teaches yt to become at last
sin, when our will assenteth thereto, whereas we hold concupiscence yt self
to be sin: etc. Eleuenthlie as co^cerninge the mediatorshipe of Christ,
whereas Calvin teaches that Christ was mediator according both to his divine
and humane nature, to the contrary whereof, we See Bellarmin. tom. 1. l^b. 5.
de Christo mediatore, c. 1. etc. 3. and so teaches S. Austine l. 10. confess.
c. 43. saying. In quantu^ homo in tantu^ mediator, in quantum autem verbum,
non medius, quia aequalis Deo.
teach that Christ though God and man, was yett but inferior and therefore
but mediator, only according to his humane nature, Calvin reprehendeth the
fathers as herein dissagreeinge from him and consentinge with us, saying,
Calvin. institut. lib. 2. c. 14.. 3 says hereof. Hic excusari non potest
veterum error, qui dum ad mediatoris personam non attendunt, totius fere
doctrinae quae in euangelio Ioannis legitur genuinum obscurant sensum, etc. and
see also Beza in his epistol. theologic. printed. 1573. ep. 28. page 174. ante
med. Calvin. l. 4. c. 12.. 23. says. Certe quod sacerdotibus indictum fuit
coniugium, id factum est impia tyrannide etc. and l. 1. 4. c. 12.. 28. he
reprehendeth herein S. Hierom.
And hear the error of the ancient fathers cannot be excused, who not being
attentive to the person of the mediator, do obscure the true sense of allmoste
the wholle doctrine contained in John's gospel, etc. Tweluethlie concerning
the marriage of priests, Calvin as reprouinge the fathers herein says, (e)
marriage was by (their) wicked tyranny forbidden unto priests; for which he
alleges in his margin Siricius, who lived 1200. years since, and he further
says. C^luin. l. 4. c. 12.. 27. says. Hinc illi canones quibus primo
vetitum est ne matrimonium contraherent qui peruen^sent ad sacerdotij gradum
etc. hac quia v^debantur reuerentiam sacerdotio conciliare, magno plausis etiam
antiquitus recepta esse fateor: and see further hereof Calvin. l. 4. c. 4.. 10.
ante med.
From hence proceeded those canons, which forbid marriage to priests etc.
which thing, for so much as yt seemed to bring priesthood in reverence, was
with great likinge by antiquity received: Which his assertion in so
reprouinge herein the ancient fathers is further affirmed by diverse master
Jewel. in his defense of the apology, printed. 1571. part. 2. page 195 fine,
says hereof, here master Harding is like to find some good advantage as
haueinge undoubtedly, a great number of the holy fathers on his side: and
see also the fathers doctrine against priests marriage confessed in Origin.
Hierom. Ambrose, Innocentius, Syricius, and Epiphanius, by Chemnitius in his
examen. Council. Trid. part. 3. page 50. a. b. and 52. a. and 62. a. after the
edition of 1578. confessed likewise, in Syricius, Innocentius, Calixtus, the
second council of Arles, the council of Neocesarea etc. by Hospinian. in his
histor. sacramentar. part. 1. printed. 1598. lib. 2. page 132. and see also
the like in the centurie writers. cent. 3 cap. 6. col. 148. line. 48. and
centur. 4. cap. 4. col. 303. throughout, and col. 486. line. 58. and col. 704.
line. 21. and col. 1293. line. 5. and 17. And Bucer in his gratulatio ad
Ecclesiam Anglicanam, printed. in 4. Anno 1548. page 35. prope finem,
acknowledges Ecclesiam Aegypti, Orientis, and sedis apostolicae diui Hieronymi
tempore non recipere solitas in sacerdotibus, nisi qui mariti aut non fuissent,
aut esse desijssent: Whereto he there opposes saying: Nos contra obijcimus
(...) Spiritus sancti:
of his followers: Thirtenthlie as concerning satisfaction Calvin says. I
Calvin. l. 3. c. 4.. 38. says. Parum me mouent quae in veterum scriptis de
satisfactione passim occurrunt, video quidem eorum nonnullos (dicam simpliciter
omnes fere quorum libri extant) aut hac in part lapsos esse, aut nimis aspere
ac dure loquutos.
am little moved with that which the ancient fathers do ordinarily write of
satisfaction, diverse, or rather all of them whose books are extant, either
erred herein, or spoke over harshlie. Whereto master Whitaker adds saying,
see this in master Whitaker. contra Camp. printed. 1604. rat. 5. page 78. and
see him also alleged in master Fulkes defense of the English translations,
printed. 1583. page 368. ante med.
not Cyprian only, but allmoste all the most holy fathers of that time were
in that error, as thinkinge so to pay the pains due for sin to satisfy
gods justice: etc. Fourtenthlie as concerning solemn enjoined penance Calvin
says, the Calvin. instit. l. 4. c. 12.. 8. says. Qua in part excusari
nullo modo potest immodica veterum austeritas, quae and prorsus a Domini
praescripto dissidebat, and erat mirum in modum periculosa, nam cum peccatori
poenitentiam solennem and priuationem a sacra communione nunc in septem, nunc
in quatuor, nunc in tres annos, nunc intotam vitam indicerent, quid inde? etc.
immoderate austeritie of the aunciente fathers was inexcusable, and varied
whollye from the lords commandment in their enioyninge solemn penance to
sinners for. 7 or. 4 or. 3. years, etc. in so much as yet he further specially
reproves S. Hierom for tearminge penance the second table after shipwreck,
and in like plain manner are the fathers herein confessed and Chemnitius in his
examen. printed. 1578. part. 4. page 68. a. fine, says. Nec vero nescius sum,
veteres aliquando nimis largiter and verbis nimium magnificis disciplinam illam
canonicam commendare etc. and Melancthon. in epist. aa Romanos, printed. 1540.
in cap. 14. page 350. prope initium. and also in the book entitled. Libelli
aliquot Melancthonis etc. printed in 8. Witembergae. 1561. fol. 11. a. initio.
says. Tota Synodus Nicaena, consensu multitudinis aut temporis victa,
approbauit canones paenitentiae, etc.
reproved by Chemnitius, and Melancthon; Fiuenthlie as concerning Monachisme,
Calvin says of the ancient monckes. Calvin. instit. l. 4. c. 19.. 17. says
of penance. Ementitum sacrame^tum ornarunt, etc. secundum esse tabulam post
naufragium, quia si quis vestem innocentiae in baptismo perceptam peccando
corruperit, per paenitentiam reparare potest, sed dictum est Hieronymi,
cuiuscunque sit, quin plane impium sit excusari nequit: etc. and see also the
Centuristes. cent. 4. c. 10. col. 1243. line 33.
They lay upon the ground, their drink was water, their meat bread,
herbs and roots, etc. Calvin. institut. lib. 4. cap. 13.. 8. says of the
ancient monckes. Humi dormiebant, potus erat aqua, cibus, panis, herbae ac
radiculae praecipuae lautitiae in oleo and ciceribus: ab omni delicatiore victu
and corporis cultu abstinebant: Haec hiperbolica videri possent nisi ab
oculatis and expertis testibus traderentur, Nazianzeno, Basilio, and
Chrisostomo.
Eyewitnesses were the reporters hereof, Nazianzen, Basile, and Chrisostom:
(whom our adversaries do master D. Willet in his Synopsis, printed. 1592.
page 258. charge the fathers with rigorouse and unnatural chastisinge of
their bodies contrary to the rule of the gospel: reproueinge there also
Saint Basile, and Gregory Nazianzen, for pluckinge down them selves by
immoderate fasting, and concludes there saying. Where in all the scriptures
learned these men thus to punish their bodies?
therefore reprehend) they Calvin. institut. lib. 4. cap. 13.. 9. yt is further
said of them. Non solum a vino and carnibus abstinent, etc.
abstayned from wine and flesh, (o) certain of the fathers did euilly
understand, ibidem. lib. 4. cap. 13.. 13. fine. Calvin. says. Fateor hunc
locum a quibusdam ex patribus male intellectum, atque hinc natam esse
voluntariae paupertatis affectationem.
Math. 19.21. from whence did spring the affectation of voluntary poverty
and again he says further Calvin. institut. l. 4. ^. 13.. 17. says. Hoc
inquinut ab vltima memoria fuit obseruatum, vt se alligarent continentia vot^
qui totos se Demin^ dicare vellent, fateor quoque antiquitus receptum fuisse
hunc morem, sed eam atatem sic ab omni vitio liberam fuisse non concedo.
This say (the papists) was observed from the furthest age, that they who
would wholly consecrate them selves to the lord, should bind them selves with
the vow of continency: I confess this custom was auncientlie received, but
that age not to be so free from blame etc. in so much as he forbeareth not to
reprehend S. Austine, saying, Calvin. lib. 4. c. 13.. 16. says. Interim non
dissimulo vel in illa quam Augustinus commendat prisca forma (monachismi) esse
non nihil quod mihi parum placeat:
I do not dissemble, but that even in that ancient form of monachisme which
Austine commends, is somewhat which I dislike: and in like plain sort are
the fathers charged with error in monachisme by diverse master Carthwrighte in
his 2. reply. part. 1. printed. 1575. says, that monckes are antichristian
notwithstanding their auncienty. page 502. circa med. and that Hieroms
Monks, Hermites, and Anchorites, were at that time very gross. page 510. ante
med.
other protestant writers. Sixtenthlie as concerning Saint Peter, Calvin
says Calvin. institut. l. 4. c. 6.. 6. says. Nam illae veteres ineptiae
etc. relatu quoque indignae sunt, in Petro fundatam esse ecclesiam, quia dictum
sit, super hanc Petram etc. At nonnulli ex patribus sic exposuerunt, sed quum
reclamet tota scriptura, quid eum authoritas aduersus Deum pratenditur?
Those ancient fooleries are unworthy of rehearsal etc. (as) that the church
was founded upon Peter, because yt was said to Peter, upon this rock etc. but
certain of the fathers have so expounded yt, but the wholle scripture is
against them etc. and the very like is affirmed by Danaeus Danaeus in
respons. ad Bellarmin. disput part. 1. printed. 1596. ad. 3. controu. cap. 25.
page 277. post med. says. Dictum enim Christi. Math. 16. Tu es Petrus and
super hanc petram etc. pessime de persona Petri sunt interpretati patres.
Caluines great disciple: Seauententhlie as concerning Antichrists cominge
not to be till the Roman Empier (yett in being) be first overthrown, Calvin
says therein of the fathers, I Calvin. in omnes Pauli epistolas, printed.
1565. in 2. Thessal. 2. verse. 3. page 752. b. post med. says. Ac miror tam
multos scriptores, doctos alioqui and acutos, in re tam facili hallucinatos
esse, nisi quod quum errasset vnus, turmatim alij fine iudicio sequuti sunt,
etc.
wonder that so many learned writers could be deceived in so easy a matter
etc. and the like acknowledgment is made by See Iustus Molitor de Ecclesia
militante, printed. 1605 page 110.
Iustus Molitor, and others: Eightenthlie, as concerning the ancient primacie
of the Roman church, Calvin affirms Calvin. institut. lib. 4. cap. 7.. 12.
says. Nulla est vox in eius scriptis qua superbius iactet primatus sui
amplitudinem quam ista, nescio quis episcopus non subiectus sit sedi
apostolicae, vbi in culpa inuenitur: etc. tribuit sibi ius corrigendi etc.
how that S. Gregory does in no place more proudly, boast of the amplitude
of his sea, then where he says, I know not what Bishop is not subject to
the Apostolic sea, if he be found in fault etc. that also Calvin. ibidem.
lib. 4. cap. 7.. 4. says. Quod autem scribit (Gregorius) oblatum fuisse Leoni
hunc honore^ in synodo Chalcedonensi, nullam habet very speciem.
Gregory did without any color of truth write, that the honor (of being
called universal Bishop) was offered to Pope Leo in the council of Calcedon:
that likewise Calvin. ibidem.. 11. says of Pope Leo, fuit enim vir ille vt
eruditus ac fecundus, ita gloriae and dominationis supra modum cupidus: Calvin.
institut. lib. 4. cap. 7.. 9. confesses this, affirminge that the Roman
Bishops did then allege this council as being the council of Nice, which he
reproves, whereas yt was in very deed celebrated not long after the Nycen
council, and many of the fathers of the Nycen council present thereat: And
see the protestante writer Osiander in centur. 4. lib. 3. cap. 2. page 295.
confessinge and recitinge the 7. Canon of this Sardicum council, which
prescribes appeals to Rome:
Pope Leo was above measure desirouse of glory and rule: and that the (o
ancient) council of Sardis, was alleged in S. Austines time as in proof of
appeals to Rome. Nintenthlie as concerning reprobation and induration, Calvin
says, The Calvin. institut. lib. 2. cap. 4.. 3. says. Veteres religiosi
interdum simplicem quoque veritatis confessionem in hac part reformidunt etc.
ne Augustinus illa quidem superstitione interdum solutus est, quemadmodum vbi
dicit indurationem and excacationem non ad operationem Dei, sed ad
praescientiam spectare, at istas argutias non recipient tot scripturae
loquutiones, etc.
ancient fathers were affraide to confess the simple truth in this behalf,
etc. and not Austine him self was sometimes free from that superstition, as
where he affirms that induratio^ and excecation pertayne not to the workinge
of God, but to his foreknowledge: Twentithlie as concerning the Euchariste,
Calvin says of the real presence. That Whereas Hillarie. l. 8. de Trinitate
post initium, affirms: manentem in nobis carnaliter filiu^, to wit, our
natural and corporal union with Christ, because that, nos vere sub misterio
carne^ corporis sui sumim^s etc. and that we are, in Christ^ per corporalem
eius natiuitatem, and ille rursum in nobis per sacramentorum misterium etc.
Whereto assenteth Cirill. in John. l. 10. cap. 13. acknowledgeinge, misticae
benedictionis virtutem, quae cum in nobis fiat, corporaliter quoque facit
communicationem corporis Christi, Christum in nobis habitare etc. neque
habitudine solum quae fit per charitatem, sed etiam participatione naturali, of
which like judgment are diverse other fathers. Calvin. in libro epistolarum and
respons. printed. 1597. epist 208. page 392. initio, hereupon says. Veteres
ac Hillarium praesertim and Cirillum longius quam par sit prouectos fuisse
video, etc. illi inscitia sua deprehensi, and miseram latebram suffugiunt, etc.
sed modo ne authoritatem eorum nobis obtrudant noui isti fusores, mihi satis
erit non subscribere, etc.
Hillarie and Ciril went further therein then was convenient, and therefore,
that he will not subscribe to them: so he, of those two ancient fathers, the
first of the latin church, the other of the greek, whereto assenteth his
colleague Peter martyr, saying: I so says Peter Matyr in his epistles
Annexed to his common places in English in his epistle there to Beza page 106.
b. ante med.
will not so easily subscribe to Cirill, who affirmed such a communion, as
thereby even the substance of Christ's flesh and blood, first is joined to the
blessinge, for so he calls the holy bread etc. affirminge yet further in
this respect see this there in the second alphabeticall table of the
additions, under the letter. H. at the the word heresy:
the heresy of Cirill touching the communion of Christ: whereto might be
added soundrie like testimonies of other Bucer. in his confessio de Eucharistia
in Anglia ab eo scripta. Anno 1550. extante in the treatise entitled, Scripta
eruditorum aliquot virorum de caena Domini, printed. in 8. 1561. page 37. fine
says. In tantis misterijs religio mihi est, vel sanctorum patrum authoritate
loquutiones vsurpare quae in scripturis traditae non sunt: quo enim illis nos
traduxerit satan, and Antichristus deploramus omnes etc. qua sane de causa,
illa sanctorum patrum dicta de mutatione symbolorum, etc. vsurpanda nunquam
concesser^, nimis enim aliena sunt a verbis Dei, and merent hodie Ant christis
ad horribilem illam supra omnes artolatriam, also Adamus Francisci in his
margarita theolog. printed Witembergae 1602. page 256. post med. sai^he.
Commentum papistarum de transubstantiatione mature in Ecclesiam irrepsit: and
the protestant writer Anthoni d'Adamo in his Anatomy of the mass, printed.
1556. page 236. a. ante med. says. I have not yett hitherto been able to
know, when this opinion of the real and bodelie being of Christ in the
sacrament, did begin.
protestante writers: In like manner. Whereas we in regard of this real
presence do affirm that the sacrament may be See our opinion hereof
reported by master D. Willet in his Synopsis, printed. 1592. page 460.
reserved, which our adversaries deny, affirminge upon their contrary
ground of but hereof see Peter Martyr, in his epistles Annexed to his common
places in English. page 207. b. post med. and Szegedin. in loc. commun.
printed. M.D.XIII. page 182.. 12. 15.
sacramental presence, that so says. D. Willet in his said Synopsis. page
460. ante med.
it is no sacrament unless yt be received, Calvin confesses for us and
against him self of reseruinge the sacrament saying. Calvin. institut. lib.
4. cap. 17.. 39. says. Clare patet repositionem sacramenti quam nonnulli
urgent vt aegrotis extra ordinem distribuatur, inutilem esse etc. sed quisic
faciunt habent veteris ecclesiae exemplum: fateor, verum in tanta and in qua
non sine magno periculo erratur, nihil tutius est quam ipsam veritatem sequi:
I confess that those who so do, have the example of the aunciente church,
but in so great a cause wherein to err is greatly perillouse, nothing is
more safe then to follow the truth etc. and in like manner (to omit the like
full testimony of see Chemnitius in his examen, printed. 1578. part 2. page
102. a. post med.
Chemnitius) does Peter Martyr charge S. Ciril and others, Peter Martyr.
aduersus Gardneri librum de Eucharistia, printed. 1581. ad. object. 213. col.
838. post med. having recited S. Cirils plain saying, for reservation,
says thereof. Quod autem subijcitur, Eucharistiae reliquias assernatas in
crastinum diem, a sanctificatione non cessare, spectat vt opinor ad receptam
quandam consuetudinem apud veteres, etc. ea consuetudo etsi saperet non nihil
superstitionis, tamen illi Cirillus alijque subscribebant, statim enim a
temporibus apostolorum, paulatim caeptum est degenerari ab illi veteri
simplicitate diuini cultus.
with subscribinge to the superstitiouse custom of reservation. One and
twentethlie as concerning the further question of sacrifice (which is reputed
for the sea heretofore cap. 4. sect. 1. fine, at. i.
greatest now dependinge controversy) Calvin reprehendeth the fathers for
their affirminge the Euchariste to be (directlye master Fulke against the
Rhem. test. printed. 1589. in Haebr. 7. sect. 3. fol. 406. a. initio. says.
Melchisedechs bread and wine pertayned not to his pristelie office, neither did
he offer yt to God: And master Whitaker in his answer to master William
Raynolds, printed. 1590. etc. page 67. says, Melchisedeth did not by any
thing wherein he so sacrificed, prefigure the priesthood and sacrifice of
Christ.
against the opinion of protestants) a sacrifice according to the order of
Melchisedech: Whereof says he, Calvin. in omnes Paul's epistolas, printed.
1505. in Haebr. c. 7. verse. 9. page 924. b. ante med. says. Quo magis tot
veteres Ecclesiae doctores hac opinione occupatos fuisse miror, vt in
oblationem panis and vini insisterent, etc. certe vt error errorem trahere
solet, quum ipsi sacrificiu^ in Christi caena nullo eius mandat^ finx^ssent,
adeoque canam adulterassent addite sacrificio, colores postea hinc inde
accersere cenati sunt, quibus errorem suum fucerent: Arrisit hac panis and vini
oblatio, and nullo iudicio protinus arrepta est: etc. so bold is Calvin with
the fathers:
I meruaill that so many aunciente doctors of the church, were possessed
with this opinion: the like whereof is affirmed by master Fulke against
Heskins, Saunders etc. printed. 1579. page 99. post med says. I confess that
diverse of the old fathers were of opinion, that the bread and wine which
Melchisedech brought forth, was sacrificed by him, and that yt was a figure of
the sac^ament which they improperlie call a sacrifice: and see the fathers
further reproved herein by master Fulke against the Remishe testament in
Haebr. cap. 7. sect. 8. fol 405. b. fine, and by master Whitaker contra
Duraeum, printed. 1583. page 818. and 819. and master Fulke against Heskins
etc. page 5. circa med. confesses, how the fathers thought that Melchisedech
therein resembled the pristehoode of Christ:
master Fulke and others: In like manner does he reprove Calvin. in tract.
theolog. printed. 1597. de vera ecclesiae reformat. page 389. a. fine, and b.
initio. says. Solenne est nebulonibus istis (meaning us catholics)
quicquid vitiosum in patribus legitur corradere etc. cum ergo obijctunt locum
Malachiae, sic (demissae sacrificio) ab Ireneo exponi, oblationem Melchisedech
sic tractari ab Athanasio, Ambrosio, Augustino, Arnobio, breuiter responsum
sit, eosdem illos scriptores alibi quoque panem interpretari corpus Christi,
sed ita ridicule vt dissentire nos cogat and ratio and veritas.
S. Ireneus, Athanasius, Ambrose, Austine, and Arnobius, for their confessed
doctrine of sacrifice, wherein he houldeth them vt supra. at. t.
ridiculouse, and he yet further says. see this next heretofore in the
margin at. r.
I wonder that so many ancient doctors of the church, erred and forged a
sacrifice in Christ's supper without his commandment, and so adulterated the
supper with addinge of sacrifice: and again Calvin. in his tract. theologic.
etc. de vera Eccl^sia reform page 389. b. fine, says. Veteres excusandi non
sunt, quatenus scilicet ipsos apparet a puro and genuino Christi instituto
deflexisse, nam cum in hunc finem celebranda sit caena, vt sacrificio Christi
co^municemus, eo non contenti oblationem quoque addiderunt: Hoc auctarium
vitiosum suisse dico, partim quia beneficium, Christi morte nobis prestitum,
obscurat, partim quia etc.
the ancient fathers are not to be excused, who varied from the pure
institution of Christ, for whereas the supper is to be celebrated, to the end
that we may communicate with Christ's sacrifice (upon the cross) the fathers
therewith not contented, have added a (further) sacrifice (in the Euchariste.)
This their addition I affirm to be faulty, as obscuringe to us the benefit
of Christ's death etc. Whereto he yett further adds, that the Calvin. in
libello de caena Dom. post med. extant in his tract. theologic. printed. 1597.
page 7. b. fine. and 8. a. initio. says. Neque tamen possum veteris Ecclesiae
consuetudinem excusare, quod gestu ac ritu suo speciem quandam sacrificij
figuraret, ijsdem fere ceremonijs quae sub veteri testamento in vsu erant, eo
excepto quod panis hostia loco animalis vtebantur, quod cum nimis ad Iudassmum
accedat, nec Domini institutioni consentaneum sit, minime probo:
custom of the aunciente church is not to be excused, in that yt set forth a
kind of sacriffce, in gesture, rite, and allmoste the same ceremonies, that
were usual in the old testament, only excepted, that in steed of a beast,
they used bread, etc. In so much that whereas we do against our adversaries
distinguishe (as in respect of the diverse manner of oblation) the sacrifice of
the euchariste from Christ's other bloody oblation upon the cross, in
respect of which diversity, we term the euchariste the unbloody sacrifice,
the fathers are so clerelye consentinge with us herein, that Calvin says,
Calvin. in tractat. theologic. de vera eccles. reformat. page 390. a. ante med.
says. Respondi quod videbatur de patrum authoritate, itaque cum concludunt
Ecclesiam secundum scripturae sanctorumque patrum testimonia duo sacrificia
agnoscere, in altero mentiuntur, in altero errant, plus hominum placitis aut
opinion: quam debeatur tribuendo: scriptura enim vbique illis reclamat, etc.
quod ad veteres spectat, non est quod in eorum gratiam ab aeterna and
inflexibili Dei veritate recedamus; proinde incruentum illud sacrificium quod
commenti sunt homines sibi habeant, etc.
As concerning the ancient fathers, we are not in favor of them, to depart
from the truth, therefore that unbloody sacrifice which men have feigned, let
them keep to them selves: etc. and again Calvin. in omnes Pauli epist. in
Habr. c. 9. verse. 26. p. 94. 6. b. fine, says. Hinc patet quam friuola sit
distinctio illa etc. quum dicunt papista immolationem Christi in cruce fuisse
sanguineam, missa vero sacrificium etc. nihil moror quod sic loquantur vetusti
scriptores, neque enim est in hominum arbitrio, cuiusmodi ipsis libuerit
sacrificia fingere:
this distinction of the papists of Christ's bloody oblation upon the cross,
and the unbloody sacrifice in the mass, is friuolouse etc. I am nothing
moved that the ancient writers speak so, for it is not in men's power to
forge sacrifices at their pleasure. Furthermore whereas we (in respect we
houlde this sacrifice for propitiatory) do in our celebration thereof, make
mention therein of the dead, Calvin rejects the fathers herein, saying:
Calvin. in tract. theolog. de ver. eccles. reform. page 394. b. ante med.
says. Superest alter ordo mortuorum qu^rum mentionem in caena fieri volunt,
vt detur illis locus refrigerij, lucis and pacis: non nego hanc fuisse
vetustissimam consuetudinem, and quoniam magna est vis consuetudinis, aut
potius regnum, ideo eiusmodi preces fateor Chrisostomo, Epiphanio, Augustino,
and similibus probatas fuisse, quod a maioribus quasi per manus traditae
essent, etc. quod breui tempore inualuerat, nimia facilitate fine ratione aut
iudicio secuti sunt:
As concerning the other sort of the dead, of whom they would have mention
to be made in celebration of the supper, that a place of ease, light and
peace, might be given to them; I confess that the custom hereof was most
aunciente, and that such prayers were allowed of by Chrisostom, Austine, and
Epiphanius, as received by succession from their ancestors, the usage whereof
the before named fathers followed, without reason or judgment: etc. And in like
plain sort are the fathers directly charged, with offeringe sacrifice for
the dead by master Fulke in his confutacion of purgatory, acknowledges that
Tertulian, Ciprian, Austine, Hierom, and a great many more, do witness that
sacrifice for the dead is the tradition of the Apostles: page 362. ante med.
and page 303. circa med. and 393. paulo ante med. after the edition of 1577.
also whereas in S. Cirill. (who lived about Anno Dom. 320.) in catech. mystag.
5. ante med the sacrament is by him termed, hostia propitiationis: and maximum
animarum (defunctarum) iuuamen pro quibus offertur. Hospinian (a learned
Caluiniste) in histor. sacram. acknowledges the received custom of that
ancient age saying. dicit Cirillus (Hierosolimitanus) pro sui iam temporis
recepta consuetudine, sacrificium altaris maximum iuuamen esse animarum, (part.
1. lib. 2. cap. 7. page 167. initio. In like manner Bullinger de Origin
erroris, printed. 1539. fol. 223. a. initio. says. Augustinus meminit
oblationis pro defunctis, etc. in Enchir. 109. neque negandum est defunctorum
animas pietate suorum viuentium releuari, cum pro illis sacrificium mediatoris
offertur. etc. id quod ideo copiosius expono, vt intelligas ritum illum
offerendi pro defunctis, non institutum esse ab Apostolis, sed a sanctis
patribus, quibus hic quidem error pius etc. condonari potest: and see
Bullingers deceades in English. decad. 5. sermon. 9. page 1082. a. post med. and
see Lauather de spectris, printed. 1570. part. 3. c. 10. page 254. circa med.
master Fulke, and other of Caluines followers: Two and twentithlie: As
concerning Angels their invocation and honor, Calvin says, That no
doctrine by him impugnedys, Calvin. institut. l. c. 24. 10. says. Ita videmus
Christi gloriam superioribus aliquot seculis fuisse multis modis obscuratam,
cum immodicis elogijs Angeli praeter verbum Dei cumularentur; neque vllum fere
antiquius est vitium ex ijs quae hodie impugnamus:
more ancient then yt: And as concerning prayer to other sanctes, Calvin
Calvin. instit. l. 3. c. 20.. 21. says of prayer to saints. Id aliquot
seculis factitatum quis neget, etc.
reprehendeth the usage thereof for former ages: as also master Whitguifte
late Archbish. discoursinge master Whitguifte in his defense etc. printed
1574. tract. 8. page 472. fine, and 473. initio.
of doctrine taught in any age since the apostles, affirms without any
other exception of age or father, that (to use his own words) All the master.
Whitguifte. ibidem. page 473. paulo post initium.
Bishops and learned writers of the greek church and latynes also for the
most part, were spotted with doctrines of freewill, merits, invocation of
saints and such like, etc. Lastly, as concerning Images, Calvin
reprehendeth S. Gregory, affirminge, Calvin. institut. lib. 1. c. 11.. 5.
says. Scio illud, vulgo plus quam tritum libros idiotarum esse imagines:
dixit hoc Gregorius, at long aliter pronunciat spiritus Dei, in cuius schola
si edoctus fuisset (Gregorius) hac in part nunquam ita loquutus foret.
that he speaks otherwise of them then does the holy ghost: Hitherto of
Caluines boulde reiectinge of the fathers, even in the points now controuerted
between us and his followers, in all which he confesses the fathers to speak
for us and against him, haueinge no other evasion but in some places to
pretend, either that the fathers meante not as they spoke, or else (which
master Carthwrighte master Carthwright in his 2. reply. part. 1. page 627.
fine, says. If yt be a simple answer to set one author against an other, yt
is much more simple to set one authority at variance with it self, without
shewinge any way of reconciliation:
terms a simple (kind of answer) that they were herein contrary to them
selves. Affirminge further to such purpose in general, and saying of the
fathers. Calvin. in his preface, ad Franciscum Regem Galliae paulo ante med.
(set before his institutions haueinge me^cioned, patres antiquos and melioris
adhuc saeculi scriptores, says of them. Multa ignorarunt sancti illi viri,
saepe inter se co^flictantur, interdum etiam secum ipsi pugnant.
They good men, were ignorante of many things, oftentimes they contend
among themselves, and do sometimes differ even from themselves: to which
like unworthy answer Peter Martyr, Melancthon and Beza do likewise in these
extremes finally betake see Beza hereafter c. 7. sect. 4. prope finem, at. n.
and see Melancthon in epistolam Pauli ad Romanos, printed. in 8. 1540. in cap.
14. page 419. ante med. and Peter Martyr de votis, printed. 1559. page 463.
paulo ante med.
them selves. To conclude this point, against all slipperie evasion vndulie
pretended by master D. Feilde: Whereas master D. Feilde in his books of the
church, printed. 1606. lib. 3. cap. 15. and 16. and 17. page 91. 92. 93. etc.
pretends that Calvin intended not to charge the aunciente fathers as erringe
with the papists in the foresaid articles, to that end framinge a several
conceited evasion upon each several particular example, master Whitaker
directlye to the contrary confesses, as next hereafter in the margin at the
figure. 4. Erratum esse a veteri Ecclesia etc. that the ancient church erred
in them, and that these foresaid examples, were veterum errores quos cum
papistis communes habuerunt, etc. errors of the ancient fathers, which were
common with them to the papists: a thing in yt self as yet more evident by
the like answerable acknowledgement of the centurie writers, confessed as here
next hereafter by master Whitaker, and also of other protestante writers
added to Caluines confession upon each particular alleged example for the
most part.
our alledginge of Calvin concerning the premises is so undoubted and true,
that whereas Bellarmine alleged Calvin, and the centurie writers as
chargeinge the ancient fathers with error see this in Bellarmin. tom. 1. de
Notis Ecclesia. l. 4. c. 9. nota. 6.
in freewill, lymbus patrum, denial of concupiscence after baptism to be
sin, satisfaction, prayer for the dead, merit, penance, the superstitiouse
fast of lent, the unmarried life of priests, baptism of lay persons in
case of necessity, sacrifice, etc. in prooffe whereof for so much as
concerns Calvin, he also alleged most of the sayings recited as heretofore
out of Calvin; master Whitaker (no less learned then master D. Feilde)
answeringe thereto, confesses both of Calvin and the Centuristes, saying
Whitaker de Ecclesia contra Bellarminum. controu. 2. quaest. 5. page 299. ante
med. answeringe thereto says. Profert Bellarminus quaedam testimonia ex
Caluino and centuriarum scriptoribus, isti quasdam veterum errores annotarunt,
quos cum papistis co^munes habuerunt ne^pe de libero arbitrio, de meritis, de
lymbo, de inuocatione sanctorum, de calibatu episcoporum, de satisfactione, and
de quibusda^ eiusmodi, etc. Whereto he there answers, saying. Respondeo
verum esse quod Caluinus ait, and qui ce^turias scripserunt, in multis erratum
esse a veteri Ecclesia, vt de lymbo, de libero arbitrio, de operum meritis, and
reliquis illis quae supra commemorantur, etc. (after the edition of 1599.)
Bellarmine alleges certain testimonies from Calvin and the Centurie
writers, these noted certain errors of the ancient fathers which were common
with them to the papists, as namely concerning freewill, merits, lymbus,
invocation of saints, the unmarried life of priests, satisfaction, and some
more such l^ke, etc. before recited, whereto he there further answers not
euadinge as does master Feilde, but confessinge and saying. vt supra at the
figure. 9.
Respondeo verum esse etc. I confess yt is true which Calvin, and the
Centurie writers do affirm of the aunciente churches erringe in lymbus,
freewill, meritt of works, and in all those other points before mentioned:
so confessedlie true is that which is as heretofore set down concerning
Caluines bold reiectinge of the ancient fathers: Wherein how he together with
master Whitaker, D. Humfrey, Peter Martyr, and Beza who join with him
Whitaker contra Duraeum. printed. 1583. l. 6. page 423. fine, says. Ex patrum
erroribus, vester ille pontificiae religionis cento consultus est: and observe
further master Whitaker next before at the figures 4. 5. also D. Humfrey, in
libello de vita Iuelli, printed. 1573. page 212. circa med. says to us as in
reprehension of master Iuells so bold offer, to be tried by the fathers:
Nimium largitus est, and vobis plus aquo concessit, and sibi nimium fuit
iniurius, etc. and seipsum and Ecclesiam quodammodo spolianit, etc. quid nobis
rei cum patribus, cum carne and sanguine? and Peter Martyr de votis, printed.
1559. page 476. paulo post med. says. Quamdiu consistimus in concilijs and
patribus, versabimur semper in ijsdem erroribus. And see Beza hereafter, cap.
7. sect. 4. at. i. k.
in so reiectinge the fathers, have at once discovered their own nouellisme,
and withal set forth the confessed antiquity of our catholic religion,
let the indifferent reader (to whose censure we submit whatsoever has been
said) in gods name judge.

VI.
Now lastely, how seditiouse Calvin was reputed both in doctrine and
practice, appears by his confessed seditiouse opinion Master Bridges, Bish.
of Oxforde, wrote a special book entitled a defense etc. answeringe also to
the Arguments of Calvin Beza, and Danaeus with other our reverend learned
brethren both, for the regiment of women etc. printed. 1587.
against the regimente of women in civil causes, as thereby to ibidem lib. 9.
page 711. prope initium, he says. Danaeus and Calvin were carried away in
this matter to defeat the natural right and title of the sovereign (women)
princes of England, etc.
defeat the then two catholic queen's of England and Scotland: Also he is
not abashed to write, that Calvin. in Daniel. cap. 6. verse. 22.25. says.
Abdicant se potestate terreni principes dum insurgunt contra Deu^ imo indigni
sunt qui censeantur in numero hominum: potius ergo conspuere oportet in illorum
capita, quam illis parere:
princes do bereave them selves of authority when they erecte them selves
against God, yea that they are unworthy to be accounted in the number of men,
and therefore we must rather spitt upon their faces then obey them: a
saying so reproueable, notwithstanding all excuse thereof by master D.
hereof see protest. apol. prefat. sect. 11. page 18. at. a. b.
Moreton, that master D. Wilkes, though for Caluines credit supressinge his
name, obiecteth yett to the puritanes these very words of Calvin as being
seditiouse, saying. master D. Wilkes of obedience, printed. 1605. page 60.
They were your teachers who account those princes that are not refined by
their spirit, unworthy to be accounted emongst the number of men, and
therefore rather to be spitted upon then obeyed, they were your teachers who
defend rebellion against princes of a different religion etc. Whereto might
be added further testimony see Calvin. institut. l. 4. c. 20 31.
of Caluines other like seditiouse doctrine: In so much as the late Archbishop
of Canterbury, and master D. Sutlife do both of them confess, how that
John Knoxe, so says master Bancrofte the late Archbishop in his d^ngerouse
positions etc. page 10. initio.
a man trained up at Geneua, (and whom Calvin terms Calvin. in epist. and
respons. epist. 305. fine. and page 565. fine, the epistle being written to
Knoxe, says to him. Vale eximie vir, and ex animo colende frater.
an excellent man, and his vt supra. at. i.
most reverend brother) see this in the history of the church of Scotland,
printed by Vantrovillier. page 213. and alleged by master Sutlife in his
answer to a libell supplicatory, printed 1592. page 192. ante med. and 71.
circa med. and see this also reported by master Ba^crofte in his dangerouse
positions, printed. 1595. page 10. ante med.
reports the doctrine of Calvin and certain other ministers then residinge
at Geneua, teachinge that yt is lawful for subjects to reform religion when
princes will not, yea rather then fail, even by force of arms. Whereto might
be added (as the best interpreter of Caluines doctrine) the known confessed
example of Geneua it self, the very seat of Calvin, in which says master
Sutlife, they master Sutlife in his answer to a libel supplicatorie. page
194. initio.
of Geneua did depose their (catholic) liege lord and prince from his
temporal right, albeit he was by right of succession the temporal lord and
owner of that city and territory: master Bancrofte in his dangerouse
positions etc. page 9. post med.
since which time (says the late Archbishop) yt has been a principle with
some of the chief ministers of Geneua etc. that if kings and princes refused
to reform religion, the inferior magistrates or people by direction of the
ministry might lawfully, and ought if need required, even by force and arms
to reform yt them selves, etc. And thus much brifly concerning Caluines life
and doctrine, referringe the manner of his tragic death, to that which has
been heretofore said thereof, not only by heretofore. cap. 6. sect. 1. at. d.
Conradus Schlusselburge a protestante writter of great heretofore, cap. 5.
sect. 1. at. 1.
esteem: but also by heretofore. cap. 6.. 1. after. f. at. *.
Johannes Herennius, though him self otherwise an earneste Caluiniste.

BEZA. CHAPT. VII.
Now lastelie as concerning Theodore Beza, whose life was in like manner
written by Hierom Bolsecke, and by him published. Anno 1582. wherein he
obiecteth against Beza many great and heynouse imputations set down in
particular, with special naminge of times, places, and persons, as for example
(emonge other) the sellinge of his priorie for ready money in hand, and
further lettinge yt to others in farm for five years upon money before hand
received, whereupon the abused parties (upon his secret steallinge away) fell
at public suite which depended of record in the court at Paris; Also his
then steallinge away (at the time of his said flight) the tailors wife
dwellinge in Calender street at Paris: furthermore the gettinge of his maid
with child at Geneua, and his then fayninge both him self and the maid to
be sick of the plague, whereby none should dare to come to them, whereupon he
requested that they might be lodged in two chambers of Petrus Viretus in an
outter gardine, which obtained he caused a barber surgion to let the woman
blood, and to give a strong purgation, after which she was delivered of a
dead child, which they buried in that gardine, as the said barber after
confessed to Bolsecke himself: during which mean time Beza (to cover the
matter) composed certain spiritual songs of the great pains he suffered by
vehemency of the plague, and printed them at Geneua: whereto are further
added, his printed seditiouse books for stirringe up of civil wars in
France, whereof one was entitled, the French furies, an other Truethe, an
other the Watch, an other the waking Bell, with others. Besides many other
like greeuouse imputations; and the same delivered as being so particular and
public, that the untruth of them, if any were, could not but become
discouerable to all men's knowledge: Although that all these were even in Bezas
life time published by Hierom Bolsecke, and With great show of confidence for
yt is by him dedicated even to the honorable, magistrates, counselors, and
other governors of Geneua, for that (says he) they could best tell whether
most of those reports were true or not, and of such as they knew not, could
best learn and enquire: And he professes to have written Bezas life
purposelie in Bezas life time, to the end that Beza then liueinge might answer
for him self:
with great show of confidence, by him dedicated to the governors of Geneua,
and not without earneste protestation of his truth and fidelity therein, yet
in regard of my see heretofore, cap. 6. sect. 1. prope initium.
former alleged reason concerning Bolsecke, and the other method whereto I
have restrained my self, I will purposelie forbear, either to affirm and make
good or otherwise to disable Bolsecks foresaid report of them, as contentinge
my self with such only other testimony, as is delivered by learned
protestants them selves: In which course is not unworthy of observation, who
much Beza differed from the apostolic zeal and spirit, in his uncharitable
and profane disclayme in all care of Beza in his words extant. in Sarauiae
defensio tract. de diuersis ministrorum gradibus, printed Londini M.D.XCIIII.
cap. 19. page 309. circa med. says. Neque vero nobis hic curiose inquirendum
puto number ad omnes gentes peruenerint Apostoli, nec etiam magnopere nobis de
legatione ad remotissimas aliquas gentes laborandum, quum nobis domi and in
propinquo sit satis superque, quod nos and posteros exercent, has igitur potius
tam longinquas peregrinationet locustis illis, etc. Iesunomen ementientibus
relinquamus, etc.
conuertinge heathen nations to the faith of Christ, leaueinge that
(professedlie) to the Jesuits: a resolution in him so vnchristiane, that D.
Sarauia (a learned Caluiniste) for such Sarauia. ibidem. page 309. post med.
says thereof. Responsionem huiusmodi a Domino Beza non expectabam, nec a
quoquam theologo, cui euangelij praedicatio cordi sit, vt esse debet, etc.
adserere iudico impium and ab omni christiana charitate alienum.
condemns it. In like manner concerning Bezas licentiouse doctrine, what
more dissolute in this kind then his assertion that Beza de aeterna Dei
praedestin. extant in his tract. theologic. printed. 372.. 7. says. Stat ergo
co^clusio, Deum ipsum prout ei libuit, omnia futura ab aterno decernere, ita
quoque illa suo tempore sua ipsius efficacitate peragere sicut vult.
God decrees all things to come, and by his own efficacye works them: And
as Suinglius teaches, that in respect hereof one hereof see Suinglius
h^retofore. cap. 5. sect. 2. in the margin. at. o. p. q.
and the very same wicked action which is evil in us, is yett good in God: so
likewise says Beza, Beza. de aeterna Dei praedest. vb^ supr. page 73. 19.
says. Quicquid agit Deus bonum est etc. omnia autem ^fficit, omnia igitur
bona sunt quatenus a Deo efficiuntur, and discrimen illud boni and mal^m
instrutis duntaxat locum habet, etc and see the same also in Bez^s displaye of
popish practi^es in English, printed. 1578. page 112. post med.
whatsoever God does is good he does all things, therefore all things are good
as they be done of him, and the difference of good and evil has place only
in the instruments: Also he further teaches, that God so says Beza in his
Displaye, etc. page 202. paulo ante med.
exciteth the wicked will of one thief to kill an other, guides his hand and
weapon, justly enforcinge the will of the thief, so says Beza ibidem. page
116. fine.
That God styrred up the mind of David to number the people: that likewise
God so says Beza ibidem. page 17. paulo post med.
does decree some to destruction: Beza ibidem. page 31. fine.
creates to perdition: and Beza ibidem. page 31. initio.
predestinateth to his hatred and destruction, see this confessed and disliked
in Beza and others by master D. Willet heretofore. cap. 6. sect. 2. at. h. k.
see this also in master Bezas respons. ad acta colloquij Montisbelgar. etc.
printed. 1589. part. 2. page 233. initio. and circa med.
without any respect had to their works, either good or evil: in so much
that (says he) God so says Beza, in respons. ad act. coll. etc. page 233.
fine, and 234. and 235. and see Andreas his report hereof in his epitom.
colloq. Montisbelgat. page 47.
decreed even the (very) fall of Adam, and see this recited and rejected out
of Bezas writings by Grauwerus in his absurda absurd. 22. etc. cap. 5. fol. A.
a. 2. and see in opusc. printed. 1570 pa. 4 7. initio.
predestinateth (the reprobate) not only unto damnation, but also unto
(sin) the cause thereof, hitherto concerning the reprobate: Now as touching
his faithful professors, Beza teaches, that he see this in Iacobus Andreas
his epitome. colloquij Montisbelgar. printed. 1583. page 44. and 48. in^tio.
who does once truly believe, cannot afterward fall from the grace of
God, or lose his faith by his adultery, or any other like sins: As for
example that Beza. in respons. ad acta colloq. etc part. 2 page 73 fine, and 74.
David by his adultery and murder, did not (so much as for that time) lose
the holy ghost and fall from his faith (in which respect perhaps yt was,
that Beza as is see hereafter. c. 7. sect. 1. fine, in the margin. at. y.
hereafter alleged, did foe lasciuiouslie paraphrase David's Penitential
Psalm) whereto Bezas favorers do subscribe, affirminge as in sequel upon
Bezas foresaid doctrine, that so says. D. Fulke in the tower disput. with.
F. Campion. printed. 1583. the second days conference. fol. l. 1. b. prope
initium.
David (even) when he committed adultery was, and remained the child of God:
That also see this in master Fox Acts and monuments, printed. 1563 page
1338. b. post med.
when we sin, we diminishe not the glory of God, all the danger in our
sin being the evil example to our neigbour: by cause that according to
this doctrine, sin so teaches master Wotton in his answer to the late
popish articles, printed. 1605. page 92. circa med.
is pardoned as soon as committed, so teaches master Wotton. ibidem. page
41. circa med. and see Calvin. institut. l. 4. c. 15.. 3.
the faithful person having (at once) forgiveness of all his sins paste and
to come: Hence follows their received doctrine, that the difference of
mortal and venial sin arises, Musculus. in loc. commu. printed. Basileae.
1573. in loc. de peccato, de discrimine peccati venialis ac mortalis, page 28.
circa med. says. Sciendum est magis esse in hac causa personas peccantium,
quam ipsa peccata confiderandas: and see Beza next heretofore at. f.
not from the differente natures of the sins in themselves, but of the
parties committinge them: so as to their faithful professors so teach
Beza. in respons. ad acta colloquij, etc. part. 1. page 24. circa med. and
Musculus in loc. commu. vbi sup. page 28. paulo post med. saying. Si personae
peccantes in Christo sunt electa, consequitur and illorum peccata mortalia non
esse sed venialia: etc. Si vero qui peccant sunt reprobi, omnia illorum peccata
quamuis leuia videantur, mortalia existunt: see also Calvin. l. 3. c. 4.. 28.
and master Fulke against the Rhem. test. printed. 1598. in 1. epist. Joan. c.
1. sect. 5. initio. and fine, fol. 447. b.
all sins are venial, and to others, So says master Willet, in his
synopsis, etc. printed. 1592. page 560. ante med. and Musculus. in loc. commu.
as next before at. x. and Beza. in his noui testam. printed. 1588. page 467.
b. line. 23. says. Ex hoc co^sequitur nulla electis mortalia, nulla reprobis
venialia esse peccata.
all sins are mortal: that therefore sin Whitaker de Ecclesia contra
Bellarminum, printed. 1599. controu. 2. quaest. 5. page 301. circa med. says.
Nos dicimus, si quis actum fidei habeat, ei peccata non nocere, id quidem
Lutherus affirmat id nos omnes dicimus.
is not hurtful to him that actuallie believes: In so much as master
Parkins concludes saying, so says master Parkins in his works, printed.
1603. page 465. b. paulo post med. and in the last edition of his works,
volum. 1. printed. 1608. page 390. a prope initium.
God will not condemn the elect if they sin, for the ground work of
(their) salvation is laid in gods eternal election, and a thousand sins in
the world, nay all the sins in the world etc. cannot overthrow gods
election etc God condemns no man for sin, if he be adopted in Christ: of
which adoption each faithful professor may also not coniecturally persuade,
but most certainly and infalliblie this is so common in Beza, and his
followers, as needs no proof.
assure him self: All which premises are so gross in Beza, that Castalio (a
learned Caluiniste, and of great see heretofore. cap. 4. sect. 3. at. *. s. t.
u. x.
esteem) with others do not forbear to see Castalios words of reprehension.
in Beza de aeterna Dei pradest. extant. in Bezas. tract. theol. printed. 1570.
page 423. initio. Where he says. Tua doctrina aiunt homines manifest fieri
deteriores. and see page 409. ante med. and Iacobus Andreas in epitom.
colloquij Montisbelgar. page 47. circa med. where he says. Deus est author
peccati secundum Bezam, and page 54. circa med. he says. Bezae opinio de
praedestinatione impia est and blasphema: and page 48. initio. he says of
Bezas doctrine, that it is, horrendum auditu.
reprehende, and charge Beza for his foresaid licentiouse doctrine. As also
Bezas own puritan brethren of Delphe published to the world in the book
entitled Iacobi Arminij S. Theologiae Doctoris eximij disputationes etc. cui
praemittitur oration de vita and obitu Arminij recitata a Petro Bertio. coll.
illustr. D. D. ordinum regente dignissimo, printed. M.D.CX. in the said,
oration post med. is thus reported. Circumferebatur forte quorundam piorum
man^bus, libellus a quibusdam fratribus in Ecclesia Delfensi scriptus aduersus
D. Bezam hoc titulo. Responsio ad argumenta quaedam Beza and Caluini ex
tractatu de praedestinatione in caput 9. ad Romanos: eum libellum beatae
memoriae D. Martinus Lydius, qui antea pastorem egerat in Ecclesiae
Amsterdamensi tunc vero professorem agebat in noua Frisiorum accademia
transmiserat ad D. Arminium, rogaueratque vt aduersus fratres Delfenses
patrocinium susciperet D. Bezae credebatur a D. Lydio per quam ^doneus huic rei
Arminius etc. neque erat omnino ab hoc instituto Arminius alienus, recens enim
ex schola Geneuensi auribus circumferebat sonum lectionum and argumentorum D.
Bezae: accingit ergo sese operi, sed dum molitur refutationem, dum argumenta
vtrimque expendit, dum confert scripturas, dum se torquet ac fatigat, vero
victus, primum sequntus est sententiam illam ipsam quam oppugnabat, postea in
eam diuina virgula and Spiritus Sancti ductum delatus est, quam ad finem vsque
vitae constanter ad seruit, etc. Iacobus Arminius in Fr. Iunij locum iubentibus
ita curatoribus surrogatus est.
their special book thereof by them written against Beza in so much that
whereas D. As next before in the margin. at..
Martinus Lydius (public professor in the new university of Frisia)
entreated D. Arminius (who succeeded Iunius in being public professor at the
university of Leyden) that he would undertake the patronag of Beza against
the brethren of Delphe, as haueinge been resident before at Geneua, and but
lately heard Bezas lectures, and arguments touching this matter, Arminius
accordingly undertakes the same, and endeuoreth the said brethrens
refutacion: but whilst he expendeth the arguments on both parts, and
conferreth the scriptures, himself is overcome, and imbracinge thereupon the
very same opinion which he began to impugn, he perseuered therein to the end
of his life: so grossly erroneouse was Bezas doctine hereof houlden, and for
such specially rejected, even by the learned puritan divines of his own
society. But leauinge as now Bezas like further licentiouse doctrine over
tediouse to recite, and to proceed in the other course and order of his life:
first then emonge those (confessed many) licentiouse Anthoni Faius. l. de
vitae and obitu clarissimi viri D. Theodori Bezae, printed. Geneuae. 1606. page
9. paulo post med. confesses and me^cioneth, poemata illa quae (Wolmario)
praeceptori illi suo inscripsit, in quibus non mores, sed stylum Catulli and
Nazonis ad imitandum sibi proponens epigrammata quaedam licentiosius, quam
voluisset scripta effudit.
poems of his wherein he imitated the style of the most wanton, Catullus and
Nazo, occurreth that known scandalouse epigrame here recited in the In Bezas
epigrams is extant (among other) his epigram of Andebertus and Candida, the
which having this title. Theodorus Beza de sua in Candidam and Andebertum
beneuolentia: begins thus. Abest Ca^dida Beza quid moraris? Andebertus abest
quid hic moraris? Tenent Parisij tuos amores, habent Aurelij tuos lepores, and
tu vezelijs manner pergis, procul Candidula amoribusque. Immo Vezelij procul
valete, and vale pater, and valete fratres, nam Vezelijs carere possum, and
carere parente and his and illis. At non candidula Andebertoque:
margin, by him made of his inordinat likinge to his ganimed termed
Andebertus, and to his woman called Candida, in which (as thereby appearethe)
he much sed vtrum ergo praferam duorum? vtrum inuisere me decet priorem? An
quenquam tibi Candida anteponam? an quenquam anteferam tibi Andeberte? quid si
me in geminas secem ipse parts? harum vt altera Candidam reuisat, currat
altera versus Andebertum? at est Candida sic auara noui, vt totum cupiat tenere
Bezam, sic Bezae est cupidus sui Andebertus, Beza vt gestiat integro potiri.
Amplector quoque sic hunc and illam, vt totus cupiam videre triumque, integris
frui integer duobus.
debateth whether sin he may prefer, and in the end concludes with
praeferre attamen alterum necesse est, o duram nimium necessitatem! sed post
quam tamen alterum necesse est, priores tibi defero Andeberte, quod si Candida
forte conqueratur, quid tum? Basiolo tacebit vno:
preferringe the boy before his Ca^dida: I do before hand acknowledge that
master D. Fulke in his treatise against the defense of the Ce^sure, does in
his their answer hereto, wholly rest as in denial Master Fulke in his
treatise against the defense of the censure, page 24. 6. cominge to answer
the objection of these particulars, takes notice of them in particular, but
only answers with denial in general of all imputations objected against Beza.
thereof. As also Geneua it self has in like shameful denial thereof,
lately committed a very notable and remarkable discovered whereas master D.
Morton confesses hereof as next hereafter at. k. in his apologia catholica,
printed at London by John Norton. Anno 1605. They of Geneua set forth an other
edition thereof in 8. printed indeed at Geneua, but in show and title thereof
at London and as by (the very same) John Norton, Anno 1606. in which page 448.
they do quite put forth master D. Moretons here next ensuinge words of
acknowledgement at. k. and in steed thereof do insert words of their own,
importinge a full and absolute denial, whereby they pretend. D. Moreton to
say that these reports thus given of Beza, were untruths a maledicentissimis
and mendacissimis hominibus impudentissime conficta etc. An impudency in them
so egregiouse that master D. Moreton in the second part of his apologia
catholica, printed Londini Anno 1606. in his animaduersiones etc. in the end of
that book in lib. 2. cap. 21. exclaimeth thereat saying thereof: Noua impressio
Londini dicta, vere Geneuae facta, totum responsum meum pro Beza penitus
expunxit, and responsum suum affuit: proh! hominum fidem, doleo quidem tantam
cum scriptis meis iniuriam factam esse, tum etiam praelo Geneuensi tantam
corruptelae labem contractam.
forgerie, mentioned in the margin hereof, but all in vain, for the matter as
being so evident, is not only affirmed by the foresaid protestante writer
See Schlusselburge. heretofore, cap. 6. sect. 1. in the margin. at. d. and
Schlusselburg. in theolog. Calvin. lib. 1. fol. 93. a. initio. says. Constat
and hoc Bezam obscaenissimos versus scripsisse ad germanum Andebertu^ Aureliae
electum, and eundem tanquam adonidem a Beza factum esse.
Conradus Schlusselburge, who publishes a constat thereof. And by Tilma^nus
Heshutius in his book entitled. Verae and sanae confessionis etc. says of
Beza. Spurcissimis suis moribus dedecori fuit ipsis disciplinis honestis,
quique nefandos amor illicitos concubitus, scortationes faeda adulteria
sacrilego carmine decantauit orbi, non contentus eo quod ipse more porci in
caeno flagitiosarum libidinum sese volutaret, nisi etiam aures studio sae
iuuentutis suae illuuiae contaminaret:
Tilmannus Heshutius an other protestante writer of great reputation, but is
also yet further confessed by our English protestant writers, master D. D.
Sparks in his answer to master John. D. Albines, printed. 1591. (this
foresaid matter being objected there. page 397. He in his answer thereto,
page 400.) says thereof; all this was before he was of our religion, even
whiles he was one of yours when he made them:
Spark, master D. master Moreton in his apol. cath. part. 1 l. 2. c. 21.
page 355. circa med. recites our objection saying: Orbi notum est quam salax
fuit Beza, qui publicatis poematibus paudastris suas celebrare non crubuit,
galliae probru^ simoniacus, sodomita, omnibus vitijs coopertus: whereto he next
after answers (as confessinge the matter of fact and) saying: Erat, erat,
sed dum in volutabro vestro miser haeserat, etc. ille Beza igitur dum papista,
hircus fuit.
Moreton, and master D. Sutliue de Turcapapismo, printed. 1599. l. 3. c. 10.
page 204. circa med. answers saying. In memoriam reuocat quae Beza
adolescens and papista in quandam Candidam cecinerat etc.
Sutliue, who all for their best answer thereto do affirm, that indeed
Beza did this, but (say they) before his calling to the gospel, when he was
yet popish: which their answer (to forbear the impertine^t. for though we
deny not, but that many greeuouse sinners have repented and become afterward
very holy men, yet that any ever since Christ's time, offendinge so inhumanely
and against nature (as is here confessed of Beza) should be called
extraordinarely by God, to restore and publishe to the world true religion
then formerlie decaide (as Beza in the conference at Ratisbone affirmed his
calling to be extraordinerie: whereof see that learned Caluiniste D. Sarauia,
in defens. tract. contra respons. Bezae. printed. 1594. page 56. fine, post
med. and 74. fine.) is the point now only urged, and whereof we affirm all
example to be wantinge: for as to that which master Morton. ( in apol. cath.
page 355.) alleges of Saul made Paul, is unapt (if not iniuriouse to the
Apostle) seeinge his error was only his persecutinge the church, grounded upon
preposterous zeal toward God, ( Act. 22.3.4.) and not in other wickedness
of life, to the contrary whereof him self says. As touching my life from my
childe-hoode, and what it was, all the Jews know, that after the most
strayte sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee. Act. 26.5.
impertinencie thereof) is most evidently untrue, as appears even by
testimony of Anthony Faius (Bezas dearest colleague, Anthoni Faius. l. de
vita and obitu Bezae page 4^. fine.
and successor at Geneua) who (in his over partial treatise of the life and
death of Beza) affirms that Faius. ibidem page 8. fine, and 9. ante med. and
see page 11. ante med.
Beza being but twelve years oulde, was brought up in learning under
Wolmarius, and by him then instructed out of the pure fountain of Gods word,
Witness hereof Faius, vbi supra, where he makes recital of Bezas will or
testament page 73. initio. in which says. Faius, gratias agit Deo immortali,
quod anno atatis suae 16. verae Christianae religionis cognitione ac luce
donatus sit:
in the ready knowledge of true Christian piety. A thing more evident, in
that Beza himself in his last will, and testament (alleged by Faius) does (r)
give (special) thanks to the Immortal God, for that at the 16. year of his
age, he was enlightened with the knowledge of true Christian religion: which
time of his supposed enlightninge (amputation being had of his birth, Faius vbi
supra. page 8. post med.
24. Iulij 1519. and of his foresaid epigrames, printed at Paris under Bezas
name by Robertus Stephanus, Ann. 1548.) appears evidently to have been many
years before his foresaid publishinge of the said epigrames, the which also
as may seem by Anthony Faius, see this next hertofore in he margin. at b.
he dedicated eue^ to his foresaid master Wolmarius, by whom next heretofore
at. n.
as before he was first instructed in religion. In further prooffe whereof
much more is affirmed by See Schlusselburg. in theol. Calvin. lib. 1. fol. 92.
a. post med. and b.
Schlusselburge from recital out of Bezas other writings, in so much as
Beza in excuse thereof denies not the same epigrames, but only says. see
this confessed and reported in these words by the author of the answer for
the time to the defense of the ce^sure, printed. 1583. fol. 99. a. circa med.
Indeed Andeberte was a young man then most dear to me, etc. to whom being
at Vezel I wrote trifelingelie certain verses, wherein I did declare my
singular desire of seeinge him etc. But wheither the foresaid verses importe
no more but so, let the reader judge: As also I refer to like judgment upon
what ground work yt was, that so reports the said author in his said
answer, fol. 98. b. ante med..
being called to Lausanna, (a protestante town) to profess the greek
tongue, inquiry was made into his life etc. (whereupon) Beza makes mention of
his epigrames, etc. and testifies to them (of Lausanna) that there were many
things in them, which did utterly dislike him, for which he was hartelie sorry.
Hereto I will now but add remembrance of that poetical vain, which Beza
afterward waxinge oulde, continewed and used, when turninge the Psalms of
David, into latin verse, (a work greatly commended Faius de vita and obitu
Bezae page 80. affirms that, Psalmos vario latinorum carminum genere
elegantissime and suaeuissime expressos, orbi Christiano edidit, and see this
treatise of Bezas, further there mentioned page 78. fine.
by Anthony Faius) he did among other in Bezas tract. theologic printed
Geneuae. 1570. page 661. He paraphraseth the 50. Psalm as thus describinge
Bersabe.
paraphrase the 50. Psalm, which being wholly paenitentiall, and
comprehendinge in it nothing but matter of greeffe and tears, let yt be
indifferently weighed, upon perusal but of part thereof alleged in the
margin, (we will not say how lasciuiousely, but) how unanswerable to David's
contrition the same is by Beza penned.

Tandem ad Bersabes conuertit lumina vultus,
Bersabes qua non formosior altera, cunctas
Isacidum populos inter numerata puellas,
Sed coniuncta viro and matter iam digna videri,
Et mox tam raras mortali in corpore dotes
Miratus, patulae radiantem frontis honorem
Purpureasque genas, pulchri and discrimina nazi,
Os roseum and flauos per eburnea colla capillos
Marmorcumque sinum, porrectaque brachia long,
Et terretes digitos, me vero ludere in istis
Fas oculus inquit:
And a little after he further describes her being in the fountain, in these
lasciuiouse verses: Omnibus arridet pulchrae sibi conscia formae,
Nunc sinit extrema crispantes front capillos
Ludere, nunc varia discriminat art vagantes,
I am celare sinum simulat, mammasque coercet,
Et superobiectat tennis velamina telae:
I am cunctas ostentat opes, colloque superba
Nudato, pulchra mentitur imagine diuam,
Interdum excultis illi qui stabat in hortis
Marmoreo insignis labro atque perennibus vndit
Foute lauat, cereresque iaculatur amores.


Was this the spirit of Dauides repentance, or rather of Bezas yet hitherto
continewed vein of Nazo and Catullus, whom he is mentioned to have imitated
n^^^ heretofore at. b. These wanton verses were such an open scandal, that
now in the other late editions (as namely in Bezas Psalms of David turned
into latin verse, printed at Antuerp. 1580. they are for very shame quite
omitted and left fourth, but yet still extant and to be seen in the other
former edition before mentioned, and in Bezas Psalms of David in latyne verse,
printed at London. 1580.

II.
But to proceed in the further discourse of Bezas life, that learned Lutherane
Conradus Schlusselburge, reports further saying, Schlusselburge. in theolog.
Calvin. l. 1. fol. 92. b. fine, says. Constat and hoc Bezam sibi despondisse
suam Candidam inscijs parentibus, and cum ea quatuor Annos consueuisso
concubina vtendo, autequam Candidam vxorem duxerit.
this also is manifest, that Beza espoused his Candida without her parents
assente, and for four years space before he married her, kept her as his
concubine: And whereas yt is also reported, that his secret flighte in company
of the said woman for preuentinge of troubles hereupon to him intended, was
the first occasion which brought him with her to Geneua, where (says the
reporter) he hereof see next hereafter in the margin at. b. *.
was forced to marry her in prevention of open scandal at their then
conceived incontinencie, (which also is made more odiouse and remarkable by
Bezas own unchaste profane Hutterus public professor in the university of
Witemberge, in his libri concordiae explicatio. printed. 1608. Art. 7. fine,
and page 703. circa med. reports saying. Beza in fine libri de absentia
corporis Christi in caena scribit, Candidae sieve Amasiae suae culum (parce tu
Christ blasphemias istas mihi referenti) imo partem diuersam magis adhuc
pudendam, mundiorem esse quam illorum ora, qui simpliciter verbis Christi
inhere^tes, credunt se praesens Christi corpus in caena sacra, ore suo accipere.
words, so immodeste as I blushe even in my very forbearance to English
them) yt is not altogether without scruple, that Anthoni Faius not ignorante of
this so common report, and vndertakinge (in his said discourse of Bezas life)
to make mention of Bezas marriage, does no better prevent or clear yt, but
rather (as some conceive) does give color thereto, tellinge how that Beza
Faius de vita and obitu Beza. page 11. initio, says. Nam and voluptatem
illecebris, and ambitiosulae gloriae quam ex epigrammatorum editione erat
adeptus, honorumque amplissimorum spe irretitus aliquandiu detinebatur, etc. ac
primum ne a iuuenilibus illis desiderijs superaretur, vxorem sibi despondit,
sed clam conscio vno and altero ex pijs amicis.
being entangled with the enticement of voluptuousness, ambitiouse sweetness
of glory gotten upon the edi ion of his epigrames, and with hope of
prefermente, did (least he should be overcome by those youthful desires)
promise him self in marriage, but yett secretly, one or twoe of his godly
frend^ made privy thereto: And that continewinge with the party in this
estate long time together, at last (says Faius) betakinge ibidem page 12.
fine, yt is said: Seque in voluntariam exilium cum sua coniuge recipit
Geneuam, Anno 1548. ibi primum palam in Ecclesia solenni inter Christianos ritu
matrimonium celebrauit.
him self into voluntary exile, he with his (foresaid) spouse came to
Geneua, and there first openly in the church, celebrated the marriage
according to the solemn rite of Christianes: then which discourse of Faius
what more More inferringe for Faius his pretense of Bezas former supposed
marriage, being as of his marriage not known and open but in secret, and in
presence of some one or other of his godly friends not to be named, together
with further mention of his open marriage after all this in the open church at
Geneua, upon his first cominge thither with he her, what other thing argues
all this, but that Beza was enforced to marry her upon the then conceived
suspicion of his incontinencie with her:
inferringe to prove that Beza was as then suspected to live with her
incontinenthe, and that to avoid the danger thereof, therefore married her
openly in the church at Geneua, which was no less them sacrilege, had he
been then before allreadie married to her: this point seems furthermore so
evident, that our English protestant poet master Owen, takes notice thereof
in his epigrames, where writing of Bezas two wives, he says. The master
Owen in his so much esteemed epigrames, printed Londini. ex officina Humfredi.
Lownes, Anno 1607. editione tertia (wherein he so commends his English
protestant Bishops l. 2. epigram. 23. 24. and 25) does there. l. 1. epigram.
141. in Theodorum, thus write of Bezas two marraiges. Vxorem tibi more nouo fas
ducere non est, quid refert? veterinam tibi lege licet: At tu Mosaicam violasti
bis quoque legem, nupta prior meretrix nam fuit, haec vidua est. Leuit. c. 21.
verse. 7.13. and 14. thus far master Owen:
first was a whore, and the second a widdowe, concerning which his second
wife, I cannot but commend to all indifferente judgments, what sign of
mortification beseeminge Bezas pretended hereof see Beza in epist. theolog.
printed. 1573. ex Alemanno, page 49. and see hereafter c. 7.. 5. fine, in the
margin at. s.
extraordinary vocation was by him showed, when after the Faius de vita and
obitu Beza. page 54. ante med. says, Anno 1588. mense April. e viuis
excessit, Claudia de Nossa Beza coniux, cum qua coniunctissime and honestissime
vixerat annos quadraginta.
death of his said first wife, him self being then sole Fayus. ibidem.
page 74. ante med. says. Liberos nullos vnquam habuit.
without children, and at the time of her said death, aged Fayus. ibidem. page
8. fine, affirminge Beza to be borne. 24. Iunij Anno 1519. and the same
compared to her foresaid death in April. 1588. yt follows by computation,
that he was then aged 69. years wantinge but one monethe.
threescore and nine years, he yet afterward (being then entered upon the 70.
year of his age) in more then ordinary haste, even within the compass but of
some few It appears by Fayus vbi supra. page 66. fine, and 67. initio. that
Beza died. 13. Octobris 1605. aged. 86. years. 3. months and 19. days: and
yt appears further. page 74. ante med. that his second wife had been then
married to him duringe the space of 17. years, which 17. years being deducted
from the foresaid, 86. years of his age, shows her marriage unto Beza to
have been within the mean time, which was between April. 1588. in which his
first wife dyed (as next heretofore. at. e.) and the 13. of October then next
followinge, which begun the first seauententh year of the second wives
continuance with Beza: and this perhaps was the cause why Anthony Fayus being
curiouse in settinge down the very year, and certain time of Bezas other
proceedinges, as namely of his birthe ( page 8.) his death. ( page 66.) his
first marriage at Geneua ( page 12.) the death of his first wife. ( page 54.)
and diverse other like, forbeareth yet to observe this course in like settinge
down the certain time of his second marriage, though yet nevertheless the
obseruant reader may otherwise collecte the same from him, in that upon his
foresaid mention of Bezas first wifes death, Anno 1588. set down, page 54. he
does say, page 55. that Beza made his second marriage (aliquanto post tempore)
a small time after, and the same there set down as in order precedent to
Bezas actions of Anno 1589. which year of Anno 1589. begins not before, page
56. initio.
months Fayus vbi supra. page 55. paulo post med.
married (not without great note thereof both at home and a broad) Katherine
the (young) widdowe of Franciscus Taraffus, whereof master Owen in his
foresaid epigrames (amongst his high, praises there seriously given of diverse
his protestant Bishops) affords not his vnwittie nor unpleasant master Owen
in his epigrames (mentioned next heretofore. at. c.) lib. 2. epigram. 14. in
Theodorum, says. Iam septem denos ageret cum Rex David Annos fouit ei gelidum
pulchra puella latus, cui ne dissimilis tanto videare propheta, duxisti iuuenem
tam Theodore senex.
remembrance.

III.
AS concerning Bezas notable dissemblinge and temporisinge in matter of
religion, I will (forbearinge master See next hereafter, sect. 4. after z. in
the margin at. *.
Bancroftes further charginge him in this kind) only allege one example
thereof mentioned by the protestante writer Osia^der, who reports see this
in Osia^der. centur. 16. lib. 3. cap. 28. page 657. post med.
that certain (protestants) being cast into prison at Paris, the French
Caluinistes sent, as Legates into Germany Beza and Farellus, that they might
obtain from the protestant Princes, their intercession to the French king
for the (foresaid) captives, these legates Beza and Farellus goinge first to
Worms unto the Lutherane divines, Melancthon, Brentius, Marpachius, and
Iacobus Andreas, offered unto them a confession of their faith, in which they
did profess (among other things) the very substance of Christ's flesh to
be exhibited in the sacred supper, and that the difference among the
(protestant) divines, was not of the thing yt self, but only of the manner
of the presence, which was known only to God: Pl^raque in illa confessione
sit posita erant, vt videretur non Caluinistica sed Lutheranae: huius
confessionis antographon ego vidi and legi manu Theodori Beza and Farelli
subsignatum etc. Tigurini Theologi hanc Beza and Farelli confessionem vt nimis
Lutheranam reprehenderunt, quibus responderunt Beza and Farellus; opus sibi
fuisse bono dolo ad liberandos fratres: item se in illa confessione clam apud
se in scrinio pectoris sui, duas voces per fidem and spiritualiter retinuisse:
( Osiander. ibidem. page 65. ante med.) also the Lutheran writer Holderus in
his book entitled. Afinus, printed. Tubingae. 1587. cap. 29. page 49. circa
med. says hereof. Tigurini vbi de re tota certiores fiunt, tanta hominis
impostura acriter dolent, and eam confessionem magna contentione impugnant,
Bezamque falsi reum peragunt: quid vero interim Beza, number se deserit? minime:
Audi artem tali artifice dignam: vult persuadere Tigurinis, dolum aliquando
bonum esse, and aliud agere, aliudque simulare, etc.
and many things were so put in that confession, as they seemed not
Caluinisticall, but Lutherane: the original copy of this confession I my
self (says Osiander) both saw and read, yt being subscribed with the hand
writing of Beza, and Farellus: hereupon they had recourse unto the Duke of
Witemberge, by whom they also obtained from other princes intercession to the
French king: (at their return) the Tigurine divines reprehended this
confession of Beza and Farellus as over Lutherane, to whom Beza and Farellus
answered, that they stood in need of (some) good deceipte whereby to deliver
their brethren. Also that in the foresaid confession, they privately
retained with themselves in the secret of their breast, these two words, viz.
by faith, and spirituallie: thus far the protestant writer Osiander
concerning the said confession, which (as him self says) he both saw and
read over, with his own eyes: And is it now so hateful and reproueable in
some catholics to equivocate though verbally and in case of safety of
their own or their brethrens lives, and yet lawful for Beza to equivocate,
not verbally, but by subscribed writing, neither as in case of safety of
life, but of profession of faith? A course so peculier in Osianders opinion
to the Caluinistes, that he doubts not to say of them, Osiander. centur. 16.
lib. 3. c. 61. page 796 paulo post med. says. Hanc enim maximain seu regulam
habent Caluinistae, licere pro gloria Christi mentiri.
They hold this for a ground or principle, that yt is lawful to lie, for the
glory of Christ.

IV.
AS concerning Bezas reported seditiouse doctrine and practices, does he not
allow and highly commend the wars in France for religion against the
laws and king of that contrie, saying So says Beza in his epistle
dedicatorie of his new testament, to the Queen of England Anno 1564.
that the nobility of France (under the noble prince of Condie) laid the
foundation of restoringe true Christian religion in France, by consecratinge
most happily their blood to God in the battle at Breuxe, whereat Beza was
see this in Anthoni Fayus de vita and obitu Beza, page 45. prope finem.
present and persuadeinge? Did he not write a seditiouse book of this
argument, entitled De ture magistratuum in subditos, so known and evident,
that master Sutlife confesses thereof, saying, master Sutliue in his
answer to a libell supplicatorie, page 75. paulo post med. and see page 71
paulo post med.
Their doctrine does wholly tend unto trouble and rebellion, Beza in his
book of the power of magistrates, does arm the subjects against the prince
in these cases A book ibidem. page 92. post med.
(says he yet further) which overthrows in effect all the authority of
Christian kings and magistrates: And again he alleges Bezas judgment of
excommunicate princes saying: Beza master Sutline, ibidem. page 98. initio.
roundly teaches, what reason have Christianes to obey him, that is satan's
slave? And the like is yet further confessed in this kind against Beza by
master See master Bancrofte in his survey of the holy pretended discipline,
printed. 1593. c. 3. page 48. prope initiu^. Where he charge Beza and the
Geneua discipline expressly with desperate points of deposinge princes and
puttinge them to death in diverse cases of resistance against reformation: and
see in his book entitled Dangerouse positions, page 21. and 18. Also master
Bancrofte in his foresaid survey etc. cap. 3. page 42. circa med. says. He
that shall read master Caluines, and master Bezas two books of epistles,
and likewise the commentaries of France, with diverse other discources about
those affairs, and should withal give any credit, either to Hesbutius,
Balduinus, Carpentarius, or others (men learned all of them, and some of them
protestants) would certaynlie marvel to understand into what actions and
deallinges they thruste themselves, of war, of peace, of subjection how
far yt extended, of reformation without stayinge for the magistrates etc.
Bancrofte the late Arch. As also that temperate protestante writer D. Sarauia,
argues sufficiently Bezas seditiouse doctrine, in his over modest or rather
excusing reprehe^sion and answer thereto, saying, Quid his Sarauia in defens.
tract. de diuersis gradibus ministrorum contra responsionem clarissimi viri D.
Theodori Beza. printed. 1594. cap. 2. page 74. paulo ante med.
verbis etc. some restedoubtful what master Beza inte^deth by these words,
where he thinks yt not right, that the godly should stay til the Wolves be
expelled by public authority, and that he may seem, secretly to insinuate,
that those Wolves may be expelled by private authority, as was done in the low
contries and other places etc. against the minds of the chief magistrates:
thus far D. Sarauia, which course of pretended reformation without staying
for the magistrates, was so common to see Bezas own words recited in Sarauia
vbi supra, also our learned adversary master David Owen in his Herod and
Pilate, etc. printed by Cantrell Leg, printer to the university of Cambridge
1610. in the epistle dedicat. confesses saying. Master Beza ( in these.
Geneu. p. 249.) did determine that the officers of state, such as are the 7.
Electors in the Roman Empire, and the three estates in every monarchy, have
authority to repress tyrannouse princes, which if they do not, they shall
answer before God for their treachery against the people: Also. page 48.
ante med. master Owen further says. Anno 1560. Beza printed his confessions,
wherein he avouches that there are vices in princes though lawfully
established by succession or election etc. what shall be done in this case to
these princes? I answer (says he) that yt belongs to the superior powers
such as are the 7. Electors in the Empire, and the statesmen of the kingdom
allmoste in every monarchy to restrain the fury of tyrants, which if they
do not, they are traitors to their contries, etc. thus far Beza, hitherto
the words of master Owen. Furthermore. Beza in epist. theolog. printed 1573.
epist. 68. page 318. ante med. faith. Habeo alia nonnulla maioris momenti quae
tamen per literas commode significare non pussum: perplacet autem mihi quod de
conuentu absque vlla principium aut ciuitatum authoritate priuatim instituendo
scribis: and then thrusts in this bodge. Quamuis nullis prorsus conscijs
principibus id fieri minime velim: and so likewise in his other words
reprehended by Sauaria (as next heretofore at. t.) Beza expressly says: Si
pijs semper expectandum putas, dum lupi vltro cedant, vel publica authoritate
expulsi, tibi minime assertior, but yet says he with a like bodge: Nihil
seditiose mouendum extra controuersiam est, sed pie and constanter amplectandas
affirmo omnes diuinitus oblatas very cultus diuini restituendi occasiones etc.
and nisi ita factum esset, quas tandem ecclesias hodie haberemus? what seeminge
hypocrisy is this? to teach reformation against the magistrates mind, and
yet for soothe not seditiously, as though yt could be so performed without
sedition: Beza is so plainly reproueable herein, that he is in such respect
specially as before, discovered and reprehended by master Owen a learned
Caluiniste.
Bezas confessed doctrine and practice, that himself in such respect
concludes, as upon confessed experience in that kind, that (says he) vt
supra at. u. fine.
except we had so done, what churches at this day should we have had?
whereto might be added sondrie of Bezas seditiouse see next heretofore in the
margin at. s. u. co^cerninge Pultrots sleeinge endwayes (as him self
conceived) on Horsback all night after he had discharged his pistol upon the
murdered duke, and of his unexpected being found and taken in the morninge next
after, at the place where he did the deed: the protestant author of secundae
partis commentariorum etc. mentioned next hereafter at. z. says. Equo vary
euagatus intempesta nocte in eum prope locum vnde discesserat etc. redit, inque
custodiam Heluetiorum incautius incurrit. page 345. ante med.
sayings, for such confessed and rejected by our learned adversaries, as also
Pultrots known murder of the old duke of Guyse, who being thereupon very
strangely (if not miraculously) apprehended, did at the time of his execution,
publicly the protestante author of the treatise entitled. Secundae partis
commentariorum de statu religionis and reipub. in regno Gallia libri tres.
Carelo none rege, printed. 1571. page 357. post med. says of Poltrots
execucion. Illud interfects Guisij supplicium dedit, quaestionis haebita edito
quodam scripto, Poltrotius Amiralium facinoris illius authorem and hortatorem
appellabat, and Theodorum Bezam cum alio minime nominato ministro illi
accusationi inuoluebat vt ad eam rem impulsorem etc. Also Pultrots confession
at his death yet extant in printe, charge Beza as persuader and procurer
thereof, in answer whereto master Whitaker in his answer to father Campion. (
rat. 8. and after the English edition page 223.) does surmise that Pultrot
was induced to accuse noble and innocente men, through hope of impuretie, or
fear of punishmente: By which pretexte all accusations, made by the
confessions of offenders at their deaths, are most improbablye taken away.
charge Beza, as being the first author, and persuader thereof. Hereto also
might be further added, Bezas like makeinge war against the confessed
master Bancrofte in his said survey, c. 8. page 127. circa med. says. Beza
suceeeded master Calvin in place but neither in learning nor all his virtues,
and I do attribute yt to his want of judgment that he has showed him self
such a busy body (against the lawfulness of Bishops calling) where he had
nothing to do etc. by his secret letters and other disordred writings etc.
and yet forsoothe he can write to other men and pretend quite the contrary:
want of iudgmente, and anciente fathers in defense of his nouellisme, and
therein also his disorderly writings, his like confessed see Bezas
insolency noted by master Bancrofte (late Archbishop) in his foresaid
survey, cap. 3. page 54. initio.
insolency, see his pride noted ibid.
pride, leude see him charged with lewd saying. ibidem. page 59. post med.
saying, and discreditinge see this noted in Beza ibid. c. 19. page 219. fine,
and 220. initio.
him self in being cranke with the ancient fathers: which last point is in
him so evident, that he forbeareth not to compare Beza in epist. theol.
printed. Geneuae 1572. epist. 1. page 5. initio. says. Itaque dicere nec
immerito quidem vt opinor consueui, dum illa tempora apostolicis etiam proxima
cum nostris comparo, plus illos conscientiae, scientiae minus habuisse; non
contra scientia plus, conscientiae minus habere, haec mea sententia est: etc.
the protestante writers of his time, with the most ancient fathers of the
apostolic times, affirminge of them that they had then vt supra at. e.
scientiae minus, less knowledge in matters of religion: and of his own
protestante writers, that they have now vt supra at. e.
scientiae plus, more knowledge: and speakinge else where of the aunciente
fathers even Beza in his epistle dedicatorie to the princes of Condie paulo
post initium, set before his n^we testamente says. Ipsa temporum historia
manifest probat, optimis etiam illis temporibus (si cum posterioribus
conferantur) eam fuisse episcoporum partim ambitionem, part^m facilitatem and
ignorantiam, ac multorum etiam apertissimam ac desperatissimam improbitatem, vt
satanam plane catibus eorum prafuisse, vel ipsi caeci facill^me perspiciant,
etc.
in the best times (compared now to these) of his time, he affirms that
satan Vt supra. at. h.
was playnlie president in their assemblies and counsels: in so much as
reprehendinge the ancient fathers for their (popish) opinions, in particular
of Beza. ibidem. in epist. dedic. paulo post. hauing^ distributed the fathers
into two ranks, the one being before Constantine the great, the other, from
thence to the declininge of the Roman Empire about the time of Theodosius,
says. Dicam aliquid amplius: Bona (vt spero) cum little venta, qui in illorum
scriptis sunt versati; iam tunc iaccbat in Gracia satan, prima mortuorum
inuocationis fundamenta, quibus tantum aberat vt sese opponerent nonnulli prima
notae Episcopi, vt alij etc. extruendis honorificis templis honoranda martirum
memoriae and accumulandis ritibus incumberent: etc. apertas superstitiones
nascentes non modo non reprimerent, sed etiam fouerent, etc. hinc illae liberi
arbitrij opiniones etc. And some little next after he further affirms that.
Prouidentiae, liberi arbitrij, fidei, and gratuitae iustificationis noticia,
was philosophicis gracorum episcoporum commentis pene oppressa, etc. and then
again next after. Innalescebat eodem tempore mortuorum inuocatio, and stulta
opinio calibatus, quos pudendos errores aperte defendit Hieronymus etc. and
monachos in Aegipto and Syria etc. non aliter quam Angelos plerique
admirabantur: preces quoque pro mortuis tum liberius adhiberi capta, and orta
de purgatorio igne, platonica quaestio, etc. deligemus eos qui circa Theodosij
magni saculum vixerunt, certe fateor eo tempore doctissimos episcopos
extitisse, at hoc ego tamen affirmo, vix posse quenquam illorum dari, qui non
and secum ipse, and ab alijs, multis in rebus and ijs quidem maximi dissentiat:
invocation of saints, honoringe the memories of martyrs, increasinge of
rytes, frewill, justification, monachisme, prayer for the dead, purgatory etc
he yet further concludes against the fathers that lived in the time of
Theodosius the great (who begun his regine within the protestant writer
Michael Beuther, in his ephemeris historica, printed at Basile. 1556. page 166.
initio. says. Anno Christi 336. Constantinus magnus obijt: and ibidem. page
34. initio. He says. Anno Christi 379. Theodosius Consors imperij factus est:
Which first number being taken out of the latter, the remain will be. 43. years
forty three years next after the death of Constantine hereof see master
Fulke in his Retentiue against Bristowes Motives etc. printed. 1580. page 279.
post med.
our first Christian Emperor) that scarce any see next heretofore at. k.
of them can be named, who dissented not both from others, and also from him
self in many things, and those truly of greatest moment etc. Affirminge
lastly, that his colleague John Beza in his foresaid epistle dedic. to the
prince of Condie post med. says concerning the interpretacion of scripture:
Magnus ille Ioannes Caluinus beatae memoriae etc. veteres and recentiores omnes
long superauit:
Calvin (in his exposition of the text) did far excel all the aunciente
fathers: In respect of which premises, let now the studiouse reader but
indifferently judge, how far Bezas novel doctrine was dissentinge from the
aunciente fathers, and if the protestante Archbishmaister Bancrofte had not
good cause to tax Beza see next heretofore at. d. and see also the
protestante writer Holderus in his Asinus Auis etc. printed. Tubingae, 1587.
cap. 43. page 43. page 60. post med. specially charginge and reprehendinge
Beza, for his so reiectinge (as next heretofore at. h. in his foresaid,
epist. dedic. to the prince of Condie) the aunciente fathers.
(as before said) with discreditinge him self in being so cranke with the
ancient fathers.

V.
Lastly as concerning Bezas bouldnes in mistranslateinge and peruertinge of
the sacred scriptures: to give but some brief touch thereof: first in
defense of priests pretended marriage, where the text speaks of the
apostles prayinge, with the deuote See heretofore cap. 6. sect. 4. initio. at.
c.d.
women etc. Beza translatethe, with see there at. e. in the margin.
their wives, and the same so untruly as heys therein forsaken by our English
see there at. f.
translators: In like manner where the apostle does prescribe to those that be
married in the imperative mood (most evidently in sense to be to be supplied:
for the text being (...). Honorab^le co^nubium in omnibus: marriage honorable
in all. Hebr. 13.4. next before these words are. Let brotherly love
continue: verse. 1. be not forgetful etc. verse. 2. remember etc. verse. 3 and
then next after these words are. (...) mores alieni ab auaritia: for which our
English translations, and likewise (Beza) do translate, expressinge the
imperative, though in the original wantinge, let your conversation be without
covetousness: verse. 5. so as both next before, and next after the foresaid,
4. now questionable verse. the imperative mood being so often used, and by
our adversaries and Beza him self supplied in the foresaid. 5. verse. in the
original whereof yt is no more expressed, then in the now other. 4. verse.
most evidently conuinceth, that the vet be substantive being wantinge in the
4. and 5. verses a like, the said. 4. interueniente verse. is to be supplied in
sense, not with the indicative but imperative mood.
supplied) saying. Hebr. 13.4.
Honorabile connubium in omnibus: let marriage be honorable in all, as much to
say, as let marriage be honorable and inuiolablye preserved in all points:
Beza in pretense of Christ's marriage translateth in the affirmative Beza in
his new testament. of Anno 1587. translateth honorabile est inter quosuis
coniugium. Hebr. 13.4
marriage is honorable, and not as the Apostle says, (...), in omnibus, but
as turninge the newter gender into the masculine, inter quosuis in all men vt
supra at. x.
addinge so to the original text, these two words, is, and, men: so
directly against the same apostles confessed doctrine of that the same
Apostle. 1. Tim. 5.9.11.12. forbiddethe those widows to marrye: is confessed
playnlie by Marlorat. in his noui testamenti catholica expositio, printed.
1593. in 1. Tim. c. 5. verse. 11. page 375. a. fine, by master Alison in his
confutation of Brounisme, printed. 1590. page 71. (who there also alleges
Bullinger and others so likewise expoundinge the words of S. Paul) and by the
protestante author of the book entitled, Antichristus sieve prognostic. finis
mundi, printed. at Basil. per Petrum Peruam. page 148. fine, and 149. all which
do houlde the marriage of these widows unlawful in regard of their vowed
chasterie: and see further the like enclininge opinions of master D. Abbot in
his second part of the defense of the reformed catholic, tradicions, quast.
1607. of Vows, page 1024. post med. and of the author of catholic
tradicions, quaest. 43. page 224. post med. And of master Budle in his book
of evangelical fastes, page 19. circa med. and 20. ante and post med.
prohibitinge certain vowed widows to marrye, that Calvin him self
(though of Bezas judgment) durst not translate otherwise then, Calvin. in
omnes Pauli epist. Haebr. 13.4.
honorabile in omnibus coniugium, and see heretofore c. 4. sect. 3. in the
margin. after. r. at. *. ^.
Castalio as learned an adversary as Beza, does in his so much commended See
there at. s.
translation, translate (directly against Beza and with us) see this in
Castalio^ great bible dedicated to K. Ed. 6. printed. at. Basil. 1573.
honestum esto matrimonium in omnibus: Secondly concerning real presence and
sacrifice, whereas the text (confessedlie according to the letter of Beza. in
his nouum testamentum, printed. 1588. in Luc 22. page 317. b. fine. 9. says.
Haec verba si constructionem spectemus, necessario non ad sanguinem, sed ad
poculum pertinent:
grammatical construction, and of all ancient copies) is that the cupp was
shed for us, which arguinge Christ's blood to have been contained in the cup,
most directly proves sacrifice and real presence. Beza Beza in the first
edition of his new testament of Anno 1556. says hereof. Omnes tamen vetusti
nostri codices ita scriptum habent: and see this point confessed by Hospinian
in his histor. sacramentaria. part. 1. printed. Anno 1598. l. 5. cap. 1. page
443. post med.
to avoid the argument thereof, and to leave this sheedinge as indifferente
to be referred to the cross, says of S. Luke the greek is in construction
and readinge verbatim according to this ensuinge in latin. Hic calix nouum
testamentum in sanguine meo pro vobis effusus: wherein the word (effusus)
varyinge in case from (sanguine) and in gender from (testamentum) relates
most evidently to (calix) wherewith in construction yt only agrees.
that he committed herein Beza in nou. test. page 317. b. line 12. says. Aut
manifestum est Solaecophanes etc. aut potius cum haec essent ad marginem
Annotata ex Mathaeo and Marco, postea in contextum irrepserunt:
a manifest Solecophanes or incongruitie in greek (for so our adversaries
Beza. ibidem line. 24. says. Et potest excusari Solacismus etc. and
Hospinian. in histor. sacram. part. 1. l. 5. cap. 1. page 443. says hereof.
Ad hoc responsum estiam antea a nostris aut Solaecismum esse commissum a Luca
etc. and Andreas Crastorius, de opificio missae, printed. Basileae 1594. l. 2.
page 237. post med. says. Beza etc. Propter poculi effusionem Solaecismum
inesse diuinat: the more boulde therefore was master D. Fulke. who against
the Rhemishe testam. printed. 1601. in Luc. 22. verse. 10. sect. 9. page 241.
paulo ante med. says to us. Where you say that Beza, chargethe Luke with
Solecisme or false greek, without all conscience you slander him most
impudentlie etc.
understand him, notwithstanding master D. co^cerninge master D. Fulke see
next before in the margin at. i.
Fulkes boulde denial thereof,) or else vt supra at. h. and Hospinian. in hist.
sacram. page 443. post med.
rather, that yt is a corruption crept into the margin, and from thence into
the text, whereupon he doubts not (purposelie as thereby to diuerte this
sheedinge from the cupp) for to translate (in steed of the cup was shed) that
the Beza in Luke. ^2.20. translatethe. Hoc poculum est nouum illud foedus per
sanguinem meum qui pro vobis effunditur:
blood was shed, directly against the words of the text, and the
judgment of his own brethren the Chitraeus lib. de Baptismo and Eucharistia,
printed. Witebergae 1584. page 299. says. Plane hoc peculiare habet, quod
calicem pro vobis effundi scribit Lucas etc. and see further in Vrsinus his
commonefacio cuiusdam Theologi de S. cana etc. printed. 1583. page 183. initio.
learned Lutheranes: Thirdhe as concerning Christ's discendinge into hell.
Whereas S. Luke (as determininge all S. Luke writing in greek and using those
words that are proper for soul and hell, determines (if any were) the
ambiguitie of the Hebrew in psalm. 16. so as they cannot be understood of
carcass and grave.
pretended ambiguitie of the Hebrew) alleges the prophet saying; Thou Act.
2.27.
wilt not leave my soul in hell: Beza to preuente the argument thereof
translateth, so translateth Beza in his nouum testamentum, of. 1556. of set
purpose (as him self in his annotations thereupon confesses) against
purgatory and lymbus patrum
thou will not leave my carcas in the grave: Wherein though (as see the last
English bible, of Anno 1612. Act. 2.27. and see Castalios bible mentioned
next, before at. d. at. Act. 2.27.
being refused by our English and allmoste all translations, he afterward
in his latter Beza in his nouum testamentum, of. 1588. in Act. 2.27.
translateth. Quoniam non derelinques animam meam apud inferes:
edition does correct him self, yett here also does he defend Beza ibidem.
page 438. line. 16. says. In priore nostra editione recte interpretatus eram,
non derelinques cadauer meum in sepulchro:
and justify this his former translation: Fourthly as concerning the story
of the adulterouse woman recorded by S. John. 8.4.5. etc.
John: Beza delivers his profane suspicion saying. Beza vbi supra, in John.
7.35. page 373. a. line. 23. says. Quod narrat Iesum solum fuisse relictum
cum muliere i^ temple, nescio quam sit probabile; nec satis coheret cum eo quod
mox id est verse. 12. dicitur etc. and quod scribit Iesum digito scripsisse in
terra, nouum mihi and insolens videtur, nec possum conijcere quomodo possit
satis commode explicari.
Where the story reports that Jesus was left alone in the temple with the
woman, I know not how it is probable: and again (as against all ceremonies
whose explication is not vulgar) where vt supra at. z.
yt says that Jesus wrote with his finger on the ground, seems to me
(nouum and insolens) strange and insolente; neither can I conjecture howeyt can
be fitly explicated: thus far Beza. Fiuethlie where S. Matthew reckoninge up
the Apostles names says. Far duodicius Apostolerum nomina sunt hoc, primus
Simon qui dicitur Petrus etc. Math. 10.2.
Primus Simon qui dicitur Petrus etc. Which cannot be taken as by way of
numbringe, for then would have followed, secundus Andreas, which does not:
neither as in respect of their calling to follow Christ, for Andrew John.
1.42. and Ambros. in 2. Cor. c. 12. says hereof: Andrew first followed our
savior before Peter, and yet the primacie Andrewe received not but Peter:
first findethe Simon and bringethe him to Jesus: not yet as in regard of any
set order of their placeinge, which in all but Peter and Judas yt but in Math.
10. 2.3. etc. and Marc. 3.16.17. etc. and Luc. 6.14.15. and Act. 1.13. He that
is named second or third or fourth in one of these, is otherwise placed in
other of them:
promiscuouse, and as yt were casual, Peter being usually Peter is first
named. in Math. 10.22. Marc. 3.16. Luc. 6.14. and Act. 1.13. and fee further.
Mat. 17.1. and Marc. 5.37. and 13.3. and Luc. 22.8. and John. 21.2.
named first and sometimes tell the disciples 45. and 9.32. Peter and they
that were with him. Marc. 1.36. and Luc. 8.45. and 9.32. Peter and the
Apostles. Act. 5.29. and 2.14. and 1. Cor. 9.5.1. Cor. 9.5.
only against all the other, and Judas for his unworthiness Math. 10.4.
Marc. 3.19. Luc. 6.16.
named last. From all, which is inferred that the word primus, in Mathewe,
signifies not number, but primacie. Beza as fore saying this rayseth up a
scruple against the concordance of all copies, saying Beza in non. test. of
1556. and in his later edition of 1588. in Math. 2. verse. 2. page 45. b. line.
21. says. Quid si hoc vocabulum (primus) ab aliquo additum est, qui Petri
primatum vellet stabilire?
What if this word (primus) be added (into the text) by some fauoret of
Peter's primacie? for it is not coherent with that which ensues etc. The
further examples that might be given in this kind are many, and over
tediouse here to recite in respect of which like, his most excellent
majesty in the sum of the conference before his majesty, printed, 1604.
page 46. circa med. yt is said. The worste of all his majesty thought the
Geneua translation to be
pronounced the Geneua translation to be worste of all: and see this there.
page 47. initio.
that in the marginall notes annexed to the Geneua translation, some are very
partial, untrue, seditiouse; etc. and our learned adversary master Parkes,
further says to master D. Willet. so says master Parkes in his apology
of the three testimonies of scripture concerning Christ's disce^dinge into
hell: in his defense of the first testimony of scripture fine at fol. Ddd.
As for the Geneua bybles, yt is to be wished, that either they may be purged
from those many foulde errors, which are both in the text and margin, or else
utterly probibited: As also Molineus a learned adversary, says of Molinaeus
says. Theodorus Beza, Math. 10. verse. 10. and Luc. 9.3. De facto mutat textum
vt hos ita conciliet: see Molinaeus in testam. part. 20.30.40.64.65.66.74.99.
and 8.13.14.21.23.
Beza, that he actuallie changes the text: and Sebastian Castalio a hertofore
cap. 4. sect. 3. in the margin. at. *. after r.
very learned Caluiniste, and most skillful in the tongues, (whose
translation of the scriptures, is commended and preferred before all others, by
master see there at. s.
D. Humfrey. see there in the margin at. s.
Hipperius, Melancthon, Sr. John Cheek, Martine Bucer, and others) haueinge
noted certain errors of Beza, in his translation of the only first ten
chapters of S. ibidem.
Mathewe, concludes saying. so says Castalio in his defensio suarum
translationum, printed. at Basil. per Ioannem Oporinum, page 182. 183.
I trust I have showed sufficiently by these ten chapters of S. Mathewe (in
which I have omitted many things worthy of reprehension) what a long
register of errors I might gather out of his whole work, for he oftentimes
erreth, not only in words etc. but also in things, and the same most
weighty etc. and says yet further, Castalio. ibidem. page 170. prope finem,
says. Annotabo autem non omnes eius errores, na^ opu^ esset nimis mague libro
etc.
I will not set down all his errors (of translation) for that would require
too great a volume: Hitherto concerning Beza, the doctrine of whom, and of all the other persons before entreated of, was at their first profession thereof,
so novel and strange to Christian ears, that Beza in the conference at
Poysie being demanded of the calling of him self and other his then
associates, affirmed the same to be see this affirmed of Beza by D. Sarauia. (a
prime Caluiniste divine in our nation) in defensie. tract. contra respons.
Beza, de diuersis ministrorum gra^ibus, printed. 1594. page 56. fine, and 60.
post med. and 74. fine. And Beza, in his epist. theologica, printed. 1573.
epist. 5. Alemanno paulo post initium, and page 49. says to Alemannus:
Ordinariam certe vocationem pratexere non potes, quis enim te elegit? Ergo de
extraordinaria videamus: huic vero tum demum locum esse dicimus, cum vel nulla,
vel pene nulla est ordinaria vocatio, sicut nostra temporibus accidit in
papatu, cum expectari ordinaria vocatio quae nusquam erat, nec debuit, nec
potuit: Also master D. Fulke against Stapleton and Marshal. printed. 1580.
page 7. post med. says. The protestants that first preached in these days,
had likewise extraordinary calling: And Lascicius (a learned Caluiniste) in
the book de Russorum, Muscouitarum and Tartarorum religione, printed. 1582.
page 23. alleges Caluines words to be; Quia Papae tyrannido abrupta fuit
vera or^inationis series, (...) subsidio nunc opus est, etc. etquc (...)
extra^^^ suit hoc munus quod Dominus nobis iniunxit: see also Calvin.
institut. l. 4. (...) 4. In like manner master Carthwrighte in master
Whitguistes defense etc. tract. 4. cap. 1. diuis. 2. page 217. circa med.
says: When the churches have been by Antichriste razed from the foundation,
God has styrred up evangelists even immediately by his spirrit without
calling of men to restore his churches again, as Wicliff, Huss, Luther,
Suinglius, etc. And master Fulke in his Retentiue against Bristowes Motives,
printed. 1580. page 300. (...) says, that in Luthers time God sent
extraordinarelie, immediately from himself, as Helias, Helizeus and the
prophets were sent, etc. so Christ sent his apostles and evangelists, and
so was Luther and such as he, sent to repair the ruynes of the church: And
master Parkins in his works, printed. 1605. fol. 916. a. post med. and b.
affirms that the calling of Luther, Oecolampadius, Peter martyr etc. was
extraordinary,
extraordinary: And thus much finally concerning the foresaid pretended
extraordinary reformers of our age, referringe to the impartial judgment of
the indifferent, and learned reader him self, upon his due consideration had
of the premises, whether we are to repute them seriously for such, or rather
for those other again^^e whom the holy ghost foreworneth: saying. Ezechiel.
3.3.6.7.
Ve Prophetis insipientibus qui sequuntur spiritum suum, and nihil vident:
dicentes ait Dominus, cum Dominus non miserit eos: and, dicunt ait Dominus, cum
ego non sin^ loquutus.

THE CONCLUSION TO THE MODERATE AND DISCREET PROTESTANTE READER.
HAueinge hitherto discourced of Luther, the first father of pretended
reformation, and of those his followers who labored the alteration of religion
in diverse countries, as Suinglius for Suytzerlande, Melancthon, Andreas, and
others for Germany, Calvin and Beza, for France, Bucer, and Ochine for
England, Knoxe and Bucanan for Scotland etc.

The conclusion now to be inferred (gentle Reader) upon these premises, will
perhaps in thy judgment appear to be, either that thou have been hitherto
missenformed and greatly deceived in thy conceived opinion had of those men,
or else that in my narration made of them, I have labored to wrong and abuse
thy simple and well meaning credulity: for me to be peremptory in affirminge
of the first, (yt being so directly against the information to thee
delivered by so many of thy own grave and learned protestante divines)
might perhaps lie open to be perverted into a more offensive (if not penal)
sense of misconstruction, then I (out of my due respect) am willinge, that
either my self or the reader hereof should incur, in which regard I do
professedly forbear yt: And to acknowledge the later, were to make me further
chargable, then self accusinge conscience does give witness unto: That now
then which I conceive to be left remayninge for me in these extreemes, whereby
to avoid all occasion, either of injustice, displeasure from others, or of
unworthy imputacion to my self, is no other then by submission of this my
labor (which in all humble manner I do accordingly hereby exhibit) unto the
careful examinacion, and thereupon ensuyinge iudgmente of thy self in
particular: wherein if it fall out that I have not mistaken, but (whereof I am
very hopeful or rather confidente) truly, and sincerely alleged the
prooffes and testimonies by me cited, the matter then hereby discovered, is not
to be either dissembled or contemned, but undoubtedly such and of so great
importance, as I may well forbear to express thereof by words, what the
vaste largenes of thy conceyuinge is unable duly to comprehend.

Only for thy better incorragemente and more ready direction, to examine the
truth of what has been formerlie said, I am hereby to advertise thee, that
in my discourse had of these matters, I have purposely forborne the many
aboundinge testimonies of such our catholic writers, as severally lived and
conuersed with Luther, and those others formerlie entreated of; of whom they
constantlye deliver strange things, and such as whereof these hereby now
reported, are but (as yt were) the appearinge slender outside: In steed of them
I have (as all zealouse of thy satisfaction, and no less then careful to
avoid offense) contented my self with thy own protestante authors, men all
of them learned and of public note. I have also for the most part (in
regard of the sometimes variable editions of certain of their works,
alleged where occasion and need requires) the particular year of such their
books impression, together with further direction to the leaf and very part
of the leaf, in which the alleged testimony is extante to be found: if
either the printer or my self have by escape or negligence mistaken page 91.
for 19. or committed any other such like usual error, thy indifferency and
pains, will I hope suffice to discern, and correct so small a fault: The
matter now examinable is not toucheinge any difficulty of doctrine left
subject to variety of exposition, but only concerning matter of fact,
whereto is needful no judge, but eyes: which but afforde, and that done,
spare not to become severe in thy equal judgment.

If thou remain (as I think thou doste) preoccupated and all perplexed, as
houldinge yt for incredible rather then improbable, that so wise and learned
men, as Luther and those others formerlie entreated of, should be of such
unworthy condition, as has been hereby described: or if they were, that then
they should be so applauded and magnified with the favor, and currente of
their times, may yt please thee, to retain an impartial consideration
thereof from the known examples of former ages, which may suffice to instruct
thee, that the greater gravity learning and wisdom, of Arius, Donatus, and
other ancient condemned nouellistes, did not then prevail to excuse them in
the eyes of true judgment, from any their known personal vices, as neither
did the kings and emperors of those times, in respect of such their vices,
forbear to embrace and defend their errors: Nouellisme howsoever in y^^ own
first nakedness deformed, haueinge yett once gotten but some little advantage of
borrowed beauty, from the predominancie and swaye of times, never wants
means either of bouldnes, learning, or probability of discourse, whereby to
supporte and enlarge her first beginninges: the very absurd doctrine of
Mahomet, as also the plurality of Gods maintained by the heathen
philosophers, have not wanted opportunity of help in this kind, and the same
sometimes so preuaillinge, as has often prevented and cut off all means,
of bringeinge the same into consultation of but doubt or question, and yet (I
am persuaded) yt was not so much any seeminge show of extraordinary
learning, or other probability of opinion (as also neither of virtuouse and
godly life) that made Luther so applauded and repaired unto by the broken
branches of our Catholic church, as yt was his selecte and choice preparinge
of his doctrine, to entertayne and fit the then several affected humor of
each peculier declininge estate and degree, as namelye his alluringe of the
dissolute clergy with Hereof see herefore cap. 2. sect. 12. at. x.y. and see
Luthers book de votis extant. tom. 2. Witemberg. printed. 1562. fol. 277. a.
prope finem, and fol. 327. a.
liberty of pretended marriage, his see heretofore. cap. 2. sect. 7. in the
margin at. b. And observe the answerable experience of so many monasteries,
abbeyes, and other church lyuinges, now seyzed upon under pretexte of
reformation by the temporal magistrate; and impropriated to profane seculer
uses, in so many several foreign nations upon their receiuinge of Luthers
pretended reformation: And see further Luther. tom. 7. de Missa priuata and
vnct. sacerd. printed Witemberg. 1558. fol. 231. a. fine. and b. initio. and
see Bucers words next hereafter in the margin. at. *. And see further. D.
Sarauia in his book of the diverse degrees of ministers, printed. 1592. page
218. fine, and 219. fine, and 221. fine, and in his epistle there to the
ministers etc. fol. 6. 2. And Simon Pauli super quartum Euangelium in
quadrages. says. Ex principibus and nobilibus viris, multi euangelium
susceperunt hoc titulo, vt ecclesiae bona ad se rapiant. etc. Also master
Bancrofte late Archbish. in his Survey etc. printed. 1593. cap. 21. page 237.
ante med. says. When reformation of religion was first urged, yt was thought
such an effectual motive as would procure attention, viz. to entitle princes
after a sort to the church goods, etc. and ibidem. cap. 8. page 111. post
med. he says. Many do love Luther for no other cause, but for that they
think they have cast off their Bish. by means of him, and have obtained
liberty, etc.
exposinge of monasteries and other ritche spoils of the church, to the
greedy appetite of the temporal magistrate, who (not unlike to those the
psalmiste speaks of) said, Psalm. 83. verse. 12. after the English translat.
of An. 1612
come and let us take to our selves the howses of God in possession; and
finally, his further deludeinge of the simple and sinful laietie, with his
other foresaid licentiouse doctrines of see heretofore, c. 2. sect. 4.
throughout.
only faith, and disclayme see heretofore, cap. 2. sect. 4. and 5. throughout.
in works, etc. over Iacobus Andreas concione 4. in cap. 21. Lucae,
confesses and says of Luthers followers, in these words. They say we have
now learned to be saved by only faith in Christ etc. we cannot satisfy by our
fasting, prayer, etc. therefore permit that we may give over these, saying
that we may be saved otherwise by the only grace of good; and to the end the
world may know them to be no papists, nor to trust in good works, they
take, course to put none in practice etc. Also Bucer in his scripta Anglicana,
printed. 1577. libro 1. de Regno Christi, cap. 4. ante med. and page 24. circa
med. says hereof. Maxima horum pars visa est, ea ex Euangelio Christi
petijsse, primum etc. vt iugum qualiscunque disciplinae poenitentiae and
religionis vniuersa quae in papatu reliqua fuit abijcerent, proque carnis suae
arbitrio ac libidine instituerent agerentque omnia: tum non ingratum eis fuit
audire, iustificari nos fide in Christum non bonis operibus, quorum nullo
tenebantur studio: etc. nec pauci eorum, qualemcumque Euangelij praedicationem
eo tantum receperunt, vt inopes inuaderent ecclesiasticas, etc.
greedelie then accepted of: In the several embracinge of all which (as S.
Hierom said in like manner of Vigilantius his followers) they Hierom. contra
Vigilant.
favored not so much him, as their own vices: these, o these. (I fear me)
were those fatal stepps whereby Luther aspired to his so sudden vprisinge
greatness, the which being accompanied with the visitation of Gods heavy
judgments, hangeinge over the preuaillinge sins of those degenerate times,
which were increased to their full heighte of measure, brought forth to the
world, that ensuynge calamity of the churches vastetie and desolation, which
posterity now discerns and so much wondreth at: whereas had the catholic
people of those times in these our Northen parts of Europe, and those other
likewise of former times in the Eastern church, but preserved inviolable
their accustomed integrity of life and manners, not then Luther in those, nor
Mahomet in these, could ever have so infatuated the world with an efficacy
of deludinge error, more feelinge and gross to faith, then ever was to sense
the Egiptian darkness.

If now lastelie (friendly reader) any of thy learned professors, who not
daringe to deny the premises of this precedente discourse for true, shall in
these extremes (which is the last point I can imagine worthy of prevention)
labor to distracte, or rather to Befoole thee, with inequall obiectinge
Inequall obiectinge for our catholic church, having confessedlie continued
duringe all the last thousand years, and theirs but since Luthers time, their
liberty of exceptinge against so many popes, is thereby inequall as in respect
of the other fewer number of theirs to be by us excepted against:
(in steed of answer) what intemperate malice haith either feigned, or truly
sometimes delivered, concerning the supposed wicked lives of certain popes,
who not being the first restorers to light of our religion, lived so
whereas yt appears by direction signified next hereafter at. k. l. that our
catholic religion, has been generally professed for above a thousand years
(at the least) last paste, it is evident that all those popes, to whose lives
our adversaries make usual exception, lived many ages after this confessed
begun continuance of our religion
many ages after the same was universally professed, let my fore warninge
hereby once for all, suffice to inform thee directly as to the point, that the
question now is not whether the high priests of the old law or the high
priests now, have after the establishement of religion been sometimes wicked
men or not, (for admittinge they were, yet are we taught not to Act. 23.5.
speak evil of the people, but in obedience to Math. 23.3.
observe what they teach, not what they do.) The very touch of that now
properly yssuable, is whether that the truth of religion haueinge been (as is
supposed against us) extincte, or to the world latente and invisible for so
many hundredth years paste, may be thought to be now revealed to the world by
men of fastigiouse and wicked life; That our catholic faith (the many
professors and diuulgers whereof are confessed for Saints: as for example
first concerning S. Gregory and S. Austine who above a thousand years since
converted us English men to the faith of Christ, master Ascham in apolog.
procaen. Dom. printed. Londini. 1578. page 33. circa med. says. Augustinus
Anglorum Apostolus qui nominatur etc. fundator omnis papisticae doctrinae etc.
and John. Bale in catalog. scriptor. illustr. Britan. printed. at. Basil. cent.
14. page 117. says of Austine. Plebem per interpretes fidem papisticam
docuit. And master William Harison in his description of Britanye, set before
Hollinsheads great Cronicle after the last edition, volum. 1. page 29. b.
line. 11. says. Austine came and brought in popery: with more full words,
ibidem. page 27. a. line 27. and 30. and yet master Godwine in his catalogue
of Bishops, printed. 1601. page 3. ante med. says. That blessed and holy
father S. Gregory, etc. and master Thomas Bell in his survey of popery,
printed. 1596. part. 3. cap. 2. page 187. circa med. terms him Saint
Gregory surnamed the great, that holy and learned Bishope of Rome, etc.
Also master Godwine in his catalogue, terms Austine, Saint Austine, (
page 7. ante med.) our Apostle. ( page 7. initio.) And master Fox act. mon.
printed. 1576. page 117. a prope finem, and master Godwin in his catalogue,
page 4. fine, do affirm and mention the miracles wrought (at our conversion)
by Austine through Gods hand: And see the like affirmed by Hollinsheade in
his foresaid Cronicle. page 100. b. line. 60. Secondly concerning S. Bid,
who living about a hundredth years after our said conversion, and diuulged
the history thereof: Luc. Osiander in his epitom. etc. centur. 8. lib. 2. cap.
3. page 58. initio, says. Beda omnibus pontificijs erroribus, in quibus nos
hodie a Papa dissentimus inuolutus est etc. and yet says further there of
him. Bonus fuit vir: as also he is termed Reverend Bid by master Fox act.
mon. printed. 1576. page 128. b. initio. and by master Bell, in his regimente
etc. printed. 1606. page 175. initio. and by master Bucer. Who ( in his
gratulatis ad Ecclesiam Anglican^m, printed. Anno 1548. page 82. post med.)
terms him, vere venerabilem Bedam, and master Cowper in his chronicle,
printed. 1565. at the year, 734. fol. 171. b. says. The holy man Beda for
his learning, and godly life, was renowned in all the world etc. In like
manner concerning S. Boniface who above 800. years since converted Germany
to the faith of Christ, that he was a known catholic, see plainly
confessed by the centurie writers, centur. 8. col. 794. line 51. and col. 796.
line. 43. 44. etc. in which respect they do there term him, the slave of
Antichriste etc. and yet concerning his like confessed sanctimonie of life see
also there, col. 794. line. 49. under the title. Opera eius in ministerio bona,
and col. 795. line. 23. and likewise col. 801. line. 41. under the title. De
donis and virtutibus eius: Thirdly concerning saint Bernard Abbot of
Claireuaux who lived Anno Domini 1120. and was author of the Bernardine Monckes
(whereof see Hospinian. de origin monachatus. printed. 1588. fol. 179. b.
initio.) the centurie writers in their 12. centurie, do say of him.
Acerrimus propugnator sedis Antichristi fuit etc. ( col. 1638. line. 16.) and
again, Bernardus coluit Deum Maozim ad nouissimum vitae suae articulum. (col.
1637. line. 45.) yet more. Ad comitem aquitanniae Bernardus dixit, quicquid
extra Ecclesiam Romanam est, illud necessario iudicio Dei interire, sicut ea
quae extra arcam fuerant in diluuio absorpta sunt etc. item qui Papam Romanum
(Antichristum) persequitur, hunc ipsum filium Dei persequi. (col. 1639. line.
44.) and yet master Whitaker de Ecclesia, printed. 1599. page 369. post med.
says. Ego quidem Bernardum vere fuisse sanctum existimo: and Hieronymus
Marius, in his Eusebius captiuus, printed Tiguri. 1597. fol. 36. a. circa med.
says. Quis quaeso Basilium, Bernardum, Dominicum etc. tanquam a Deo
reprobatos haberet? Thus much of S. Bernarde. Fourthly as concerning S.
Francis and S. Dominicke who living Anno Dom. 1204. instituted the several
orders of Franciscanes and Dominicanes: their religion was so evidently
catholic, that master Whitaker de Ecclesia, printed. 1599. page 369. post
med. says. Franciscus vero and Dominicus homines superstitiosi fuerunt etc.
de religione vero quod sciam, idem illi senserunt quod nunc vulgus papistarum
sentit: and yet Pantaleon in his chronic. printed. 1568. page 100. initio,
says. Dominicus vir doctus and bonus praedicatorum ordinem instituit Anno
1225. and concerning S. Dominicke, see Dominicus Marius as next before: and
Luther in his loci communes printed. 1594. class. 5. page 117. circa med.
says. Fateor sane non defuisse suadona, Francisco, Dominico, Bernardo, etc.
and Pantaleon: in chronic. page 95. fine. says. Sanctus Fra^ciscus sanctitate
and eruditione illustris, in Italia claret: and Melancthon, in his apologia
confession. Augustanae, printed at Witemberg. 1573. fol. 221. b. ante med.
says seriously. Bernardus Franciscus and alij sancti viri etc. and in his
corpus doctrinae, printed Lipsiae. 1561. page 95. fine, yt is said. Antonius,
Bernardus, Dominicus, Franciscus, and alij sancti patres, elegeruut certum
vitae genus etc. And Tindal in his revelation of Antichrist extant in master
Fox his act. mon. printed 1563. page 1338. a. prope initium, says. I doubt
not but saint Bernarde, Francis, Dominicke, and many other holy men erred as
concerning mass: Hitherto of of them. Lastly as concerning Franciscus
Xauerius, who being by profession a Jesuit, did in this our age viz. Anno
1541. begin his succesful conversion of the east India to the Christian
faith, confirminge the same to them of that nation with great holiness of life
and stupendiouse miracles, the same is so evident and confessed, that master
Richard Hackluite preacher, in his book of principal nauigations etc.
printed. 1599. in 2. part. of the 2. volum. page 88. initio. does in such
respect mention (to use his own words) that holy man (Xauerius) his
particular virtues, and wonderful works in that region.
Saints) having been universally professed (as is confessed) for above a
thousand See heretofore in the preface to the reader. initio. in the margin
at. a. the testimonies of Simon de Voyon, master Powel, master Parkins, and
master, Naper,
years at the least before Luther, and (as confesses master Naper) duringe
all that time without master Naper upon the reuelatio^s proposition. 36. fine,
(and after the edition of 1594. page 68. fine, and after the other edition, of.
1611. page 90. fine,) says. We conclude that between the year of Christ
300. and 316. the Antichristian papisticall reign began reigning universally,
and without any debateable contradiction. 1260. years.
any debatable contradiction, should now in this last age begin to be
impugned, and thereupon abandoned: That likewise the religion and church of
protestants at this present, pretended for only true, should continewe
unknown, latente Hereof see heretofore in the preface to the reader, at. a.
fine, the several testimonies of master Brightman, and master Naper.
and invisible for above a thousand years paste, and but now see next
hereafter at. p.
brought to light and reuealled, and now also but reuealled by men of such
unworthy condition, as has been formerlie hereby described, and who then
knew of Luthers not knowinge of any to join with him at the time of his
first begun innovation, see heretofore, cap. 1. sect. 1. in the margin at.
l. and see also further heretofore in the preface to the reader at. d. e. g. h.
this point is also more evident in that the prooffe of the affirmative lying
on our adversaries part, they are not hable to name any one congregation, nor
so much as any one man, who at Luthers first breach from our church, anno
1517. was then originally not catholic but protestante.
not of any other church, or so much as of any one other person in the
world, at that time formerlie in being and of their religion, is the scruple
which ministers the now present occasion of so great doubt; For that our
foresaid holy professors should damnablie err, and that the devil and
Luther, the devil and Suinglius, the devil and Carolostadius, and men so
further branded as Andreas, Calvin, Beza, and the rest (pardon courteouse
reader the zeal of my so earneste speakinge, by me now or else where
throughout this treatise used, as but upon supposall til they be answered or
avoided of the premises for true) that these I say should be used by God (as
the apology of the church of England says of Luther and Suinglius) for see
this in master Jewels defense of the apology of the church of England,
printed. 1571. part. 4. cap. 4. diu. 2. page 426 prope finem: and see
heretofore in the preface to the reader, at. e. f. i. and also in the margin
there at. h.
most excellent men, even sent of God to give light to the wholle world in
the midst of darkness, when the truth was unknown and unheard of, is the
point now insisted upon, and specially referred to thy consideration: for if
these men have the truth with them, and that the true church as they houlde,
either erred or became invisible (to speak the least) for the thousand years
last paste before Luther, then as in case of like supposall said Tertulian,
we may likewise say Tertul. de prascript. says. Age nunc omnes (Ecclesia)
errauerint etc. nullam respexit spiritus sanctus vt eam in veritatem deduceret,
ad hoc missus a Christo, ad hoc postulatus de patre etc. neglexerit officium
Dei villicus Christi Vicarius, finens Ecclesias aliter interim intelligere,
aliter credere quam ipse per Apostolos praedicabat, etc. ecquid verisimile est,
vt tot ac tanta (Ecclesia) in vnam fidem errauerint? etc. aliquos Marcionitas
and Valentinianos ( for which we may no less Ironically say aliquaem
Lutheru^ and Suinglium) liberanda veritas expectabat: interius perperam
euangelizabatur perperam credebatur tot millia millium, perperam operata, vt
tincta, tot opera fidei perpera^ administrata, tot virtutes, tot charismata
perpera^ operata, tot sacerdotia, tot ministeria perperam functa tot denique
martyria perperam coronata.
Is it like that so many, and so great churches erred? Or (to forbear the
like complainte of Nazianzen. ep. 2. ad Chelid. says. Absconditam post
Christum sapientiam nobis annunciant, rem Lachrimis dignam, si enim triginta
his annis f^des originem habuit, cum quadringenti ( for which we may now
say mill quingenti) fere anni ab eo tempore fluxerint, quo Christus palam
conspectus est, inane tanto tempore fuit Euangegelium, inanis etiam fides
nostra, and martires quidem frustra martyrium subierunt, frustra etia^tales
tantique antistites populo praefuerunt.
Nazianzen) as said that worthy ancient father Vincentius Lyrinensis (in his
goulden book translated by our adversaries) in these words: Vincentius
Lyrinensis. l. adu. haeret. cap. 33. and after the English ^ translation,
printed. at London by Thomas Fulke. Anno 1611. fol. 59. a.
which novelties if they should be received, it cannot be, but that the faith
of the blessed fathers should be violated, either all or for a great part
thereof at the least: that all the faithful of all ages, all the saints,
all the chaste or continente virgins, all the clergy, Levites and priests,
so many thousand of confessors, so great armies of martyrs, so great an
assembly, and multitude of cities and people, so many islands, provinces,
kings, nations, kingdoms, contries, and finally that now allmoste all the
world etc. should be said to have been ignorante for so long continuance of
time, to have erred, to have blasphemed, and not to have known what they
should believe etc. And if the ancient fathers might thus set forth and
amplify against all then pretense of appearinge nouellisme, the absurd
supposall of the churches erringe, but for so small a season (in comparison)
before their times, how much more then is the same now preuaillinge against
the indignity of our adversaries assertion, in chargeinge the confessed true
church with latencie and error for so many more hundredth years as are by them
as before pretended, til now at last that Martine Luther and others, Next
heretofore at. p.
gave light to the wholle world in the mydst of darkness: In which respect I
will (and as I take not vnaptelie) conclude, with signifyinge my complainte
hereat in these words (allmoste the very same with those of our learned
adversary master D. Bilson in the like case.) master Bilson in his survey of
Christ's sufferinges, printed. 1604. page 421. ante med.
If Christian religion were not (professed so many confessed ages) since
Christ's time before our age (wherein Luther and Suinglius men so qualified as
before said, took upon them to restore the same) this (then) is a greater
forsakeinge of Christ, then any was on the cross, for then has God forgotten
all his promises so often mentioned in the prophets, and confirmed to Christ
etc. The due consideration to be had of all which premises (beloved Reader)
I do without all further inferringe or vrgeinge, finally referr to the
religiouse care of thy own more leasurable reserved observation and judgment.

THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOK.
CHAPT. I. SEct. 1. mencioninge the motives of Luthers revolt. Sect. 2. his
objected disputation with the devil. Sect. 3. an examination of that which is
pretended in answer thereto. Sect. 4. the acknowledgmente thereof from learned
protestants them selves. Chapt. 2. Luthers licentiouse doctrines. Sect. 1.
concerning pastors being subject to the peoples judgment: Sect. 2. of not
warringe against the turk. Sect. 3. touching the canonical scriptures and
their translation. Sect. 4. concerning faith. Sect. 5. concerning works.
Sect. 6. concerning marriage, divorce etc. Sect. 7. concerning magistracy.
Sect. 8. concerning sacraments and their administration. Sect. 9. of Christ's
passion in his humane nature upon the cross. Sect. 10. concerning the B.
Trinity. Sect. 11. of God and the author of sin. Sect. 12. concerning
marriage and single life. Sect. 13. concerning the immortality of the soul.
Sect. 14. concerning local hell. Chapt. 3. Of Luthers external behavior:
and Sect. 1. of his pride: Sect. 2. of his contention, and raylinge: Sect. 3.
of his inconstancy in doctrine. Sect. 4. of his pretended certainty in
doctrine. Sect. 5. of his maintayninge his doctrine against his own
conscience. Sect. 6. his marriage and other condition of life. Sect. 7. of
Iacobus Andreas. Chapt. 4. Sect. 1. of Melancthon. Sect. 2. of Bucer. Sect. 3.
of Bernardine Ochine: and some little touch of Knoxe, Bucanan, Crammer,
Goodman, etc. Sect. 4. of Carolostadius. Chapt. 5. Of Suinglius: and Sect. 1.
the manner of his reuolte and pretended revelation. Sect. 2. his doctrines.
Sect. 3. of his unchaste conversation: Sect. 4. his sedition and death. Sect.
5. of Luther, and his arisinge at one time, and the ominouse apparitions then
before showed etc. Chapt. 6. Sect. 1. Of Caluins external behauior and death.
Sect. 2. of his doctrine concerning God and the author of sin: Sect. 3. his
doctrine touching the Trinity: Sect. 4. of his translatinge the scriptures,
and his doctrine of Christ's sufferinges: Sect. 5. his proud reiectinge of the
fathers in their affirminge of our catholic doctrines, concerning, 1. the
Trinity, 2. freewill, 3. merit of works, grace and justification, 4. lymbus
patrum, 5. prayer for the dead, 6. lent fast, 7. grace confered by
sacraments, 8. the necessity of baptism, 9. ceremonies usual in sacraments,
10. concupiscence not to be sin in the baptized, 11. Christ mediator
according to his humane nature, 12. the unmarried life of priests, 13.
satisfaction, 14. solemn enjoined penance, 15. monachisme, 16. Peter's
primacy, 17. Antichriste, 18. the Roman churches primacie, 19. induration, 20.
real presence, and reservation, 21. sacrifice etc. 22. Angels and Saints,
23. Images. Sect. 6. his sedition Chapt. 7. Sect. 1. Of Beza his licentiouse
doctrine, and also of his Andebert and Candida etc. Sect. 2. his marriages.
Sect. 3. his equiuocatinge i^ doctrine. Sect. 4. his sedition, and contempt of
the ancient fathers. Sect. 5. his bouldnes with the scriptures.
FINIS.

