Old Mad-cappes new Gally-mawfrey.

Made into a merry mess of Minglemangle, out of these three idle-conceited
Humors following. 1 I will not. 2 Oh, the merry time. 3 Out upon Money.


AT LONDON Printed for Richard Iohnes, near St. Andrews Church Holborne. 1602.

TO THE TRVE TOVCH OF WIT, IN THE SPIRIT of the best understanding in a
Gentlewoman (worthy of much honor) Mistress Anne Breton, of Little Catthorpe
in Leicestershire, Nicho. Breton wishes all eternal happiness.
THE much good that I know in you, and the good that in your goodness I have
received from you, makes me willing to remember you, with this small token of
greater service that I owe you: wherein, though there be nothing worthy the
accepting; yet upon good consideration, it may be you shall find some thing,
almost worthy the reading. The humors in it are variable, but the intent aymeth
at one mark; which is, the Nature of the best mind: In which, as near as I
can, I have played the merry Verser, I dare not say, the Poet. But as it is;
let me entreat you, in your kindness to accept it, in your good thoughts to
grace it, at your idle leisure to read it, and in no wise to commend it: but,
to remove a Melancholy, to look upon its; and when you have done, to laugh
at it: So, in thanks for your undeserved good favors, leaving my Verses to
your good patience, and my better Virtues to your commandment, I rest.

Yous in better service: Nich. Breton,

TO THE READER.
YOU that have good stomachs to digest any thing, may happen to make away
with this Dish of Gallymawfrey; where, if every morsel be not minced so fine,
as may be swallowed without chewing, bear with haste in the dressing, and the
(...) will do well enough: To tell you what it is here you have tasted it may
happen to make you the worse willing to middle with it To be short, Pe^er can
but bite and heat the mouth, and yet it may (...) the Collicke so some Herbs
may be bitter, and yet wholesome; and so some line may better be me (...), then
taken: But all is one, commend it or discommende it, I will not but refer it
to the World, to like it or leave it: and so in the humor of I will not, (I
mean, be tedius) I end.

Your friend, N. B.

OLD MAD-CAPS new Gally-mawfrey.
1. Mad-caps I will not.
MY wretched thoughts, ye wretched thoughts of mine,
How shall my soul your secret essence see,
That thus with passions makes my heart to pine,
With sorrows force, too forcible for me!
But let me tell ye, whatsoever ye be,
I will have help for all mine Agony,
And tread upon ye in your Tyranny.
I will not care for Beauties clearest light,
But shut mine eyes at such an idle look,
Nor Midas treasure shall bewitch my sight:
I will not be with Gold, for God mistook,
This worlds best wisdom is a wicked book,
Whose greatest bliss shall never come aboard me,
Nor will I care, for what it can afford me.
Youth, I will hold a posting kind of time,
Age, when it comes, a care that will not tarry,
Honor, too high for quiet hearts to clime,
Love, but a bond of them that live to marry,
Power but a charge for conscience to carry,
Time, but a course that never can be stayed,
And Death, a Bug-beare to make fools afraid.
What can I wish for may be worth my wishing,
But I were (almost) better be without it?
What can I fish for may be worth my fishing,
When I have lost both hook and line about it?
If ought avail I greatly doubt it:
What should I work for, when in fine I know,
My self and all, unto the grave must go?
No, no, my thoughts, content your selves awhile;
I know too well the tricks of all your trust:
Ye shall no more my beaten brain beguile,
With seeking Diamonds in the Sea-coale dust,
The Canker take the treasure that will rust.
I have no mind to any of your toys,
That, in Trueths judgments, are mistaken joys.
I will not learn to tell a shameful lie,
Because the Devil is their damned Sire.
I will not use my tongue to blasphemy,
For fear my soul do find it in hell fire:
I will no place of wicked pride aspire,
For fear when I am at the height of all,
A slipping foot do breed a break-neck fall.
I will not wear a Nose-gay in my hat,
A picktooth in my mouth, flowers in mine ear,
Nor hunt the Otter, nor the water-Rat,
Nor have an Ape sit nitting of my hear,
Nor run betwixt the Beareward and the Bear,
The Bull-dogge, Ban-dogge, nor the Puppits play:
None of these thoughts shall throw my wits away.
Nor will I learn to cogge and foyst a Dye,
Nor pull all day at a Primero Card:
Nor see a Cock, to strike his spur awry.
From all these thoughts I am by reason barred.
To follow play, I find the time too hard.
No, let me sit alone and keep my stake,
While winners laugh, and losers hearts do ache.
I take no pleasure in your sweet perfumes.
The open air is healthful unto Nature,
Which lives long, while stuffed sense consumes
Both mind and body into many a creature:
Nor do I love a forced colored feature,
But plain and pure milke-white and Cherry-red:
These are the colors that are best in bed.
I love no leere, nor wink, nor wily look,
But straight fore-right, a penny in my face:
I love to read in no ungodly book,
For fear instruction breed me but disgrace:
I love to plead in no dishonest case:
No, no, the world such wickedness does breed,
I know not (almost) what to love indeed.
What do I care to see a Swasher swagger,
With frounst Mustachios, and a staring eye?
Alas the day, I never saw a bragger,
But hardly scapes the Beggar e're he dye,
If that the Hangman put not out his eye.
No, no, I love the civil kind of iesture,
Right on and plain, both in my look and vesture.
What care I at a Country Wake to see
A Fiddler fumble on a wicked note?
Or in a play, what can it pleasure me,
To seeking Pippin in a painted coat,
Or hear a fellow tell a tale by roate,
Or see a boy to play a wenches part?
I cannot laugh at such an idle Art.
What if I chance to see a wench so painted,
That not a Plastrer in the town can mend it?
And if perhaps, her tutch withal be taynted,
Let them that be her secret friends, defend it:
I neither will defend it, nor offend it:
No, let her go along with her disgrace,
I love not her that wears not her own face.
And if I see a Miser munching Chuffe
Furd with a forest round about his face,
Clinging his clunsh-fist in a Calueskin cuffe,
And lace his Ierkin with a letherne lace,
Within a Church, to take a Chauncels place;
Let him go sleep out all the Sermon while,
What do I care for such a John a style?
And if I see a crew of cunning knaves,
Laying of plots to coozen single wits,
Let them alone, and come not near the slaves,
They will be met with one day for their fits,
When that the Hangman by the halter sits.
Let them not touch my pocket, nor my purse,
And, let them hang, I never wish them worse.
What if I meet with Mistress Fiddle-strings,
That makes twenty faces in a day?
I will not meddle with her Aperne strings:
My dare is out for plucking flowers in May,
Such idle humors I must throw away,
And say unto my self, but what I see,
Such prick me dainties are to proud for me.
And if I meet a finicall fine youth,
That wears his best clothes on a worky day,
And makes a leg with yea forsooth, in truth,
And learnes to lispe and look the the other way,
And knows not well upon what ground to stay:
Alas poor fellow let the fool alone:
What should I care for either John or Ione?
And if I meet a Mistress wide-mouthed Malkes,
And see her slauer like a filthy slut,
And mark her when with John a Nods she walks
Into the wood, to learn to crack a Nut,
I will not teach a Sparrow to keep Cut.
Let them go tumble till their bones be weary:
Why should I trouble them when they are merry?
Away with all unprofitable humors,
Your huffe and snuff, and swagger, swear and swill,
The fruits whereof are but ungracious rumors,
That hateful wit condemns of heedlesse will,
Which hunteth after nothing else but ill.
Fie, fie upon them all, I care not for them,
And blessed are they, that in their hearts abhor them.
What, shall a blessed beauteous virgins face
Beget a wicked humor in mine eye?
Shall Reason so much run into disgrace,
As so to yield to Natures villainy?
If she be fair, must I be foul thereby?
No, no, my thoughts, I Will quickly turn the case,
I Will have as fair a soul, as she a face.
Come not to me with an odd coined Jest,
Or prittle prattle of a puddings skin:
For Jests are stale, and Iesters at the best,
Unto the beggars are too near a kin,
And idle prates I have no pleasure in:
Tell me of somewhat that may do me good,
And never hide your heads within my hood.
Speak you of News? it is odds they be not true;
And if they be, pray God they be not ill:
But good or ill, if that they be too new,
I pray you in your silence keep them still.
For too much speech does prove to little skill:
But for all news, until the truth be known,
Rather hear twenty, then report of one.
Is there a wench within your idle walk?
Well, let her walk, I will not hear of her:
I do not like of such ill humored talk:
I can your silence to such talk prefer:
And my Conceit to better cares refer.
Mine eyes grow dim, ears deaf, and senses dull,
I care not for a sheep without her wool.
Tell not me of a horse, nor of a hound,
The Iades will kick, and Dogs will sizzle all:
Nor tell me of a song, nor of a ground,
I have no humor to be musical;
Nor tell me of a vain Poetical:
Verses are grown so common and so course,
They bring but small reuennue to the purse.
Tell me not of a coat of cloth of gold,
Or silk and silver, pearl and precious stone,
It Is ten to one the fashion will not hold,
Besides, a Prince should by such robes be known:
And though the world to a mad pass be grown,
I will content me with good home-made cloth,
That has no harm, but only by the moth.
Tell not me of a dainty dish of meat,
When poison may be stolen into the broth,
Nor in my Napry how to be too neat,
I can content me with clean lynnen cloth,
And take my drink, and blow away the froth,
Look in my purse to answer my expense,
And make a virtue of experience.
Tell not me of a pleasant cup of Wine,
And Sugar to it: what is that to me?
That drinking smack shall touch no tongue of mine.
Wine, Beer or Ale, I care not which it be:
I love the diet that fits my degree:
If it will wet, and cool and quench my thirst,
I care not who be last, so I be first.
It may be, ye will think I love a pie
Of spice and plummes, but truly it is not so,
My diet stands not upon Spicerie.
To Beef and Mutton can good stomachs go.
Hunger is the best sauce that I do know.
It Is good for young fine wives that be a lust,
To long for plummes, and pies, and pasticrust.
A Tit-mouce roasted, and a Sparrowe stewde,
Is meat for such as eat for fashion sake.
And Beer or Ale, of running water brewde,
Is good for them that fear the belly-ake,
And crustie bread, or a hard Biscuit cake,
These are trim victuals for some stomachs feeding,
But such fine diet is not for my breeding.
Tell me not of a fine and daynty book,
A Spanish slipper, or an Irish spur:
Give me a shoe that well may fit my foot,
I care not for a buskin made of furre,
It Is good for those that ever fear the murre:
Give me a shoe or boot to keep me dry,
I care for no fantastic foolery.
Tell not me of a newfound piece of stuff,
That scarce will last a minute of an hour,
Nor of a strange conceited Muffe nor Ruff,
That may be seem a Swashers Paramoure.
I do not care to sit in Venus boure.
Cost is but lost that is so ill bestowd,
And had I wist, is but a fool beshrowd.
Bid me not keep my money in my purse,
And pay no debts, let beggars lie and starve:
I do not mean to get my self a curse,
With scraping for that may the present serve:
I will not so from honest reason swerve:
Let careless minds their conscience forget,
I think it is a hell to be in debt.
Yet will I never count of coin but dross,
And wish it but for necessary use,
To answer fortune in a froward cross,
And to avoid the cunning of excuse,
When lack of faith might fall into abuse:
For in respect of Love, I care not for it:
And as for Avarice, I do abhor it,
2. Mad-caps Oh the merry time.
OH where is now that goodly golden time,
When gold was counted but a needful dross,
And Reason sought but by desert to clime,
While few or none that feared gain or loss,
When patience bare the brunt of every cross,
And no man loved his neighbor to an end,
But once and ever, say and hold a friend:
When one might have a hundred eggs a groate,
And for three halfepence, half a strike of Rye,
And for a shilling make himself a coat,
To keep him warm, and many a Winter dry:
And for a farthing, a good pudding pie,
A good old drawing Jade for half a crown,
And forty pence the best Cow in a town:
When youth would serve for meat and drink and cloth,
And wear their best clothes but on Holidays:
And in a year you should not hear an oath:
When Tut and stoole-ball were the Summer plays,
And buffets made no sword and buckler frayes.
No puntos nor stoccados were not known,
When John had naught to do but with his Ione.
When fine maid Marian in a Moris dance,
Could bride it like a millers ambling Mare,
And every blew-cote by his Cognizance,
Made all the Country know whose cloth he ware?
And every Farmer kept good household fare,
And not a rich man would a beggar rate,
But he would give him alms at his gate:
When pride did teach no Princocks to go gay,
Nor Prick me dainty, pick her fingers ends,
Nor lust could take the virgins love away,
Nor heedelesse wits were careless of their friends,
Nor blessed spirits feared accursed fiends.
But honest wits so near to wisdom came,
That nothing almost could be out of frame:
When Mistress Fubs that Fiddle faddle fusse,
No colors knew to mend her coorse complexion,
Nor Prancking Parnel like an idle pusse,
Could gull a Nymph with an imperfection,
But every Schole-boy knows his Interiection,
And had by heart a better part of speech,
Then make a full point only in a Breech:
When swearing Swopskin could not swash it so,
But every Mule could point him for an Ass,
Nor munching Miser could so closely go,
But men could note him for an Owliglasse,
And make him hateful wheresoever he was.
And not a whore, but is so woe begone her,
That all the Country would cry out upon her:
When faith and truth was found in yea and nay,
And words of wisdom had their worthy weight,
When Sunshine beams did make the blessed day,
And every stalk did bear her flower full straight,
And such as saw them, joyed to see their height,
And every Bird was bush't within the spring,
When all were hushed, when Philomen did sing:
When all the day, the Connies kept their burrowes,
And not a Lamb was troubled with a worm:
The fearful Hare was squat amid the furrows,
Till fear or hunger made her leave her form,
And seasoned Shepherds never feared a storm:
And youth and beauty lived like Turtle Dones,
When age would not be angry at their loves:
When Nymphs and Muses sweetly kept the woods,
And old Hob-goblin kept within the caves:
The Farmer sought not for his neighbors goods.
But Sam and Simkin were the merry slaves,
That danced Trenchmoore on their graundsirs graves:
And Su and Sib would trip it on the toe,
As if they knew not on what ground to go:
When curds and cream were such a dainty dish,
As made the Lovers lick their lips for joy:
And youth as merry as their hearts could wish,
When Cupid was so kind a hearted boy,
As never wrought a blessed thought annoy,
But gracious Spirits were so well agreed,
That truth was fair on every face to reed:
When Ale, and Beer was once old English wine,
And Beef, and Mutton was good Country cheer,
And bread and cheese would make the Miller dine:
When that an honest neighbor might come near,
And welcome: Hoh maid, fill a pot of Beer,
And drink it soundly in a wooden dish,
When wagges were merry as their hearts could wish:
When not a Peddler walked without his pack,
And not a Tinker, but did sound his pan,
And every Tradesman, by What do you lack?
And every Tapster, by his wooden can:
And by his dealing every honest man:
And every wife, was by her husband known,
And then it was a blessed world alone.
When Susan Sowre-face, that would sit and powt,
For all the parish, was a pointing stock:
And Lazy Lobkin, like an idle lowte,
Was made no better then a washing block:
While the good husbands, that maintaynde the stock,
And laid up closely for a raynie day,
Were they, that kindly bare the bell away:
When no man kept a dog but for an use,
The Mastife chiefly, for to hunt a hog,
The Hound to hunt the Hare out of her mewse,
And for a piece, a fetching water-dogge,
Or for to beat a Foul out of a bogge.
A Horse to bear as easy as a cradle,
And not to kick, nor fling out of the saddle:
When maidens wink't to see a Hen a tredding,
And careful Widows carried honest minds,
And Brides would blush to hear but of their bedding,
And humors would not alter with the winds,
But love was it, that faith for ever binds,
And pitch, and pay, and take, and try, and trust:
When hearts were hateful that were found unjust:
The word of connicatching was not heard,
The practice was so seld or never in use,
And virtues grace, was chiefly in regard,
When justice gave redress for all abuse,
While care of conscience suffered no excuse.
But judgment cut off wicked vvilfulnesse,
Or mercy wrought repentance happiness:
Then honest husbands had the merry lives,
That saw their children well brought up at school,
And joy in heart to see their honest wives,
Seldom or never, from their spinning stool,
When none was idle, but was held a fool.
And he, nor she, could justly be offended,
When all amiss could quickly be amended:
When usurers were counted but as Jews,
And Parasites did go in painted coats,
And whores and drabs were kept but in the slewes,
And Cuckowes might be sounded by their notes:
While Farmers mixed no Rye among their Otes,
But every Ear could show what corn was sown,
And every wife was by her husband known:
When Huswiues loved to talk of home-made cloth,
The fine even thread, and of the kindly whiting,
And how to kill the canker and the Moth,
And of my childrens reading and their writing,
And of mine Uncles eldest sons inditing,
As well in prose, as pleasing Countrie-rime,
And chat, and work, for fear of losing time:
When men would meet on Sundays at the Church,
With true devotion, not for fashion sake:
When cunning wit would give no fool the lurch,
But in each cause, a kind of conscience make,
And with indifferent hand both give and take:
While all things were so common among friends,
That good beginnings made as blessed ends:
When maidens sat and neately milkt their Cowes,
And Lambs and Rabbits skipped up and down:
And little children marched with their bowghes
In a May morning to a market town:
And Batchelers gave wenches a green gown:
And smouching yonkers gave the gyrle a kiss,
When all was well, where nothing was amiss:
When Cake and Pudding was no simple feast,
And dealt about in bittes like holy bread,
And ripe young Rooks were taken in the neast,
While Ruth and Rachel did the Rye loaf knead:
When Kit would smile to see cock Sparrowes tread,
And Pipe and Taber made as merry glee,
As at a May Pole one would wish to see:
When Bride-cups with their dainty gay Bride-laces,
The Bachelors with such a grace would carry,
And maidens follow with such mincing faces,
As would allure a man half mad to marry:
And not a wagge nor wench without Rosemary,
A Nose-gay, Napkin* and a pair of Gloves,
These were the orders of the ancient loves:
When the old folks went mannerly before,
And the young people kindly followed after,
The parents held the basin at the door,
The One for my son, the other for my daughter:
When all the Churchyard might beful of laughter,
And service done, the youth on every side,
Would run to meet the Bridegroom with the Bride.
When going home, in order as they went,
The Fiddlers played before them all the way:
And not a maid that had her aperne rent,
Her face clean washed, and had not a clean stay,
Her shoes well blackt, was held a slut that day.
When plummes and pies would fill the belly full,
And nappy ale made many an addle skull:
When many a Lad would lift the leaden heel,
And dance until he swet, and dropped again,
And wind his wench about him like an Eele,
and toss and turn her like a lusty swain,
While harmeles hearts were in a merry vain:
And then a posset, and a spiced cup,
And so goodnight, to make the matter up:
When sheepes-eies winking first began the wooing,
And hearts and hands did set on faith and troth,
And then the matter was not long a doing,
When it was needelesse to devise an oath,
And for apparel, good plain home-made cloth.
She in her hair, and he in that he had,
Thus was the Less contented with the Lad.
He had his fathers harrowe, and his plowe,
A young gray Fillie, and a curtold Mare,
She had her Mothers blessing and a Cow,
A milke-paile, and some wooden dayrie-ware,
A slitch of Bacon for good household fare.
He had a Cottage and a fair backe-side:
And so did live the Bridegroom and his Bride:
When scarce they had been married fifteen hours,
But he would to his work, she to her wheel,
And then look what is my neighbors, what is ours,
And card, and spinne, and wind upon the reele,
And mix the Iron kindly with the steel,
And keep some corn to fill the empty sack,
For fear the beggar catch them by the back:
Work all the week for a good Sundays dinner,
And then as merry as the day was long,
When they might well afford their drink the thinner,
If that the meat did make the porridge strong,
And all was right, where nothing did go wrong.
But Sim and Sib so lovingly agreed,
That then it was a loving world indeed.
When hunger was the sauce for every meat,
While early rising did good stomachs make,
And labor was the bath to make men sweat,
One with a forke, another with a rake:
When Tom would work a vie for Susans sake.
And he that sung and whistled at the cart,
With hay, and ho, did bear the merry heart:
When honest minds would never beat their brains
To fetch out words a mile above the Moon:
Nor frame their Wits to loose a world of pains,
To make a morning of an after noone:
Nor wait too long, nor yet to wish too soon:
But work their Wills and Wits together so,
As met the wind where ever it could blow.
Strange Words were Riddles unto simple ears,
New Fashions, Follies unto Wisdoms eyes:
And faithful hearts, were void of idle fears,
While true Plain meaning sought no Policies:
For till the Poets Figures did devise
To make men study till their brains were mad,
Truth was much more in estimation had.
Oh when men's Hearts lay bare upon their Breasts,
While Words and Deeds were all one in effect.
And wicked Humors were not turn'de to Iestes,
When Honor had to simple Truth respect,
And Wisdom would ungracious thoughts reject,
And Love was love for Love, and not for Gain,
Then was the World in a true Golden vain.
Then was not borne that wicked Machauile,
Whose Rules have metaphormol'de many a mind.
Nor Truth would stand to study out a style
That were too high for honest wits to find.
Nor Cunning tricks, the Careful eye would blind:
But when the tongue did speak, the heart would prove
Truth was the substance of the speech of Love.
Then was (in deed) that true Nobility,
That had respect to nothing but it self:
When no infection in Gentilitie
Could gull the mind with greedines of pelf:
Nor suffer Cupid play the peevish elfe,
Nor Venus pride, to match with Vulcans Croome,
Nor wicked Midas step in Mars his room.
Then, was the Sheep known easily by his brand,
Cow by her low: and by his bark the Dog:
The neighbor justly measur'de out his land,
And helped to pull his Horse out of the bogge:
No Titles tried about a Timber-logge,
But rather loose it, then to go to Law,
To spend a Sheafe of Corn about a Straw.
And then was Law the only rule of Love,
Where many hearts agreed all in one:
And careful Conscience did in Concord prove
The blessed life of such an union:
When Grace with Pride could not be ouergon,
But humble, mild, and modest smiling eyes,
Made the World seem a kind of Paradise.
But some will say, All those good days are past:
Well, let them go; as good may come again:
Time goes apace: but run he nere so fast,
He may be overtaken in the plain.
Such as have Gold, are in the golden vain,
While that the poor must champe upon the bit,
And Fools must fret, because they have no wit.
He that has Money, may do many things,
Yet all, as good as nothing, in the end.
And he that wantes, knows what the spirit wringes,
That goes to heau'ne, to seek to find a friend,
While all in vain, does he his spirit spend,
That thinks on Earth is any dainty honey,
But that which Art distilleth out of money.
3 MAD-CAPS Out upon Money.
OH Money, Money, it is a Monarch such,
As makes men know not what themselves may be:
It makes the churl his neighbors good to grutch
And felles the Plant before it be a Tree.
And makes the Miller through a Mil-stone see
More cunning, towling in a Strike of Rye,
Then can be found out by the Farmers eye.
It makes a Wench as tawnie as a Moore,
To seem as fair, as she were red and whighte.
It makes a Rich men make him self as poor
As he that were not scarcely worth a Might:
It makes a Cowarde quarrel with a Knight:
Yea, and sometime, to give him such a blow,
As all his strength does wholly overthrow.
It makes a Rascal in his rogish pride,
To thrust his Nose at tandom in the wind:
And bringes a Groom a wooing to a Bride,
That scarce would wish to let him look behind,
Nor take a Trencher, till her Dog had dinde:
And yet that Subject of all thoughts disgrace,
Shall put a handsome Stripling out of place.
Why? Money puts a Fool into some Wit,
And makes a Wise man wary of his will:
And puts on Roast-meate on the Beggars Spit:
And makes a Bungler learn a better skill,
Then take a Trade, and live by losses still.
Why, Money such a power in Malice bears,
As sets a World together by the ears.
But, what of this? Be Money what it can,
It Is but a kind of purified dross:
The overthrow of many an honest Man,
That has not patience to endure a Cross,
While one man's game, does breed an others loss:
And therefore let them love it that have store,
I would but have to use it, and no more.
Is there no God, but Gold? nor good, but gain?
All Silver Saints; that must high worship have?
Is there no Grace, but in the Golden vain?
Where, either be a King, or be a Slave?
No, it is for Fools, which Fortune so to shave:
It Is Virtue only bringes the truest wealth,
Though Money may do well, to maintain health.
What reason is there Beauty should have blame,
For getting Money out of Follies hands?
Or why should Money have so ill a name,
To lap a Spend-thrift in unthrifty bands?
Why, Money is a Monarch over lands,
And must be sued too, when a Man does lack,
Or else perhaps be put into a Sack.
Alas poor Money, how he is misus'de:
And yet I see not who can be without him:
I never came yet where he was refus'de,
But Cappe and Curtsey, all that came about him:
And he that wantes him, all the world will flout him:
And though some happily find him idle talk,
Yet if he have no Money, he must walk.
Yet be it fit for never so good uses,
Heed must be taken in the getting of it:
For, against Law, there can be no excuses,
When Justice does in sacred Judgment sit,
And knows what is for all offenses fit:
And therefore better it is for to abhor it,
Then come before a Judge to answer for it.
No, let no mind that means to live at rest,
Go further for his good, then Law will guide him:
But, in the mean, to think that music best,
That does not let too high strains ouer-stride him,
Least true Musicians happen to deride him:
Upon enough, it is enough to look,
And what is more, is quite beside the book.
Profit does well, but Honesty is better:
But, both does well, and parted much amiss:
Each sense is not according to the letter,
The truth in deed in the construction is,
Where Wit may find, that Will not walk amiss,
In the true judgment of Discretions eyes,
A man may be both wealthy, kind, and wise.
But, since it is so hard a thing to do,
To gather Wealth with perfect Honesty:
It is to strange a thing to come unto,
With men of only Worlds capacity:
Let me but labor for Necessity,
Feed, cloathe, and keep the Beggar from the door,
Pay that I owe, and I desire no more.
For, let the Greedy-minde gape after Pelf,
He may be choked when his throat is null:
The Ship may tun vnhapply on a Shelfe,
That little doubted, when it lay at hull:
What is the Sheep that never lost his Wool?
Or what is he, that must not leave his Gold,
How dear soever he his Treasure hold?
Ungodly Dross, why should it so be witch
The minds of men, to take away their minds,
As in too many that are too too rich?
Where Catching-spirites Avarice so blindes,
As in their Bags, their beggar comfort binds:
Oh hateful Coin, that can invent such evil,
As so from God, to send men to the Devil.
But yet I think, I have my self mistaken,
It Is but the use, that makes it good or ill:
In an ill sense it ought to be forsaken;
But in a good, it helps a forward will:
Then as I said, it is a blessed skill,
So to conceive, perceive, to take and use it,
That Wit may have no Reason to refuse it.
For he that looks upon a World of Wealth,
May hap be Subject to this bagidge dross:
And when he thinks on that ungodly stealth,
That makes a gain of many a thousands loss:
It may be to his Comfort such a Cross,
That he would wish for Job his poverty,
Rather then Dives superfluity.
But let each Conscience commune with it self,
And put off Passions with Discretions care:
I leave the Scraper to his scratching pelf,
And, wish the honest wealthy all welfare:
And, to my self but an indifferent share,
That when Good fortunes lots do kindly fall,
I might have some, although my some be small.
But Wishers, Wisemen say, are idle woulders,
And wish and would, is worth but little ware:
And they, that are no better known householders,
Do often at dinner, keep their Table bare,
Where empty dishes give but hungry fate:
And therefore let them wish for Wealth that list,
I Will play the fool no more with Had-I-wist.
What I can get, or keep, or kindly save,
That Is up with five; well got, and well spent:
A little Spade will make a Great man's Grave:
And, he lives happy, that can die content:
And, he accursed, that is passion rent
With grief, and fear to loose their comfortes here,
And lack the Joys that to the soul are dear.
But, let it go; for it is a perlous thing
For many a man almost to meddle withal:
It makes some dance within a wicked Ring,
When that the Thief does from the Gallows fall,
And does the Wits of many a mind enstall:
So that in fine, since such it is I see,
Let them that list, gape after Gold for me.
And seek the treasure of the Spirits wealth,
Where no Corruption enters with Infection:
But Holy-loue maintains the truest health,
And keeps the Senses in their best perfection:
While- Faith is fed, but with the Souls affection:
And in that Treasure to repose my trust,
Which can not fail, not with the Canker rust.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London for Richard Iohnes. 1602.


