I WOULD, AND would not.



LONDON, Printed by Tho. C. for Tho. Bushel. 1614.

To the Reader.
YOu that read, what you would be, I know not; what you would not be, you know
your self: But what you should be, God knows: But for my self, I have found
what is best to be, and so wish other, except they neither know what they
should be: nor well what they would, or would not be: Scorn i^ not, because it
is in verse, or rhyme, for if you will read it, you may perhaps find more
pleasure and profit in it, then a worse piece of prose: not to persuade you to
any thing, further then your liking; I leave the censure of it, to your
discretion, and my better Labors as they fall out, to your further content.
And so, loath to make you believe more, then perhaps you shall find, hoping,
that no man will be angry with his own shadow, nor say (meaning m^) when he
com^s to a f^^le point: But take the best and leave the worst, and break none
of the pal^; as kind hearts do in the Country: I rest, as you may see in my
Discourse, what I would, and would not be: and without would not, would be as
I should be.

Your friend and well-willer, B. N.

I WOULD, And would not.
1.
I Would I had, as much as might be had,
Of wealthy wishes, to the woldes content:
That I might live, all like a lusty Ladde,
And scorn the world, and care not how it went:
But eat, and drink, and sleep, and sing, and play,
And so in pleasures, pass my time away.
2.
And yet I would not: for too wealthy then,
I should be troubled with a world of toys:
Kindred, Companions, Troops of Seruing-men;
Fashion-Deuisers, Fools, and Guirles, and Boys:
Fiddlers, and Iesters, Monkeys, Apes, Babounes,
Drunckards, and Swaggerers, and such trouble-townes.
3.
Besides, I should forget to find the way,
That leads the Soul to her Eternal bliss;
And then my state were at a woeful stay,
No, I would wish, a better world then this.
And in Afflictions, here on Earth to dwell,
Rather then seek my Heaven on earth, and run to hell.
4.
I would I were a man of such deep wit,
As might discern the depth of every cause:
That wherefoere I did in Judgment sit,
I might be held a Note-booke, in the Laws.
My brain might seem a kind of miracle:
And every word I spoke, an Oracle.
5.
And yet I would not, for then, woe were me,
I should be troubled wit^ a world of Cases:
Both rich and poor, would then ^^y Clients be,
Some, with their pleasing, some, with piteous faces:
And when the Rich had left their briberie,
I should not rest for Formap^uperie.
6.
I would I were a man of greatest power,
That swaies a Scepter, on this worlds great Mass:
That I might sit on top of pleasures Tower,
And make my will, my way, where ere I pass:
That Law might have her being from my breath,
My smile might be a life, my frown a death.
7.
And yet I would not, for then, do I fear,
Envy or Malice would betray my trust:
And some vile spirit, though against the hair,
Would seek to lay mine honor in the dust.
Treason, or Murder, would beset me so:
I should not know, who were my friend, or foe.
8.
No, I do rather wish the Low estate,
And be an honest Man, of mean degrees:
Be loved for good, and give no cause of hate,
And clime no higher, then a Haw-thorne tree;
Pay every man his own, give Reason, right:
And work^ all day, and take my rest at night.
9.
For sure in Courts, are worlds of costly Cares,
That Comber Reason, in his course of rest:
Let me but learn, how thrift both spends and spares;
And make enough, as good as any feast.
And fast, and pray, my days may have good end,
And welcome all, that pleases God to send.
10.
I would I were the fairest, sweetest Creature,
That could be painted, with the purest Art:
That Art might wonder at the work of Nature,
How so perfection made up every part.
That every Eye that saw me, might admire me,
And every heart, heard of me, might desire me.
11.
And yet I would not, for then, out alas,
I should be troubled with a world of fools:
When many a simple Idle headed Ass,
Would put his wits unto some Poets schools,
To learn to make a verse to flatter me:
As there were no such loving fool as he.
12.
No, I do rather wish the lovely Brown,
Where virtues Beauty makes the Inward fair:
Then be the gallant Gazer of the town,
And make mine honor, but a Barbers Chair:
When none that had, with loss of treasure tried me,
Once finding my foul Inside would abide me.
13.
I would I were an Innocent, a fool,
That can do nothing else, but laugh or cry:
And eat fat-meate, and never go to school;
And be in love, but with an Apple-pie:
Wear a pide-Coate, a Cockes-Combe, and a Bell,
And think it did become me passing well.
14.
And yet I would not: for then should I not
Discern the difference, twixt the good and bad:
Nor how the gain of all the world is got,
Nor who are sober, wise, nor who are mad.
Nor in the Truth of follies sense to see:
Who Is the fool now? there is no such fool as he?
15.
I would I were a Fiddler, and could play,
A thousand quauers in a minutes space:
And at a Bridale, bravely lead the way,
Before the Bride, and give the Groom, a Grace.
That I might shake the head, and stare, and gape,
And make a thousand faces like an Ape.
16.
And yet I would not: for ten to one
My fiddle, or my fingers should not rest:
But every Jack a Lute would call upon,
Such Moris daunces as do like him best:
And every wagtaile with a wanton Eye,
Would hang upon me for a Heidegy.
17.
I would I were a Cuckolde Wittal Ass,
And car'de not who did mount my Hackney Saddle,
Yet think I have as true a loving Less
As ere lay in Swaddling Clouts or Cradle:
And manerly go to the Church before her,
And would not hear, how many did be whore her.
18.
And yet I would not: for then do I fear,
My horns would be so hard, I could not bide them
And when their weight were more the^ I could bear
Alas I know not what to do to hide them.
But every one would say in bitter scorns,
Look yonder goes a gallant pair of horns.
19.
I would I were the arranst Cuckolde maker,
That ever answerde for his Aperne sport:
There should not escape a wench, but I would take her
And set her to her work in such a sort
That all the world should know, while I had health
I would not see an Idle Commonwealth.
20.
And yet I would not: for then do I doubt,
Bride-well and I, should wrestle for the Whippe:
And once got in, I hardly should get out:
Till I had soundly paid for Trully-Trippe,
When all the Beggars in the street would whoo me,
And do me all the shame, that they could do me,
21.
I would I were a most notorious Thief,
That might affright all true men, where I go:
And when I made demand, they might be brief,
That in their Budgets do my business know.
And such as travail, with concealed treasure,
Should be but Stewards, to maintain my pleasure.
22.
And yet I would not: for then out of doubt,
Some dog, or devil, would for Coin betray me:
Some privy search, would surely find me out,
O^ Watch, or Warrant, some way, would way-lay me.
And being caught, with Bills, and Clubb^s, and staves,
Be (...), with a crew of beastly Slaves.
23.
Then to the Justice, brought with such a Joy,
As if some Camp, or Castle were surprisde:
Who knowing how such Stragglers do destroy,
A world of wealth, has presently deuisde,
Unto the Iaylers keeping to commend me:
Where I must stay, until the gallows end me.
25.
No, I had rather lead a quiet life,
And fear to look no true man in the face:
Keep a poor house, maintain an honest wife,
Travel no further then the Marketplace.
On Sundays go to Church, and home again,
And with my neighbors, drink a pot, or twain.
26.
I would I were a Iuggler, and could play
A thousand p^ankes upon a Pepper-corne:
And draw the witt^s of Wyzardes, so away,
They all might wonder at a Bullockes-horne.
And with their purses, run and follow me,
To make them think they see, they do not see.
27.
And yet I would not: for then well I know,
Some Eye, or other, would my sleights descrye:
And to the world reveal my cunning so,
I could not answer for my Knavery.
But some Curst-queane, would either crack my crown,
Or Constable, would course me out of town.
28.
I would I were a Myller, and could grind
A hundred thousand bushells in an hour:
And ere my M^ster and my (...),
B^ closely filtching of a bag of Flower.
And send it to my Sweet-hart, for to make,
A Pudding-pie, a Pastey, or a Cake.
29.
And yet I would not; least my Thumbes should be
Held all too great upon my towling-dish:
And such as did my secret cunning see,
Might curse, and wish me many a bitter wish:
And ^ay, when they before the Mill-dore-stand,
The Millers-thumb's as broad as half a hand.
30.
No, I had rather fairly buy my bread,
And spend it as I get it honestly:
Then scarcely sleep in quiet in my Bed,
When I but think upon my subtilty;
To lay the wench along upon the Sack,
And steal her meal, e^e she had turned her back.
31.
I would I were a Tailor, and could cut
A thousand yardes of Velvet out in shreads:
And in my purse, the money closely put,
While simple hearts were beating of their heads,
With labors t^yle to keep a poor estate,
Like honest Cutberd, and his bony- Kate.
32.
And yet I would not: least by falsehoods trade,
I should be called a stealer, that is a thief:
No, in no wise, by such means to be made
A Master-workman, were too great a grief.
No, Let me rather be an honest youth,
That never stole a yard of stuff in truth.
33.
I would I were a Keeper of a Park,
To walk with my bent Crosse-bow, and my hound,
To know my Game, and cl^sely in the dark,
To lay a barren-Doe upon the ground
And by my Ve^^zon, more then by my Fees,
To feed on better meat then bread and chief.
34.
And yet I would not: least if I be spide,
I might be turned quite out of my walk;
And afterward more punishment abide,
Then longs unto a little angry talk.
And cause more mischief after all, come to me,
Then all the good the Does did ever do me.
34.
No, I had rather be an honest Keeper,
To walk my Park, and look unto my Pales;
And not to play the sluggard and the sleeper,
And hold my Landlord up with idle tales.
Take but my Fees, be merry with my Dame,
And so to gain, and keep an honest name.
36.
I would I were a Collyer, might ^ell Coals,
And ^ill my sackes a quarter full of dust:
And haung emptied them in some dark holes,
Swear out my measure to be full, and just.
Then laugh to think when I were gotten home,
How I had c^^zen'd a kinde-hearted (...).
37.
And yet I would not: least by my black face,
I might be held a Devil then in deed:
And so to do my fellows all disgrace,
When many a one the worse for me should speed.
No, God forbid, let me be true and just,
While other hide, the Devil in the dust.
38.
I would I were a Gardener, and had skill,
To dig and rake, and plant, and sow, and slip:
The Caterpiller, and the Mowle to kill,
To proyne my Trees, and all my stalks to strippe.
And when to pluck my fruit, and sow my seeds,
And how to keep my Gardein clean from weeds.
39.
And yet I would not: for then should I fear,
The Thief, the Mowle, the Worm, and blasting winds:
I should not look about me any where,
But I should find some crosses in their kinds.
My Plants would wither, or my seeds would rot,
Or loose in one year, more then ere I got.
40.
No, I would rather take the Markets hap,
And pay my Coin, and keep my mind in quiet:
And what I bought, to bring home in my lap,
And when I come home, dress it for my Diet.
Then in my Gardein, watch a Mowle or (...),
And have an other planting in my house.
41.
I would I were a Painter of such Art,
As like Appelles, might abuse the Eye:
And to the life, so set out every part,
That strange Conceits might be deceived thereby.
And I might use my pensill in such sort,
As all the world should never make report.
42.
And yet I would not: for then do I fear,
My heart might fall upon Idolatry:
For while my hand were drawing of a hair,
I might be rapt into a thought too high.
When thinking to behold an Angels face,
Forget the devil in an other place.
43.
No, I had rather only learn to know,
The difference of my Colors in their kinds:
And have a care, to set my shadows so,
They may not be a hurt to blessed minds.
And use my pensill, on my cloth, and board,
And for what price I might my pains afford.
44.
I would I were a Merchant of all wares,
That I might furnish all both Rich and poor:
And what should fall unto the Beggars shares,
I might have plenty, always at my door.
My shop might be a Market of such state,
As all the world may stand and wonder at.
45.
And yet I would not: for even do I fear,
I should find many a Beggar in my book:
And when I could my money not forb^are,
I might go hang my credit on a book.
When if both Town, and Country came unto me,
In one, or both, some debt^rs would undo me.
46.
No, I would rather be of mean estate,
Have money always ready in my chest:
Be sure to buy my wares at the best rate,
And sell good stuff, and serve my friends the best,
And cosen no man, with false weight nor measure,
But with true dealing make a poor ma^s treasure.
47.
I would I were a practiser in Physic,
To know my simples, Compounds, and my waters,
To heal the Rume, the Toothache and the Tisicke,
The Coughe, old Aches, and such other matters,
That I might by my skill in general,
Be held the Master of the Vrinall.
48.
And yet I would not: for then day nor night,
I should have quiet scarcely in my bed:
And in my Conscience have full many a fright,
To hear my Patient suddenly were dead:
When by a Vomit, I had burst his heart,
Or pur'gde his guts out through the nether part.
49.
No, I had rather be an Herbalist,
To know the virtue both of Herbs and Roots,
Then be too bold and desperate Alchymist;
That often his weight and measure ouer-shootes,
And so, by either want of Care, or skill,
In steed of Curing, give a killing-Pill.
50.
I would I were a high Astronomer,
That I might make my walk among the stars:
And by my insight might foresee a far,
What were to come, and talk of peace and wars
Of liu^s and deaths, and wonder, to ensue,
Although perhaps, but few do fall out true.
51.
And yet I would not: for then do I doubt,
With too-much study* I should grow st^rk mad:
When one Conceit would put an other out,
While giddy brains beyond themselves would gad.
And seeking for the (...) within the Moon,
Mistake a morning, for an afternoon.
52.
No, I would rather learn no more to know,
Then of the times and seasons of the year:
What days the Fayres are kept, and how to go
From town to town, and every Sheer, to Sheere.
That (...) may not their day-note-books slack,
And so to make an honest (...).
53.
I would I were a r^re and sound (...),
And had the Laws of honest love by heart:
Would not corrupt my Conscience for a million,
Nor ever plead, but on the honest part.
Examine strictly, and consider duly,
And so give sentence to the matter truly.
54.
And yet I would not: for then might I hear,
How Truth gets hatred, for her honest mind:
And simple-Fees, do make but sorry che^^e,
While true Plain-dealing has but barely dinde.
When such as know the world, and how to use it,
Seeing a Fee come fair, will not refuse it.
55.
I would I were a Scriuener, and could pen,
All kind of writings, write all kind of hands:
Be well acquainted with great Monyed-men,
And closely deal for all their goods and Lands.
And being furnished fully, to my pleasure,
Play them a trick* to make them look their Treasure.
56.
And yet I would not: for then I am sure,
My Conscience would receive a Mortall-wound:
And such a wound as never Art could Cure,
By all the feats that ever s^ri^e^er sound,
When if I scap'^ mine ears for Forgery,
My soul should go to Hell for Usury.
57.
No, I had rather in a Copy book
Write a good sentence for a Scholars reading:
Whereon the parents may be glad to look,
And say, God send their hands a happy speeding.
And take my money on the Saturday
For all the week, then bid my Boys go play.
58.
I would I were a Trades man, and could sell
My wares by weight, and measure as I list:
And had such tricks to make my market well,
That I might send home fools with Had-I-wist.
That while poor souls did sit with losses crying,
I might grow Rich, with swearing, and with lying.
59.
And yet I would not: for my Conscience then,
Would make me feel the smart of falsehoods woe:
When I beheld the ends of faithles men,
With what a horror to their Hell they go.
While true plaine-dealing hearts in quiet die,
And faithful love does live Eternally.
60.
I would I were a Broker, and for Coin
Took any Pawnes, and ^are not what I took
For interest, nor how I did pou^loyne,
So I might get it with the Silver hook.
W^o were the Thief, so ^ might buy the wares,
Nor who did shift, so I did get the shares.
61.
And yet I would not: for then do I doubt,
Some private Eyes, would closely pry into me:
And some odd Ladde or Landresse find me out,
And for receiving stolen goods would undo me.
When with the loss of all my goods, scarce hope,
To be so happy, as to escape the Rope.
62.
No, I had rather try a better Trade,
Whereby to make some honest kind of gain:
Whereby some better reckoning may be made,
Then buy Repentance with so great a pain.
Now fie upon them, Brokers, Bawdes and Thieves,
Make poor men wear their Ierkins without sleeves.
63.
I would I were a close promoting Mate,
To pick a hole in each offenders Coat:
And make a show of service to the State,
When I would purse up many a privy groat:
But in great Sums follow my Information,
Till I were well paid for a Reformation.
64.
And yet I would not: for then every knave
Would single me out, for a secret friend:
And teach me how to play the cunning slave,
To bring my business to a wretched end.
While hellish Craft with Cloak of heresy,
Might hide a world of foul iniquity.
65.
No, I would rather learn my self t'amend
What is amiss, and so my friends advise;
Then when I see an other man offend,
In secret, seek his ^uine to devise.
And making show to seek the good of all,
Set up my self, with many thousands fall.
66.
I would I were a Tapster, fill my pot
Half up with froth, and make my gain of drink:
And make no Care, how I my money got,
So I might hea^e my Gold and silver chinke.
Make more of Drunkardes then of better men,
By putting off bad licour now and then.
67.
And yet I would not: for then should I be,
At Call and Check of every Jack and Gill:
And many a Lobcocke would look into me,
What drink I drew, how I my pot did fill:
And sometime trust so far upon the score,
I scarce should put my head out of the door.
68.
No, I had rather run an other Race,
Though for less profit, yet for more content:
That both with God and man, might be in Grace,
Wherein my time might be more happily spent.
And rather pay, my penny for my pot,
Then cosen twenty people for a groat.
69.
I would I were as tall, and stout a man,
As ever drew a sword out of a sheath:
That I might see, who durst come near my Can,
Or speak a word, where I but seem to breath,
Or fortune durst, but cross me with her wheels,
For fear to see, her brains about her heels.
70.
And yet I would not: for then where should I
Bestow my self? but every man would fly me:
I should be sure to have no company,
Where none that love themselves, that will come nigh me,
And fortune would be sure to fit me so,
That she would some way seek mine overthrow.
71.
I would I were a Trauellor, to pass
The Roughest Seas, and card'e for wind and weather:
And might arrive, where never Creature was,
But Beasts, and Birds* that live and feed together.
And tell at home what I abroad have seen,
Where never man yet but my self had been.
72.
And yet I would not: for I fear, that few
Would trust my stories, were they nere so true:
Words are but wind, and wind is but a Dew,
Far Travelers may say that black is Blewe.
Although perhaps some simple souls may say,
Surely, this man has trauailde a great way:
73.
No, I will rather try my Fortunes here,
And to my best advantage use my wits:
Then run abroad, and buy Repentance dear,
Knowing how often, unhappily Fortune ^ittes.
When weather-beaten Sails, with wind, and rain,
Scarce make a Saving- Voyage home again.
74.
I would I were a Player, and could Act
As many parts, as came upon a Stage:
And in my brain, could make a full Compact,
Of all that pasteth betwixt Youth and Age.
That I might have fiue-shares in every Play,
And let them laugh, that bear the Bell-away.
75.
And yet I would not: For then do I fear,
If I should gall some Goos-cappe with my speech:
That he would freat and fume, and chase, and swear,
As if some Flea had bit him by the Breech.
And in some passion, or strange Agony,
Disturb both me, and all the Company.
76.
I would I were a Poet, and could write;
The passage of this Paltry world in time:
And talk of Wars, and many a valiant fight,
And how the Captains did to Honor clime.
Of Wise, and Fair, of Gracious, Virtuous, kind,
And of the Bounty of a noble mind.
77.
But speak but little of the life of Love,
Because it is a thing so hard to find:
And touch but little at the Turtle-Doue,
Seeing there are but few Birds of that kind.
And Libell against lewd and wicked hearts,
That on the earth, do play the Diuells-parts.
78.
And yet I would not: for then would my brains,
Be with a world of toys Intoxicate:
And I should fall upon a thousand veins,
Of this and that, and well I know not what.
When some would say, that saw my Frantic fittes,
Surely the Poet is beside his wits.
79.
I would I were an honest Countrey-Wench,
That only could make Curtsey, smoile, and blush,
And sit me down upon a good-Ale bench,
And answer wanton Tomkin, with a Iush.
And well, Go-too, and How-now? Pray-away,
And for a Tanzey, go to Stoole-Ball-play.
80
And yet I would not: For then do I fear,
My Lovers would be out of love with me:
If I would not believe them when they swear,
That I am she, and I am only she,
Of all the Maids, before the Church-house door;
That has their hearts, and what can I have more?
(...) 101.
No, I had rather be an honest wife,
And love my husband, and look to my house;
And with my Neighbors lead a quiet life,
And keep a Cat, to drive away the Mouse.
Hatch up my Chickins, pen up my clocke-Henne,
And have nothing to do with naughty men.
102.
I would I were the gallanst Courtizan,
That ever put a foure-Ear'de Ass to school:
That I might clean put down Maid Marian,
And never be without my dainty fool.
And make my money baggs come ^umbling to me,
And glad to see what service they can do me.
103.
And yet I would not: for then do I doubt,
Some Cunstable, or Beadie of Bridewell:
By some old Bawd, would surely find me out,
When for his silence, I should pay full well.
Or Cart it to the place of youths Correction,
Where chopping Chalk, would quite spoil my Complexion.
104.
No, I had rather be an honest Maid,
That never knew any loves delight:
And of a man, almost to be afraid,
Then see me to set my Maider head so light.
As for a wicked choice, to change my name,
To fit me only, with a f^e for shame.
105.
I would I were a Bruer, and could make
My water pay the charges of my Malt:
And for small Beer, the price of strong beer take,
And help a musty Barrel with bay salt.
Keep leaking vessels, stop them up with Clay,
The drink may run out, when the Earth's away.
106.
And yet I would not: for then I should think,
If I should take good money for ill Beer:
My Customers would curse me for my drink,
And say I sold both that was naught, and dear.
And one so drive an other daily fro me,
That in the end they would quite overthrow me.
107.
No, I had rather truly pay my penny
For my full pot of either Ale or Beer:
Then seek that hurt or spoiling of a many,
Or to undo the poor in a dear year.
Or make them say, whose trust I do abuse,
Oh wicked Bruer, look what drink he brues.
108.
I would I were an excellent Divine,
That had the Bible at my fingers ends:
The world might hear out of this mouth of mine,
How God did make his Enemies his friends.
I were so follow'de, as if none but I,
Could plainly speak of true Divinity.
109.
And yet I would not: for then ten to one,
I should be called but a Precizian:
Or Formalist, and might go preach alone,
Unto my holy brother Puritan.
And so be flouted for my zealous love,
In taking pains for other men's behoue.
110.
No, I had rather read, and understand
The Rules of Grace, that have the learned led:
To know the power of the Almighty hand,
And with what food, the blessed flock are fed.
Rather then with a thundering and long prayer,
To lead into presumption, or despair.
111.
I would I were a man of warlike might,
And had the Title of a General:
To point the Captains every one their fight,
Where should the Vangard, and the Rereward fall.
Who should be leaders of the forlorn hope,
And who the Entrance to the Army open.
112.
And yet I would not: for then I might see,
How discontent might cause a Mutiny:
Whereby the Army might in danger be,
To be surprised by the Enemy.
Or by the loss of men, for honors gain,
To wound my Conscience with a bloody pain.
113.
No, I had rather praise the Course of peace,
And st^^y (...) to help to hold the same:
And ^ow soon quarrels ill begu^ may cease,
And ho^ to keep acco^d in quiet frame.
That old an^ young may live contented so,
That to their graves, may all in quiet go.
114.
I would I were the Miserablest wretch
That ever Crambde up money in his Chest:
That I might learn, but like a dog to fetch
Lambs from the Fold, and Duckelings from the nest.
And when I took the pains to pluck and pull,
Know how to gain, by Feathers, and by wool.
115.
And yet I would not: least while I did live*
I should scarce trust my self with that I have:
I should not hear the word of Lend, nor give,
But only study, how to get and save.
And when I die, have written on my door,
The Dog is Dambn'de, that preyde upon the poor.
116.
I would I were the strangest Prodigal,
That ever strew'de his money in the street:
That I might make the Beggars m^rry all,
When they but saw the shadow of my feet.
And Churles might chafe, to see me so to throw
Away the wealth, that they did scrape for so.
117.
And yet I would not; least when all were gone,
My stock, my goods, my Leases, and my Lands:
It sure would break my heart to look upon,
My whole estate to be in others hands.
And then to hide me in some secret place,
Or grieve to death, to think of my disgrace.
118.
I would I were so neat and Spruse a Noddy,
As all in print, might speak, and look, and walk:
And so become for every idle body,
A kind of ^able, or a Stable-talke.
And say to see me, tripping on the Toe,
The Fool's so proud, he knows not how to go.
119.
And yet I would not: least some Wood-cock-asse,
To equal me in my (...):
Might paint, and princke himself up in a glass,
And study counterfeit Gentilitie.
And so perhaps put me into some passion,
To see my fashion, grow so out of fashion.
120.
No, I will rather wisely look about me,
And wear both what, and how might fit my state:
And have a care within, what were without me,
I might not be an Owl, to wonder at.
But I might pass through all the Pide-coat-throng,
And be no Taber for an idle-toong.
121.
I would I were a Beastly- Epicure,
That car'de for nothing but to eat and drink:
And talk of naught but Natures-Nour^ture,
And filling up my Flagons to the brinke.
Of lusty swallows, and of pleasing taste,
And make no care how much good meat I waste.
122.
And yet I would not: least the world should say,
Look, yonder goes a barrel full of Beer:
Who gulls in more good victuals in one day,
Then might suffize an honest man a year.
And ere he dye, it will (no doubt) be found,
The Beast did burst, and stunck above the ground.
123.
No, I had rather keep a better Diet,
And live with Bread and water all my life:
Then in my Guts to keep so great a Riot,
And in my S^omacke have so sore a strife.
That I should puff, and blow, and swell, and sweat,
And be halfe-dead, ere I digest my meat.
124.
I would I were a man of all men's minds,
My Wit were drawn into all kind of passions:
And my Conceyts were all of sundry kinds,
My Clothes made after all-Countrey-fashions.
I knew the secret of all Natures-sence,
And so of Earth, and all her Excellence.
125.
And yet I would not: for then sure should I,
Be all too gazed at wheresoere I go:
And like the poor bare-feather'd Aesops-Pye,
When every Byrd did her owne-feather know.
Be followed with many a flowting-lacke,
Or Ravens feathers all pulled from my back.
126.
No, I had rather wear but home-spun-thread,
And have my Clothes close upon my Breech:
And by my Labours-toyle to get my bread,
And use no other but my Countrey-speech.
And rather have a Fool think me a fool,
Then crafty workmen know me by my Tool.
127.
I would I were the truest-hearted woman,
That ever spoke with a most pleasing Tongue:
And never mean to give offense to no man,
Nor never thrust into an idle throng.
But so have care of all my Carriage,
It may be help unto my Marriage.
128.
And yet I would not: for then every Maid,
Within our town, would stand and laugh at me:
And call me Fool, and say I were afraid,
To know what in an honest man might be.
For she that will not look ere she did leap,
Might curse the Tradesman, though his Ware were cheap.
129.
No, I had rather be a reasonable,
True, Honest, Witty, merry- Bony-Kate,
That would not fear the Constable,
To see him look in at our window-Grate.
As many We^ches will be now and then,
That have been meddling with too-many men.
130.
I would I were the rarest Politician,
That ever plotred for pre-eminence:
And of the Doggedst disposition,
That ever was in Natures residence.
And car'de not how the world to Ruin went,
So I might only purchase my Content.
131.
And yet I would not: For then do I fear,
Some sudden-Flash from Heaven would fall upon me:
And all the world rejoice to see and hear,
In helples grief, how I am woe begone me.
When I of force should bid the world Farewell.
And Death were sent to summon me to Hell.
132.
No, I had rather keep the plain Highway,
That leads the soul to her Eternal rest:
Then by Illusion, seek out a wry-way,
To hatche my Eggs up, in the Diuells-nest.
And with the World, when I had made an end*
To find in Heaven an Euerlasting-Friende.
133.
I would I were, and yet I would not too,
Because I know not that, I know ^ot what:
And when I would do, then I cannot do,
When that would put out this, this put out that,
And such strange Fancies would ^y spir^t feed,
That in the end, I should grow mad indeed.
134.
Then let me see, if I at least can see,
What may be seen, that is worthy to be seen*
Wherein might be, and only there might be,
That always has been, and has only been.
In true Conceit, in state of Comforts store,
Where I would be, and say, would not no more.
135.
Yea, that (...) such a thing indeed to find,
As one mi^^t seek until ^is Eyes were out:
With all the st^ength both of ^is heart and mind,
And travel over all the Earth about.
And noting Natures works, and worth in all,
Find all as nothing, or to nothing ^all.
136.
Yet there is something wheresoere it is,
And it is some-w^^re, and nowhere, but there:
Where all is well, and nothing is a^^sse,
But yonder, here and there and e^e^^-where.
Where the bright-Eyes of Bless^d-Soules may see,
Where all the Joys of Hearts and Soul^^ may be.
137.
^ut wher^s this same, where? that would be known,
And wh^re is this same knowledge to be ^ound?
And where is such a seed of Science sown?
And where is such a blessed piece of ground?
And where is such a Blessing to be sought,
That for that worth, se^^ all the world at ^ought?
138.
Where all the pride of Beawtie is put down,
What Natures Reason, must subscribe to Grace:
And wit and will, may wander up and down,
And Virtue only keeps a Glorious pl^ce,
Where she alone unto her Servants shows,
Where a^l the comfort of the spirit goes.
139
Yea, there alone the heart and soul may find,
The sacred sum of their Eternall-Sweete:
Which gladdes the soul, the spirit, and the mind,
Where all the Graces do toegther meet.
And all together, do agree in one,
To sing in Glory to their GOD alone.
140.
What? neither great, nor wise, no^ Rich, nor fair?
What would ^ be then? might I as I would:
I would not be a Moate amidst the Air,
Nor yet a Mowle, to dig within the ground.
Nor Byrd, nor Beast, that can but eat, and sleep,
Nor like a Baby, can but laugh and weep.
141.
Nor like a Bowby, without wit or sense,
Not like a Baboune, for a Bearardes whippe:
Nor like a Lowse, in beggars Residence,
Nor like a Flea, that can but leap and skippe.
Nor like a worm, but to be trodden on,
Nor like a Gue-Gaw, to be gaz'de upon.
142.
Nor would I be a Byrd within a Cage,
Nor Dog in Kennell, nor a Bore in Stye:
Nor Crab-Tree-staffe, to lean upon for Age,
Nor wicked Live, to lead a Youth awrye.
Nor like a Flooke, that floates but with the Fludde,
Nor like an Eele, that lives but in the mudde.
143.
Nor would I have the Crane pick out mine Eyes,
Nor Pyes, nor Parats, teach me how to prat^:
Nor fill my Pawnche too-full of Wood-cock-pyes,
Nor have M^dge-Howlet make me watch too-late.
Nor let the Cu^kooe learn me how to sing,
Nor with a Buzzarde, make too Low a wing.
144.
Nor would I be a C^tte, to hunt a Mowse,
Nor yet a Ferret, to go hunt a C^ny
Nor yet an Ao^ to stand and look a Lowse,
Nor yet a Sh^epes-head, to be sold for money.
Nor yet a Hawke, to se^ze upon a Ducke,
Nor yet a Nars^, to give a Baby suck.
145.
Nor would I write upon the death of Dogs,
And say here lies a good olde-stinking Curre:
Cut Rusty face^ out of rotten Logges,
Nor of an Owles-skinne, make an Ape a Furre.
Nor teach a Bird to whistle in a Cage,
Nor be a Ministrell at a Marriage.
146.
Nor teach a Cat, to hunt a Mowse drye-foote,
Nor a young Squyrrell ho^ to clime a Reed:
A skarre-cr^w in a Garden how to shoot,
Nor a blinde-Harper, how a Song to read.
Nor how a Fle^ may escape the Fingers ends,
Nor how a Lowse may live among her Friends.
147.
Nor would I be a Golden Alchymist,
To study the Philosophers fa^re stone:
And feed a sight of Fools, with Had-I-wist,
To weep for S^luer, when their Gold is gone.
Poope Noddy, never was there such an other,
To make a Cousen of a simple Brother.
148.
Nor would I be a Fool when all is done,
To wear Pyed Coats, Turn-spit, and eat fat-meat:
Follow my Master, dandle his young Son,
And tell my Mistress, who the Fool did beat.
That she might chide her Wenches every one,
For meddling with her Fool, when she was gone.
149.
Nor sing new-Ballads, nor make Countrey-games,
Nor set up sights, were never seen before:
Nor walk among my c^ue of Cursed-Dames,
And be a Pander to a Paltry-Who.
No, Pandarisme is so poor a Trade,
That none but Beggars, bargain for a Jade.
150.
No, I would not be any one of these,
Nor any of this wretched worlds delight:
I would not so my spirits comforts leese,
To have mine Eyes bew^tcht from heavenly light.
No, I would have an other World then this,
Where I would seek for my Eternall-Blisse.
151.
And till I come unto that Glorious place,
Where all Contents do overcome the heart:
And Love does live in Euerliuing-Grace,
While greatest Joy does feel no smallest smart.
But GOD is all in all, to his beloved,
The Sweet of souls, that sweetest souls have proved.
152.
To tell you truly, what I wish to be,
And never would be other, if I could:
But in the comfort of the Heavens Decree,
In soul and body, that I ever should.
Tho^g^ in the world, not to the world to live,
But to my GOD, my service wholly give.
153.
This would I be, and would none other be,
But a Religious servant of my God:
And know there is none other God but he,
And willingly to suffer mercies Rod.
Joy in his Grace, and live but in his Love,
And seek my bliss but in the heaven above.
154.
And I would frame a kind of faithful prayer,
For all estates, within the state of Grace:
That careful love might never know despair,
No ^eruile fear might faithful love deface.
And this would I both day and night devise,
To make my humble spirits Exercise.
155.
And I would arede the rules of sacred Life,
Persuade the troubled soul to patience:
The husband, Care, and Comfort to the wife,
To Child and servant, due obedience.
Faith to the friend, and to the Neighbor peace,
That love might live, and quarrels all may cease.
156.
Pray for the health of all that are deceased,
Confession unto all that are Convicted:
And patience unto all, that are displeased,
And comfort unto all, that are afflicted.
And mercy unto all, that have offended,
And Grace to all, that all may be amended.
157.
Pray for the King, the Queen, and Countries health
Their Royal issue, and their Peers of Estate:
The Counsel, Clergy, and the Commonwealth,
That no misfortune may their bliss abate.
But that, the Almighty so his Church will cherish,
That not a member of his Love may perish.
158.
Wish King, to have King David's heart,
And every Queen, the Queen of Shelaus wit:
And every Council Salomons best part,
Of understanding, for a kingdom fit.
And every Lady, fair Rebeccaes face,
And every Virgin, the wise Virgins Grace.
159.
And every Soldier, Iosuahs true spirit,
And every Scholar, Aarons eloquence:
And every Miser, wicked Dives merits,
And every poor man, Jobs true patience.
And every Lawyer, Mary's heavenly mind,
And every Merchant of Zacheus kind.
160.
Do not with Esaw, hunt for venizon,
And sell thy birthright for a mess of pottage:
Lest Jacob steal away thy benison,
When Isaach falls upon the years of dotage.
But be a Joseph in the time of need,
To good old Jacob, and his blessed seed.
161.
Be Abraham in obedient sacrifice,
And follow Lot in his loves holiness:
Like Solomon, be in thy Judgment, wise,
And Jonathan in friendships faithfulness
Like Henoch make thy Joy of heavenly love,
And with Eliah live in Heaven above.
162.
And diet not with Holofernes drink,
But follow Judith, in her joyful strength:
Let Dalila, not make stout Sampson wink;
Lest the Philistines fall on thee at length.
Nor Sal^mon be led with Pharaohs Child,
Lest by the flesh, the spirit be beguilde.
163.
Be both a Priest, a Prophet, and a King,
A Priest, to make thy self a Sacrifice:
A Prophet, to declare the way to bring
The blessed Spirit, unto Paradise.
A King to rule thy self, with such direction,
Thy Soul may keep thy body in subjection.
164.
Know what, and how, and where, and when to speak,
Be fearful, how thou do thy God offend:
A virtuous vow, take heed thou do not break,
And mercies pleasure willingly attend.
Hold back thy hand from all unlawful Action,
And weane thy Spirit, from ungodly Faction.
165.
Flatter not folly, with an idle faith,
Nor let earth stand upon her own desert:
But show what wisdom in the Scripture says,
The fruitful hand, does show the faithful heart.
Believe the word, and thereto bend thy will,
And teach obedience for a blessed skill.
166.
Chide sinners, as the father does his child,
And keep them in the Awe of loving fear:
Make sin most hateful, but in words be mild:
That humble patience may the better hear:
And wounded conscience may receive relief,
When true repentance pleades the sinners grief.
167.
Yet flatter not the foul delight of sin,
But make it loathsome in the ^ie of Love:
And seek the heart with holy thoughts to win,
Unto the best way, to the souls behoue.
So teach, so live, that both in word and deed,
The world may Joy thy heavenly rules to read.
168.
Heal the infect of sin, with oil of Grace,
And wash the Soul, with true Co^tritious tears:
And when Confession shows her heavy Case,
Deliver faith from all Infernal fears.
That when high Justice threatens sin with death,
Mercy again may give Repentance breath.
169.
Sit not with Satan, on the Horse of pride:
But see sweet Jesus sitting on an Ass:
Better on foot, then sowly so to ride,
As with the Devil into hell to pass.
There is no mean, but either heaven or hell,
For on this Earth must no man ever dwell.
170.
Time has a course, which nature cannot stay,
For youth must die, or come to doting Age:
What is our life on Earth? but as a play,
Where many a part does come upon the Stage.
Rich, poor, wise, fond, fair, foul, and great and small.
And old, and young, death makes an end of al.
171.
Where he that makes his life a Comedy,
To laugh and sing, and talk away the time:
May find it in the end a Tragedy,
When mournful Bells do make no merry chime.
When sad despair shall fear Infernal evil,
While Sin and death, are Agents for the devil.
172.
But do not Rave, nor Rail, nor stamp, nor stare,
As if thy care would go to cuffes with sin:
But show how mercy does Repentance spare,
While working faith, does heavenly favor win.
And loves obedience to the law does prove,
The chosen Soul, that God does chiefly love.
169.
Thus would I spend in service of my God,
The lingering hours of these few days of mi^e,
To show how sin and death are ouertrod,
But by the virtue of the power divine.
Our thoughts but vain, our substance slime and dust,
And only Christ, for our Eternal trust.
174.
This would I be, and say, would not, no more,
But only not, be otherwise then this:
All in effect, but as I said before,
The life in that life's kingdoms love of his.
My glorious God, whose grace all comfort gives,
Then be on Earth, the greatest man that lives.
FINIS.

