A TREATISE OF CHRISTIAN BENEFICENCE, AND OF THAT LIKE CHRISTIAN Thankfulness
which is due to the same.

The which, as they are duties of singugular account with God, so are they of
as necessary use to all Christians, for the keeping of faith and a good
conscience, as are fire and water for common use and comfort to the natural
life of all men.

Honor the Lord with thy riches, and with the first fruits (or chief) of all
thine increase. Pro. 3.9.

Go ye and learn what this is I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Matthew.
9.13.

A man that has friends ought to show himself friendly: for a friend is
nearer than a brother Pro 18.24.

He that rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house. Pro.
17.13.

Printed at London by John Harison for Thomas Man. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR JOHN POPHAM Knight, Lord chief Justice of
England, one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
AMong the rest of the most holy and wise Proverbs of king Solomon, who both
for godly policy, and also for purity of Religion, may worthily be esteemed
the wisest of all kings, all the time of his uprightness and sincerity: these
sentences (Right Honorable) are expressly commended by the most holy Spirit of
wisdom it self, to belong to the wise; yea even to those who ought to be
most wise above all other; to wit, the Princes, Judges and Rulers of the people
of God.

It is not good (says the wise king) to regard the face (that is, the person
of any man) in judgment. The reasons follow.

Him that says to the wicked, Thou art righteous, shall the people curse, yea
multitudes shall abhor him.

But to them that rebuke him shall be pleasure, and upon them shall come the
blessing of every goodman.

They (that is, every good man) shall kiss the lips of him that answers
upright words. Prou. chapter 24 ver. 23.24.25.26.

The which Sentences do briefly and very pithily give to understand these two
things: first how great vprightnes ought to be in all Princes, Judges and
Rulers, to the end they may judge righteous judgment: secondly, how great the
blessing is, which by the sentence of God himself, does belong to all such;
namely, that they shall be a joy to the people of God, that the people again
shall reverence the^, and that God will hear their prayers for the^. They show
also herewithal, that on the contrary, such as take an unjust course, have
reproach and dishonor, yea vengeance due unto them.

So graciously is the God of righteousness inclined and bent toward his
righteous servants; and so wrathfully is he settled in his judgment and decree
against the rest.

But leaving to treat of the duty of the Magistrate and Governor, which is
not the present purpose: may it please your Honor, to give one poor Minister
of the word of God, in the name of many, who by the grace of God have care of
our own bounden duty; your favorable good leave, in regard of the premises,
to testify that great joy which we have by you, and that reverend estimation
which we have of you, with hearty desire of all increase of Gods best graces and
blessings upon you, and the rest of our good Governors under her Highness;
because of that care of uprightness of judgment, wherewith God of his mercy
has honored and graced you in the sight of us all, to the sensible and
public benefit of all: seeing (as it is evident from the holy sentences
before rehearsed) it is the will and pleasure of God, that we of duty should
so do. And the rather also, because we perceive that mercy is linked with
justice, in your gracious and current proceedings; the which we know from the
book of God, to be effectual to help singularly, to the establishing of the
honor and peace of the throne of our most gracious Queen Elizabeth, whose
royal souereigntie through her whole dominions, we humbly beseech God of his
infinite mercy, even for Jesus Christ's sake, long and happily to continue and
advance among us. Amen.

Such (right Honorable, our very good Lord) is the general purpose of the
present writing, but yet so as the more particular intent, is to testify the
late increase of our joy, reverend estimation, and humble prayer with hearty
thanksgiving to God for you, and all other our good and godly Governors, under
her Majesty; as also the increrase of our humble and hearty thankfulness to you
and the^, and to her gracious Majesty especially, even for the late point of
so great merciful justice, which you have established and put in execution
among us, to the singular glory of God, honor of your government, and comfort
of all well-disposed subjects, in that you have suppressed the vagabond life of
a most wicked and unprofitable, yea a most dangerous and harmeful sort of
people: the which being of too ancient breed among us, were of late years so
mightily increased, that by their licencious and unjust, yea very sturdy and
shameless vagring and begging, all mercy of almes-giuing was so violently
catched up and devoured at every rich man's gate, and also at every mean man's
door, that mercy was degenerated, to the cruel and wastfull feeding and
fostering of such an idle and wicked rout, as by the rule of the holy Apostle,
were altogether unworthy of any alms, in so much as they were such, as utterly
refused to work. And be sides, in vain confidence and proud presumption of an
imagined prescription of time, at the first mention of their restraint, they
feared not, at our doors, to speak contemptuously and skornfully of so holy a
purpose, as if it had been an impossible thing, that rogues should have abiding
places, and that beggars should live of their labors.

But thanks be to God, to her Majesty, and to you: this excellent point of
merciful justice, was no sooner advanced and authorized by gracious Statute
wisely penned, and enacted by high Court of Parliament, to the same effect and
purpose; but it has so prosperously, and with so speedy success prevailed,
that God has, to the great comfort of all that love true judgment and mercy,
showed evidently, that his good hand went with the execution of it, as no doubt
his good Spirit was formerly president in that holy consultation and advise,
which was taken about it.

The which one Act (right Honorable) how many good acts it has wrought, highly
to the honor of God, and her Majesty, and the whole government; and also, how
good and commodious it is to the public weal of the whole nation, a long
narration would hardly suffice worthily to declare. O how much filthiness of
adultery and fornication, of the vagabonds themselves, is hereby cut off,
which was wont in more then brutish manner, to be practiced in all places of
their confused lodging together, at every Fair and market through the land,
after they had filled themse^ues with the fattest of the roast, and drunk
themselves drunken with the strongest of the Beer that their Hostess could
provide for them, for that which they had partly begged and partly stolen the
same day! What a cloak and covert of much bastardize, practiced by the rogues
bad-good masters, mistresses, and dames, is hereby taken away; seeing they shall
henceforth no more carry about the base-born, to hide them in far removed
places, or to lead them about, as their own natural children, as many of
them were wont to do! How are not only the disordered births, but also the
untimely deaths, of many young infants, prevented; the lives whereof (though
the fruit of their own bodies) this merciless and savage people little
regarded! How graciously is the man-stealing of some proper children, with the
intolerable misusage and disfiguring of them, hereby defeated, so that their
cruel and unnatural practices, shall no more abuse the pity of others by
begging with them! Who knows how many private persons shall be hereby
safegarded from robberies and pilferies; yea and the public peace, from
dangerous mutinies and rebellions, by such evil instruments (I mean counterfeit
soldiers) as were entering into that rude faction? In all these things, how are
the souls of such miserable and forlorn sinners, tendered and plucked out of
the devils jaws, as we may say; in that the most abominable course of their
life is dammed or hedged up, if happily they may at the last, held by due
correction, in a more orderly conversation, be brought to repentance, as there
is hope that God will give many that grace! To speak the sum of al in few words;
how happily are a most lawless and lice^tious multitude, whch by their
wa^dering disorder of life, eluded all law, brought within the just limits and
discipline of law; yea such a monstrous and sottish multitude, as neither
regarded Church nor common wealth, neither God nor Prince, neither word,
prayer, sacrament, nor marriage, neither wife, nor child, nor any honest labor,
either touching themselves, or for the education of their adulterous
offspring: but lived, and delighted themselves in a most barbarous and beastly
confusion, to the multiplying of a most vile generation! And how is the whole
land it self, and the sacred seat of justice, disburthened of that guiltiness
and danger of Gods wrath, which might in short space have grown, now at the
last, by over long sufferance: seeing so great and foul evils, would certainly
have cried to heaven with a loud and shrill voice for vengeance; if they had
not thus tempestiuely, by the power of lawful authority, and by the godly
care and remorse of our Magistrates, been made as it were dumb and speachlesse
before the judgment seat of God!

And now also, yet further then all this, by the denial of disordered succor,
or toleration to the idle and vagrant; o how co^modiously may poor laboring
householders, and vncounterfeit impotent and aged people, yea many thousands
both of young and old, such as shall be found to need relief, be, by that
uncomfortable and waste charge, which was even cast away in that former course
of giving, now relieved and cherished in their honest and lawful trade of
life, to the great glory of God, and to the singular blessing of the whole
land; if happily according to the good prouisoes, and liberties authorized to
the same end, by the worthy Statute and explanations thereof, the provision for
the poor shall be with a liberal heart, and with a wise and discreet hand
duly collected and employed.

Wherefore finally as a kindly fruit of all former respects; how ought not all
the people of the land be the more willing both in this and also in every
other good, dutiful, and comendable service of all just contributions,
required on the behalf of her Majesty; even for this, that it has pleased her
Highness, to take so gracious an order, upon the humble information of your
Honors, that her Subjects should be cased for ever of so great and noisome,
and every way so ungrateful a burden; and not only so, but to provide also,
that true alms, may be given and distributed in such a manner, as every
contributor may have much more comfort in the bestowing of the same, and
greater hope of a more rich blessing from God, upon every one, that is a
merciful and cheerful giver, then they could have before?

But who (as was said) can sufficiently, without a large discourse lay forth
the worthy parts, of this so noble and princely an Act; which shall stand
for ever in record, for a blessed memorial of the right godly wisdom and
care of our gracious Queen Elizabeth; and of all the worthies of the high
court of Parliament; and namely, of your Honor in this behalf, among all
other worthy Acts? Verily, more and greater good, both to our selves and to
all posterity, through the gracious blessing of our God, will grow from it, then
easily can of the wisest be conceived; if the justice herein prescribed,
being still pursued and practiced as there is good hope it shall; mercy also,
and liberality, which is likewise therein intended, and commanded, may be ready
to acompany and support justice, according to the minds of the Lawmakers.
That is to say; if, as all loitering drones and lubbers be forbidden to be
fatted abroad, so no diligent Be or painful Labourer be suffered for want of
necessary relief toward his over great family and charge of children,
specially in time of sickness, or in old age, or in times of dearth, be
suffered, as it were in the hardness of winter, when no flowers can be found,
to pine away and perish while he is closed up, as it were in his hiue, at his
own home. This verily, should be a very ungodly and unchristian, yea an
unnatural evil, as all cannot but confess. Nevertheless it is no greater,
then there is some danger of it, in many a blind and unmerciful nooke in the
land; if it be not prevented by the gracious circumspection of those, to whom
it shall belong. Yea the places of best hope, will always find it needful,
that the poor should have many good friends, of those that be in special
authority, to cause the law to speak, and to put the rest in mind of their
duties herein, lest their cry should ascend up before God more lamentably then
ever before. Musculus in Matthew. 12.
Certe turpis est mendicitas, sed tamen proximo suo quisque succurrat iubet
Deus. Alioqui crudele esset non dare egenti quae necessaria sunt, and interea
prohibere ne mendicet. Verily this common begging is an unseemly thing (as a
learned man says) Nevertheless (as he adds) it is the commandment of God
that every man should succor his neighbor: otherwise it should be a cruel
thing not to give unto the poor man such things as be necessary, and yet to
forbid him to beg.

God of his infinite mercy grant therefore, that all his Magistrates, in all
places, according to that great trust and large power committed to them in this
case, may have tender care, to see that all things may be faithfully and
diligently performed in this worthy service, for the relief of the poor, such
as shall be found to be so indeed, as the Apostle speaks in the like cause.
1. Tim. 5.3.5. And the same God grant, that every one to his power, smaller or
greater, may according to the mind and pleasure of our higher powers, and
chiefly of God himself, not only endeavor the preventing of every mischief,
not beseeming the Gospel of Christ; but also by all means, labor the
furtherance and advancement of so worthy a work, as is the practice of mercy,
to the strengthening of justice; which being well disposed and employed
together, are answerable to the goodly brazen pillars of the porch of Salomons
Temple, I^ci^ and Boaz to the establishing and co^firming of the Princes throne
and of the common wealth, and of all lawful callings, trades and traffike
therein, as it were from the Sion of the Lord. So great and tender care has
the Lord, that the poor of his people should for his sake be mercifully and
liberally provided for.

Now therefore, for the issue of this speech; may it please you right Honorable,
so far to favor the present endeavor of your humble Orator, that this Treatise
following, dedicated to your Honor, and intended for a gratulatory monument, of
the above named Act of Parliament (which shutting the door against idleness,
and all unthrifty and wastful misplacing of alms; does open the gate to the
blessed practice of true liberality in such sort, that true thankfulness also,
may therwithal be let in, which before went a roguing, with those that regarded
no home) may by the allowance, and acceptance of your Honor, be some
furtherance to the work, even to the best, that this so weak a hand could
attain unto.

And thus most humbly and heartily beseeching God, of his infinite goodness and
mercy, eue^ for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, to bless and preserve you long,
in your right honorable, healthful, and comfortable estate, here in this
present life, to his own glory, and to the service of her excellent Majesty;
for the just and peaceable government of the common wealth, to the joy and
comfort of all that do well, and to the terror of the rest, so long as they shall
continue in their ungracious and uncivil courses. And likewise beseeching God,
that after this life ended, when you have se^ued your time, according to the
counsel of God, you may have your part, in the inheritance of his heavenly
kingdom, among the rest of his most honorable Saints. I crave of your Honor,
all favorable pardon of my boldness, in presenting and dedicating these my poor
labors unto you under the credit and protection of your name. From Culford in
Suffolk the 13 of May 1600.

Your Honors in all humble and Christian duty to command. ROBERT ALLEN.

A GENERAL INscription of the Treatise following.
TO all beneficial Christians, who love and practice goodness and mercy, to
the relieuing of their poor and distressed brethren; and to all that do
receive the holy and Christian beneficence of their good and merciful
relieuers, in any time of their need:

For a token of thanks to the one, and for an admonition and spur of
thankfulness to the other, with all dutiful and hearty desire, that through
the blessing of our bounteous good God, it may be a helpefull encouragement to
all, for continuance and increase in all well-doing: R. A. a Minister of the
holy Word and Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, as one greatly indebted to
all, offers this poor mite; which, as touching this shot and reckening is
even all which for the present he has.

Craving herewithall, that (seeing by the goodness of God there is first a
vvilling mind) it may be accepted according to that he has, and not prejudiced
for any want of that which he has not, according to the privileged rule of
the Apostle Paul, 2. Cor. 8.12. the equity whereof, as well agrees to
thankfulness for benefits as to beneficence it self. Craving furthermore no
other reward, then the benefit of your faithful prayers, that he together
with your selves, may have all meet and convenient sufficiency in all things,
and abound in every good work, through the rich grace of God mightily
abounding toward us all, even for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake: who, though he
was most rich, yet willingly became most poor, that through his poverty all
of us might be made rich. To him therefore with the Father and the holy Ghost,
one only true God, be all praise, honor, and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

A Treatise of Christian beneficence, and of that like Christian thankfulness
which is due to the same.
Seeing the whole argument of this our intended Treatise, is called by the
Apostle Paul, The matter of Giving and Receiving, Philip. 4.15. by a
similitude borrowed from the use of books of Account, wherein is diligently
entered, and kept in record, what each party has from time to time delivered or
received the one from the other, till the day of reckening do come. We will
therefore, according to the same his holy direction, speak of it, under those
plain and familiar terms; following also therein, the same his order and
distribution, concerning the parts or branches thereof.

In the former part, which is of giving gifts or benefits, indeuouring as
great plainness as we can, we will in the first place, consider what giving is.

Secondly, what sundry virtues are required to the right manner of Giving,
and therwithall on the contrary, what be the vices which do either altogether
hinder, or at the least corrupt the same, if they be not shunned and avoided.

Thirdly, what is the reward of right christian giving.

Fourthlie, what the punishment of illiberalitie and not Giving is.

Last of all, certain answers shall be made, to such objections, as Satan and
man's own corrupt and covetous, or distrustful and vnbeteeming affection, do
mightily suggest, to the hinderance of holy beneficence; yea even to the
utter suppressing of it, if possibly the Devil could atchieue and win the
same. This shall be the order and contents of the first part of our Treatise,
concerning Giving.

In the latter part, which is of Receiving gifts or benefits; we will
likewise, in as plain an order and manner as we can attain unto, declare
first, what that Receiving is whereof we speak.

Secondly, what graces or virtues are requisite to the right manner of
Receiving gifts and benefits, and there with also, which be the contrary vices.

And in the third place, we purpose to show the greatness of the sin of
unthankfulness; and accordingly, how grievous punishment belongs to all
unthankful and irreligous Receivers; whosoever they be, that shall
unchristianly wast and consume that which is christianlie given, and bestowed
upon them.

Finally, we will add a certain Florilegie (if we may so call it) that is, a
collection of choice sentences out of the best sort of writers both former and
latter, christian and philosophical, such as God used among the heathen to
cherish that light of natural understanding, and conscience of humane office
and duty, which he would have preserved in the midst of them: and such also
as he has used for his more holy and honorable instruments for the direction
and instigation of his people from time to time, to walk not only in
humanity, but even in Christian mercy and compassion toward their brethren,
in a holy communion of Saints before him. Not for necessity of proof or for
power of persuasion, as if the holy Scriptures were not alone sufficient to
every holy use, both of doctrine, reprehension, comfort and exhortation: but
that every one, that will not shut his eyes, may more clearly perceive, that he
shall stand every way convict, and condemned before God, and in his own
conscience, and before the world, if he do not mind and practice the duties
herein contained. And that especially, in more then ordinary hard times, such
as of late have continued for sundry years together, and are like again to
renew upon us, if we call not the more earnestly upon God for mercy, and if we
shall not more unfeignedly repent of our most grievous sins, which have, as it
were, armed his justice, and kindled his wrath against us. And in this respect,
I trust, such addition of sentences shall not be ungratefully accepted, either
of the learned, who will take an honest and scholler-like delight in the
elegancie of the speech, wherein the Authors express their grave and weighty
meditations of these matters: or of the unlearned, for whose sake I will
English at the least the more brief and principal of them. And the rather
have I this trust, because they will wisely consider, that there is more
liberty allowable this way, in a course of writing, then in an usual order
and custom of preaching: and again, because in no other argument may this be
to better purpose performed, then in that which is presently in hand.

Excellency of Giving.
THE FIRST PART of the Treatise.
CHAP. 1.
What Giving is.

IN so much as in this argument of Giving and Receiving; Giving, as was
observed in part before, has the first place in order, it being as it were by
birth and course of nature before Receiving; but much rather, in so much as it
is of greatest pre-eminence and worth in dignity, to the which also belongs
the chief fruit, and as it were the first-bornes double portion in the
blessing; according to those words of our Savior Christ himself, which the
Apostle Paul would have very diligently remembered of all Christians, in that he
said, It is a blessed thing to give rather then to receive, Act. 20.35. Reason
therefore strongly chalengeth, that we begin with Giving, as with the
principal and more worthy part of that Prize, which now is striuen for.

And how, I pray you, should it not be as the Apostle remembers from the
doctrine of our Savior Christ, that Giving is a more blessed thing than
Receiving; seeing that by how much men of God, are more bountifully minded, and
more liberally handed; by so much do they more lively, both in disposition of
mind, and also in practice of Action, represent and resemble the likeness of
God himself: who by no other thing is better manifested and made known,
either for his own honor and glory, or to our comfort, then by the bounty
of his goodness and mercy, in giving and bestowing his benefits and blessings
upon us, his poor and unworthy servants? This doubt the Lord himself gives
clearly to understand in his holy Scriptures, where he has of purpose most
fully revealed himself; in that he holds forth the light of his mercy, to
shine out most brightly among the re^^ of his most noble and divine virtues; as
we may perceive by a few testimonies culled out of many, which it shall be good
for us to allege, before we proceed any further, as it were out of so warm a
Sunshine. The Prophet Moses tells us, that at what time it pleased God, at
his request, to proclaim the glory of his name, Exodus chap. 34. verses 6.7.
that he used more words in number, and larger in sense, to express his mercy
then any divine property else: yea then the wrath of his justice, which is there
mentioned with it. The words of mercy which exceed in number are these:
Merciful, gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth;
compared with, not making the wicked innocent, and visiting of iniquity: four
or five to two. The words which exceed in largeness of sense are these,
Reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin;
that is, infinite sins, and all kind of great and grievous sins; compared
with these words: Visiting the inquitie of the fathers upon the children, and
upon the childrens children, to the third and fourth generation. But mark, I
pray you, that I do not lessen or diminish Gods justice, to enlarge his mercy;
for that were most impious sacrilege, seeing both are infinitely perfect above
all unequal comparison: but I speak, as Moses tells us that the Lord
himself spoke, co^paring the displeasure or anger of his justice, with the
favor of his mercy, in regard of his covenant made in respect of Christ, by
whose satisfaction this wrath of justice is wonderfully co^tracted, yea, in
respect of the elect, made temporal, yea is clean diuerted and abolished. For
otherwise perfect; that is, infinite, both mercy and justice, meet together in
the salvation of the elect; God accounting it just to save the unjust for
Christ's sake, who is the Lord our righteousness. But let us come to some other
testimonies wherein God has in singular manner renoumed his mercy. The Lord
(says the holy Psalmist) is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great mercy. The Lord is good to all and his mercies are over all his works.
Psalm. 145.8.9. And Psalm. 136. he repeateth this foot of the song, as often as
there be verses in the Psalm; that is, 26 times one after the other: For his
mercy endures for ever. And he makes this as the chief reason of all his
works; yea even of his most fearful and heavy judgments upon the wicked: in
the which, he propounds to himself, not so much the confusion and
destruction of the wicked in his justice, as the benefit of his Church and
people, to the glory of his grace and mercy; as is easy to be seen in the
reading of that Psalm. According also to that Isaiah 43.4. Because thou were
precious in my sight, and were honorable, and I loved thee (says the Lord)
therefore will I give man for thee, and people for thy sake. This singular care
of the Lord over his people, is every where repeated in the holy Scriptures,
Read Psalm. 9.9. and Psalm. 10.17. and 18.27. and 34.6. and 40.17. and 113.5.
and 146.7.8.9. God will be a refuge to his poor people, he will hear them, he
will save them, he will destroy their enemies, etc. And for what other causes
also, does God at any time advance any of his servants from poor estate to
high degree; out of adversity to prosperity; but that they might glorify his
name, in being a refuge and succor to the rest of their poor and distressed
brethren; according as Mordecai sends his admonitorie message to Queen
Ester, chap. 4.14. saying: Who knows whether thou art come to the kingdom
for such a time'

Who therefore sees not, that the merciful relieuing of the needy and poor,
(specially such as approve themselves to be of the household of faith,
faithful servants in the family and Church of God is a virtue of singular
excellency: seeing such as do thus, do herein show themselves in special
manner, as dear children, to be the most kindly and ingenuous imitators and
followers of God their heavenly father, in that which he accounts his most
singular glory as we have seen before. In which respect also, says our
Savior Christ to his disciples: Be ye merciful, as your Father is merciful.
But not only must the children of God be like their heavenly father in doing
good to their fellow brethren, but even to their enemies also, as the same our
Savior teaches. For even God is not only kind and beneficial to the good
and just, but also to the unkind and evil, causing the comfortable light and
warmth of his Sun to arise upon them, and his rain to make their fields and
cattle fruitful: Matthew. 6.44.45. and Luke 6.35.36. Finally, according to the
holy Proverb, chapter 19.22. That which is to be desired of a man is his
goodness. For herein specially is all that comprehended for the which he is
to be praised: as 2. Chron. 3 2. verse 32. the whole praise of Hezekiah is
noted by his goodness. And so also of king Josiah, chapter 35.26.

The heathen also, whether by the light of nature, or by the remnant of
tradition of doctrine, from the first fathers of whom they came, after the
dispersion of the nations, they held this for a principle, and so have set it
down in their writings; that in nothing man is more like unto God, then in
beneficial and kind dealing. And when Demosthenes (as they write) was asked,
what man might have, wherein he should resemble God, he answered: If he should
deal beneficiallie, and speak truly. And hence it was no doubt, that even
among the same heathen people of the world; the honorable title of beneficence
and bountifulness was, as it were, by a law of nations, principally attributed
and ascribed to Princes and Rulers; whom it should beseem best, as in name, so
in the virtue it self to express the divine nature of God most. This coustome
of the heathen is pointed at by our Savior Christ, Luke. chapter 22.25. where he
says thus, They that bear rule over the Gentiles are called EVERGETAI, that
is, gracious, or beneficial and bounteous.

Nevertheless, here, before we go any one step further, it is to good
purpose, that we do consider, that betwixt the bounteous and beneficial
Giving of the Lord, and all humane beneficence, there is necessarilly a great
and unmeasurable difference to be put. First, because God is the only spring
and fountain of all beneficence; so that from him alone are derived all good
gifts, whatsoever either man or Angel are partakers of, or howsoever they are
made instruments of any good benifite and blessing either of them to other.
For as the Apostle Paul says from the Prophet Isaiah, and both of them in the
name of the Lord, Who has known the mind of the Lord? or who was his
counselor? Or who has given to him first, and he shall be recompensed. For of
him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be glory for ever.
Amen. Romans 11.34.35.36. and Isaiah chap. 40.13.14. And yet more particularly
touching man; whether Prince or noble Peer, rich or mighty, learned or in
authority, Prophet or Apostle, whosoever he be, he cannot possibly have any
thing, whether of this world, or belonging to the kingdom of God, to give,
unless he have first received it of that perfect and co^plete fullness which
is only in the Lord. So that worthily may the Apostle ask of one as well as of
the other, and chiefly of such as have the most excellent gifts: Who separateth
thee? And what have thou which thou have not received? and if thou have
received it, why do thou boast as if thou had not received it? 1. Cor.
4.7. And Job. 1.21. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away blessed be the
name of the Lord.

Secondly, God gives such gifts, and in such manner, as no creature is able to
give them. Thine o Lord (says king David) is greatness, and power, and
glory, and victory, and praise: for all that is in heaven and earth is thine,
thine is the kingdom o Lord, and thou excellest as head over all, and in thine
hand is power and strength, and in thy hand it is to make great, and to give
strength unto all. Now therefore, o our God, we thank thee, and praise thy
glorious name. But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to
offer willingly after this sort? For all things come of thee, and of thine own
hand we have given thee. 1. Chro. 29.11. etc. And thus no one man, but only God
has given the whole earth, and distributed it among all the sons of men. Ps.
115.16. Thus he and no other has given his only son our Lord Jesus Christ, to
and for the redemption and salvation of his Church. Isai. 9.6. and chapter 49.6.
Ioh. 3.16. and chapter 4.10. and Romans 5.15. etc. where the excellency of this one
gift is amplified above all other by the holy Apostle: and chapter 8.31, 32. What
shall we then say to these things? If God be on our side, who can be against
us? who spared not his own son, but gave him for us to death, how shall he not
with him give us all things also? According to this divine munificence, God
has given the Church to Christ, Psalm. 2.8. and Ioh. 17.6, 7, 8, etc. to the
end, that though it had justly deserved to be utterly stripped, and left wast
and naked, it might nevertheless by him be beautified and adorned with all
excellent and princely gifts. Mat. 28.18 19, 20. Ephesians. 4.11, etc. Ier. 3.15.
Isa. 50.4. even with such gifts as no money could purchase; but only the blood
of Jesus Christ, which is more precious then all gold and silver, Act. 8.20. 1.
Pet. 1.18.19. Among these most precious gifts, is heavenly knowledge and
understanding Ps. 119.34. Mat. 11.25, 26, 27. and chapter 13.11. and chapter 16.17.
Likewise faith and repentance, and forgiveness of sins, are in the number of
these inualuable gifts of God, Act. 5.31, 32. and chapter 11.17, 18. 2. Tim. 2.25,
26. Ier. 24.7. and chapter 32.39.40. In this catalogue of the gifts of God, is that
peace of conscience which passes all understanding, Philip. 4.7. that is to
say, such a gift, the excellency whereof cannot thoroughly be discerned of us.
Finally, of this magnifice^t bounty of God, eternal life and salvation are the
gifts of God, to poor miserable and damnable sinners. All these, Gods bounty
above man's.
and if there be any such like; they are such gifts of God, as infinitely
exceed all man's donation and gift. And no marvel, though the gifts of God be
thus inestimable; because his love toward us, from whence they proceed, is
passing all knowledge. Ephesians. 3.19. So that to set out the greatness of Gods
gifts, we may justly say unto God, with his holy Prophet: What shall we render
to the Lord for all his benefits toward us. Psalm. 116.12. And with his holy
Apostle What thanks can we recompense to God, etc. 1. These. 3.9. And to
admonish our selves of our duties: O my soul praise thou the Lord, and all
that is within me praise his holy name. My soul praise thou the Lord, and
forget not all his benefits. Who forgiueth all thine iniquity, etc. Psalm.
103.1. etc. Read also Psalm 107. And to comfort our souls against all
spiritual fears, anguish, and disquietment; Return to thy rest o my soul:
for the Lord has been beneficial unto thee. Because thou have delivered my
soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling: I shall
walk before the Lord in the land of the living, Psalm. 116.1. etc. Hitherto
therefore, of the second difference of Gods beneficence; how in measure, it
infinitely exceeds all the bountifulness of man.

Thirdly, God only is constant and unweariable in continuing the bounty of his
gifts upon all such as he chooses at the first, to bestow his bounty upon:
for Whom he once loves, he loves to the end. John. 13.1. The unchangeable
decree of God is expressed by his fatherly love. Mal. chap. 1.2. and Romans 9.13.
As it is written, I have loved Iaakob. And Romans 11.29. The gifts and calling of
God are without repentance and Hosh. 13.14. Repentance is hid from mine eyes.
and again, 1. These. 5.24. Faithful is he which has called you, and he will
do it. and Isai 40.28. Know thou not? or have thou not heard, that the
everlasting Lord the God has created the ends of the earth? He neither
faints nor is weary: there is no searching of his understanding, etc. and
verse. 31. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, etc. And
this is the cause, why king David, in the place before alleged: 1. Chron. 29.
acknowledging the present great grace, bestowed upon himself, and the people,
in offering willingly toward the house and worship of God, to be his special
gift: he prays God, to keep the same grace for ever, in the purpose and
thoughts of the hearts of his people, and that he would still prepare their
hearts unto himself. And further, that he would give to his son Solomon a
perfect heart, to keep his commandment, etc. For right well did the holy king
know, that man left to himself, is lighter then vanity; and most fickle in the
purpose and care of the best things; and namely, in beneficence and liberality
toward the Church and people of God. Wherefore also, well says a godly learned
man: that it is proper to God to hold on in a continual care to save and
preserve, and not to be provoked to cease from the bestowing of his benefits,
because men are unworthy of them.

Finally, he is infinitely more kind and bounteous to his enemies then any man,
or all men can be to theirs, though all their kindness were laid together.
Matthew. 5.45. Luke 6.35.36. Romans 2.4. And that either most graciously to win
their souls unto him, for their own most happy salvation: or else to leave
them altogether most justly without excuse. But thus the greatness of Gods
divine bounty, and the excellency of his gifts, furpassing all gifts that
any man or Angel, yea that all men or Angels can possibly give: they have
held us somewhat longer then was at the first intended, though not with lost
time or labor, as we trust. Let us now return to instruct our selves further
touching that beneficence and giving which ought to be in continual practice
among men; after the example and president which we have in the Lord, so far as
we (prevented by his good grace) may in our measure attain unto.

Giving therefore (wherein men in their poor measure may by the grace of God
resemble that divine bountifulness which is in God, like as many little
gutters or channels of the stream may declare how plentiful the head of the
river or lively spring is) it is (to speak something more generally) a free
imparting and communicating of that which is (at the least in a man's own
persuasion) rightly his own, Giving what, more generally.
to the use or commodity and possession of another. Or thus: It is the
alienating of a man's own right, to make another the owner of that, wherein he
had all the property before.

According to this more general definition, a man might take occasion to
speak more generally of giving; by a distinction of Gifts, according to the
diverse condition and estate of the giuers; and according to their several
minds and purposes in giving, and so forth. For there are gifts of the Subject
to the Prince, as the Moabites and Aramites brought gifts to king David, when
he had subdued them: 1. Chron. 18.2.6. of the servant to the Master, of the
tenant to the landlord, and of the child to the father, as gratulatory and
dutiful presents for honors sake, as Joseph sent gifts to Iaakob his father
out of Egypt into Canaan. Genesis 45.23.

And again, there are gifts of the Prince to the Subject for reward, or of
mere clemency and favor, according to the royal bounty of a Prince; as in
the 6. chapter of the book of Ester, where the great king Ahashuerosh asks
Haman: What shall be done to the man whom the king will honor? And Dan. 2.48.
king Nebuchadnezzar made Daniel a great man, and gave him many and great
gifts.

There are gifts of the poorer and weaker, to those that be more rich and
mighty, to procure favor, or at the least, to mitigate the rage and fury of
anger; to which end, Iaakob presented his gifts to Esau, and in most submisse
and humble manner desired him to accept of his present. And as wise Abigail by
her presents, together with her gracious behavior, appeaseth the wrath of
David, greatly kindled against her husband Nabal. Of the which kind of gifts,
it is said in the holy Proverbs: A gift in secret pacifieth anger, and a gift
in the bosom great wrath. Proverb. 21.14.

On the other side; there are gifts of the rich and mighty, to the poorer and
inferior sort, Diverse kinds of gifts
because they mind to make them indebted to them, that they may use them for
their greater benefit and gain, as Pharaoh preferred Joseph, and
Nebuchadnezzar Daniel, and those other three men of Israel.

Some give gifts, to help out good and just causes and suits, as Iaakob sent
presents to the chief Governor of Egypt; little thinking that it had been
Joseph his son: Genesis 43.11. Take (says he to his sons) of the best fruits
of the land in your vessels, and bring the man a present, etc. And
contrariwise, some give gifts to corrupt true judgment, and to contriue and
compass a mischief: of whom it is said, A wicked man takes a gift out of the
bosom to wrest the ways of judgment. Pro. 17.23. and thus Ziba presented
king David with a gift, minding and compassing treachery against his master,
2. Sam. 16. For a gift if it be once accepted it is of great force every way,
as Prou. 17.8. It prospers, whithersoeuer it turns.

Finally, there are gifts of one friend and neigbour to an other; and that of
all degrees, when they are kindly affected the one to the other, for mutual
love and friendships sake; the one striving after a sort to overcome the other
with kindness and benefits: according to the common saying which goes
concerning such: There is no love lost betwixt them. After this manner the
Queen of Sheba gave king Solomon great gifts: and he again requited her with
like royoll gifts, 1. King. chapter 10. verses 10.13. The which kind of strife has
been always honorable, even among the nations of the heathen; and the more
honorable, because (as they rightly esteemed) if a man strive unto thankfulness,
there is no reproach or dishonor, though he be unwillingly overcome. They write
of Taxiles, a petty king of India, that he offered Alexander, coming out to
make war against him, this notable challenge: If (says he) thou be our
inferior, receive a benefit of us; but if thou be our better, then do us a
good turn. Alexander accepting the challenge: We will strive (says he)
whether of us shall be the more beneficial. Giving what, more special.
Alexander then embracing Taxiles very cuteously, did not only abstain^ from
spoiling his country, but also he enlarged his dominion.

Thus as was said, there are diverse kinds of gifts, and great variety in the
diverse manner of the bestowing and placing of them.

But it is not the intent of the present Treatise, to follow this argument in
so large a discourse; but only to speak of religious and me^cifu^ Giving;
which, wearing the crown or garland above all the rest, may receive a more
particular and special declaration, thus: It is a most free, or frranke, and
liberal imparting some meet and convenient portion of that wherewith God of
his goodness has blessed every man, That this is a part of goodness and
beneficen^e, it appears, Heb. 8.3. under the name of offering gifts to God,
yea the Lord req^ireth the heart it self as of gift. He will a^cept of nothing
in way of constrain^ or extortio^. Re^de also Matt. 5.23. If thou bring thy
gift to the altar. and^
to the maintenance and advancement of Gods pure religion and worship, and to
the merciful relieuing, comforting and succouring of all such as we see, or
for want of such, of those whom we do by credible report, understand at any
time, to be in any present necessity and need, in such m^ner as God himself
would have his own worship to be vpheld and furthered, and the poor among his
people in all Christian Churches, to be comfortably relieved and succored.

Of the which religious and merciful contributing and giving, are the words of
our Savior Christ, men^ioned in the beginning of this chapter, to be
understood, in that he said: It is a blessed thing to give rather then to
receive. It is our purpose therefore to employ our chief study and diligence
to the laying open of this point so far as that portion of time and grace may
afford, which God of his mercy shall, in the midst of the ordinary duties of
his holy ministry, alot unto the same.

CHAP. 2. A gift must be free.

What graces or virtues are requisite to the right manner of Giving: and of the
contrary vices which do either hinder or corrupt the same.

BEcause the examination of the definition or description of giving, will
afford us a commodious and just occasion to note the virtues of right Christian
giving: and likewise because the virtues being known the contrary vices will the
more evidently appear: it shall be worth our labor to take a more large view
and examination of the same; and even to make it the ground and direction of
this our second Chapter.

First of all therefore, it comes to be considered that Giving (as was said)
is a free, or frank, and liberal imparting or communicating, etc.

Now that it is so, that a Gift must be free, and proceed of a liberal and
frank mind, it is evident and plain from that which our Savior Christ
teaches in the sixth chapter of the Evangelist Luke, verses 33, 34, 35. If
(says he) ye do good to them which do good to you, what thank shall ye have?
For even sinners do the same. And if ye lend to them of whom ye have hope to
receive, what thank shall ye have? For even sinners lend to sinners to receive
the like. Wherefore love ye your enemies, and do good and lend, looking for
nothing again, etc. and Prou. chap. 25.21.22. If he that hates thee be
hungry, give him bread to eat. etc. and Romans 12.20, 21. Overcome evil with
goodness. Luke 10.30. etc.

If then Christians must be beneficial to their enemies, though nothing can be
looked for in way of recompense from their hands; much rather must we be
helpful to those that be Christianly minded toward us, though they shall never
be able to requite us. If we must overcome evil with goodness (which as it is
the most honorable, so is it the most difficult victory that may be) much
rather must we overcome our selves, to do good to those, who would, if they were
able, give us encouragement by their kindness, to strive this way with them.
It is contrary to the nature of a gift for the Giver to have any desire of a
recompense for it. This were rather to put to usury, or to sell, or at the
least to make an exchange of one thing for another, and not to give a gift. He
that gives a gift in truth, must do it simply, even for it self, as it were,
because in his own heart he esteems it meet and worthy that it should be
done, because God has so commanded, and because he has promised so much the
rather to recompense it, by how much all humane quittance is more firmly
neglected. To this purpose (says our Savior Christ) When thou make a feast,
bid thou the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind, that cannot
recompense thee again, and thou shall be recompensed at the day of the
resurrection. Luke chapter 14.12, 13.14.

That also which our Savior Christ commands his disciples, concerning the
preaching of the Gopell and working of miracles, which were precious gifts of
God, saying: Freely ye have received, freely give, Matthew. 10.8. the same also
has place by a certain analogy and proportion in the distribution of the
outward blessings and Gifts of God, from the hands of all those to whom, as to
his stewards, he has of his free favor committed the distribution of them.
For seeing God gives the one as well as the other of his free bounty, these
as well as they, are to be distributed freely, of benevolence, and not as of
sparing, or grudgingly, as Paul instructs the Corinthians, 2. epist. 9.5. And
again in the 14. verse of his Epistle to Philemon: Without thy mind (says he)
would I do nothing, that thy benefit should not be as of necessity, but
willingly.

When the Creeple, which lay at the gate of the Temple of Jerusalem to ask
alms, desired an alms of Peter and John, as we read, Act. 3.2. etc. Peter
says unto him: Silver and gold I have none, but that which I have, that I give
thee: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth arise and walk. Peter no doubt
was willing to have given gold or silver to the Creeple freely, if he had had
it, as may appear in that he gave willingly and freely that which was better
than gold.

This grace of freeness or franknesse is necessary, to the end it may be done
with cheerfulness and gladness of heart; which is a grace of near affinity
with the former, and is greatly esteemed of the Lord: according as it is said,
The Lord loves a cheerful giver, 2. Cor. 9.7. Yea, so does he love it, that
he prefers a smaller gift, which comes willingly and chearefully, before a
gift of greater value, when it is drawn forth constrainedly. Wherefore (as the
Apostle says) according as every man wishes in his heart, not grudgingly, or
of necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver: in the place even now
alleged. And before that, in the 12. verse of the eigth chapter. If there be
first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not. Hence also it is that, in the beginning of the
same chapter, Saint Paul very highly commends the Christians of the
Macedonian Churches, because in great trial of affliction their joy abounded,
and their most extreme poverty abounded to their rich liberality. For to
their power (says the Apostle) I bear record, yea, and beyond their power
they were willing: And prayed us with great instance that we would receive the
grace and fellowship of the ministering which is toward the Saints. A notable
example of an excellent grace, the which being so singularly commended by the
holy Ghost; Examples of cheerful giving.
may justly both give encouragement to such as are at any time most free and
frank (seeing as the Apostle gives to understand, they have herein a very
honorable fellowship in a very gracious work, most worthy of all hands to be
helped forward) and also it may justly shame the most beggarly and servile
liberality of the common sort of worldly professors, whose hearts are tied,
yea, as it were, chayned and locked up in their chestes and purses. For when
due consideration of circumstances, do oftentimes much commend and advance a
thing above it self, being simply considered; and namely in this action of
liberal giving, when a thing is given with a large heart, and not niggardly;
willingly, yea desirously of themselves, and not by any vehement entreaty of
others; of that little which a man has, and not of superfluity; when a man
esteems his gift a benefit, yea an honor to himself, in that he is
admitted to have communion with the Saints of God, to the relief of his
Saints; and finally, when a man seeks the occasion of giving and offers
himself, rather then stays till he be prompted by others, and neglects not
the occasion being manifestly offered unto him: by all these circumstances the
liberality of the Macedonians is commended unto us for a rare example to be
followed herein.

But the Macedonians are not altogether alone. Let us therefore help forward
our own slacknesse by some other examples. Among the which Zache in the 19.
chapter of the Evangelist Luke (though he were least in stature of body among a
great multitude) yet he is an example as tall as a Cedar in Lebanon, yea and
also speedily shot up in more excellent manner then the gourd of Jonah, to the
magnifying of the mighty power of God, in the grace of his blessed Gospel.
For so soon as he began to taste of the sweetness of that salvation which is
brought to light by our Savior Christ, he stands forth, and his heart is
enlarged to profess, even before the Lord, who knew his heart: Behold Lord
(says he) the half of my goods I give to the poor, etc. And verily, if we
ask the cause why the common sort of our rich pofessours (a small number
excepted in comparison of the rest) are now a days so skant in giving, as they
are; and in their skantnesse so vnchearefull: it is for that their hearts
continue so furfetted and oppressed with gross cares and covetous desires
after this worldly pelf, that they have small taste, and willingly are ignorant
(notwithstanding they have much teaching) what those fruits be, which the
bounty of God toward themselves, ought to draw from them, in respect of their
brethren: which lesson Zache, being a willing and teachable scholar, by and by
understood.

And let us well mark that our Savior Christ, who accepted the offer of
Zache, which was but of half his goods to the poor, refuses to give any
encouragement to that other rich man in the 18. chap. of the same Gospel,
unless he would sell all that he had, and give the same wholly to the poor.
Why was that? Zache being enlightened by faith, and touched with godly sorrow
for his sins, dedicated the half of his goods to the poor, with a hearty
and cheerful affection, to declare his thankfulness to the Lord for his great
mercy toward him in the forgiveness of his sins, etc. But the other rich man
goes away heavy and sorrowful, even to think of parting from his earthly
possessions and goods; preferring them before the spiritual riches and
inheritance of the kingdom of heaven. Therefore he remaining unbelieving, and
without repentance, goes from Christ, without any comfort at all, for that
time. And the hardness of his heart, in that he was closed and shut up against
the poor, was also even as a bar to hold out the comfort of Gods mercies,
that it could make no entrance, nor find any friendly entertainment with him.

But that we may see, as in a crystal glass, of what reckening a cheerful
and hearty giver is in the sight of God: let us consider the example of the
poor widow, as it follows in the 21. chapter of Luke, in comparison of
many rich men. For though in respect of the small quantity of her offering,
she gave as good as nothing to speak of, yet her gift is preferred before the
greater quantity of all the rich men's offering put together at the same time:
Of a truth (says our Savior Christ, seeing her willing and ready mind) this
widow has cast in more then they all. For they have of their superfluity,
cast into the offerings of God, but she of her penury has cast in all the
living she had. Our Savior gives to understand, that she had no more then she
offered, till she should earne it with her fingers ends, as we use to speak.
Her example therefore is notable, in that she would rather want her self, then
to be altogether wanting in the holy contribution to the treasury of the Lords
Temple.

The like willingness and cheerfulness of mind, did utter it self more
plentifully in outward fruits, in that excellent woman Dorcas, according to her
more rich and able estate, who used to clothe the poor with coats and
garments, which she made at her own costs and charges, to the relieuing of
many Christians, as we read Act. 9.36. etc. Lydia also was so earnest, that
she constrained Paul and his company to come to her house and to abide there.
Act. 16.15.

The like cheerfulness ought to be in the heart of every godly woman,
according to that notable description of a virtuous wife, in the last chapter
of the Proverbs; where it is written, that She stretches out her hands to the
poor, yea both of her hands to the needy.

Hereunto let us add the example of that noble Obadiah, for singular
mercifulness, in venturing his own life, in hiding and fostering a hundredth
of the Lords Prophets, to preserve them from the rage of Iezabel. 1. King.
18.3.4. Surely Obadiah would never have put his life in so great hazard, if he
had not had a frank and free heart thereunto. Abraham ran to give his guests
intertainment, Genesis 18.2.

But not to stay in particulars any longer, let us come to the general
commendation of the people of God, in their holy co^tribution toward the
Tabernacle of the Lord, Exo. 35.20. etc. Every one (says the text) whose
heart encouraged him, and every one whose spirit made him willing, came and
brought an offering to the Lord for the work of the Taberna^le of the
Congregation, and for all the uses thereof, and for the holy garments: Both men
and women, as many as were free hearted, etc. they brought a free offering to
the Lord, gold, s^lke precious stones etc. The women brought their looking
glasses made of some shining metal chap. 38.8. Yea, more then enough was
offered by the congregation. chap. 36.5.6. Read also 2. Chron. 29.31.36. and
chap. 35.8. where the willingness of the Princes and whole congregation, is
commended both in king Hezekiah, and also in king Josiah his reign.

And let this (I pray you) be well observed, that the Lord does not for his
part, willingly accept of any offering or duty, which is not performed with a
willing and cheareful heart, as appears in the fifth verse of the 36. chap.
of Exodus, where he admits only the willing heart to offer unto him. This is
the thing (says Moses) which the Lord commands, saying: Take from among you
an offering unto the Lord. Whosoever is of a willing heart, let him bring such
or such an offering, as is there expressed. It is like to the proclamation
which the Lord makes, Deuteronomy. 20.8. concerning the going forth of his people to
fight his battles. Whosoever is afraid or faint-hearted (says the Lord) let
him go and return to his house, least his brethrens heart faint like his
heart. The Lord we see, refuses the faint-hearted soldier, as no soldier for
him. And even so he refuses the vnchearfull Giver, conributor, or offerer,
either toward his worship, or toward the relief of the poor among his people,
as no meet offerers or contributors to him; seeing they be such, as have not
yet taken any courage to fight against that profaneness, covetousness, and
distrust in Gods providence, with many other sins, which of necessity must
be overcome by a spiritual encounter against them, before the Lord can take
pleasure either in the giver and offerer, or in the gift and offering which is
tendered before him: whereof we have for evident examples, Cain in the old
world, and Ananias with Sapphira his wife in the latter days of the Gospel.

Wherefore, not without great cause does king David (as was upon occasion
touched before) give most hearty and glorious praise unto God, for giving
himself and his people, hearts to offer willingly for the building of the
Lords Temple. 1. Chron. 29.14, etc. And let us observe it well, that it is
indeed a special grace, from the bounteous hand and gracious Spirit of God;
and the same also a singular token of his love, when any can with willing
hearts, as wise disposers of the manifold grace of God, cheerfully distribute
the good gifts of God, which he has made them stewards of. For doubtless,
there is naturally in every man, so great self-love and covetous desire to
increase still in worldly riches and wealth, and so little zeal of Gods word,
or love to his children, that our hearts may be compared to the bowe-net, which
easily takes in the fish, but hardly lets any go out again; and our hands
are as one would say, so glewish or bird-limed, that they hold fast whatsoever
comes into them; so all is fish which comes to not. Liberality therefore
and franknesse of heart is a gift or grace of God.

A very near, yea an inseparable companion to this godly, frank and
free-heartednesse, whereof we have hitherto spoken; is a holy joy and delight
as well in giving to the relief of men, as in offering to the honor and glory
of God. So we read concerning the notable example of the Macedonians alleged
before, that their joy abounded in their willing and cheerful contribution. And
so likewise we saw in the example of king David and his people. The people
(says the text) rejoiced when they offered willingly to the Lord with a
perfect heart. And David the king rejoiced also with great joy. Joy is a
Companion with cheerfulness in giving.
Read also Deuteronomy. 26.10.11.14. The thank-offering must not be celebrated in the
morning, or vnchearfully, but with great joy and gladness of heart. As for
grudging and vnbeteeming, it has no place nor fellowship in this business:
let it therefore be sent packing with Judas, who by reason of this evil
affection in himself, and because of his theeuish covetousness, could take no
joy, no not in another bodies cost; to wit, when Mary the sister of Lazarus,
bestowed her costly ointment, as a token of that honor and love which she
bare to our Savior Christ, Ioh. 12.3. etc. It ought long since to have bin
rotted and mouldred away, with the carkeise of that ancient and great churl,
drunken Nabal, 1. Sam. 25.10.13. with whom also let us leave the grunting of
the Gaderenes, Mat. 8.34. and the inhospitall Samaritans, Luke 9.52.53. And let
us on the contrary, as beseems al good servants of God, hearken to the
preceptory exhortation of the holy Apostles Paul and Peter. Be ye harborous one
to another without grudging 1. Pet. 4.9. and Philip. 2.14. Do all things
without murmuring and reasonings.

Now to the end these evil affections of Judas, Nabal, and the rest, may be
relinquished and cast from us, as most unworthy the servants of God; and that
such as give or offer to holy uses, may do that which they do, with a frank
and liberal mind, and so have much joy and comfort in it; it is furthermore
necessary that they have these graces following.

First, a delightful and precious estimation of those things whereunto they do
give and contribute, whether it be to the maintenance of Gods worship, or for
the relief of his poor Saints. Secondly, faith. Thirdly, humility. Of these
therefore, let us consider, so far as may concern the matter we have in hand.

Touching the first of these graces; let it not seem tedious, to look yet
once again upon king David, seeing God has every way made him a most
beautiful example and mirror herein. The giver must have delightful and
precious estimation of that to which he gives.
Because (says he) I have a delight in the house of my God, I have prepared
for it with all my power, gold for vessel of gold, etc. Yea moreover I have of
my own gold and silver, which I have given to the house of my God, beside all
that I have prepared for the house of the Sanctuary, even three thousand
talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of fined
silver, to ouerlay the walls of the houses, 1. Chro. 29.3. etc. And Psalm
132. it is testified, that he vowed to take no delight in any other thing;
until he had taken due order for the establishing of the worship of God among
his people. An evident proof whereof, may be taken from that his most joyous
dancing before the Lord with all his might, when God vouchsafed to permit him
to fetch home the holy Arc to the city where he dwelt, 2. Sam. 6. And further
also, from that joy, which he took at the prosperous success of religion; as
is evident, Psalm. 122. where he professes, that he did in singular manner
rejoice, when the people said unto him: We will go into the house of the Lord.
Our feet shall stand in thy gates, o Jerusalem, etc. And again, in that he
professes in the same Psalm. verse. 8.9. saying: For my brethren and
neighbors sakes I will wish thee now prosperity. Because of the house of the
Lord our God, I will procure thy wealth. Hitherto of David's delightful and
precious estimation of the house and worship of God. The like is testified
concerning the peoole of God; of whom he speaks thus, in the 16. Psalm. Thou
art my Lord (says he) my well-doing extends not to thee: But to the Saints
that are on the earth, and to the excellent: all my delight is in them. And
thus must every one, both smaller and greater; whosoever in his place, and
according to his ability, minds the true practice of beneficence and
goodness; he must delight both in the worship, and also in the true
worshippers of God, esteeming them worthy of all the good, which he may
possibly procure unto them. And first, touching the Temple of God and his
earthly Jerusalem, a type of the spiritual and heavenly; look by how much God
has diminished the cost and charge of the ceremonious worship and service
thereof, such as it was in the time of the Law; A gift must be given in faith.
by so much the more does he require, that his spiritual worship be
spiritually furthered: and that the poor among his Christian people be more
honorably regarded; according as in that respect, he has honored them, yea
even their bodies, with the appellation and name of his Temples, in whom his
holy Spirit has chosen to dwell, and that also in more excellent manner, then
heretofore in the Temple of Jerusalem. These, though they have oftentimes wanne
and thin faces, with spare and weak bodies, for want of more full and
dainty diet, and though they go poorly clothed; yet, besides that the
temples of their bodies are redeemed by the precious blood of Christ, their
souls, which are the principal part, and as the Manor house of that rich
purchase, they are richly adorned with many excellent gifts and graces of the
holy Ghost. And therefore in no wise may they, by any who belong to the Lord,
be despised; but rather be highly esteemed and honored: or else all
beneficence toward them, will easily cease, and quickly wear away. To this
purpose, we are to remember not only what the holy Proverb says, that he who
is merciful to the poor, and freely gives unto him, makes the Lord his
debtor, who will surely repay him: but also that the Lord esteems the poor
so precious unto him, namely, those that do truly believe in him: that he
accounts it done to himself whatsoever is done unto them. Matthew. 29. as is
plain in that description of his last judgment. Thus far of the first grace
necessary to a free and liberal mind.

The second grace is faith; that is to say, not only a persuasion that they
which practice this duty, do please God in so doing; but also, that he will
bless and graciously provide for all such, as shall continue in the same
course: accoring to the testimony of the holy Aopostle, Heb, 13.16. where he
gives this charge: To do good, and to distribute forget not: for with such
sacrifices God is pleased, and Philip. 4.18. Saint Paul affirms, A gift must
be given in humility, chiefly in respect of God.
that they are as an odor that smells sweet, and a sacrifice acceptable and
pleasant to God: according also to that excellent comfort which follows
immediately in the same place, in that he writes thus: And my God will fulfill
all your necessities through his riches, with glory in Jesus Christ. Read
also Hosh. chap. 6. verse. 6. where the Lord prefers mercy before sacrifice
and therefore it cannot be but he greatly accounts of this duty. But for the
further strengthening of faith in this point, read more in the third chapter
of this Treatise, concerning the reward of right Christian Giving.

The third grace necessary to frank and liberal Giving, is, that such as do
give to others, yea, or toward the worship of God, be humbled in the sight and
conscience of their unworthiness, of the least of those good blessings, which
they enjoy from the hand of God; so that they may say in truth of heart, as
Iaakob did: I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and all the truth
which thou have showed unto thy servant, Genes. chap. 32. verse. 10. Yea, so
necessary is this grace, to the practice of beneficence and liberality, that
the Apostle Paul, minding to exhort to the practice of it, does first of all
give warning against pride, which he knew would otherwise hinder the same. Yea
he commands in the name of the Lord, that there be a continual charge given
against it, both by Timothy, and also by all other ministers of the Gospel to
the end of the world. Charge them (says he) that are rich in this world,
that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain riches, but
in the living God (who gives us abundantly all things to enjoy) That they do
good, and be rich in good works, and ready to distribute and communicate.
Laying up for themselves in store a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may obtain eternal life. 1. Timoth. chap. 6. verses 17.18.19. In
the which words, note also, that together with this moral precept of
humility toward men, he leaves no place for opinion of merit with God, which
is the height of pride; A Gift must be given in righteousness.
and in truth, the most strong poison and bane of all true beneficence; yea,
that which utterly peruerteth and destroys whatsoever good thing a man may
seem to do. Hitherto of the first branch of our Definition or description of
Giving, that it is a free, or frank, and liberal imparting or communicating
to other.

It follows now, that it is a communicating of some meet and convenient
portion of that wherewith God of his goodness has blessed every one above the
rest of his people: wherein, these three things do offer themselves to be
considered of us.

First, that Christian Giving or liberal beneficence, is to be prractised in
righteousness; and of that which is a man's own, justly obtained and gotten.

Secondly, that Beneficence and the actions thereof are to be ordered wisely,
and according to good discretion.

Thirdly, that it is a duty belonging to every Christian, whomsoever God has
in any measure made able to spare any thing, to relieve his brother or
neighbor, who is more poor and needy then himself. Of all and every one of
these, let us consider in the same order.

Touching the first of these three points; namely, that Christian beneficence
is to be performed of that which is our own justly gotten: how can we
think that it should be otherwise, seeing God requires of all his servants,
both high and low, rich and poor, that always, in all things, they do
exercise justice and judgment? According to that which we read Psalm 106.3.
Blessed are they which keep judgment and do righteousness at all times. In
which respect also, the servants of God are every where in the holy
Scriptures, noted by this property in general, that they love righteousness.
And more particularly, concerning this duty of liberality and beneficence,
which we speak of; the very alms which the servants of God are to give, and
which only God allows, it bears even the name of Righteousness: and that
not only, because it is a duty, of right and justice to be performed toward
such as have need; but that therewithal likewise we might be given to
understand, that it is just and right, that alms should be given of that which
is righly a man's own, and not of that which is gotten by any unrighteous
dealing. To this purpose tends that which we read, Deuteronomy. 24.13. where the
Lord our God speaking of right merciful dealing to the poor, says; that it
shall be accounted for righteousness, to such as duly practice the same. And
Dan. 4.24. the holy Prophet exhorting the unjust and cruel Tyrant, to take
thence forward a just and merciful course; he counsels him to break off his
sins by this kind of righteousness and mercy toward the poor. And Psalm.
112. verse. 2. The Spirit of God speaking of the right merciful and true
almes-man indeed; he alleges by his holy Prophet, that his righteousness is
a joint companion, or rather a guide of his mercy. He is merciful (says the
holy Ghost) and full of compassion and righteousness. And again: He has
distributed and given to the poor: his righteousness remains for ever. The
which place of Scripture the Apostle Paul citing to the same purpose, 2. Cor.
9.9. he expresses the liberality of the merciful man, by the same word
Righteousness, though our English translation uses another word, saying in
the same sense, His benevolence endures for ever. And verse 10. God will
increase the fruit of your benevolence. Prouentus iustitiae. The Greek text
is in either verse DICAIOSVNE, righteousness, as it is in the Hebrew TSIDQATH.
Likewise in the beginning of the sixth chap. of Matthew. in steed of alms which
is in the Greek, the Syrian word, after the manner of the Hebrew phrase, as
also of the Chalde, as Tremelius in his note upon the same place, well
observes, is righteousness, in so much as alms is not the least part
thereof. For to speak truly, no man can worthily bear the name, or do
indeed the part of a liberal man; unless he be first a righteous and just
dealing man. Liberality given of an other man's goods, is no liberality from
the hand of an usurper, though he seems to be the giver of them. It is rather
his theft and fraud, or else his oppression and rapine; it is not his
liberality. O how much better were it, for such a one to make restitution,
rather then to bear the face or rather the visa^d of a liberal and merciful
man! verily, alms of that which is gotten by iniquity, is abomination to the
Lord. The cry of him, who has been oppressed, spoiled, or defrauded, will be
louder in the ears of the Lord for vengeance; then the prayer, or
thankes-offering of the other, for blessing and reward. For what reason or
equity is there, that some small portion, which unrighteous men give, of that
unmerciful yea cruel hauock and spoil which they have made, should take away
any guiltiness of their great and grievous sin. Wherefore, let so many as
mind to make practice of true liberality, hearken in the fear of God, to the
wise counsel of king Solomon, Prou. chapter 5.15. Drink (says he) the water of
thy cisterne, and of the rivers out of the midst of thine own well. Let thy
fountains flow forth, and the rivers of waters in the streets: that is,
joyfully enjoy and use that portion of outward blessings, which God has in
mercy, as a fruit of thy honest labor, or otherwise as it has pleased him,
to bestow upon thee; not only for thy necessity, but even for thy sober
delight and comfort also: provided, that of that which thou may spare, as it
were the ouerflowings of thy full cisterne, others that stand in need, and are
as the dry and thirsty ground, may be mercifully refreshed and relicued by
thee. And then it follows in the same place for a further instruction: But
let them be thine, even thine only, and not a strangers with thee: that is,
order the matter so, that through no evil or intemperate abuse of thine, God
be provoked to alienate thy goods from thy self to any other: of the which
judgment he had spoken before in the tenth verse of the same chapter. A gift
must be given with discretion.


Moreover, the Lord protests expressly, that he hates robbery, yea though it
be joined with burnt offering: Isai 61.8. As though the Lord should say, Such
kind of people, without true repentance, shall find no expiation with me, how
plentiful soever they are in their unjust sacrifices. For as it is in the holy
Proverb. chap. 15. verse 8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to
the Lord. And Deuteronomy. chap. 23. verse 18. It is abomination to the Lord thy God
to bring the hyre of a whore, or the price of a dog into his house for any
vow. The sacrifices which may be pleasing to the Lord, must not only be in
their own nature and kind such as they ought to be, without blemish, of the
best of the flock or heard: but also they must be every way, the sacrifices of
righteousness, as touching the whole manner of the offering of them. And our
own they must be, by special right and interest, and not another man's; or
come to us lightly and at adventure we cannot tell how. Right worthy is the
saying of king David to Ornan (yea though he would for his part have given his
threshing flower unto him for a place dedicatorie to the worship of God) Not so
(says he, seeing he was himself to dedicate it unto God) but I will buy it
for sufficient money: for I will not take that which is thine for the Lord,
nor offer burnt offerings without cost. 1. Chron. chap. 21. verse 24. And right
worthy likewise is that protestation of Zacheus in the Gospel, who disposing
half his goods to the poor, as a fruit of his faith, repentance and love unto
Christ, does promise also restitution for that wrong dealing, wherewith any
could justly charge him.

The foundation of Christian beneficence and giving, being thus laid, as it
were, in righteousness: the second point now follows, wherein it is required,
that beneficence first justly gotten, should no less wisely and discreetly be
afterward ordered and disposed. For (as we might perceive even now) king
Solomon deuideth the wealth and riches of a man, into that which is contained
in the cistern, which is as it were the stock, the which must not be suffered
at any time, over negligently and wastfully to run out, as if a man should
pull out the plugge at the bottom: and into the ouerflowings of the cisterne,
which are as the overplus of the revenues and increase; the which, though they
be employed to the benefiting of such as be not of their own proper family
and charge, yet will not impair a man's estate. The cisterne therefore, is by
the advice of God himself, wisely and charily to be looked unto.
Nevertheless, in times of extraordinary straightes, the servants of God stand
bound to stretch forth their hands in more then an ordinary and wonted
measure: That which our Savior Christ says to the rich man in the 19. chap. of
Mat. and Mark. 10.21. and Luke 18.22. If thou will be per^ect sell all that
ever thou have, and give it to the poor: it is not to be taken for a common
rule prescrib^d to all, but (...) ^^^oue^^^ o^ ^^e hypoc^^^^ (...) him that
p^^^^nded to (...) to (...) ^e ba^^ (...) Read A^. 5 4. Wh^^ i^ remained (...)
Peter to An^^ (...) appertained it not unto thee? and after it was sold was it
not in thine own ^ower.
yea so far fotth (the urgent necessity of poor Christians so requiring)
that the richer sort must not refuse to open the bowels of their compassion so
wide, as willingly to sell some part of their possessions, for the relief of
their brethren: who ought to be more dear and precious to them then all
worldly riches; after that most worthy example of the Christians of the
Primitive Church, whereof we read in the fourth chapter of the Acts of the holy
Apostles from the 32. verse. According also, as in the former times, the Church
of God under the law (concerning the maintenance of Gods true worship) made
laws to themselves of their own accord, for extraordinary allowance that way,
at what time the ordinary would not suffice. Nehem. 10.32.33. and that also
agreeable to the commandment of God practiced by Moses, Numb. 31.25. etc. and
by king David, 1. Chro. chap. 26. verse 27. For of the battles and of the
spoils they did dedicate to the maintenance of the house of the Lord. Rea^
also 2. Chron. 31.3.4. the notable example of king Hezekiah, who of his o^ne
substance allowed a great portion, and likewise commanded the people so to do,
that the Priests and Levites might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord.

The reason why the seruats of God, are in times of more then ordinary want,
to make an extraordinary supply, is, for that even, as in times of
persecution, the Lord takes trial of the faith of those that be truly his,
toward himself: for to shrink away were notable and shameful
unfaithfulness: so in times of special scarcity and want, God takes trial
of our love to our brethren, whether we set more by our money and outward
goods, then by the spiritual comfort of their souls, and maintenance of their
lives; which doubtless were not only singular unkindness, but even grievous
unmercifulness, yea cruelty to be condemned in any of the children of God.

Neither may this seem strange, that for the love which we bear to the
brethren, we should disburse part of our outward goods, for the comfort of
their natural lives, and to encourage them to walk cheerfully in the ways of
the Lord: seeing (if need should so require) we must not think our lives too
dear, to pour them forth for their preservation, and for the comfort and
confirmation of their faith, as 1. John. 3.16. We ought to lay down our lives
for the brethren. And so we read that Priscilla and Aquila endangered their
own lives, and were willing to have died, rather then Paul's life should have
been destroyed, Romans 16.4. To whom therefore (says the Apostle) not I only give
thanks, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles.

Nevertheless, both in the ordinary and also in the extraordinary
distribution of that alms and beneficence, which any Christian gives, great
caution is to be used, for the preventing of all unnecessary waste, lest that
be loosely and unskillfully scattered and thrown about, which ought to be very
wisely as it were sown, and most husbandly disposed. To this purpose is that
which we read in the fifth verse of the 112. Psalm. A good man is merciful
and lends, and will measure his affairs by judgment. That is, he will
order and moderate all things with so good discretion, and keep himself
within so good a compass, that in doing good, he will still continue to do
good; yea and that with an increase, and not by decreasing through the blessing
of God. For as king Solomon says in his holy Proverbs: Through wisdom is an
house builded, and by understanding it is established. And by knowledge shall
the chambers be filled with all precious and pleasant riches. chap. 24.3.4. And
again, chap. 21.20. In the house of the wise is a pleasant treasure and oil:
but a foolish man deuoureth it.

Thus then we may see, that beneficence by wisdom may be practiced, not only
without utter impouerishme^t; but also to the further enriching, and to the
most singular benefit and blessing of the wise and discreet practisers of it:
according to that which follows in the very next Proverb: He that follows
after righteousness and mercy, shall find life, righteousness, and glory.
Wisdom therefore moderateth beneficence, and beneficence inricheth the wise;
so that through the grace of God, they continuing in benefiting others, prove
most beneficial to themselves in the end.

Now that it is the special grace and commendation of beneficence, that it
should be so considerately disposed, that every man's beneficence should not
end in one or a few benefits, not only the godly wise, but even the heathen
wise men, have observed. And to this end, they prescribe many good cautions,
for the guiding and directing of liberality, lest after that it has broken
the feruile yoke of niggardly covetousness, wherein it was unjustly detained;
it should degenerate into over licentious prodigality, or some other unworthy
and unbridled folly. These eautions I think it not unworthy to set them down,
as they follow.

First, that none be any way dammaged or hindered by the unwise, and
indiscreet, or unjust disposing of liberality.

Secondly, that no man's beneficence be above his ability.

Thirdly, that nothing which any man is able to perform be done for ostentation
and vain glory.

Finally, that in the practice of liberality, every one, to whose relief it is
disposed, be respected according as he is more or less worthy for virtue, or
in greater or lesser need through the present exigence, as one may say, of his
misery, etc.

These and such like, are the wise cautions, which even heathen men have seen
meet to be observed, for the well ordering of liberality and beneficence:
they all holding, that unadvised beneficence is very discommendable, and that
even great gifts so bestowed, are of less worth and reckening, then small
benefits wisely disposed.

The same cautions and directions, which the only perfectly wise and sacred
word of God, does most wisely and perfectly teach, would to God all Christians
would be careful to learn and practice better then ever the Heathen did. Which
verily, by the grace of God they should easily do, or at the least not more
unwisely, to the shame of Christianity, if they would hearken to the
instructions of his word. Then should not the foolish hearts of so many of us,
be as closely drawn together and fast locked up as are the strings of our
purses, and the liddes of our boxes and hutches, when we should do any good:
therein preferring earthly riches which are corruptible and transitory, before
the heavenly and eternal treasures of the kingdom of heaven: so setting
greater store by worldly friends, then regarding, by the well bestowing of our
riches, to prepare our selves friends against that great day of account, which
God will one day call us unto: aspiring and hunting more after the vain glory
and pleasures of this life, then after the spiritual joys and incorruptible
crown of the kingdom of heaven. Then should not so many be so ouerwise, as
to neglect all practice of beneficence, lest they should (as they pretend)
bestow it amiss sometime: as though it were not better that alms should be
sometimes lost and perish, then any creature should at any time be lost for
want of alms, and as though it were said in vain, that some at unawares have
received Angels into their houses, when as they did think them to be but
mortal men. Then should not so many bestow that which they account their
l^beralitie, yea, their greatest, and most religious bounty, so corruptly and
profanely as they use to do: in setting open their houses to Dicing and
Carde-play, to masking and mumming in Christmasse, and to other lewd practices
at other special times of the year, which they account their good
housekeeping. Then should not the usual liberality of a number be spilt, as
it were water upon the barren and vnpofitable ground, as heretofore it has
been, upon roguish, vagabonde, and idle persons, which nothing at all minded
any honest course of life in obedience either to the laws of God, or of the
land wherein they lived: yea, which is a thousand times worse; then should
it not be in any wise employed of any to the maintenance of abominable
idolatry and superstition, and of such as are the wicked instruments and
ministers thereof, damnable Jesuitical and Seminary Priests, etc. For all
such beneficence (falsely so called) is no true liberality, but clean
contrary to the nature of this most noble and freeborn virtue, which
implies only that kind of bestowing of our goods, which best beseems a
liberal and free mind indeed: that is, such a mind, as is made free by the
Spirit of God, from all servile furtherance of sin or sinners, in any evil
way, and to all willing preferring and aduauncing, only of true Godliness and
Religion, by all the good and holy means that it can.

Finally, if true wisdom and discretion might always hold the stern of
Christian beneficence and liberality, yea, even there where there is an honest
and good mind; then not so many, yea rather none at all, should so soon
sink themselves, and grow utterly unable in short time to hold out in that
course which first they begin with too full and broad a sail: though the
truth is, much fewer have need of a bridle to curb and hold the^ in, then the
rest stand in need of the sharp spur to put them into that quicker pace,
which easily they might be able without any tyring to continue and abide in:
according to that saying of the holy Prophet, The liberal man will devise of
liberal things, and he will continue his liberality, Isai. 32.8

And thus we may perceive in a good part, what wisdom is requisite to the
discreet ordering and disposing of every man's, yea even of his own private
beneficence. And therefore we are the less to marvel, though the Lord
requires special wisdom to the bestowing of the public beneficence and
alms of the Church, which arises of the particular contributions of many
into one sum: according to that which we read in the sixth chap. of the Acts
of the holy Apostles, concerning those Deacons, who were by the consent of all the Apostles to have this charge: Wherefore (say they, guided herein by the holy
Ghost, and that by occasion of some former failing in this behalf) brethren
look ye out among you seven men of honest report, and full of the holy Ghost
and of wisdom, whom we may appoint to this business. Concerning the singular
wisdom of which ordinance, in regard of the institution, which is from the
wisdom of God himself, and how wisely the public beneficence of the
Churches of Christ is to be disposed; I will only set down in this place, that
which an excellent learned man has written concerning this matter, he showing
therein the remedy against vagabond and roguish beggars, who ought not to be
suffered among Christians: Like as our godly Magistrates have wisely discerned,
and of late worthily provided for the more through and full suppressing of
them, P. Martyr Loc. Com. Clas. 2. loco 12. in praecept. 8. Sect. 7.
then ever heretofore: blessed be the name of God therein. There ought to be
(says that learned man) in every Church certain choice men, who should have
the names of all the poor set down in writing, the which should carry a
diligent eye, to mark both the greatness of the poverty wherewith any are
distressed, and also what work they were able to do: and accordingly to
distribute the alms, giving no maintenance to make any grow idle, and
withdrawing their alms from such as are unwilling to labor. To the which end
also order ought to be taken, that there might be in several Churches a
public treasury, wherein public contributions should be laid up: and that
every man as he is able, should not only offer something every time of the holy
assembly, but that three or four times of the year they should prepare some
more worthy gift: and concerning the Governors of the treasury, that it
should be their duty, not only to distribute the same, but also to give the
Church an account, both what they have received, and what they have laid out.
Neither is there any reason, why any should pretend that they will distribute
their own goods, as they themselves should think good, in so much as it is
hard for any to know all, and the true state of things is more easily found
out by men which are purposely appointed thereunto: and beside, it is rather to
be wished that all things may be done in an orderly course then no man can tell
how.

This is the discreet judgment and godly advise of that great learned man.
And verily, howsoever the public ordinance of God does not take away and
suppress the particular disposing of men's private benevolence, as they shall
see good upon their own godly and private considerations; yet it must needs be
a great ease unto every one, touching persons unknown to them, in that they
may with good conscience leave them to those who have the charge of the public
distribution. Now as touching that which remains, concerning that wisdom
and discretion which is to be used in distribution of beneficence, we shall
have occasion to speak of it anon.

The last of the three former points, is henceforth to be considered of us; to
wit, that it is every Christians duty, according to his ability, Every man of
any ability is bound to give, and that also with pity and compassion over the
needy.
to v^e his discretion, in dedicating a portion of that which he gets by his
honest and just labor, or which he may spare of any his revenues, either more
or less to the practice of beneficence, and that even as in the sight of God,
who by his sovereign authority requires it at every man's hands. There is a
very usual and common need of mercy, and therefore the commandment is given in
general to all, and particularly to every one. And when mercy and goodness
has place in all Christian virtue, it has, as it were, the chair of estate
in beneficence and liberality: and for the same cause is assigned of God to be
a certain moderator, and, as it were, the chief in commission with justice.
He has showed thee o man (says the Prophet Micah) what is good and what the
Lord requires of thee, Surely to do justice, and to love mercy. chapter 6.8. and
Zach. 7.9. Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying: Execute ye true judgment,
and show mercy and compassion every man to his brother, etc. and Psalm. 37.21.
The righteous is merciful and gives.

Now, that all are to make practice of this grace, read 1. Cor. 16.1. etc.
Concerning the gathering for the saints, as I have ordained in the Churches of
Galatia, so day, also every first day of the week (that is, on every Lords
day, the Christian Sabbath) let every one of ye (says the Apostle) put aside
by himself, and lay up a God has prospered him, that then there be no
gatherings when I come. That is, that so there be no need to spend any
further time for that special collection. And when I am come (as the holy
Apostle adds) whosoever ye shall allow by letters, them will I send to bring
your liberality to Jerusalem. And if it be meet that I go also they shall go
with me. And 2. Cor. 9.7. As every man wishes in his heart. And 1. John 3.17.
Whosoever has this worlds good and sees his brother to have need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? And
Ephesians. chap. 4.28. Let him that stole steal no more: but let him rather labor
and work with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give unto
him that needs. And when the people coming to John's baptism, asked of him,
Every man is bound to give: and that also with pity and compassion.
what they should do for declaration of their repentance: he answered them and
said: He that has two coats, let him part with him that has none, and he
that has meat, let him do likewise. Luke chap. 3.11.

Thus then it is plain, that all stand bound to give. And not only so, but
that which is more, we are further to understand, that every one stands bound
according to his ability, and according to all just occasions offered of God,
to do good; that is, mercifully to succor and relieve all and every one which
stands in need of our help: as the parable of our Savior Christ set down
in the tenth chapter of Luke, to show who is a man's neighbor, does evidently
declare: from the example of that merciful Samaritan, in his succouring of the
distressed Jew. According also to that speech which the Lord uses by his
Prophet Isaiah, chap. 58.7. Hide not thy self from thine own flesh. For
though there were no more but this bond, that one man is of the same flesh or
kind with another; the Lord gives to understand, that it ought of it self to
be counted sufficient reason to provoke any man to deal mercifully with every
one that is of the nature of man. And herein ought every one to settle his
mind to continue vnwearible, seeing God himself has so appointed, that the
occasions and necessities of exercising mercy will be continual, according
to that we read, Deuteronomy. 15.11. and more expesly, Matt. 26.11. where our Savior
Christ says: Ye shall have the poor always with you. according also to the
holy Proverb. chapter 22.2. The rich and the poor meet together: the Lord is the
maker of them all. And wherefore is he so? No doubt that by the rich he might
help the poor, and by the poor make trial of the rich, as it is well
observed and answered by a godly learned Father.

Nevertheless, the same our God who commands us to do good unto all, and that
always; he does specially require that we be chiefly beneficial to those
poor ones, which be of the household of faith. Every man is bound to give: and
that also constantly and without weariness.
Gal. 6 10. And further also, even concerning these, though we are to begin to
exercise our kindness, with the recompencing our kindred, which is noted to be
an honest thing and acceptable before God. 1. Tim. 5.4. Yet we are not to stay
there, but to extend our goodness to other our poor neighbors and near
dwellers; and not only so, but sometime also, even to such as dwell in places
far distant from us: according to that right Christian practice whereof we
read Romans chap. 15. verse. 24. etc. When I shall take my journey into Spain
(says Saint Paul) I will come to you, etc. But now I go to Jerusalem to
minister unto the Saints. For it has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to
make a certain distribution unto the poor Saints which are at Jerusalem. For
it has pleased them, and their debtors are they. etc.

Neither are we to stay til such as we mind to help be pressed with extreme
need, and therefore to make delays; but to take hold of the occasion, and if
it may be, even to prevent their calamity. For so we have the precept, Prou.
3.28. Say not to thy neighbor, Go and come again, and to morrow will I give
thee, if thou now have it. Why so? It may be he may die that he cannot come, or
though he live, yet be discouraged from coming again: or if he do come, thou
may be more hardened against him then before; or it may be, that thou may
be suddenly taken away by death from all that thou have, as our Savior Christ
says in the parable to the rich covetous and unmerciful man.

Wherefore, far better both in respect of themselves (who taking the time to do
well, shall reap in due season) and more comfortably to others (seeing the
deferring of the hope is the fainting of the soul, but the desire accomplished
is as the tree of life) and also more to the honor and glory of God, which is
best of all do they, which dispose and give themselves to pursue hospitality,
and to distribute to the Saints most readily; according to that Romans 12. verse.
13. TEN PHILOXENIAN DIOKONTES, pursuing or prosecuting hospitality. Every man
is bound to give: and that also with good expedition. Petrus Martyr.
Long autem maius est persequi hospitalitatem quam esse hospitalem: It is far
more to pursue hospitality then to be hospital, as says a learned
interpreter. Of this sort of holy and kind hearted pursiuants, Lot and Abraham
are commended for singular examples in the old Testament, and Philemon and
Gaius in the new.

And that there is special regard to be had of the household of faith,
mentioned before; and among those to such of them chiefly, who being destitute
by any occasion, are of singular godliness and grace above the rest; there is
very great reason why it should be so: not only because they are more precious
in the sight of God, but also because they of all other are least regarded, yea
rather most maligned and spighted in the world, the children whereof do only
love and cherish their own. And like wise also concerning the rest, howsoever
unbelievers must be tendered of the faithful, though they regard not them; and
better is it, as was said, that alms should be cast away, then any creature
should perish for want of relief. (In which respect, the Christians of the
Primitue Churches, even in the midst of the hot rage of their persecutors,
Read M. Fox Acts and monu. pesrecution 10. page 76.
got singular credit to their profession, in that they showed more mercy to
miserable infidels, then did the unfaithful themselves.) Yet wisdom and
discretion is to be used this way, for their sakes, who are wont to pretend
need without cause, or in a measure above their need, while they make
themselves more poor and friendlesse, or more diseased and lame, or more weak
and feeble then they are indeed, or in that they lay the blame upon other for
their undoing and decay: when as in truth they have had no other riflers and
oppressors then their own sloth and unthriftiness, whereby their poverty
has been armed against them, according to that we read Prou. chap. 6.11. and
again, chap. 24.32.33.34. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding
of the hands to sleep. So thy poverty comes as one that trauelleth by the
way, and thy necessity like an armed man. Wittingly therefore, Every man is
bound to give rather with his own hands in his life, then by executors after
his death.
and without good caution to give unto such, specially if they be of set
purpose idely and leudly minded; is, not only to cast away that which a man
gives, but which is worse, to cherish and confirm the wicked in their sin,
as was said once before: yea, and thereby also to defraude those that are
better minded, to whom of right that beneficence, so cast away, was only due.

To conclude this point of our definition, concerning every man's Giving; it
may not be amiss, to add unto the former considerations; that it is a more
wise course, and also more agreeable to the nature of true and lively
beneficence, for every one to give and dispose with his own hands, and by the
oversight of his own eyes, that which he minds to give, even in his life
time, rather then to leave all, or the greatest part to the disposition of his
executor after his death. For such gifts are subject to much fraudulent and
unfaithful dealing, as experience daily confirms; that we say nothing of the
opinion of merit, or of the danger of superstition and praying for the dead,
which has by long custom attended that course. And beside, it seems less
commendable in the Church of God, for any to give his gift, when he can keep
it no longer: and less comfortable to the conscience of the Giver in the sight
of God, because he may doubt whether it be rather an extorted or a free gift.
Nevertheless, that beneficence which any good Christian bequeatheth by his
last will and testament (which we may call his funeral beneficence) is not to
be condemned, though the other course specially of such as be more rich and
wealthy, is to be accounted so much the more honorable, by how much it does
more evidently declare both a lively faith in Gods fatherly providence, and
also a more lively and pure love to the brethren: and therefore for excellency
sake may be called Vital Beneficence.

It follows now in the latter part of our definition or description of
Christian Giving, that all whatsoever is given, The ends of giving.
must tend to the maintenance and furtherance of Gods true worship and the
ministry thereof, or to the relief of poor Christians especially, and that
all must be done according to Gods own will, as he has in either respect made
the same known in his holy word. As we have already seen in some part, and
are henceforth upon the occasion so justly renewed, further to consider of it
once again.

Hence therefore two things follow to be more purposedly and distinctly
declared of us. First, what are the ends of Christian and religious bestowing
of gifts: and secondly, what must be the rule and squire to direct the ordering
and disposing of them.

First therefore, concerning the ends of Giving, diverse times already
touched; we must of most bounden duty to God, allow the first and chief
place in this care and provision, for the maintenance of the pure worship of
God, and of the public ministry and faithful ministers thereof, together
with Schools of good learning, as necessarily appertaining to the nurcerie and
preservation of the same. For the worship of God and ministry thereof, is
most directly to his honor and glory: and further, without it we could
neither be sanctified our selves, not any thing which we enjoy, nor have any
poor Saints at all to be relieved. And then, what great thing were it for
any to be careful to relieve the frail and corruptible bodies of men, if
that in the mean season, their most precious and immortal souls should be
suffered for evermore to perish and decay.

First therefore, touching the worship of God and holy exercises thereof, we
have the commandment of God himself, for the contribution of his people
thereunto. Deuteronomy. 16.16. They shall not appear before the Lord empty. Every
man shall give according to the gift of his hand and acding to the blessing of
the Lord thy God which he has given thee. And chapter 12. verse 19. Beware
that thou forsake not the L^uite as long as thou live upon the earth. And
touching the obedience of the people of God, to this his commandment, we have
already seen what their zeal has been under the law, first in contributing
to the Tabernacle of God and the ministry belonging unto it. And after that
likewise, to the holy Temple of Jerusalem, and service thereof; the charge
whereof amounted to so great expense, that if every man had not come with a
full hand in free offerings, moreover and beside the former ordinary allowa^ce,
it could neither have bin builded, nor maintained, in such manner as beseeme^
the Majesty of the great God of heaven and earth. This practice of
contribution to this special end and purpose, remained as the ordinance of God
to all posterity: as we may perceive by that which we read Act. 21.24. where
the Disciples say to Paul, Thou shall purify thy self and contribute with
them.

And as for the poor; to the end we may see how mercifully louingelie and
liberally the Lord requires, and the same very earnestly, that they should
be dealt withal; it were good that every one should in his best earnest read
the 25. chapter of Leuiticus, and the 15. chapter of Deuteronomie. The which laws
albeit they are now long since expired so far forth as they were for a time
fitted to the external policy of Israel: yet the equity of them ought to be
still in force, and the charge which the Lord gives touching the substance of
the matter, contains moral duty, whose date is equal with the continuance
of the world; and stretches it self, as far as there is any church and
people of God to the ends of the earth. If (says the Lord in the 15. chap. of
Deuteronomy. from the 7. verse) one of thy brethren with thee be poor, within any of
the gates of thy land, which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall not
harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor brother: But thou shall open
thine hand unto him and shall lend him sufficient for his need which he has.
Beware that there be not a wicked thought in thy heart for to say, The seventh
year, the year of freedom is at hand: therefore it grieueth thee to look on
thy poor brother, and thou give him naught, and he cry unto the Lord
against thee, so that sin be in thee. Thou shall give him, and let it not
grieve thy heart to give unto him: for because of this the Lord thy God will
bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put thy hand unto.
Because there shall ever be some poor in the land, therefore I command thee,
saying: Thou shall open thine hand unto thy brother, to thy needy and to thy
poor in thy land. Read also Eccles. 11.1.2.6. Cast thy bread upon the waters,
etc. Give to seven and also to eight, etc. and Isai 58.6.7. The fast which the
Lord has chosen, is it not to loose the bands of wickedness, to take off the
heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every
yoke? is it not to deal thy bread, to the hungry, and that thou bring the
poor that wander into thine house? When thou see the naked that thou cover
him, and not hide thy self from thine own flesh? Then shall thy light break
forth as the morning, etc. Thus we see the commandment of God. We see also his
promise of blessing: of the which more afterward. Now verily howsoever it be
more to man's natural liking, to do all the good he does as a will worship, at
his own pleasure, where, and when he list, to serve his own vain glory, and
other his corrupt affections and lusts: yet it is only to the good liking of
the Lord, and to his glory, yea and to our own benefit also, that we perform
every good thing in conscience of our bounden duty, according to the holy
laws and commandments of God. For to such kind of duty, and namely to such
beneficence only does the promise of Gods blessing belong.

And furthermore, seeing the Lord God had so gracious care for the poor of his
people, as we saw even now, in the time of the Law; it is in no wise to be
thought, that he is less careful for the poor of his Christian Churches, now
in the days of the Gospel: nay rather, we have good reason to persuade our
selves, that his care is rather more fatherly and tender, according to the more
clear revelation of his own bowellike compassion and mercies, by the
appearance of his son. No doubt, but both the poor of the Gospel, who are
most tenderly loved and pretiously esteemed of the Lord, and also the Gospel
it self which is the most bright shining wisdom and the most gracious power
of God to the salvation of all his people, both poor and rich, they ought more
mightily to allure and draw us all, to so much the more willing and bountiful
contribution, so far as the necessities of the poor, and reverent decency of
the ministration of the Gospel should require.

And first concerning the maintenance of the ministry of the Gospel: Have we
not power to eat and to drink, to wit, at the costs and charges of the
Church, says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 9.4. etc. and verse. 7. etc. Who goes on
warfare any time at his own cost? who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of
the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock and eats not of the milk of the
flock? Say I these things according to man? Says not the law the same also?
For it is written in the law of Moses, Thou shall not nousell the mouth of the
Ox which treads out the corn. Does God take care for oxen? Either says he
it not altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt it is written, that he
which eareth should ear in hope: and that he who thresheth in hope should be
partaker of his hope. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a
great matter if we reap your carnal things? And verses 13.14. Do ye not
know, that they which minister about the holy things, eat of the things of
the Temple? and they which wait at the altar are partakers with the altar? So
also has the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel, should live of
the Gospel. This point we see is exceedingly labored, and not only confirmed
by excellent weight and number of reasons, and from the divine authority of
God himself; but also garnished by a figurative course of speech, sharpened,
as it were, with often renewed questions or interrogations, so as it cannot be,
but it must needs enter and prevail with every one that has any sparkle of
true spiritual understanding and life of affection in him. And therefore, no
marvel though the same Apostle sets it down for a law to the Churches of
Galatia, that he who is taught in the word, should make him that has taught
him partaker of all his goods, chap. 6. verse. 6. Nevertheless, he knowing the
disposition of man, to be ouer-bold in eluding and trisling away the
commandment of God in this behalf, he admonishes all me^ to beware that they
deceive not themselves, assuring the^, that God will not be mocked nor dallied
withal. And thereupon also, the holy Apostle takes further occasion to exhort
earnestly to willing, liberal, conscionable, and constant performance of this
duty without weariness.

Neither does he only exhort to this duty of contribution and allowance of all
kind of the good things of this life, for the commodious and comfortable
maintenance of the Ministry and Ministers of the Gospel: but likewise he
does in the same place earnestly exhort all of the richer sort of Christians,
to be beneficial to all that stand in need, specially to the poor
Christians, the household servants, or rather children of the same family with
them, as has been observed before.

Howbeit, notwithstanding the holy Apostle does thus link the maintenance of
the ministry of the Gospel with the relief of the poor; we are
nevertheless, to admit that difference betwixt one kind of provision or
allowance and the other, which the Lord God himself has put by the
determination of his own word. For the relief of the poor is a mere alms,
and as one may say, a grace or gratuitie of mercy, as touching those that are
relieved: who seeing they perform no special service toward the Church, they
can challenge nothing but as of good will, and for the Lords sake, who
becomes surety for the^. But the maintenance of the ministry is due as a
reward or wages of a worthy service, according to that prouerbial saying which
our savior Christ applies to this purpose, The laborer is worthy of his wages,
Luke 10.7. It is true indeed, that no man either minister of the word, or any
other, can plead worthiness or desert at the hands of God, for any service
they are able to perform: for we are all unprofitable servants to him, and
infinitely failing in that wherein we stand bound to him: but in that
reckening and account which God allows betwixt Ministers of the Gospel and
the people, our Savior Christ gives plainly to understand, that as every
poor laboring man, when he has done his day-worke, is worthy of his wages at
night (for he does not receive his hire as an alms, but as a debt and duty
belonging to him, even for the work which he has done) so is the Minister of
the word worthy of his maintenance, and that in a liberal and comely manner, as
may well beseem that honorable account which the people of God do make of the
Gospel of their salvation. And in this respect does the Apostle Paul
(speaking by the spirit of our Savior Christ) note out the maintenance of the
ministry of the Gospel, by the title of honor, and not of alms or mercy;
signifying thereby, with what kind of dutiful affection it ought to be yielded
unto them, even for the honor which they bear to the Lord himself. Yea,
whereas the Apostle calls the widows allowance, for her inferior service
to the Church, by the name of honor; it is to marked that he says by an
increase of speech, that the Elders, or Ministers of the word whosoever labor
in that work, are specially worthy of double honor: as 1. Tim. 5.2. Honor
widows which are widows indeed. But verses 17.18. The Elders which rule
well are worthy of double honor, specially they which labor in the word and
doctrine. For the Scripture says, Thou shall not mousell the mouth of the Ox
that treads out the corn: and the labourer is worthy of his wages.
Christians thus doing shall perform that which belongs to them, according
to the precept of king Solomon, Prou. chap. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy
riches, and with the chief of all thine increase. Hitherto of the ends of
Giving.

It follows now that we consider of that which was made the second point of
the last branch of our definition, The Rule of Giving.
namely, what must be the rule and squire, to direct the ordering and disposing
of all Gifts to their right ends. For, as has been already affirmed: Allour
giving both the one way and the other, as well toward the religion and worship
of God as for the relief of the poor of his people, it must be in such manner
as God himself wills and prescribes.

Now, Christian beneficence and liberality is the will and comma^d^ment of God
as well touching the manner and measure, as the duty it self.
what this will of God is we must learn out of his own most holy and sacred
word. And herein we are to be the more willing and teachable Scholars, because
if we should give place to our own wills, we should easily fall into such
extremities on either hand, as al Christians ought to avoid in so worthy an
action as Christian beneficence is. For this we are to know, that as filthy
covetousness, with all unthankful and vnbeteeming niggardliness, is abominable
before the Lord, whose most free and frank bounty infinitely exceeds all
whatsoever may possibly be yielded either to him or his: so neither can he like
that there should be any, either prodigal or immoderate wast, or any proud,
vain glorious, or hypocritical ostentation and pomp in the practice of
Christian liberality: yea or that there should be any indiscreete
ouer-reaching above any any man's condition and state.

In that great famine which was under the Emperor Claudius Caesar, according
as it was foretold by Agabus, who prophesied thereof, Act. 11.28.29. the
Disciples of Antiochia, where they were first called Christians, Every man
according to his ability sent succor to the brethren which dwelt in Judea. And
2. Cor. 8.13. It is not (says the Apostle Paul) that other men should be
eased and you grieved. But that your abundance should supply their lack, etc.
It is well pleasing to God, as has been declared already, that every one
should so look to his Cisterne at home, that all leake not or run out abroad.
We have seen also, how the Apostle requires special care at the hands of
every Christian, for those that do more nearely belong unto them, 1. Tim. 5.4.
A worthy example whereof we have in the Patriarch Iaakob, Genesis 30. verse 30.
The little (says he to Laban) which thou had before I came, is increased
to a multitude: and the Lord has blessed thee by my coming: but now when
shall I travel for mine own house also? And afterward chapter 42.1.2. Behold
(says he to his sons) I have heard that there is food in Egypt: get ye down
thither and buy us food thence, that we may live and not die. In the 17. chap.
of the first of the Kings, the widow of Zarrephath thinks it a sufficient
reason, to deny Elijah the Prophet so much as a morsel of bread, because her
provision for her self and her child was now almost even all spent: neither
could Elijah have been further instant, had not the Lord sealed him, as it
were, a commission to assure her, that that small remnant of her meal and oil
which was left, should not be diminished, though she would consent to minister
food unto him, even of the same her small store, for the relief of his
necessity. In the law, the Lord God permitted the richer sort of his people to
gather in the increase of the fruits of their own grounds, Leuit. 19 10. and
chap. 23.22. And more fully Deuteronomy. 24.19. etc. Read also Exodus 23.10.11
to their private store houses and uses: only he pleads thus far for the
poorer sort that they might for that season of the year gather some help
toward their relief, by the gleanings which should be left. To the which
purpose, he requires notwithstanding, that the scatterings of the corn, or
other fruit, should not be gathered by the owners over near from them. But
touching that special care which every one is allowed to have over his own
family, it is not impertinent here to call to mind that our Savior Christ in
his holy parable, Luke 15.17. resembles the Lord God himself to such a
provident and wise householder as had bread enough for the meanest of his
servants, while the prodigal and unthrifty son, forsaking his fathers house,
was ready to perish by famine abroad. The Apostles of our Savior Christ
requiring of the Christian Churches, the continuance of their contributions
without weariness, they do free them from the charge of idle and inordinate
persons, 2. These. 3. 6.7.8.9. Finally, for the direction of giving, our Savior
Christ Matthew. 6. warns all his scholars to take heed that they give not
their alms to be seen of men, etc. but that they should so deal their alms,
that their left hand should not know what their right hand did.

Now likewise for our direction how to give toward the upholding and aduauncing
of the holy worship of God: howsoever our hearts and our hands ought to be most
dutifully and readily enlarged that way: yet it pleases God to let us
understand, that he neither requires nor allows of any vnncessary
superfluity or superstitious pomp thereunto, as though it were his mind to
enrich himself (as one would say) and his own house with the pillage and
impouerishing of his people.

It is true, that the people of God are seldom found in that fault, that they
will exceed measure toward the worship of God: but rather they delight to dwell
themselves in their sieled and garnished houses, and to heap up much riches
for their own private uses, yea even to serve their own lusts, though the
house of God lie wast, and though all things belonging to his worship do, in
the mean while, want their convenient and seemly allowance; according to that
complaint which the Prophets Haggai and Malachie made against the ingratitude
of the people in the times they prophesied in. Nevertheless, in so much as there
have been examples of exceeding zeal and forwardnes, the Lord has thought it
good to give a testimony of his gracious moderation in commanding a stay. So
we read, Exodus 36.5.6. The people (as Moses testifies) brought more then
enough for the use of the work of the Tabernacle which he had commanded.
Wherefore (as it is in the Text) Moses gave a commandment, and they caused it
to be proclaimed through the host, that they should bring no more. And whereas
afterward, king David in his zeal toward the worship and Sanctuary of the
Lord, would gladly have hasted the time of building a glorious Temple to the
name of the Lord, 1. Chro. 17.1. For, Behold (says he to Nathan the Prophet) I
dwell in an house of Ced^r trees, but the Ark of the Lords covenant remains
under curtains, etc. Yet the Lord saw good to respite him, by reason of the
great charge and business of war wherein he had employed him, and reserved
that work for Solomon his son, to whom he minded to give a peaceable reign.

Now, like as the Lord so tendereth his people, that he will not be
ouer-burthensome to them himself, so has he put the like mind into his
faithful servants. As for example, when he returned the captivity of his
people out of Babylon, the holy Priest and perfect Scribe of the Lord Ezra, and
other the faithful servants of God with him (guided no doubt by the holy
Ghost,) were careful, lest they might seem to abuse, or incroche upon the
bounty of those heathen Princes, whose hearts God had moved to be already very
good and beneficial to them: and for that cause spared them in some things
wherein they had need of their further assistance, as we read in the book of
Ezra, chap. 8.22.

The Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ were likewise in special manner sparing
and tender over the Christian Churches, that they might not be over burdensome
to them. Nay rather, upon some special considerations, they would not for the
time, require that ordinary and necessary allowance toward their own
comfortable maintenance, which was meet. Read Act. 20.33.34. I have coueted
no man's silver, nor gold, nor apparel. Yea, ye know that these hands have
ministered to my necessities and to them that were with me. Read also 1. Cor.
4.12. And 2. ep. chap. 12. verse. 13. etc. I have not been slothful to your
hinderance, etc. Behold, the third time I am ready to come to you, and yet will
I not be slothful to your hinderance, for I seek not yours but you, etc. But
be it that I charged you not: yet for as much as I was crafty, I took you by
guile. Did I pill you by any of them whom I sent unto you? I have desired
Titus, and with him I have sent a brother: did Titus pill you of any thing?
Walked we not in the self same Spirit? Walked we not in the same steps? And
again, 1. These. chap. 2. verse. 3.4.5. Our exhortation was not by deceit, etc.
Neither yet did we ever use flattering words, as ye know, nor colored
covetousness, God is record. and verse 17. When we might have been chargeable
as the Apostles of Christ, etc. and verse 9. For ye remember brethren our
labor and travel: for we labored day and night, because we would not be
chargeable to any of you, and preached unto you the Gospel of God. And again,
2. These. chap. 3.8. Neither took we bread of any man for naught: but we
wrought with labor and travel night and day, because we would not be
chargeable to any of you. How then? May not Ministers of the word require their
maintenance at the hands of the people? Yes verily, as has been proved before.
And the Apostle had already said, We might have been chargeable as the Apostles
of Christ, 1. These. 2.7. And it follows in the text of the second Epistle,
Not but that we had authority, etc. His purpose is therefore, to show only
what is the part of the Minister of the word, as extraordinary considerations
and necessities may require in the difficult and hard times of the Church: but
not to justify any people in the neglect of their Preachers, of whom they, for
their parts, ought to have an ordinary and honorable care, that they want
nothing that is meet for them, on their own and the Lords behalf.

Nevertheless, from such examples, and from the whole information of the word
of God, not only may the insatiable gulf of the covetous and ambitious
hierarchy of Rome be worthily condemned: who exceeding their predecessors the
Pharisees, in the worst times of the degenerate and backsliding Church of the
Jews, have by infinite devises of superstition and false doctrine, as it were
by many watercourse and channels, drawn the wealth of all nations into the
Popes Exchecquer, like as all rivers run into the deep gulf and belly of
the sea: but also the same examples may justly admonish all true and faithful
Ministers of the Gospel to be content with a moderate and sober state and
condition of life; yea, and to bear a part of the burden with the Church, in
all the difficulties and streights thereof. For by infinite ods it is better to
be in a more mean outward estate with the flourishing and prosperous increase
of spiritual gifts and graces, as in the Primitive Churches, then that all
things glistering in external pomp, there should be nothing but spiritual
obscurity and darkness, with miserable beggary touching all true grace and
godlilinesse, as it has for these many hundredth of years been in the Church
of Rome, where the glory of this world, and the love thereof, has taken away
and besotted their heart. So that it is truly said concerning them, that
Religion brought forth riches: and that the daughter has destroyed the mother.

And thus we may perceive, how God in his most excellent wisdom, requiring
all good competencie of gifts, neither allows any vile and niggardly
sparing, neither acknowledges any work of supererogation to be acceptable to
him in this business. To the one he says: Go offer it now to thy Prince, will
he be content with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of hosts? Mal.
chap. 1.6, 7, 8, etc. And to the other he says, Who required these things at
thy hands. Isai. 1.12. Micah. 6.6.7.

Let us therefore, I pray you, earnestly entreat the Lord, that he will
vouchsafe to give all, whom he has blessed with earthly riches in his Church,
the grace wisely and religiously to give and distribute them, according to his,
and not their own blind and inordinate will: remembering that howsoever, as the
wise king says, Wisdom is good with an inheritance, yet wisely to distribute
is better then surely to hold and possess, according to that of our Savior
Christ, It is a more blessed thing to give then to receive: and therefore not
without cause bears the name of a singular grace. 2. Cor. 9.11, 12, 13.

And finally, to the end all our other gifts which we give, may be acceptable
to God, let us first of all give our selves unto him, as the Macedonians did,
2. Cor. 8.5. Virtues of beneficence.
and let us pray him, with great instance, to accept of our persons in Christ
Jesus, as he did of Abel first, and then of his gift, Genesis 4.4. and Heb. 11.
verse. 4. So shall it never repent any of any good thing, or of all whatsoever
shall be given and disposed, either to the Lord, or to his people; according to
the will of God.

Hitherto of the graces and virtues required to true Christian beneficence or
Giving: and on the contrary, what vices are to be avoided in the same: and
that by a more large discourse: the which now briefly to repeat for a more
easy remembrance of the^, they are these which follow.



















weary of well doing, Examples of Beneficence.
as Isai. 32.8. and Heb. 6.11. Every one should show diligence herein to the
full assurance of hope to the end. and 2. John verse. 8. Looking to our selves
that we loose not the things which we have done, but that we may receive a full
reward*

Alumni and foster children do at any time offer unto them.



These virtues are diligently to be regarded of all Benefactors, lest any
should rejoice in a false and deceivable liberality; such as will afford no
sound comfort before the Lord. For as we read in the holy Proverb. Many men
will boast every one of his own goodness, but who shall find a faithful man?
As though the wise king should say, He is a rare man in comparison of the rest,
whosoever is a good man indeed.

Nevertheless, to the end we may see that God from time to time has had his
number, who have practiced true beneficence and goodness: it shall be to good
purpose to gather together such examples, whereby God in his holy Scriptures
has exemplified the same unto us, that they might be patterns to all other of
his good servants to provoke them to the imitation of them.

In the 18. chap. of Genesis, ver. 1.2. etc. We have Abraham, a father of the
faithful, commended unto us for one very notable example. And chap. 19.1. etc.
We have righteous Lot for another. Of the which two, the Apostle to the
Hebrews, chap. 13.2. says, that for a fruit and blessing of their hospitality
they received Angels into their houses at unawares in steed of men: and by
that reason moves Christians that they would not be forgetful to lodge
strangers.

Genesis chap. 20.14 15.16. Abimelech, a heathen king, shows great kindness to
Abraham: he gave him both servants, and cattle, and silver, and liberty also
to dwell to his best liking, where he would in his country.

Genesis chap. 47.12. Joseph, whom God made a foster-father to many nations, was
also a nourisher of his own father, and brethren, and his whole family in the
land of Egypt, in the time of the famine. And Pharaoh himself, though a
heathen king, gave them a country to dwell in.

Exodus chap. 2.5.6.7.8.9. Pharaohs daughter likewise, though a heathen woman,
takes compassion of an Hebrew infant, which was otherwise in great danger to
have perished; and causes it to be honorably noursed, and brought up at her
cost and charges. And in the same chap. verses 20.21. Revel the Prince of
Midian gives Moses, though a stranger unto him, very friendly and kind
entertainment: whereupon also, concerning further good liking, he gives the
daughter of his son Iethro to wife vnvnto him, yea though Moses was at time
of no worldly wealth.

Exodus chap. 18. Moses for the same cause, shows all kindness and good duty
to Iethro, his father in law, after that he was advanced to be the Governor
of the people of God. And Numb. 10.29. Come with us (says Moses) and me will
do thee good: for the Lord has promised good to Israel. and verse. 32. And if
thou go with us, look what good the Lord shall show unto us, the same will we
show unto thee.

In the 19. chap. of the Judges, verses 16.17. an old man coming from his
work out of the field at even, gives a man and a woman, and their servant
lodging, and other good entertainme^t; who otherwise, being benighted in a
strange place, should likely have lied abroad in the fields.

In the second chapter of the book of Ruth, verses 8.9. 14.15.16.17. Boaz
gives leave to Ruth, a poor maid and a stranger, not only to gleane in his
field next after the reapers, whom he willed to leave good gleanings for her;
but also, he gave her leave to take her victuals daily, with his own maids
among the reapers.

In the first book of Samuel, chap. 22.3.4. David makes provision for the
comfortable entertainment and safety of his father and mother with the king of
Moab: yea, he is mindful and careful to do it, in the midst of his trouble,
when he had much ado to shift for himself, and to escape with his own life.

In 1. King. chap. 18.3.4. Obadiah, a chief officer in king Ahabs court, in
the time of famine, when also Iezabel the Queen raged in cruel persecution
against the servants of God; he took an hundredth of the Lords Prophets and fed
them fifty in a cave.

In the the 4. chap. of the second book of Kings, verses 8.9.10. We read how
an honorable woman, or certain Lady of Shunem, observing how Elisha the Lords
prophet used to pass by her house, she causes him to come in, and to refresh
himself, yea, and allows him a chamber to lodge in, whenever he should
have occasion to come that way. And this she did because (as she tells her
husband) she knew he was an holy man of God. And chap. 6. verses 22.23. Elisha
causes the king of Israel, not only to abstain from the revenge of his
enemies, but also to give them friendly entertaiment, and to make them a
princely feast.

In the first book of Chronicles, chap. 16.3. king David at the bringing home
of the Ark of the Lord to his city after that they had offered burnt offerings
and peace offerings before God, and after that the king had blessed the people
in the name of the Lord; He dealt to every one of Israel, both man and woman,
to every one a cake of bread, and a piece of flesh and a bottle of wine.

In the second book of Chronicles, chap. 5.6. at the placing of the same Ark of the Lord in the most holy place of the Temple, under the wings of the
Cherubines; King Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel, that were
assembled unto him, offered sheep and bullockes which could not be told nor
numbered for multitude. And chap. 7.5. King Solomon offered a Sacrifice of two
and twenty thousand bullockes, and an hundredth and twenty thousand sheep: so
the King and all the people dedicated the house of God.

And chap. 31. of the same book, verse 3.4.5. etc. king Hezekiah, both by his
own example, and also by his royal authority, he reuiueth the care for
provision of holy allowance due to the Priests and Levites, that they might be
encouraged in the law of the Lord.

In the first chap. of the book of Ezra, it is recorded that the Lord moved
the heart of Cyrus king of Persia (though a heathen king) to deal bountifully
for the restoring of the true worship of God, in the city of Jerusalem. For to
this end, he gives liberty to the people of God to return out of their
captivity, and he restores all the vessels of gold and silver which
Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of Jerusalem, and had put them in the house of his
God.

The Lord also, by his holy Spirit, raised up the hearts of his people, that
they offered willingly to this work: and they which were near about the
chief Fathers of Judah and Benjamin strengthened their hands with vessels of
silver, with gold, with substance, and with cattle, and with precious things,
besides all that was willingly offered: according as king Cyrus had in the
gracious proclamation of their liberty moved and exhorted them.

The vessels which king Cyrus restored to the house of the Lord, were thirty
basins of gold, a thousand basins of silver, nine and twenty knives. Thirty
bowls of gold, and of silver bowls of the second sort four hundredth and ten,
and of other vessels a thousand. All the vessels of gold and silver which king
Cyrus restored, were five thousand and four hundredth.

And in the sixth chapter of the same book of Ezra, king Darius confirms the
same favor and bounty of Cyrus, and extends his own princely liberality to
further the worship of God. For thus he writes to the adversaries of the
Jews: Suffer ye the work of this house of God, that the Captain of the
Jews, and the Elders of the Jews, may build this house of God in his place.
For I have given a commandment what ye shall do to the Elders of the Jews,
for the building of this house of God, that of the revenues of the King, which
is of the tribute beyond the river, there be incontinently expenses given unto
these men that they cease not. And that which they shall have need of, let it be
given unto them day by day, whether it be young bullockes, or rams or lambs,
for the burnt offerings of the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine and oil,
according to the appointment of the priests who are in Jerusalem, that there be
no fault. That they may have to offer sweet odours unto the God of heaven, and
pray for the Kings life, and for his sons, etc.

And after this Darius, we read in the seventh chapter, how Artashasht at the
suit of Ezra did the like: for he gave them his royal furtherance, and full
liberty to do all things according to the will of their God; with this
special immunitie, that none of his Governors should lay upon the Ministry
toll, tribute or custom.

In the fifth chapter of Nehemiah, that worthy Courtier having obtained leave of
the same K. Artashasht to come to Jerusalem to further the work of the Lord;
he breaks off the hard courses whereby the richer sort oppressed the poor,
yea, he mightily provoke them to take a merciful course; whereof also he
himself gives them a right princely example.

In the eight chapter of the same book, both Nehemiah and Ezra with the
Priests, Levites, and people, they praise God, and the poor were relieved and
feasted, verse. 10.

And chap. 13. verses 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Nehemiah causes the portions of the
Levites to be given them, and the tithes to be brought in and paid to them:
seeing that for want thereof, the holy worship of God was neglected among his
people.

In the book of Ester, chap. 9.22. after that the Church was delivered from the
intended massacre of Haman, the people of God keep their feast of thankfulness
to the Lord, and one sends presents to another, as tokens of their mutual
joy in the Lord: and gifts are bestowed upon the poor.

In the book of Job, chap. 29.11.12. When the ear hard me (says Job, a man
of singular mercy and goodness in his time) it blessed me: and when the eye
saw me, it gave witness to me. For I delivered the poor that cried, and the
fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the widows heart to rejoice. I put
on justice, and it covered me: my judgment was as a robe and a crown. I was
the eyes to the blind and I was feet to the lame. I was a father to the poor,
and when I knew not the cause, I sought it out diligently. I brake also the
chawes of the unrighteous man, and plucked the pray out of his teeth.

And chap. 30.25. Did not I weep with him that was in trouble? was not my
soul in heaviness for the poor?

And again, chapter 31.16. etc. If (says Job, vehemently affirming, his
uprightness and good conscience in a constant course of exercising mercy) I
restrained the poor of their desire, or have caused the eyes of the widdowe to
fail, or have eaten my morsels alone, and the fatherless have not eaten
thereof. (For from my youth he has grown up with me as with a father, and
from my mothers womb I have been a guide to her, that is, to the fatherless
daughter) If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without
covering. If his loins have not blessed me, because he was warmed with the
fleece of my sheep. If I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless, when
I saw my help in the gate: Let mine arm fall from my shoulder, and let my
arm be broken from the bone. Thus much of Job, in that he was a mirror of
mercy, even above a number of right merciful men; and such a representation
and pattern of this heavenly virtue, as all may worthily take example by him.

In the 38. chap. of the Prophecy of Jeremiah from the 7. verse, etc. we read
how Ebed-melech the Blackamore is an instrument of the Lord, to deliver
Jeremiah out of the dungeon, where he was ready to starve, had not this
Ethiopian taken compassion of him, and made suit to the king on his behalf.

In the 15. chap. of Matthew. verse. 32. Our Savior Christ, the peerless
pattern of mercy, he calls his disciples unto him, and says: I have
compassion on this multitude, because they have already continued with me three
days, and have nothing to eat: and I will not let them depart fasting, lest
they faint in the way. And for want of a sufficient quantity of food, in
ordinary course, he by his divine power feeds them miraculously.

In the seventh chap. of Luke, verse 5. The Centurion, who is commended by our
Savior Christ for his great faith, above all in Israel, he has this
commendation set down of him, that he loved the people of God, and that he had
built a Synagogue for them.

And chap. 8. of the same Evangelist, verse 3. Many women, and namely, Mary
Magdalen and Ioanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, and Susanna, are praised
for ministering of their substance to the maintenance of our Savior Christ.

And chap. 10.38. Marie and Martha are commended for entertaining our S.
Christ, and his company into their house.

And chapter 19.8. Zacheus as a lively fruit of his faith, and repentance, and love
to our Savior Christ voweth the half of his goods to the poor, with
restitution for all his wrong dealing with any man.

And chap. 21.4. The poor widdowe cast her portion into the treasury, as well
as the rich, yea even all that she was able to give; and was therein preferred
by our Savior Christ to all the rich, though of their superfluity they offered
a greater quantity then she did.

In the 19. chap. of John, verse. 27. Our Savior Christ, even in his bitter
sufferings, far exceeding the sufferings or troubles of David mentioned
before; he had an earnest care, even upon the cross, for the comfortable
maintenance of his mother; and therefore wills John to be in his steed as a
son unto her: from the which time John took her home, even as if she had been
his own mother.

In the 9. of the Acts, verse. 36. etc. We have from among women, Dorcas for a
notable example of Christian good works and alms which she did; and namely,
in that she did very liberally and mercifully clothe and apparel the poor.

And chapter 10.2. Cornelius, a Captain, has singular praise to have been a very
devout man, fearing God with all his household; and to have given much alms to
the people, and also to have been much in prayer.

And verse. 6 of the same chap. Simon a tanner is the Christian host of the
Apostle Peter.

And chap. 11.29.30. The Disciples of Antioch every man according to his
ability, send succor to the brethren of Judea, in the time of a great dearth
and famine.

And chap. 16.15. Lidia, a seller of purple, being converted to the faith of
Christ, she is forthwith a most hearty and kind hostess to the Apostle Paul,
and the Christians which were of his company.

And again, in the same chapter, verses 33.34. The Iayler, immediately after
his conversion to the faith of Christ by the preaching of Paul, he shows
Paul and Silas all the kindness he can, bathing and suppling the scourges of
the rods, wherewith they had been beaten; and with great joy he sets the
best cheer he had before them.

And chap. 17.7. Jason, a citizen of Thessalonica, receives Paul and Silas
into his house.

And chap. 21.16. Mnason an ancient Disciple of Cyprus is an host of the
brethren.

And chap. 28.2. it is a very memorable record, that God provides so for Paul
and his weatherbeaten company, that the Barbarians showed them no small
kindness, in that, as Saint Luke reports, they took them to house, and made
them a good fire, to comfort them against the cold and wet of the rain.

And verse. 7. The chief man of the same I Will called Melita, whose name was
Publius, received and lodged them three days very courteously. Yea, verse 10.
it is testified by the Evangelist, that they did them great honor, and that
when they departed, they laded them with things necessary. This surely was
rare kindness, for so rude and barbarous a place, as it might seem to have
been.

In the 15. chap. to the Romans, verses 25.26. etc. The Christians of the
countries of Macedonia and Achaia send their contribution to the poor Saints,
which are far distant from them, even at Jerusalem.

And again, 2. Cor. 8. The Apostles James, and Cephas, and John gave warning
to Paul and Barnabas, that they should remember the poor: Which thing (says
the Apostle Paul) I was willing to do. Gal. 2.9.10.

Likewise Phil. 4.10.14.15.16. The Christians of Philippi have this
comme^dation, that they did sundry times send relief to the Apostle Paul,
when he was in affliction and want.

And 1. These. 1.3. The diligent love of the Christians of that Church has the
honorable testimony of the same Apostle.

And 2. Tim. 1.16.17.18. Onesiphorus (as Paul acknowledges with great
thankfulness) he often refreshed him, and ministered many things to him for his
comfort, both at Ephesus, and also at Rome, seeking him up there, and that
without being ashamed of his chain.

In the epistle to Philemon, Paul gives witness, that Philemon abounded in
love to the Saints, and that by him their hearts were comforted.

Heb. 6.10. The Apostle testifies that many among the Christian Jews were
very loving and careful in a constant course in relieuing their poor
brethren. God (says the Apostle) is not unrighteous that he should forget your
work, and labor of love, which ye have showed toward his name, in that ye
have ministered to the Saints, and yet do ministr.

And in the third epistle of the Apostle John, Gaius has special
commendation, to have been a bountiful host unto the Church, as one greatly
helpful to the truth, in that he gave entertainment, not only to the
Christians which he had acquaintance withal, but also to the brethren which
were strangers, whenever by any occasion of travel, they had need to resort
unto him. And great, no doubt, was the love and readiness of Gaius, which gave
modest strangers incourageme^t to use so great boldness, as to come so
commonly unto him.

Finally, the Christians of the Church of Thyatira (as our Savior Christ
himself testifies of them) they were more at the last then at the first in
the works of faith, and love, and of patience. I know thy works (says our
Savior) and thy love, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works,
and that they are more at the last then at the first. Revel. chap. 2.19.

In the which example, worthily may we now rest, for the shutting up of this
our holy catalogue of all sorts of Benefactors; true worshippers of God for
the most part, and some also among the heathen, being yet heathnish; whom
nevertheless God directed so graciously in some particular actions, that they
may therein be justly examples among the rest, and that even to Christians, to
provoke them to beneficence, unless they will suffer themselves to be shamed
by them, if they should be more unkind in like cases of Gods glory, or in any
humane necessities, then they have been. And this let us mark, that in these
examples recorded as we have scene in the holy Scriptures; Contrary vices and
Examples.
both touching the one sort, and the other, we have the practice of all kind
of beneficence, as well toward religion it self, as all true worshippers of
God; yea toward every one that shall stand in need of our help, whether in
feeding, clothing, lodging, or by any other way and means of relieuing and
comforting of them, according to our power: so that if we have grace, nothing
is wanting, for our direction and encouragement, to be right christian
imitators and followers of them therein.

Now briefly (for the conclusion of this chapter) let us in a short view
gather together the vices to be avoided, as contrary to godly and Christian
beneficence: They are of two sorts, either altogether hindering; or at the
least corrupting and perverting true beneficence. The vices altogether
hindering, are couetousenes, churlishnes, a grudging and repining affection,
the which arising from covetousness, is joined also with a base account, both
of God, and of his worship, and of his people: as if all were too much, and too
good, yea as if all were lost and cast away, whatsoever is so employed and
bestowed. Of all which we have had Nabal for a notorious example. But beside
these, there are also other vices of this former sort; as distrust in Gods
providence, trust in a man's own forecast, self-loue, pride, voluptuousness,
and such like.

Secondly, the vices which corrupt and pervert Christian beneficence, they are
in the worser sort of men hypocrisy, joined with colorable covetousness,
under pretense of frank and free liberality, like to that of Ananias and
Sapphira his wife, Act. 5. And together with hypocrisy, vain glory, in
hunting after the praise of men, and proud conceit of worthiness and merit,
even before God himself: also when beneficence (if so it may be called) is
applied to countenance and advance idolatrous religion, or superstitious
traditions and ceremonies in the true worship of God: furthermore, when alms
is given of ill gotten goods; specially, if they be given with a mind to make
satisfaction to God, for the fraud which has been done to men: last of all,
when any thing is given with a mind, expecting and longing after a like or
greater worldly recompense. These are then corrupting vices in the worser sort
of men. And in the better sort they may be these which follow: first,
indiscreete and wastfull giving, as to counterfeit poor, or to vagrant and
inordinate persons, with neglect of such as be poor honest inhabitants and
householders: secondly, a secure presumption in Gods providence, with neglect of
prayer to God for the upholding of our estate, and without due regard of using
diligence in the labors of our callings, and without thriftie employing of
commodities to the best advantages, such as be honest and lawful, or when any
do put forth themselves above their ability: finally, neglect of thankfulness
to God for former blessing and prosperity.

All which vices, partly as open and professed adversaries and destroyers; and
partly, as secret and undermining conspirators: they must be both mightily
and also warily resisted and prevented of all such, as mind not only to enter,
but also hold out constant, in the right Christian course of this excellent and
noble virtue of godly beneficence, the which God has so graciously commanded
and commended to us: and which his servants have obediently tracked and trodden
forth before us. Thus finishing this second chapter, let us proceed to the
rest of our Treatise.

The reward of giving to Gods worship.
CHAP. III.
Of the reward of right Christian Giving.

SEeing God, who is of infinite mercy, most rich and bountiful in all good
gifts and graces, commands all such as have Gods plenty, (as it is commonly
and rightly termed) that they be liberal in giving, and seeing he promises
also that he will of his divine bounty, reward the same: it cannot be, but
that he will indeed plentifully recompense all such, as shall obey the same his
holy commandment, and will believe that gracious promise which he has made in
this behalf. This therefore, let us now henceforth consider in this chapter,
to the end that hereby (through the blessing of God) we may both help forward
this virtue in the hearts and hands of those that be ouer-slack and negligent;
and also that we may comfort and encourage both heart and hand of all, which by
the grace of God are already prompt and diligent, that they may never wax
faint and weary, till they have attained to the full recompense of that most
gracious and free reward, which from the bounteous and never wearied heart and
hand of the Lord is thereunto promised and assured.

In speaking of which free blessing of reward let us hold the same order which
was observed in treating of the duty.

First therefore, concerning those which are liberal in such manner as has
been described; to the maintenance of Gods pure religion and worship, and for
the same cause, have any special care, to encourage and further the faithful
ministers of the word of God, in their holy ministry, or any other of Gods
faithful servants: let us see how the reward of such is assured unto them:
first from those promises, which the Lord, who is a rewarder of all that seek
him, has made unto them: and then from such examples, in whom he has given
experience and testimony to his Church, in the faithful perfourmance of the
same.

And first of all, let us consider what our Savior Christ (in whom and by whom
all the promises of God are yea and Amen) speaks to this purpose in the tenth
chap. of Matthew. verses 40, 41, 42. He that receives you (says our Savior
Christ to his disciples, whom he minded to employ in the preaching of his
Gospel) receives me: and he that receives me, receives him that sent me. He
that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets
reward: and he that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man,
shall receive the reward of a righteous man. And whosoever shall give unto one
of these little ones, to drink a cup of cold water only, in the name of a
Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall not loose his reward.

In the which words of our Savior Christ two things are principally to be
observed. First, what every one is chiefly to respect in his Christian
beneficence toward the special servants of God: yea, toward any of the least
of those that bear and profess his name: that is, that in giving unto them,
or in showing any other kindness, they do not so much respect their persons,
as the Gospel and Christ himself, and those goodly gifts of godliness,
wherewith he has graced and adorned his servants, for the common benefit of
his Chuch in the communion of Saints. For that our Savior Christ means by
giving to a Prophet in the name of a Prophet; and to a righteous man in the
name of a righteous man; and to a little one in the name of a Disciple: as
though he should say, even for the love that a man bears them, because they
be such as they be; either Prophet, as in a principal place of service, or a
rigteous man, as one more ancient and approved in his profession, or a
Disciple, as it were a nouice, or new converted and more weak Christian. This
is the first thing to be observed in these words.

Secondly, we are to observe, that according to the quality and degree of the
duty which any perfourmeth in that former respect, the reward of Gods free
bounty shall be proportionable; that is, he will fit the crown answerable to
the work of his own grace, and according to the excellency of the occasions,
which he himself vouchsafes to give; whether greater or lesser, and according
to the greater or lesser measure of faith and love, wherein the same duties are
performed and continued in: yet so, as the least kindness done in truth,
shall be requited with manifold advantage.

In the 6. chapter of the Epistle to to the Galathians from the 6. verse etc. the
Apostle Paul, in the name of Christ, giving charge to the Christian Churches,
that they provide for the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, even as
they will answer the matter before God, who will not be dallied with therein,
as we have seen before: he does therewithal assure all such as shall deal
Christianly herein, that they shall reap a plentiful fruit from the same.
Whatsoever a man sows (says the Apostle) that shall he also reap. For he
that sows to the flesh, shall of the the flesh reap corruption: that is, he
that minds earthly things, without regard of Gods kingdom and religion, and
his own salvation, he shall perish with them: but he that sows to the
Spirit, that is, he which does liberally contribute to the maintenance and
advancement of the ministry of the Gospel, shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting. Let us not therefore (as the holy Apostle exhorts) be vvearie
of vvell-doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

Answerable hereunto, is that charge which the same Apostle gives unto
Timotheus, and so to all faithful Ministers of the Gospel, in the last
chapter of that his first Epistle: Charge those that be rich in this world
(says he) that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain
riches, but in the living God (who gives us abundantly all things to enjoy)
That they do good, and be rich in good works, and ready to distribute and
communicate. Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may obtain eternal life.

Read also in the first chapter of the Prophet Haggai. verse 8. Go up to the
mountain, and bring wood, and build this house, and I will be favorable in
it, and I will be glorified, says the Lord. And again, chap. 2. verses 19.20.
Consider I pray you in your minds, from this day, and before, from the four
and twentieth day of the ninth month, even from the day that the foundation of
the Lords temple was laid: consider it in your minds, Is the seed yet in the
barn? As yet the vine, and the fig tree, and the pomegranet and olive tree,
has not brought forth: from this day will I bless you.

Likewise in the second chapter of the prophecy of Malachie verses 10.11.12.
Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in my
house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open
the windows of heaven unto you, and pour ye out a blessing without measure.
And I will rebuke the deuourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the
fruit of your ground, neither shall your vine be barren in the field, says
the Lord of Hosts. And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a
pleasant land, says the Lord of Hosts.

And I pray ye, let us mark how, when the Lord, Ier. 32. from the 17. verse
and throughout the whole 33. chapter: and likewise Ezekiel. chap. 36.25.26. etc.
speaks of restoring his people Israel from their captivity to their own
land, that they might enjoy the fruitful blessings thereof, as in former
times; he makes the renewing of their hearts to his fear and worship, the
forerunner of the same, and this blessing to be a consequent of that: according
to the ancient promise of blessing, to those that should truly worship God.
Leuit. 26.3. etc. and Deuteronomy. 28.1.2. etc. to the 15. verse.

But this promise of blessing was not made only to the people of God under the
law, upon condition they would perform faithful service and worship to God:
but it belongs to all nations and people whosoever, being at any time called
to the true knowledge of God, shall yield themselves, in the faith of Christ,
true worshippers of him; as we are sweetly taught and assured in the 67.
Psalm. For this being the prayer which the holy Ghost teaches the church to
pray in that Psalm: That all nations might know God, and joyfully praise and
worship him: the conclusion follows, with this most gracious and bounteous
promise of God: Then shall the earth bring forth her increase, and God even our
God shall bless us. God shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth shall
fear him.

This is that which our Savior Christ says, Matthew. 6.33. Seek ye first the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be cast unto
you: to wit, as an overplus, or income, to make up more then measure or tale;
as a matter of small reckening in so great an account, etc.

It is the same also, which the faithfiull Apostle of our Savior Christ
affirms, 1. Timoth. 4.8. Godliness has the promise of the life present, and
of that which is to come. For no man can truly and heartily seek the kingdom
of God, and his righteousness, and so be a right godly man indeed, but the
same must, and will be to his power, a willing maintainer and furtherer of the
true worship of God, and of his faithful servants, the public ministers
thereof. Thus much for the promise of blessing.

The examples do now follow, concerning the same blessing of God, upon such
as have had such a zealous care of furthering his worship, as has been spoken
of. The examples which we mind to bring forth, they are partly of such persons
as show that they had a persuasion in their hearts by faith, that God would in
mercy recompense their service, this way done to him and his Church: and
partly, they are such, upon whom the blessing of God, actually poured down
upon them, is more expressly testified and recorded in the holy word of God.

Of the faith of the former sort, we may take David, in his prayer of faith,
for a worthy example. Psalm. 86.2. Preserve my soul, for I am merciful: save
thou thy servant that trusts in thee. Be merciful unto me o Lord, etc.

Likewise godly Nehemia, that zealous furtherer of Gods true worship and
religion, is another most worthy example, as we may porceiue by his most humble
and faithful prayer, chap. 13. verse. 14. in these words: Rememember me o my
God herein, and wype not out my kindness that I have showed on the house of my
God, and on the offices thereof. And again in the same chapter, verse 22.
after that he had reformed the abuse and profanation of the Lords Sabbath:
Rem^mber me o my God, concerning this (says he) and pardon me according to thy
great mercy. The honorable good man prays, as we see, for Gods blessing, as
one having a lively faith in his promise: but he as well as David show by their
prayers, that they are far rmoued from the pride of the Iusticiarie, who
presumes upon his merit, and so makes himself in his best works abominable
in the sight of God.

In like manner with David and Nehemiah, had king Hezekiah a comfortable
persuasion, that God would show him mercy, because he had showed kindness to
the house of God, and to his servants the ministers thereof. Yea, it was as a
sweet refuge and sanctuary to his soul, when he was in that deep distress,
which the bitterness of his sickness had brought upon him as, we read, 2.
King. chap. 20.2.3. I beseech thee o Lord (says that godly King) remember now
how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done
that which is good in thy sight: and Hezekiah wept sore. Now what this
goodness was, the remembrance whereof was so comfortable to his conscience in
the time of his distress, it appears at large, in the 29. 30. and 31. chap.
of the second book of holy Chronicles: and more briefly is the same comprised
in the two last verses of the 31. chapter after this manner. And thus did Hezekiah
through out all Iadah, and he did well, and uprightly and truly before the Lord
his God. And in all the works which he began for the service of the house of
God, both in the Law and in the co^mandeme^ts to seek his God, he did it with
all his heart and prospered.

The like remembrance of beneficence to the Lords Prophets, gave Obadiah a
strong persuasion to plead with the Prophet Elijah, that he would deal well
with him, and not endanger his life to the wrath of his master; king Ahab: and
Elijah deals with him accordingly, as with one, in the same respect, worthy
to be tendered for the Lords cause. 1. King. 18.13. etc. Was it not told my
Lord (says Obadiah) what I did, when Iezabel slew the Prophets of the Lord,
how I hid a hundredth of the Lords Prophets by fifty in a cave, and fed them
with bread and water? And now thou say go tell thy Lord, behold Elijah is
here, that he may slay me, For Obadiah feared lest Elijah would have conveyed
himself away, and so king Ahab thinking himself mocked, should be enraged
against Obadiah. Whereupon Elijah assures him verse solemnly by oath, that he
would show himself to Ahab that day.

Yea further, the practice of this kind of beneficence, is so notable a fruit
of faith, that justly does it confirm the faith of others to expect mercy
from God upon them that exercise the same, as we see, how from the same
encouragement, the Apostle Paul prayed for Onesiphorus, his most kind and
constant, benefactor: The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus (says
Paul) for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain. But when he
was at Rome he sought me up diligently and found me. The Lord grant unto him
that he my find mercy with the Lord at that day. 2. Tim. 1.16.17.18. Now there
is no doubt, but the same Spirit which set Paul on work to pray thus for
Onesiphorus, minded also to grant the same his request, both for him and his
house. The like is to be conceived of his prayer for the Philippians upon the
same occasion: he nothing doubting, but that their contribution to his
maintenance, was an odor that smells sweet, a sacrifice acceptable and
pleasant to God, chap. 4.17.18.19.20.

But let us come to open and confirm this point, by a few more express and
plain examples, such as God has made, by evident effect of his mercy upon
them, famous spectacles of his bounty, in respect of their kind and beneficial
dealing, either toward his worship, or any Ministers thereof, for his sake, yea
though they have not so heartily minded the same as they ought to have done.

The widow of Zarephath, who gave entertainment to the Prophet Elijah,
received this great blessing by the hand of the Lord, by his means, that the
small quantity of her oil and meal did not diminish, all the time that the
dearth and scarcity continued in Israel. And beside that, by means of the
same Prophet she received again he son from death to life. 1. King. 17.15.

The honorable Shunamite also, who gave entertainment to the Prophet Elisha,
as was rehearsed before, being barren, at the prayer of Elisha, God gave her
power to conceive: and afterward also, at his prayer, she received the same her
son from death to life, as the widow of Zarephath had done by the prayer of
Elijah, 2. King. chap. 4. verse. 8. etc.

In the 39. chap. of Genesis we read that the Lord blessed Potiphars house,
though a heathen man, for Joseph's sake, eue^ from the time that he preferred
him to be the Governor of it. And afterward, he was also a blessing to
Pharaoh, and all his people, by reason that he advanced him to the chief
honor of his kingdom, next under himself. For by that occasion God made
Joseph their foster-father in the seven years of famine, yea and the
foster-father of his Church, the family of his own father, which also was
Joseph's own blessing, in so much as he was found faithful to God therein.
Neither is there any doubt, but the Lord showed great mercy to Nebuchadnezzar,
because he favored and advanced his holy Prophet Daniel, and some other the
very faithful servants of God, who were his captives in Babel. Publius also
the chief man of the I Will Melita, of the which we read before, he giving the
Apostle Paul and the Evangelist Luke courteous entertainme^t for three days,
through the goodness of God he received an Apostles reward. For by Paul his
father was healed of a grievous fever, and of the bloody flux, yea, and diverse
other of that place were healed of their diseases. Act. 28.7, 8, 9.

Seeing therefore the Lord blessed heathen men, for their preferring of his
servants and Prophets to honor, therein they chiefly respected their own
pleasure and contentment: shall we not much rather assure our selves, that
whosoever among Christians shall, for the love and honor which they unfeignedly
bear to God, and his pure religion, deal honorably with his servants, the
faithful Ministers of his word and Gospel, shall much rather be blessed and
prospered of him? It is out of question that we may. Do we not read that the
Lord greatly blessed Obed Edom and all that had, because he religiously
received, and kept the Arc in his house by the space of that three months,
wherein David was discouraged, by reason of the strange judgment of God upon
Vzziah, as the holy story shows more at large, 1. Chron. 13? And again 2.
Chron. 11.13.14.15.16.17. Do we not read, that when Rehoboam gave entertainment
to the holy Levites, and Godly minded Israelites, who from among the other
tribes of Israel, left their suburbs and p^ssessions, and came to Jerusalem,
to avoid that idolatrous and superstitious worship, which Jeroboam had set up;
they setting their hearts to seek the Lord God of Israel, and to offer to the
Lord God of their fathers: Do we not read, I say, that hereby the kingdom of
Judah was strengthened, and that Rehoboam the son of Solomon was made mighty
three years long: that is, even so long as they walked in the way of David and
Solomon as the text affirms?

An experiment also hereof we have in the same book, chap. 31.4. etc. King
Hezekiah commanded the people, which dwelt in Jerusalem, to give a part to the
Priests and Levites, that they might be encouraged in the law of the lord.
And it is there testified, that after the people had done so, the Lord blessed
his people, and the land with great abundance verse 10.

And has not our blessed Queen Elizabeth, and her whole Dominion, had
plentiful experience, how good it is, to give intertainement to banished
churches and persecuted Christians, whom God has sent for succor among us?
Blessed be the name of God for that gracious experience which for a long time
God has granted unto us. God give us grace, that we may more thankfully
acknowledge his goodness, and that we may increase in all kindness and
goodness toward his excellent servants. So no doubt, as king Solomon truly
says, They that honor the Lord with their riches, and with the chief of all
their increase, Their barnes shall be filled with abundance, and their presses
shall burst (to wit, as being worn out with pressing so great abundance of
grapes) to make new wine, Pro. 3.9.10.

Micah of mount Ephraim, having entertained a Leuite to be a Priest in his
house, he incourageth himself to think and say thus: Now I know that the Lord
will be good unto me, seeing I have a Leuite to be my Priest, Judge. 17.10.13.
But alas, poor Micah was deceived, because he exercised a superstitious
worship: The reward of giving to Gods worship. Malus Micha nactus est malu^
Leu^tam. P. Ma^tyr.
in which respect it is said in way of a Proverb: Unhappy Micah has light
upon an euilll Leuite. But if Micah had taken a right course, and maintained a
holy Leuite, to have taught him the truth of God, and to have ministered in the
true worship of God, he might justly and upon good ground have persuaded
himself, that his heart being upright, it should have gone well with him. And
so may all persuade themselves, that, if the fault be not otherwise in
themselves, God will be good unto them when they maintain his faithful
Ministers to preach his Gospel unto them. Hitherto therefore, of the blessing
of God upon beneficial contribution, and liberal giving toward the
maintenance of the holy worship and service of God: and of the faithful
ministers thereof, or toward the relief and encouragement of any other of his
special good servants.

It follows now, that we show that it is the good will and pleasure of God in
like manner, to reward the Christian liberality and beneficence of those, that
are good to the poorest and least of his Saints, as a fruit of their love,
flowing from the former zeal of Gods glory in the furthering and advancing of
his pure worship and religion. For this also has manifold witness and
confirmation in the word of God, both by promises from the sacred mouth of God,
and also from examples, as it were by the reaching forth of the hand, to let us
evidently perceive, that it is his very faithful purpose graciously to
recompense the same. wherefore, as before, so again here, let us first
consider the promises, and this being done, then let us take a view of the
examples.

In the 24 chap. of Deuteronomy. verse 13. The Lord commanding that mercy be showed
to the poor, he says, that it shall be righteousness before him to them that
shall do it. If it be accepted for righteousness in the sight of God, there is
no doubt but he will in mercy reward it. And let us note, that in this place of
Deuteronomy. the Lord speaks of mercifulness in lending, which is a degree of mercy
inferior to frank and free giving. Wherefore, The reward of giving to the
poor.
seeing God will reward mercifulness in free lending, much rather will he
account the mercy of free giving for a special kind of righteousness, and
consequently, he will more abundantly recompense and reward it. So Deuteronomy. 15.7.
etc. (which place was alleged before) the Lord comma^ding not only to lend
freely, but also to give, promises hereupon that he will bless such as shall
obey his commandment in all their works, and in all that they put their hand
unto.

In the 112. Ps. verse. 6.9.10. Surely (says the Spirit of God by his holy
Prophet and Psalmist) a good man shall never be moved: the righteous shall be
had in everlasting remembrance. He has distributed and given to the poor: his
righteousness remains for ever, his horn shall be exalted with glory, etc.
That is to say, God will mightily bless and uphold his good servants, against
all the envious repinings, and malignant endeavors of the wicked whatsoever.
For as it follows in the Psalm, The wicked shall see it and be angry, he
shall gnash with his teeth and consume away, the desire of the wicked shall
perish.

In the 37. Psalm, the holy prophet guided by the same Spirit, and wisely
observing, by his own experience, the gracious course of Gods most holy
providence, in that he tenderly watches always over his good, righteous and
merciful servants: he is bold upon the same his observation, to give out as a
principle, that God will neither forsake the righteous, nor yet their godly
seed and posterity after them. I have bin young (says he, ver. 25.26) and now I
am old, yet I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. He
is ever merciful and lends, and his seed inioyeth the blessing. And K.
Solomon, Pou. 13.22 The good man shall give inheritance to his children
children: and the riches of the sinner is laid up for the just. There is
therefore a double blessing attending upon the merciful: that is, both upon
themselves, and also upon their children and posterity: and therefore also, may
it justly be a double encouragement to move al Christians to a willing and
constant course in this kind of weldoing.

Not that ever any, which is the child of a righteous man, may not come to
beggars state, or to be exercised for a time with outward wants: for it is
easily seen that the lewd, slothful and unthrifty son of a good man does
fall into miserable poverty, as a just punishment upon him; yea even the
rather, because he having had so good an example before his eyes, and the
benefit of good education does notwithstanding refuse to walk in the good
steps and counsels of his godly father.

Neither is it so to be understood, as though no godly child of a righteous
man, may at any time suffer outward adversity and want: for this also does the
Lord also work sometimes in our sight, for secret causes known to himself,
and to the end he may work greater things by them and for them, then outward
prosperity could afford. But the meaning of the Prophet is, that neither the
righeous, nor their godly seed, shall be forsaken of God, or utterly left
destitute of man's succor in their penury and want of all things; though for a
season it may fall upon them for their trial: and then that the usual and
ordinary course of Gods dealing is to show mercy upon such, yea even the
mercy and blessing of this present life.

Furthermore, Psalm. 41. ver. 1. etc. The same holy Prophet of God pronounces
those blessed, who shall judge wisely of the poor and afflicted. And yet this
is in appearance less then to deal kindly and mercifully toward them.
Nevertheless, how little so ever it may seem to be, yet it is in truth a
principal grace, greatly serving to all external exercise of mercy and
compassion, how secret and hidden soever it be. For where there is first of
all, a charitable judgment conceived of those that be humbled by any
affliction, there will follow comfortable counsel, hearty prayer, and every
other good fruit of compassion and mercy, in hope that God will in due time
deliver and save them out of all their affliction. For so it follows in the
Psalm. The Lord will deliver him in time of trouble. The Lord will keep him
and preserve him alive: he shall be blessed upon the earth, and thou (o God)
wilt not deliver him unto the will of his enemies. The Lord will strengthen him
upon the bed of sorrow: thou (he turns his speech again to God as before)
have turned all his bed in his sickness: or have put an end to his disease or
sickness. Thus, as the holy Prophet gives to understand, will such as judge
wisely and charitably of the afflicted, bemone their estate, and comfort them
all they can: and that with as much cheerfulness as they can encourage their
hearts unto, from such good and comfortable reasons, as are mentioned in the
Psalm.

And now, in all this, what does this Prophet say, or any other testimony of
the holy Scripture affirm, which our Savior Christ does not confirm, in
that he says, Mat. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain
mercy. And chapter 25.34. etc. The king (says he, speaking of himself) even the
Judge of all the world, shall say to the^ on his right hand at the last day:
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for ye from the
foundations of the world. For I was hungry and ye gave me meat, I thirsted
and ye gave me drink, etc. and verse 40. In so much as ye have done it to the
least of these my brethren, ye have done it to me.

O how great and incomprehensible shall this comfort be to all those that shall
attain unto it, seeing it shall be the everlasting sealing up of all comfort,
and of most glorious happiness unto them! And therefore also, how worthy the
obtaining of this, is all the care of forecasting and preparation that may be?
I mean, that we may, according to the holy advise of our Savior Christ, make
our selves such friends, by the well employing of the uncertain r^ches of this
world, that when we shall want, we may be received into everlasting
habitations. Luke 16.9. Men usually, for the obtaining of a little vai^e
pleasure, or earthly profit and glory, will do very much. And shall we refuse
to do so small a thing, as our Savior Christ requires ^t (...) ^^r the
greatest advantage, and most durable ^r^fi^ (...) glory that may be? For thus
in effect our Savior speaks unto us: Be ye merciful a little while to the
poor afflicted members of my Church, for my sake, and ye shall be blessed for
ever. Give of your small earthly commodities, and ye shall be recompensed with
great, spiritual and heavenly riches. Comfort ye them with your temporal
refreshings, and your joys shall be eternal and glorious in the kingdom of
heaven. To this purpose well serves that which S. John writes, Revel. 14.13.
I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, write: Blessed are the dead, even
henceforth, which die in the Lord. Even so says the Spirit, that they may rest
from their labors, and that their works may follow them. Of the which works,
no doubt, these of mercy which we speak of, are a chief and principal part,
according to that of the Prophet Isaiah chap. 57.1.2. Merciful men are takes
away from the evil to come. They enter into peace and rest in their graves.

These things being so, let it be so far from us, to think it too great a
matter to part with a small portion of our worldly goods, to the relief of our
poor brethren; that we may rather esteem it a small thing, in comparison of
the kingdom of heaven, which our Savior Christ is minded to give unto us,
Luke 12.33.34. though we should sell all that we have, if need so required, and
give it out for alms. For thus, as our Savior says in the same place, we
should in steed of rotten bags, make us bags which shall not wax old; and in
steed of uncertain riches, obtain that treasure which shall never fail in
heaven, where no thief comes, neither moth corrupts, nor canker fretteth,
and in steed of moyling here about earthly things, our hearts shall be free to
mind heaven and heavenly things, as having already sent our treasure thither
before.

And to the same purpose, let us willingly hearken to that holy insruction,
which the same our blessed Lord and Savior teaches us in the 14. chap. of the
same Gospel, saying: When thou make a dinner or a supper, call not thy
friends, nor thy brethren, nor thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors, lest they
also bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee. But when thou make a
feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind: and thou shall be
recompensed, because they cannot recompense thee: for thou shall be recompensed
at the resurrection of the just. Not that our Savior Christ does simply
condemn or forbid all civil inuiting and feasting of one rich friend by
another, in a mutual and answerable course of kindness, so it be soberly
practiced: but he minds only to show in these words, that the feasting of
the poor is much to be preferred before the feasting of the rich, specially of
the good and godly poor; in so much as this kind of feasting is both more
necessary, in regard of the guests, which do stand in need to be this way
refreshed: as also because it is less chargeable to the feast-maker, in that a
more mean diet will content the poor: and finally, because it is more
gainefull, in that the blessing of the kingdom of heaven does belong to this
kind of merciful feasting, and not to that other feasting of the rich, which
is continually recompensed by one to the other here in this world, as our
Savior gives to understand.

Now further, if we will use but a little more diligence to peruse the holy
Proverbs of king Solomon, we shall find in that one little book so many, and
the same so excellent sentences, tending this way, as may worthily confirm us
greatly in the sure hope of the blessing of God, while we do walk in this
blessed way of mercy toward the poor and needy. Of these excellent sentences
therefore, let us here call to mind so many as for the present God shall
bring to hand. And first, that offers it self which we do read chapter 11.
verse 17. He that is merciful (says the Spirit of God by the wise king)
rewards his own soul. That is to say, he does so gracious and acceptable a
duty before God, when it is done in faith and obedience to God, that God of
his rich and free grace and mercy will surely reward it unto him. and in the
same chapter, verses 24.25.26. There is that scatters, and is more increased.
The liberal person shall have plenty: and he that waters, shall have rain.
He that withdraws corn, the people will curse him: but blessing shall be
upon the head of him that sells corn. That is, of him that exercises mercy
in his prising and selling of it, laboring in hard times to mitigate and being
down that extreme price which unmerciful men strive to bring it unto. For as
touching dear sellers, such of whom the common proverb may be affirmed, that
The more they heap, to wit, to themselves, the worse they cheap to others:
such cannot in truth be ever right good and liberal dealers. They pull down
that with their left hand, which they seem to build with their right: and so
they frustrate their reward. Whereupon also it follows in the same chapter of
the holy Proverbs: He that seeks good things, gets favor: but he that
seeks evil it shall come unto him. And in the 19. chap. verse. 17. thus we
read: He that has mercy upon the poor lends unto the Lord, and the Lord
will recompense him that which he has given. And who can wish or desire any
more sufficient surety or better pay-maister then he? Again, chap. 21. verse.
21. He that follows after righteousness, and mercy: that is, he which is
diligent in pursuing and taking hold of all good occasions to practice the
duties of righteousness and mercy, shall find life, righteousness and
glory. And again, chap. 22.9. He that has a good eye (that is to say, a
merciful eye, which will behold, and therewithal tender the necessities of
the poor) shall be blessed: for he gives of his bread to the poor. Likewise
chapter 28.27. He that gives unto the poor shall not lack. Thus much out of the
holy Proverbs.

In the book of the Preacher, chapter 11.1. etc. Cast thy bread upon the waters
(says the same most wise king, a Prophet of God) for after many days thou
shall find it. Give a portion to seven and and also to eight. etc.

In the which words king Solomon like as the Apostle Paul also has done, as
we saw before, compares the actions of Christian liberality and benficence,
to a seed time, after the which follows in due season the increase of the
harvest. And in the same place he prosecuteth this similitude, in very
excellent manner, thereby to provoke to the diligent, speedy, and constant
following of this most husbandly plow. For He that observes the wind (says
king Solomon) shall not sow, and he that regards the clouds shall not reap:
that is, he that will suffer himself to be hindered from doing good by casting
of doubts, through unbelief, or by any other stumbling block which the devil
shall cast in his way, he shall miss the harvest, because he has lost the seed
time. To the preventing of which so great a damage, king Solomon exhorts as
follows: In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thy hand
rest: for thou know not which shall prosper this or that, or whether both
shall be alike good.

In the 18. chap. of Ezekiel. verse. 7.8.9. and again, verses 16.17. The Lord does
very earnestly assure his people, that whether a man be the father of a wicked
son, or the son of a wicked father, such is the equity of his gracious
dealing, that if he himself be not an oppressor, but has restored the pledge
to his debtor, has spoiled none by violence, but has given his bread to the
hungry, and has covered the naked with a garment. And has not given forth
upon usury, neither has taken any increase, but has withdrawn his hand from
iniquity, and has executed true judgment between man and man. And has
walked in my statutes, and kept my judgments to deal truly, he is just, he
shall surely live, says the Lord God.

And yet, moreover, and beside all the testimonies hitherto rehearsed, we have
a notable place in the 58. chap. of Isaiah, verses 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. The
words are very mighty to encourage and draw on every good and faithful man,
both Jew and Gentile, to exercise the actions of goodness and mercy. For after
that the Lord has, by his holy Prophet, rehearsed what he requires to be
done: namely, that every heavy burden be taken of, that the oppressed be let
go free, and that every yoke be broken. That bread be dealt to the hungry that
the poor which wander (he means not voluntary beggars and wandering rogues,
but such as be enforced to leave their place by some urgent calamity) be
brought to men's houses: When a man sees the naked to cover him, and not to
hide a man's self from his own flesh. After this rehearsal of the duties, and
that in more pressing manner then is here repeated: then follows the gracious
promise of God in these words: Then shall thy light break forth a^ the
morning, and thy health shall grow speedily: thy righteousness shall go
before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall embrace thee. Then shall thou
call, and the Lord will answer: thou shall cry, and he will say, Here am I: if
thou take away from the midst of thee, (that is out of thy heart) the yoke
(or the tying wherewith the heavy burden is as it were fastened to the back)
the putting out of the finger and wicked speaking (that is, every inhumanity
and grieuance.) And then it follows on the contrary: If thou pour out thy
soul to the hungry, and refreshest the troubled soul: then (says the Lord)
shall thy light spring out in the darkness, and thy darkness shall be as
the noone day: and the Lord will guide thee continually, and he will satisfy
thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shall be like a watered
garden, and like a spring of water whose waters fail not. And they shall be of
thee which shall build the old wast places: thou shall raise up foundations
form many generations, and thou shall be called the repairer of the breach, and
a restorer of the paths to dwell in. Now what man (though of his own
disposition unmerciful and illiberall, as all of us are,) if he shall duly
consider this manifold and bounteous promise of God, and if he shall gather but
one sparkle of faith, to believe that God is faithful and his word true, can
choose but he must be affected, at the least after the manner of king Agrippa,
Act. chap. 26. verse. 28. to confess, that almost it persuades him to become a
merciful and liberal man. To whom also willingly do I say, as the Spirit of
God moved Paul to answer Agrippa, in that question about true faith: Would to
God that not only one, or a few almost, which read this, and the rest of the
holy Scriptures, concerning this duty of beneficence, might both almost, and
altogether, become merciful and liberal men.

But howsoever this will not be: for the children of this world will still and
always be like themselves: the covetous man will be covetous still, and he
will increase in his unmerciful courses: yet I know assuredly, that the word
and promise of God will effectually and strongly prevail with all that belong
unto him; not only to provoke them to obedience, but to fill their hearts also
with exceeding comfort, in the performance of the duties thereof. For verily,
as the holy Apostle truly testifies Hebr. chap. 6. verse. 10. God is not
unrighteous that he should forget your work and labor of love, which ye have
showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered unto the Saints, and yet do
minister, sc. Wherefore worthily did Nehemiah, in persuasion of this goodness
and faithfulness of God, embolden himself to pray to God, not only to
remember that kindness of his, which he had showed toward the house and
religion of God (as we have seen before) but also that it would please him of
his goodness, to remember him according to all that he had done for the
relief of the poor of his people. Remember me o my God (says he) in
goodness, according to all that I have done for this people, Nehem. 5.19. In
which chapter even from the beginning to the end, is this part of Nehemiahs
kindness, mercy, and liberality fully described, for our singular
instruction; specially of those that be in higher places, and have greater
power then others to do more good.

Finally, that we may conclude this point, let us hearken to that of the same
Apostle, Heb. 13. from the beginning of the chapter. Let brotherly love
continue, says he, Be not forgetful to logde strangers: for thereby some
have received Angels into their houses vnnares. So indeed did Abraham. So also
did Lot: either of them being given to hospitality, as has been observed
before. In which words, after that the Apostle has given to understand that
Love is so tender and dainty a plant, that if it be not charily cherirished
and maintained, it will wear away: he would give us further to understand,
that though we are not in these days, to look that Angels should, in the
shape of men, resort to our houses, as of ancient times they did to the holy
Patriarchs and others: yet easily may such as love and practice hospitality,
receive into their houses, such servants of God, as be more dear and precious
in his sight the^ they are ware of, which kind of guess ought always to be
very welcome to every good man. And then also who knows how great blessing
God will grant at their holy suit and supplication, to those good householders
and families, where they are at any time, for the Lords sake, kindly and
lovingly entertained? Doubtless, howsoever it be not always so apparent, as
heretofore it has been made sometime by miraculous gratifications in the
ministry of the Prophets, yet as touching spiritual recompense and blessing,
the Gospel has been and shall be as beneficial as ever the law, or times
before the law have been, to the magnifying of the bounty of the most glorious
grace of God revealed and published therein, to the end of the world.

Hitherto therefore in the second part of this chapter, of the promises of
blessing upon those that shall exercise their liberality and beneficence, to
the relieuing even of the poorest of the people, specially of such as be
greatest in the obedience and patience of the faith of the Gospel.

It remains now that henceforth we do confirm, or rather make plain, that
which is most true and certain of it self, by some examples of those, to whom
the promise and blessing of God has bin in this respect manifestly performed
upon them. But I will use the former examples here, because they which have
been alleged in the former part of this chapter, are so many confirmations of
this also: in so much as the same, who are dutiful maintainers and vpholders
of Gods true religion and worship, they are also, as a joint fruit of their
zeal to God, loving and kind relieuers of the poor people of God: even for
that love, which they bear unto God. So that the blessing in either respect is
the blessing of al through one and the same rich mercy and large bounty of the
Lord, who is a plentiful rewarder of every one, that truly seeks and
wayteth upon him.

Now among those so few examples, we will not forget to make mention of Job,
seeing he may well serve us in steed of a thousand authentical examples. For
as he was a man of singular goodness and mercy (as was rehearsed among the
manifold examples of beneficence recorded in the holy Scriptures) so was he
singularly blessed of God with all kinds of blessing, both spiritual, and also
belonging to this life. It is true indeed, that it pleased God to afflict and
try him for a certain time, with very great calamity, by loss of all his
goods and cattle, by the hands of wicked men, yea and by a sudden destruction
of all his children, as it were from heaven. All which the Lord did, to the end
he might make Job a notable pattern of patience to all posterity, and that
the malice and cruelty of the devil being poured out upon so good and
merciful a man as Job was, might be so much the more evidently discovered to
the Church of God: as also for other notable ends, which are to be observed
from that excellent story. Nevertheless, after that Job was tried, the Lord,
to show that he did not forget his former goodness; he renewed, yea
increased, and doubled all his former mercies upon him. For he gave him sons
and daughters as many as he had before; and his daughters the most beautiful
women that could be found in the land. And of sheep, camels, oxen, and asses
God gave him twice so many thousands of every kind as he had before. For
whereas he had before seven thousand sheep, now he had fourteen thousand:
then three thousand Camels, now six thousand: then five hundred yoke of oxen,
now a thousand: then but five hundred she Asses, now a whole thousand. So the
Lord blessed the last days of Job more then the first. And after this
calamity he lived an hundredth and forty years, and saw his sons and his
sons sons, even four generations: and left inheritance to all his
children. Chapters first and last of that book.

Another excellent example we read of in the 22. chapter of the Prophecy of
Jeremiah, verse 15, etc. where God says of the good king Josiah, he using his
example to the reproof of his unmerciful son Shallum: Shall thou reign
(says the Lord by his Prophet) because thou closest thy self in Cedar? Did
not thy father eat and drink and prosper, when he executed judgment and
justice? When he judged the cause of the afflicted and poor, he prospered: was
not this because he knew me, says the Lord? And so the holy Proverb teaches,
chapter 20.28. concerning every good king: Mercy and truth preserve the King:
for his throne is established by mercy. And therefore, when the Lord speaks
of the most blessed king, and of the most happy and stable kingdom that may
be, he describes it to be such a kingdom, whereof the king should be most
merciful to the poor and needy: and that he should preserve their souls
etc. This kingdom most happy and flourishing, is only the kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Psalm 72. verses 12.13.14. Thus we have two
examples out of the old Tement.

Now one or two out of the new Testament, and so will we draw to an end of this
chapter.

In the beginning of the 10. chapter of the Acts of the holy Apostles, the
Evangelist Luke reports, that the Angel of the Lord, is from heaven, a
witness to Cornelius, a religious and merciful Captain, that his prayer, and
alms, were come up into remembrance before God: and that therefore, it pleased
God to grant him the desire of his soul, that he might be more perfectly
instructed and confirmed in the Christian knowledge and faith of his salvation:
and the Angel tells Cornelius further, that God had for the same purpose,
appointed Peter, who at that time lodged with one Simon a Tanner, dwelling by
the sea side in Ioppa; that he should be the Apostle and Minister of God to
teach and instruct him: and therefore wills him to send thither for Peter.
All which came graciously to pass, according unto the message of the holy
Angel. And it was, doubtless, a greater mercy and blessing to Cornelius, and
his family, and many other of his kinsmen and special friends, then if he
could by any covetous pinching and sparing, have increased his worldly riches
by many thousands: yea greater, then if by any warlike valor and outward
force, he could, with with a few men, have conquered the whole world to
himself.

Finally, that God might leave to all posterity a most memorable
demonstration, how well pleasing to his Majesty the sacrifice of beneficence
and mercy is; it has pleased him, that by the ministry of the Apostle Peter
(even now mentioned) one Dorcas a Christian woman of singular mercy and
liberality to poor Saints, should, at the lamentation of many Christians,
both widows and other, who mourned for the loss of her, be miraculously
raised up from death to life, Act. chap. 9. verse 36. etc. God thereby giving
all to understand, both how precious his poor believers and Christians are
unto him, in that rather then they should be fosterlesse, he will raise
merciful men and women out of the grave: and also how dear they are unto him,
who relieve such as he makes so special account of. For they are the heirs
of the resurrection of the righteous, to everlasting life and happiness in the
kingdom of heaven.

Thus then (even by a few examples, as by two or three witnesses, which,
especially on the Lords behalf, may suffice for the establishing of any truth)
it may be evident unto us, as the cause by the effect, that the promises of God
made to assure all merciful men and women of his great favor and blessing are
not given forth in vain. So that as it is said of the upright and righteous
man, Psalm 37. verse 37. Mark the upright man and behold the just: for the
end of that man is peace: we may boldly affirm the same of the merciful man.
For the upright and just man, and the right merciful man is all one, as is
evident in the whole tenure of the same Psalm.

God, no doubt, who moved king David, to remember to show kindenes to the
son of Jonathan, for that kindness which Jonathan had in former times showed
unto him. For therefore did King David allow Mephibosheth the son of
Jonathan, always to eat bread at his own table, as if he had been one of
the kings own sons, 2. Sam. chapter 9. The same God, who works the same
affection usually in the hearts of all his good servants, as we shall have
further occasion to declare in the second part of this Treatise: yea that God
who oftentimes turns the hearts even of very wicked and cruel men, to
show kindenes to his children, as the Egyptians to the Israelites, and Esau to
Iaakob, etc. He himself, I say, will much less forget them that be kind to
any of his, for that love which they bear unto him. For as God is infinitely
more gracious, merciful, and bounteous then man can be: so has he, by
infinite degrees, a more perfect remembrance, to requite all kindenesses, then
they can possibly have. And as he has a most perfect remembrance, infinitely
above man, so also is he most able above man to recompense all kindness, in
that he is the Almighty; and likewise most willing above man, seeing he is
the most merciful above all, as was said even now: That God is thus most
willing we read 2. Cor. chapter 9.10. He that finds seed to the sower (says S.
Paul) will minister likewise bread for food and multiply your seed and increse
the fruits of your benevolence. That on all parts ye may be made rich to all
liberality, etc. That God is likewise most able, look back to the 8. verse of
the same chap. God is able (says the same Apostle) to make all grace to abound
toward every free-hearted and cheerful giver: for of such he there writes.
And that God is not forgetful, we have seen before, from the 10. verse of the
6. chap. of the epistle to the Hebrews. Where it is worthy to be diligently
noted of us, that God accounts it a part of his righteousness, to have the
work and labor of the love of his good beneficial servants in gracious
remembrance. For God is not unrighteous (says the Apostle) that he should
forget, etc. Wherefore we may be even as sure and certain that God will not
forget us, as we are sure that he neither is, nor can be in any thing unjust.
Let us not therefore, as the same Apostle exhorts, chap. 10.35. cast away our
confidence in this behalf, which undoubtedly has great recompense of reward.
Though man should forget those that have deserved well of them. Yea, though (as
it does not seldom fall out) that man requiteth good with evil: as Psalm.
38.20. They that reward evil for good (as the holy Prophet complains) are
mine adversaries, because I follow goodness. Yet God will at no hand deal so:
but though we can claim nothing by desert from him, but we are to account our
selves unprofitable servants, as touching any benefit which we yield unto
him: yet through his mercy, as it is said of the prayers of his good servants,
so may it be affirmed of all their good and kind dealings, that they shall be
turned upon their own bosoms, according to that we read, Psalm. 35. verse.
12.13.14.

O therefore, how I beseech you, should not the earnest consideration of these
things mightily prevail to move every one, in whom there is any sparkle of
grace, to mind this practice of Christian beneficence and mercy toward the
poor of Gods people, according to every man's abilty! And even for the same
cause also, as has been before expressed, to separate and lay aside a portion
before hand of that blessing which God gives. That so we may have always a
purse or coffer to this spiritual use and service of the Lord, as well
replenished as may be. And to this so blessed an end, that all which have
abundance should cut off, as much as may be, all superfluous and vain
expenses in apparel, in diet, in building, in plate, in household stuff, and
in every costly and curious ornament whatsoever is to any in his place and
calling, above that which is sober and meet. For by this wise, provident, and
sober course, not only the richer, but also such as be of less wealth, shall
find both a more richer treasury to defray all charges this way, and also a
more ready heart and hand, to extend their help toward all good relief. And
otherwise it will come to pass, that though we be overcome to give, yet will
it be yielded so vngainely from us, as it were the small sparkle out of the
hard flint, or as sawedust grated out of the belly of the hard oak, or, to
speak the fairest of it, it will be but as a thin and short ear of corn,
out of a very barren and unfruitful soil. So that loosing all grace in the
giving, it does make the gift it self void of all blessing, like unto the
light and waste seed, which being sown, takes no root in the ground.

Verily, if we could earnestly and ingeniously consider with our selves, and
lay together all the reasons which are to be weighed in this argument: as
namely, for a taste, that in so doing, we perform the duty of good and
faithful Stewards to God, in the right disposing of those his creatures, which
he has betrusted us withal: that thereby we prevent much murmuring and sin,
and much unjust dealing by pilferie and deceit, yea infinite dangerous snares
and temptations, whereby the devil spoyleth weak Christians, as may easily
appear unto us by the prayer of holy Agur, Prou. 30. chap. 7.8.9. Give me
]not poverty (prays wise Agur) lest I be poor and steal, Reasons moving to
beneficence.
and take the name of my God in vain. It is one of the two principal things
which he earnestly craved of God, that he might obtain at his hands, so long
as he had to live. And further, if we would duly consider, that we refresh the
souls of the the best stayed servants and saints of God, Epist. to Phile.
verse. 7. By thee the bowels of the saints are comforted.
that we mitigate the heavy burden of their cares and sorrows, and so make
their lives more comfortable to them, that hereby we give them occasion to
pour forth many hearty praises and thankesgiuings to the honor and praise of
God. Moreover, if we would consider, that hereby we gather much peace and
assurance to our selves, that we are in Gods favor: in so much as hereby (as
Saint John says) We know that we are translated from death to life, if we love
the brethren, 1. Ioh. chap. 3. verse. 14. Likewise, that whatsoever we bestow
this way, is the safer and surer portion of all our riches, according as one
truly says, that The most liberal men are the most rich men in all the world.
Add also, that we mollify the hard heartedness of our enemies, and mittigate
the envy of those that be spiteful and malignant, while we do good unto them.
And yet further, that we defeat the moth, the canker, and the thief, and store
up our treasure in heaven, as our Savior Christ teaches us. In like manner,
that we are under the blessing of the prayers of the poor, which is as a
princely protection, sealed unto us, as it were, with the broad seal of the
kingdom of heaven, Job. chap. 29.13. Finally, that we are therein blessed of
God himself with all kind of blessings in this life; and shall more
comfortably leave this world, whenever God shall call us out of it. If, I
say, we would diligently weigh these reasons, and other of like sort, it could
not be, but they would mightily weigh with us, to provoke us to a most willing
and cheerful practice of so blessed an exercise.

Whereupon also, it is clear from this discourse, that the error and dotage
of all such is very gross and palpable, whosoever forgetting that Godliness
is gain, do pursue and follow after gain rather then godliness; and that
even under the profession of true godliness and pure and undefiled religion:
contrary to that of the Apostle James. chap. 1.27. Pure religion and
undefiled, even before God the Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and
widows in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of the world. And
to that Matt. 9.13. I will have mercy and not sacrifice. For mercy is a great
and weighty matter of the law, Matthew. chap. 23. verse 23. It may appear also,
that they do greatly deceive themselves, and prejudice the truth and promises
of God, who standing aside, to behold some few examples of those that in the
practice of beneficence seemed to fall into decay, as if their goodness must
needs be the cause thereof, and so harden their hearts against all good
estimation of this excellent virtue. For, say some, do ye not see how such and
such a one have brought themselves behind hand by their entertaining of
Preachers, etc. We thought it could not last long. Whereas rather they should
blame themselves (if any such decay has been) because it came the rather to
pass upon other, because they, contrary to their duty, let too great a
burden lie upon a few, which would have been light and easy, if these idle
beholders would have set to their helping hand. For want whereof, they have
endangered themselves to a greater and more irrecouerable loss, seeing they
have thereby purchased the displeasure of God, and made themselves subject to
his severe punishments, which follow upon the neglect of mercy, as we are
now to declare in the next chapter.

The punishment of not giving.
CHAP. IIII.
Of the punishment of illiberalitie and not Giving.

IN so much as the gracious acceptance wherewithal God vouchsafes to accept
and reward the beficence and liberality of his servants, may be the more
lively illustrated and set forth from the contrary dislike, yea earnest
displeasure and holy indignation which he bears against profane illiberall
covetous merciless and cruel persons: for all these are to be joined together
(though sundry titles) to note out, as it were, with the black coal, one and
the same kind of wicked men; even such as the holy Apostle makes as it were,
the beginning, and also the period of wicked ones, Romans 1.29.30. Being full of
all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, etc. without
natural affection, such as can never be appeased, merciless. And further
also, because the consideration of the displeasure and indignation of God
against this kind of men, may be both good for the comfort of those, who make
Christian and conscioble practice of mercy and liberality, when as they shall
see how great a sin, and therewithal how manifold and fearful a danger they
have by the grace of God escaped: and also, for that through the blessing of
God, it may be a profitable help, The punishment of not giving to Gods worship.
to withdraw such as be not already past recovery, from the neglect of so
blessed an exercise, as the practice of goodness and mercy is. Let us
therefore call to mind the sundry punishments, which God in his holy
Scriptures threateneth; and which he will surely inflict upon all profane and
illiberall covetous and merciless people, whosoever will not repent thereof,
and take the contrary course.

And first, let us consider how God has punished the neglect of furthering his
worship. Whereunto well serves that which we read, Hagg. chap. 1. verse. 2.
etc. in these words: Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying, This people say,
the time is not yet come, that the Lords house should be builded. Then came the
word of the Lord, by the ministry of the Prophet Haggai, saying, Is it time
for your selves to dwell in your sieled houses, and this house he waste? Now
therefore, thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your own hearts. Ye have
sown much, and bring in little: ye eat, but ye have not enough: ye drink,
but ye are not filled: you clothe your selves, but ye be not warm: and he that
earneth wages, puts the wages into a broken bag. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, Consider your own ways in your hearts. Go ye up to the mountain and
bring wood, and build this house, and I will be favorable in it, and I will be
glorified in it, says the Lord. Ye looked for much, but lo, it came to
little: and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it. And why, says the
Lord of Hosts? Because of mine house that is waste, and ye run every man
to his own house. Therefore the heaven over ye stayed it self from dew, and
the earth stayed her fruit. And I called for a drought upon the land, and upon
the mountains, and upon the corn, and upon the wine, and upon the oil, even
upon all that the ground brings forth: both upon men and upon cattle, and
upon all the labor of the hands. And again, chap. 2. verse 16. etc. And now
I pray ye consider in your minds: from this day and before, even before a
stone was laid upon a stone, in the Temple of the Lord: Before these things
were, when one came to a heap of twenty measures, there were but ten: when
one came to the wine press, to draw out fifty measures out of the press,
there were but twenty. I smote ye with blasting, and with mildewe, and with
hail, in all the labors of your hands, yet ye turned not to me, says the
Lord. Worthy therefore in this respect is that admonition of the heathen king
Artashasht to be well observed (and well had it been for the Jews if they had
attended to it) who after that he had, together with his princely and
bountiful gifts for the furtherance of the worship of God, given
commandment, that whatsoever the God of heaven had commanded, should be done
speedily: he alleges the reason for it, as we read Ezra 7.23. For why (says
the king) should God be wroth against the realm of the King and his children?

But the Lord by his Prophet Malachie deals yet more roundly and severely,
according to the greater neglect, yea, contempt of his holy worship, in the
time that he prophesied. Will a man spoil his gods? (says the Lord by his
holy Prophet) yet ye have spoiled me: but ye say, wherein have we spoiled
thee? In tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have spoiled
me, this whole nation. And even therefore, as we may understand by that which
follows: The deuourer has destroyed the fruit of their ground, and their
vine was barren in the field. chap. 3.8.9.11.

But what is this to us Christians, will some peradventure say? Verily the same
in effect and substance which it was unto the Jews: in so much as the Lord is
as zealous for his worship to this day, as ever he was in former times: and the
lively stones also of that spiritual Temple, whereof the son of God, our
Lord Jesus Christ is the chief corner stone, they are every way as greatly
regarded of him, yea rather much more preciously esteemed, then were the dead
and cold stones, or whole building of the Temple of Jerusalem. And therefore,
as well in regard of his spiritual worship, as of the poorest of those that
do truly worship him; we are justly to look for the like, if not greater
plagues and punishments then the Jews sustained, if we shall in like manner
contemn and neglect the same.

And even already no doubt, because of our great errors and faylings either
way, it is come to pass, that as in the days of king David in Israel, so in
the reign of our own Queen God has of late visited England, though in great
mercy, with a dearth, not only of three years, but almost of twice three
together. And must we not needs acknowledge it very equal, that as we have
been very unfruitful to God in his service and worship, and exceeding slack
in the advancement of it; as also too scant and niggardly, yea rather hard and
heavy against our poor brethren, lo many years together: that therefore our
fields, and all other our endeavors and labors should be barren and
unfruitful unto us? Verily, we may justly acknowledge, that it is the Lords
mercy only that we have not been altogether consumed, even because his
compassions fail not. Lament. 3.22.

Thus we may perceive, as in a more general view, how God punishes the
profane and illiberall neglect of the furtherance and advancement of his true
religion and therewithal also, the neglect of relieuing the poor of his
people. And there is no doubt, but he will more severely punish this kind of
people, then with temporal punishments here in this world, if they repent not.
For, The wicked shall turn into hell, and all nations that forget God, Psalm
9.17. And Prou. 20.25. It is destruction for a man to devour that which is
sanctified, and after the vows to inquire.

To this purpose, it is worthy to be observed, that howsoever the ceremony of
the dedicatio^ of every man's whole increase of outward blessings, by offering
up a first fruits unto God, commanded in the ceremonial law of Moses be now
ceased: yet seeing the very moral commandment of God, which is perpetual,
requires exactly, that Gods true religion and worship be maintained and
advanced; and also, that the poor of his people be liberally relieved by the
contributions of the richer sort of his servants, as has been sufficiently
declared before: it may truly be inferred, that no man can enjoy his goods and
possessions, what soever he has, as sanctified unto him, with approbation and
blessing from God, unless he do of zeal to Gods glory, and love to the
brethren, bestow a just and meet portion this way. For as the Lord does in his
own right justly challenge all to be entirely his, as Psalm. 24 1. The earth is
the Lord, and all that is therein, the world and they that dwell therein. and
again Psalm 50.10.11.12. and 1. Chron. 29.11.12. All that is in heaven and
earth is the Lords. Both riches and honor come of him. Likewise Hag. 2.9.
Silver is mine and gold is mine, says the Lord of hosts. So he has, as an
homage to him self from the rich, interessed the poor, as in his steed, to the
liberal alms and co^tribution of the rich men's goods. Whereupon the charge is
straightly given, Pro. 3.27. that none withhold his goodness, or beneficence,
from the owners thereof: that is, from such as stand in present need thereof. The
like charge is given in many other places of the holy Scripture.

But let us come to see in some orderly course, the more particular and
distinct punishments of all profane, and illiberall, covetous, and merciless
people.

The manifold punishments of them are comprehended under these two heads:
first, those which belong to this life: secondly, that which appertains to
the world to come: which one contains all, and being eternal, is as the
sealing up and fullness of all the temporal.

Of the former sort are these which follow.

First of all, the profane, illiberall, covetous, and merciless man neither
has, neither possibly can have in his soul any comfort from God of all his
riches, how great abundance soever he does enjoy. The which punishment,
consisting in the privation or withholding of comfort and blessing; king
Solomon, as a holy Preacher and Prophet of God in the beginning of the sixth
chap. of Ecclesiastes, does notably observe, The punishment of not giving to
the poor.
among many other the great vanities of this vain and sinful world: of the
which also he says, that it is much among men. There is an evil (says he)
which I saw under the sun, and it is much among men. A man to whom God has
given riches, and pleasure, and honor, and he wants nothing for his soul of
all that it desires, but God gives him not power to eat thereof, but a
strange man shall eat it up: this is vanity and this is an evil sickness.
And again, chap. 5. verse 9. He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied
with silver, and he that loves riches, shall be without the fruit thereof:
this also (says the holy Preacher,) is vanity.

And how, I pray you, should profane and covetous men have any true and sound
comfort from the hand and Spirit of God concerning any thing which they have;
seeing God esteems them as usurpers, and not right owners of them? They may
well enough have a civil title allowable among men, according to the received
course and determination of humane laws and constitutions: but they cannot
hold them as a portion sanctified unto them by the Lord, until they shall
thankefully acknowledge them to be his free gift; and accordingly shall
dedicate and apply them to such holy uses as he has by his sacred word
appointed them unto. This then is the first punishment, even the want of true
comfort and blessing.

Secondly, God does many times, for this their wickedness, take away their
riches, and casts miserable poverty upon them. For so the holy Proverb
teaches, chap. 11.24. He that spares more then is right, surely comes to
poverty. This briefly is a second punishment.

Thirdly, God refuses to succor the unmerciful, when they stand in need,
yea he leaves them in their misery, when they call and cry to him in their
distress, because they refused to help and succor such of their poor
brethren as craved help of them. So we read Prou. 13.21. He that stops his
ear at the crying of the poor, he shall also cry and not be heard. Likewise
Zech. chap. 7. verse 8. etc. Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying: Execute
true judgment and show mercy and compassion every man to his brother. And
oppress not the widdowe, nor the fatherless, nor the stranger, nor the poor,
and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart. But they
refused to hearken, (says the holy Prophet) and pulled away the shoulder, and
stopped their ears, that they should not hear. Yea, they made their hearts as
an Adamant stone, lest they should hear the law, and the words which the Lord
of Hosts sent in his Spirit, by the ministry of the former Prophets: (wherein
mark by the way, the mighty increase, and obdurate obstinacy which sin
quickly grows unto, where it is not resisted in the beginning) therefore (as
it follows in the text) there came a great wrath from the Lord of Hosts. And
again, as it follows immediately. Therefore (says the Prophet) it is come
to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear, so they cried, and I
would not hear, says the Lord of hosts. But I scattered the^ among all the
nations whom they knew not: thus the land was desolate after them, that no man
passed through, nor returned: for they laid the pleasant land waste. The
Prophet Micah also, the third chap. of his Prophecy, verses 1, 2, 3, 4. Hear
I pray you (says he) o heads of Iaakob, and ye Princes of the house of
Israel: Should not ye know judgment? But they hate the good and love the
evil: they pluck off their skins from them, and their flesh from their
bones. And they eat also the flesh of my people, and flay off their skins
from them, and they break their bones, and choppe them in pieces, as for the
pot, and as flesh within the chaldron. Thus heinous is the sin of
unmercifulness and cruelty, according to this so doleful a description,
specially, it it be found in the bloody hand of the Prince, or in any of
chief place and power under him, who should be most tender foster-fathers
over the people of God, and chiefly over the poor of the flock. For neglect
whereof the punishment follows: Then shall they cry unto the Lord (to wit,
in their misery) but he will not hear them: he will even hide his face from
them at that time, Read also Gods fearful woe against cruel and unmerciful
me^. Isai. 5.8.9.10. Amos 6.1. etc. and chapter 8.4. etc. Micah. 2.1. etc.
because they have done wickedly in their works. No marvel therefore, though
the conscience of Joseph's brethren charged them so deeply, for exercising
cruelty against their natural brother; at such times as they thought
themfelues in great danger, when Joseph their brother (not known of them)
spoke roughly to them in Egypt, charging them to be spies, etc. For in
remembrance of that their cruelty, even now many years after it was
committed, They say one of them to another (as we read Genesis 42.21.) We have
verily sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul,
when he besought us and we would not hear him: therefore is this trouble come
upon us. And moreover Ruben said, Lo his blood is now required. And verily, it
cannot be denied, but that it was Gods exceeding great mercy, that his heavy
vengeance had not long before that, not only terrified them, but even fallen
upon them and destroyed them, as it did the posterity of Esau for the like
sin, as we read in the Prophecy of Obadiah. But not only does the Lord
punish cruelty, by the withdrawing of his assistance and mercy, but also the
neglect of showing mercy, and of staying the bloody course of other men's
cruelty, according to that good occasion and lawful power, which God has put
into the hand of any of his servants: according to that in 24. chap. of the
Proverbs, verses 10. 11. 12. If thou be faint (or deal remissely, says the
Lord by king Solomon) that is, if thou in helping and succouring others,
dealest so, as if thou caredst not greatly whether the distressed should have
any help from thee, or no: in the day of adversity thy strength shall be
small. Whereupon in the next words the Spirit of God does mightily stir up
and exhort every one to a more serious endeavor, and that with a mind
earnestly bent to succor indeed. Deliver them (says the Spirit of God) that
are drawn to death: and will thou not preserve them that are led to be slain?
he means such as are oppressed with open violence and injustice. If thou
say, behold we knew not of it, and so go about to excuse thy self: he that
pondereth the hearts (says the wise king) does not he understand it? and he
that keeps thy soul, does not he know it? will not he also recompense every
man according to his works, etc. As though he should say: Let no man deceive
himself, this matter is so weighty, that if thou deal loosely for the
oppressed, the Lord will deal earnestly against thee, if thou let him
perish when thou might have preserved him. In this respect therefore, are
the people of Israel commended, as we read, 1. Sam. 14.45. because they
reskued and delivered Jonathan against the rash oath and decree of Saul. Shall
Jonathan die (say they) who has so mightily delivered Israel? God forbid. As
the Lord lives, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, for he
has wrought with God. So the people delivered Jonathan that he died not.

Fourthly, the Lord does not seldom shorten the days of covetous unmerciful
and cruel men; and so takes the^ from their riches, which they held, as it
were, by unjust imprisonment, yea in close prison so long as they lived: or if
they continue long in their abusiue possession of their wealth, it turns to
their greater punishment and plague in the end. But for the most part God
shorteneth the days of those, which make have, till they come to a certain
ripeness of this sin: as Psalm. 55.23. Bloody and deceitful men shall not
live half their days. And Psalm. 140.11.12. Backbiters shall not be established
upon earth: evil shall hunt the cruel man to destruction. I know (says the
holy Psalmist) that the Lord will avenge the afflicted, and judge the poor.
Neither is the holy Proverb set down in vain, that the curse of the people
shall fall upon him that withdraws corn, chapter 11.26. He that hides his eyes,
(to wit from the poor) shall have many curses. For God himself says, that he
will take knowledge of those curses, which are thus violently extorted: and
that he will punish those, who give the occasion of them: according to that
which we read Exodus 22. verses 22.23.24. Ye shall not trouble any widdowe nor
fatherless child. If thou vex or trouble such (says the Lord) and so he
call and cry unto me, I will surely hear his cry. Then shall my wrath be
kindled, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows,
and your children fatherless.

And o how heavy and fearful an imprecation is that which the holy Ghost
himself (though he be most gracious and merciful) has justly indicted against
such, to declare most manifestly, that there is no mercy with God for them:
yea, and that they make their posterity also liable to the same curse, as we
read, Psalm 109.6. etc. where the holy Prophet, guided by the holy Ghost,
prays against them in this manner: Set thou the wicked over him, etc. Let his
days be few, and let another take his charge. Let his children be fatherless,
and his wife a widdowe. Let his children be vagabonds and beg, and let them
seek bread, or their beggars allowance, coming out of their places destroyed.
Let the extortioner catch all that he has, and let strangers spoil his
labor. Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there be any to
show mercy on his fatherless children. Let his posterity be destroyed, and in
the generation following let their name be put out, etc. But why is all this?
It follows. Because he remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the
afflicted and poor man, and the sorrowful hearted to slay him. And because he
wished the curse to come unto him: that is, to the poor and afflicted, etc.
Let it (therefore) be unto himself as a garment to clothe him, and for a
girdle wherewith he shall always girde himself. etc. There is more in the
Psalm tending this way: not of any bitter or uncharitable affection, but as a
pure interpretation of the justice of God against this sin. But understand it
only to be penned against such as are obstinately hardened and settled in it, as
it were in the highest degree: they malicing the poor servants of God, even
the rather because they are his servants. But if any do think the imprecation
over harsh, (which none can do without great sin against God,) let such
rather learn from the horror of the curse, so to consider the haynousnesse of
the sin, that they may be as careful to avoid it, both for their own sake,
and also for the sake of their posterity, as they would be loath to sustain
the punishment.

The like imprecation to the former, does Nehemiah, that good, merciful, and
bounteous noble man, guided by the same holy spirit of God, use, in zeal
against the like obstinacy of the same sin of unmercifulness: Nehe. 5.13.
where he thus speaks: I shook my lap (says he) to wit, after that he had
obtained of the richer sort, who had dealt cruelly before, that they promised
thenceforth to deal mercifully toward their poor brethren: and I said, So let
God shake out every man that will not perform this promise, from his house
and from his labor: that is, that being thrust out of house and home, he may
also be unprosperous in all his affairs: even thus (says Nehemiah) let him be
shaken out and emptied. And all the Congregation said Amen, and praised the
Lord. Yea, and the richer sort fearing the imprecation, which was thus
denounced in the name of God, and consented unto of all, they perform that
which they had promised. A blessed and sweet fruit of a heavy and bitter
curse, though uttered without all bitterness in the most pure and temperate
zeal of Gods holy Spirit, as was observed before.

And now further, for our present purpose, to show that the judgment of God
watches over unmerciful men for evil and not for good; we have ready at hand
the example of Nabal that churl, whom God cut off, as an unprofitable branch,
shortly after he had dealt so like himself, that is, like a profane and
sottish miser, against David the good servant of the Lord: in that he not
only denied to send him any relief, but also very contemptuously reproched
and reviled him. For about ten days after he had dealt thus, the Lord smote
Nabal that he dyed. 1. Sam. 25.9. etc. 38. wherefore, when David heard that
Nabal was dead, he said, as one giving glory to God, in his righteous
judgment; Blessed be the Lord who has judged the cause of my rebuke, of the
hand of Nabal, and has kept his servant from evil: for the Lord has
recompensed the wickedness of Nabal upon his own head.

And in like manner, Ier. 22.13. etc. God does by his Prophet threaten Shallum
a wicked son of the good king Josiah, altogether degenerating from his
fathers example, and giving himself to pleasure, without all regard of
relieuing the oppressed: yea executing cruelty, after the manner of wicked
men: Woe (says the Lord) to him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and
his chambers without equity: he uses his neighbor without wages, and gives
not him for his work. He says, I will build me a wide house with large
chambers: so he will make himself large windows, and sieling with Cedar, and
paint them with vermelion. Shall thou reign, (says the Lord to Shallum)
because thou closest thy self in Cedar? etc. No, but as it follows: Thine
eyes are only for thy covetousness, and for to sheade innocent blood, and
for oppression, and for destruction, even to do this. Therefore thus says the
Lord, against Iehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah (who before was
called by an other name, Shallum. They shall not lament him, saying, Alas, my
brother, or, Alas my sister: neither shall they mourn for him, saying, Alas
Lord, or Alas for his glory. He shall be buried as an Ass is buried, even
drawn and cast forth without the gates Jerusalem. This judgment fell upon him
in Babel.

The like dishonor even for the like cause befell the King of Babel himself,
namely, Belshazzar, Dan. chapter 5. according to the prophecy of Isaiah, against
that whole cruel and bloody monarchy: chapter 14. verses 3.4.5.6. In that day
(says the Prophet to the faithful among the Jews) when the Lord shall give
thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the sore bondage
wherein thou did serve. Then shall thou take up this Proverb against the
king of Babel, and say: How has the oppressor ceased? and the gold-thirsty
Babel rested? The Lord has broken the rod of the wicked, etc. And then verse
18. etc. All the kings of the nations, they all sleep in glory, every one in
his own house: But thou art cast out of thy grave, like an abominable branch:
like the raiment of those that are slain and thrust through with a sword,
which go down to the stones of the pit, as a cark^sse trodden under feet. Thou
shall not be joined with them in the grave, because thou have destroyed thine
own land, and slain thy people: the seed of the wicked shall not be renowned
for ever. Prepare a slaughter for his children, for the iniquity of their
fathers: let them not rise nor possess the land, nor fill the face of the
world with enemies, etc. And chap. 31.1. Woe to thee that spoyledst and wast not
spoiled: and do wicke^ly, but they did not wickedly against thee: When thou
shall cease to spoil thou shall be spoiled: when thou sh^lt make an end to do
wickedly they shall do wickedly against thee. Whereunto also let us ad
prophecy of Habbakuk, for another witness to the same purpose: chap. 2. verse.
6. etc. Shall not all these (says the holy Prophet) take up a parable against
him, and a taunting proverb against him, and say, Ho, he that increases that
which is not his, how long? and he that ladeth himself with thick clay (or
dirt, for no better is ill gotten treasure then a troublesome burden, or as a
myrie poole to fasten and ouerwhelme the covetous therein) Shall they not rise
up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that shall vex thee: and thou
shall be their pray: or trampled on by them continually, as it were clay in the
streets. Because thou have spoiled many nations, all the remnant of the people
shall spoil thee, because of men's blood, and for the wrong done in the land,
in the city, and unto all that dwell therein. Ho he that coueteth an evil
covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on high, to escape from
the power of evil. Thou have consulted shame to thine own house by destroying
many people, and thou have sinned against thine own soul. For the stone shall
cry out of the wall, and the beam (or knurle of the timber) shall answer it,
or give witness to it. Woe unto him that builds a town with blood, and
erecteth a city by iniquity. Behold, is it not of the Lord of Hosts that the
people (that, is such a wicked people) shall labor for fire, and that the
nations should weary themselves for mere vanity?

Now, according to the threatening contained in these Prophesies, against the
Kings of Babel, and their Monarchy; the Lord has made them that lifted
themselves up in the greatest height of pride and of covetous and merciless
dealing, the most evident spectacles to all the world, of his glorious
judgment executed upon them for the same. For all this was confirmed in that
overthrow which God gave them once for ever by the Medes and Persians, whom
he raised up and sent in battle against them. So then, let this kind of
merciless and cruel people be never so strongly rooted, let them be grown
up never so high, let them be maintained and vpheld never so strongly, even
with the power of a mighty monarchy: yet shall neither they, nor their
vpholders, be able to escape the punishing hand of God. Nay rather, it is
manifest by these examples, that as the sin is in higher degree, and the
offenders more mighty, so the almighty God, who judges without respect of
persons, increases his wrath, and stretches out his hand more strongly
against them.

And here, I pray you, let us not altogether forget (that among the other
sins for the which Sodom and Gomorrha with some other cities about them, were
destroyed from heaven by fire) this was not the least, that there was among
them no regard to strengthen the poor and needy, Ezekiel. 16.49. And was not
cruelty one special sin for the which the whole world was drowned. Genesis 6.13.
So that we may justly say here, as the Prophet David says of proud and cruel
persons, Psalm. 73.19.20. O how suddenly are they destroyed, perished and
horrible consumed, As a dream when one awaketh! wherefore from these examples
let all, both high and low, kingdoms and cities, and al people, learn for
ever so to fear before God, that we be not found less or more in these
grievous sins, lest we also taste of the common evil, which K. Solomon notes
to be in the world, Riches well gotten and well used, are as Manna from heaven:
otherwise they are as the Quails which God sent in his anger to destroy those
that eat them. Calu. 2. Cor. 8.15.
that Riches be reserved to the owners thereof for their evil: and that no
doubt because they be not careful to use them well. Eccle. 5.12. And thus we
see the fourth kind of punishment upon illiberall and unmerciful men, specially
if they grow to any ripeness in this sin.

In the Church of God there is a fifth punishment which we may account the
greatest here on earth, and the very forerunner of that which is greatest of
all in the world to come: namely, that the covetous and unmerciful man, though
it may be, he lives under the profession of the true religion of God, among
his people, yet in the estimation of the Lord, who judges righteous judgment,
he is no better then a rotten and dead branch, cut off and excommunicate from
the holy communion of Christ and his Church. Neither does the Lord like, that
such as are faithful Christians indeed, should have any familiarity with such
as withdraw themselves from holy contributions, and the liberal practice of
mercy and goodness, among the rest of the people of God. So says the Apostle
Paul. 1. Cor. 5.11. If any that is called a brother be a covetous person, etc.
with such one eat not. And 1. Tim. 6.5. From such as think that gain is
godliness (that is, from such as under pofession of religion, do discover
themselves to be altogether worldly and couetously minded) separate thy self.
Of these the Apostle greatly complains. Heb. 10.25. and says, that they
withdraw themselves to perdition, verse. 39.

Here therefore, having rehearsed the manifold punishments belonging to
profane, covetous and unmerciful people, here in this world; and in the last
place having found that it is the next way to everlasting destruction: it is
time, that we do now consider of this which is the greatest punishment of
all; and as was said, the sealing up and fullness of all the rest, for ever and
ever. For what are all the punishments of this life laid together, in
comparison of that most woeful damnation and torment, which (this life once
ended) shall for ever be cast upon covetous and merciless men: where the
gnawing worm of a guilty and wounded conscience never dies, and where the
most hot furnace of Gods wrath continually burns upon them. What is the want
of all true comfort in the things of this life, which a covetous merciles man
inioyeth here, to the fullness of all sorrow and dolor there? What is the
impouerishing of a covetous rich man, which (as has been showed) is sometimes
his lot and share here in this world? What is, this I say, to his most certain
and extreme desolation in the pit of Hell? What is the first death, the loss
of this life, and shortening of the days thereof, in comparison of the loss
of everlasting life, and the glorious happiness thereof? Yea rather, in
comparison of the more speedy and quick passage to the second death, and the
most miserable torment thereof. What is the temporary separation from the
society of the faithful here, to that separation which is Mar^n-atha, even
till the Lord shall come to give the last sentence of damnation for ever and
ever: which shall not only be, to the shutting of them out from a l hope of
communion with the Saints and holy Angels of God; but also to the throwing of
them down to the hiddeous and horrible fellowship of the devil and all his
cursed Angels, and to the woeful fellowship of all filthy idolaters,
blasphemers, traitors, murderers, adulterers, and all kind of wicked ones, in
the most uncomfortable dungeon of utter darkness. Finally, what were the
winning and enjoying of the riches of the whole world, accompanied with all the
pleasures thereof, and that without any intermixed sorrows, though it were for
a thousand years long: what is this, or the best that may be imagined, to
counteruaile the least part of that worst, which God has prepared for this bad
sort of men world without end?

Now, that the end of the profane covetous and unmerciful man shall be such as
has been described, it appears evidently by sundry express testimonies of
the holy scriptures: as 1. Cor 6.10. No covetous man shall inherit the kingdom
of God. In the which place the covetous man is reckened among fornicators,
idolaters, adulterers, wantons, buggerers, and such like abominable persons.
And again, Ephesians. 5.5. This ye know (says the Apostle to the Christians of
Ephesus) that no whoremonger, neither unclean person, nor covetous person,
which is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of
God. And seeing they have no inheritance there, what remains but that they
must have their portion in hell. For there are no other places for the souls
of men after this life ended, neither shall be for their brdies and souls
after the resurrection from the dead, but either heaven or hell. Wherefore even
in the next verse the same Apostle adds this earnest admonition and godly
caveat against all contrary flattering of our selves, or vain suggestion of
others: Let no man deceive ye (says he) with vain words (he calling such
vain words, whereby sin and the extreme danger of it is in any part
extenuated) for (as the Apostle assures us) for such things comes the wrath
of God upon the children of disobedience. And 1. Tim. 6.9.10. They that will be
rich fall into tentation and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts,
which drown men in perdition and destruction. For the desire of money is the
root of all evil, which while some lusted after, they have erred from the
faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. Sorrows, because he
has presently no more, as one wanting contentment: sorrows, because his
wealth increases no faster: sorrows for losses, which are always very
tedious to the covetous: sorrows in beholding other men to prosper better then
himself: sorrows every way, because he has no more joy of that which he
has, then of that which he has not. But that which at this time is to our
special purpose, is this which the Apostle affirms, that covetousness
drowneth men in perdition and destruction. And as our Savior Christ teaches,
The thorny cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and
voluptuous living so choke the word, and make such kind of men unfruitful:
that they can no more be saved, then they who are like the high way, where the
good seed of the word can make no entrance. Matthew. 13.19.20. Luke 8. verse.
12.14. wherefore also chap. 6.24. he denounces the woe against unmerciful rich
men, as having their consolation here: according to that in the 17. Ps. verse
14. They have their portion in this life. According also to the Parable of the
unmerciful and voluptuous rich man in the 16. chap. of the same Gospel by
Saint Luke: where in the 25. verse our Savior Christ describes Abraham thus
speaking to the soul of the rich man being in hell torments, and craving only
some little mittigation thereof: Son (says Abraham) remember, thou in thy
life time receiuedst thy pleasures, and Lazarus pains: now therefore, he is
comforted, and thou art tormented. This is that which is said in the 69.
Psalm, verse 22. concerning the wicked: that Their table is a snare unto them,
and their prosperity their ruin, to wit, because of their abuse thereof.
Worthily therefore does the Prophet pray, that the righteous might rather smite
him, then that he should feed of delicates with the wicked, Psalm. 141. And
justly may it admonish all, to hearken to the holy admonition of the 62. Psalm.
Trust not in oppression, nor in robbery, be not vain: If riches increase set
not your heart thereon. Yea, further, as Daniel counsels Nebuchadnezzar,
that every one do speedily break off his iniquity by showing mercy to the
poor. Dan. 4. verse 24. For otherwise, as the Lord earnestly affirms, Ezekiel.
chap. 18. verse 18. He that has not done good among his people, lo even he
dies (that is, he shall be sure to die) in his iniquity. As though the Lord
should say, he may be as sure he shall die, as if he were dead already. And
the Apostle James, chap. 2.13. There shall be judgment merciless to such as
show no mercy.

But among all places, testifying and confirming the everlasting destruction of
unmerciful men, there is none more piercing and mighty to waken the soul of
the most hard hearted man (if any admonition or rousing will waken him) then
that which is set down by the Evangelist Matthew, chap. 25. verses 41, 42, 43,
etc. where he records how our Savior Christ described his last judgment,
and the manner of his proceeding in the same, and namely against unmerciful
men, which is the common sin of all wicked men. Depart from me (says he) ye
cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels.
For I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat: I thirsted, but ye gave me no drink:
I was a stranger, and ye lodged me not: I was naked, and ye clothed me not:
sick and in prison, and ye visited me not. And whereas unmerciful men think
that they have a sufficient excuse, because that they never saw Christ
himself hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison;
as though if they had so done, they would have ministered unto him: he
professes before hand, that he will answer them and say, Verily in so much as
ye did it not to the least of these, (that is to say, of poor distressed
Christians, whom before Christ called his brethren,) ye did it not to me. And
therefore he concludes against all that neglect to show mercy, whatsoever
they can allege for themselves: that they shall go into everlasting pain.

Now if any would know, why our Savior Christ chooses to make mention only of
this sin of unmercifulness, seeing he shall come in judgment to give
sentence against all sin and all sinners: beside that which was even now
mentioned, that this sin is usually one in every wicked man: the reason may
furthermore be this; even because this sin is a most manifest conviction that
such as lie in it, are not of God, but of their father the devil: and
therefore that they belong to him wholly, and have no part or portion in the
Lord. For in like manner, as any are more merciful then other, so do they
thereby more clearly show themselves to be the true children of their heaven
lie father: even so on the contrary, as any are more cruel or merciless,
they more apparently declare themselves to be the very children of the devil:
who, as our Savior Christ says in the 8. chap. of John, was a murderer, and
the father thereof, from the beginning of the world. And how unworthy and
unbeseeming a thing, I pray you, is this, that any of the kindly children of
God, and lively members of the mystical body of Jesus Christ, should prefer
his silver or his gold, his house or his land, before his Christian brother or
sister, bought with the most precious blood of Christ, in comparison whereof
all silver and gold is but refuse, yea most vile dross? A righteous man (as it
is in the holy Proverb) regards the life of his beast, chap. 12.10. and
therefore very brutish are they, who pity not the lives of those that be
heirs of heavenly grace, and the elect sons and daughters of the most high
God, creator and governor of heaven and earth.

And thus we see, how every way in this life, and for ever in the world to
come, the punishment of profane, illiberall, covetous and unmerciful men is
manifold and grievous.

O therefore, that all would lay the consideration of these things diligently to
heart, the unmerciful and illiberal man, that he might come to the conscience
and remorse of his sin, and take warning to learn to do well. O that
Christian Princes, who have chief power on earth to advance the public
worship of God, and all such as have the disposing of the livings and
maintenance of the ministers of the Gospel, would duly consider of the^; that
they might provoke themselves to be more and more careful in the best manner
and course of bestowing of them. O that christian congregations would
earnestly weigh them, that they might learn to put away all grudging, and
niggardlie dealing, with their faithful and painful Preachers of the
Gospel, whether in paying of tithes by civil authority established and
commanded, The use of the former threats and punishments.
or in performing other their more free gratuities, and promised allowance,
where the public magistrate has not sufficiently provided. O that every
Christian would well ponder the same things, that their hearts might be
enlarged to a more liberal contribution, for the relief of the poor in all
collections made to that purpose. O that Landlords would well think of them,
that they might be moved to deal favorably with their poor tenants, and to
abstain from all hard racking and inproning of rents, taking away of their
commons, of frustrating of their good leases by captious advantages, etc. O
that Officers and Governors in corporations, and other towns, where money or
lands have been given for the relief of the poor, would so mind these
fearful punishments against unmerciful men, that they may in no wise divert
the merciful gift of others, from that good use and end wherefore they have
given it. O that every one to whom at any time, the holy legacies of the last
will and testament of any beneficial Christians deceased, would so look upon
the judgments of God, that they might thereby be seriously admonished to deal
well and faithfully, according to that trust which is committed unto them,
because otherwise their sin must needs be double, if they shall be covetous
and unmerciful in withholding another man's liberality, beside their own: yea
and because they do herein sacrilegiously conceal and frustrate the glorious
work of the holy Spirit of God, which he had wrought as his last work here in
this life, in the hearts and spirits of his good and faithful children.
Finally, would to God that all whosoever are, by any kind of unmercifulness,
in danger of Gods heavy plagues, might by the premeditation thereof, come to
repentance, in sure trust of his mercy, and so happily prevent them: yea, that
entering into the way and practice of mercy, they may proceed and go forward
therein, till they may be blessed partakers of Gods everlasting mercy. Amen.

Who, I beseech you, would not think, that it had been happy for such rich
men as our Savior Christ speaks of in the Gospel, Luke 12, 16, etc. and
again, chap. 16. verse 19. etc. if the one in steed of pulling down his
barnes to make them bigger, and both of them in steed of delicious pampering of
their bellies, had made the bellies of poor Christians, the bare and empty
houses of widows and fatherless children to be the barnes and bellies of
their overplus and superfluity? Had it not, I pray you, even in every
reasonable man's judgment, been far better for them to have learned from the
fruitfulness of their fields, and all the bountiful provision of God, both
for their backs and for their bellies, to yield their own bounden fruits of
thankfulness to God, and for his sake the fruits of love to his poor
children: then that they should be like barren ground, to yield no good fruit,
and so to make themselves near to cursing, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.8.
yea even to pull down sudden destruction and the fire of Gods everlasting
wrath upon them? I will pull down my barnes, faith one, I will pour into my
belly, says another. But in the mean while, they altogether neglect the right
way of building their head-houses; neither once consider they, that the use of
abundance consists rather in pouring out to the hungry, then in pouring
into the full belly; in relieuing and supplying the necessities of the Saints,
then in following a voluptuous course of life, as has been already declared.

That course therefore, which every man judges, would have proved happiness
to them, if they had in due time sought after it, before extreme and endless
misery fell upon them: let us, while we have time, being thus forewarned by
their lamentable example, labor for grace, that we may lay hold of it, and so
through the endless mercy of God be for ever happy and blessed men. To the
which end, eue^ with full purpose of our hearts, let us in the fear of God, and
in trust of his grace harten and harness our selves against all the lettes and
hindrances, Objections answered.
which either our own corrupt hearts, or the suggestions of the devil, or any
of his instruments shall cast in our way.

What the vices naturally settled in us be, the which we must avoid, we have
seen in the second chapter of this Treatise: and they are briefly gathered
together in the end of the chapter. We are now to answer the objections and
pretended reasons, which, from the same evil disposition of our nature, flesh
and blood uses thereby to dissuade the liberal practice of Christian
beneficence. Whereunto is appointed the next Chap. which is the last of the
former part of this our treatise.

CHAP. V.
Containing answers to such objections as flesh and blood makes, and the
devil suggesteth to the hindering of Christian beneficence.

THe objections, or pretended reasons, whereby many would gladly excuse and
respite themselves from the practice of Christian beneficence: they are either
taken from themselves and their own estate, or from the care they have of
their children and posterity, or from the unworthiness of those, to whom they
should be beneficial: or else they would excuse one charge by another, that
is, contribution to the poor by the greatness of other charges to God and the
Prince; and charges toward the Church and Ministers of Gods word, by the
burden of the poor. But whatsoever reasons they pretend, they show in the
end, that it is nothing but an unmerciful and wilful hard heart which bears
all the sway in them, as will partly appear by the objections and answers
following.

OBJECTION. 1. concerning men their own state.
Are not the goods which I have mine own, says the covetous and unmerciful
man? Why then may I not keep and dispose them to mine own liking, and for
mine own entire and only profit and pleasure?

ANSWER.
Be it that they are thine own, in as lawful and justifiable a title as may
be, yet thou must remember from whose divine providence and dispensation thou
have received them, and on what condition, and to what end and purpose. For God
who has given them to thee indeed for thine own proper use and comfort, he
has made thee also his steward, to bestow a meet and convenient portion, more
or less, according to thy ability, for the relief and benefit of such as
stand in need. Whereof thou must one day give a faithful reckening and account
unto him. Moreover, seeing they are thy goods, as thou say, and they be
indeed the good gifts and blessings of God, thou must have great care, that
good things be used well, yea even to the best ends that possibly may be. If
thou do otherwise apply them, thou may be sure that the worst will be
thine own in the end. Thy goods will change their good nature like sower wine,
and prove as thorns in thy sides, and snares to entangle thy soul to most
bitter destruction.

OBJECTION. 2.
Though I must needs confess that I have those helps to uphold my estate
which many thousands do want: yet, I cannot tell how, all is little enough to
maintain my self and mine own charge, these late years have been so
chargeable. etc.

ANSWER.
Alas (Christian brother) if there be any bowels of compassion in thee,
consider with thy self, that if it go more hard with thee, then it was wont in
more cheap and plentiful times; albeit thou have, as thou can not but
acknowledge, many helps which many thousands do want: how much more hardly
must it not of greater necessity, go with those, which have no help at all but
the labor of their hands, if the merciful relief of such as thy self art,
should at any time fail them? And again, if thou make thy moan, as one
desirous to be pitied of God; learn from thy self how thou ought, on Gods
behalf, to pity others that stand in greater need: remembering always, that
the promise of mercy is made only to the merciful. And if thou be unfeignedly
willing, upon condition that thou were better able, to deal more liberally
then now thou can: then let my counsel, in the fear of God be acceptable
to thee: abate something of the excessive and superfluous charge of thine own
apparel, and of thy wifes, and of thy childrens, and likewise moderate all
other waste expenses, which in these days do usually pass measure: and thou
shall, through the blessing of God, be in short time much better able then
presently thou art, both to furnish thy self with all meet and necessary
comfortes, and also comfortably to relieve many other besides.

OBJECTION. 3.
If I should give to every one that stands in need, I might soon give away
all that I have, and make my self a beggar.

ANSWER.
Thou frayest thy self with thine own shadow, forging an absurdity without
cause. God does not require of any one, that he should give to all, no more
then that all should give to any one. But every one is to give to such only,
concerning whom God himself offers the just occasion, in discovering the
present necessity: and so much only, as in good discretion is meet to be
given upon such special occasion. And otherwise, it suffices in ordinary
course to give that contribution which the order of the Church does require and
allow of. That the practice of beneficence and liberality is not confused,
and without good order and discreet caution, the wise among the heathen espied:
whose sayings in this place it grieueth me not to set down, to stop the mouths
of loose and inconsiderate men: Thy household provision, or, thy proper and
peculiar goods and wealth, says one, is not so to be locked up, that (the
keys as it were of) liberality should not be able to open it: neither yet is
it so to be unlocked, that it should lie open to all without exception: keep
a mean according to thy ability. And another. Unto benefits which are the
special bond (as it were even the swaddling band and nurcerie) of humane
society, it is meet that a law be set, lest that under the color of
beneficial dealing, we please our own humor in an unadvised and lavish
lightness. And again, lest this caution should altogether quench liberality,
in steed of moderating of it. Finally, as the same Author says, Among many and
sundry errors of those that live at adventure and unadvisedly, there is none
almost more hurtful, then that we neither know how to give, or how to receive
benefits as we ought to do. These and such like are the objections of
illiberall minded men in regard of their own private and particular estate.
Other follow concerning their care which they have of their children and
posterity.

OBJECTION 1. concerning care for children.
I must provide and lay up for mine own children, or else I should be worse
then an Infidel and heathen man. Does not Saint Paul say so? And is it not
good reason that I should have care to leave my children some good portions,
specially my eldest son, something better then my father left me? And the
rather, that he may uphold the credit of the name, and be a countenance and
stay for all the rest of his brethren.

ANSWER.
It is the very law of nature indeed, that Parents should provide for their
children; and therefore they that do not so, are in this point worse then
heathen men, as the holy Apostle affirms, 1. Tim. 5.8. And again, 2. Cor.
12.14. Fathers ought to lay up for their children. Nevertheless there is no
question but Christian parents must take a better course, then the best among
heathen men or infidels do, in providing, both for themselves, and also for
their children, as our Savior Christ (by whose Spirit the Apostle Paul spoke)
plainly teaches, Matthew. 6.31.32. Where, after he has used many holy and
heavenly reasons to dissuade distrust in Gods fatherly providence, he
concludes thus: Therefore take no thought (saying) what shall we eat? or what
shall we drink? or wherewith shall we be clothed? (For after all these things
(says our Savior Christ) seek the Gentiles) For your heavenly father knows
ye have need of all these things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God and
his righteousness, and all these things shall be cast unto you. Neither does
any Scripture give to understand; that we do not the part of Christians,
unless we labor to increase and bring our wealth and estate to this or that
pitch: or to leave every one of our children such and such a portion, as we
presume to assign and appoint unto them. It is far from the meaning of Saint
Paul, that any one commandment of God should be broken and trodden under foot
for another. Though Christians stand bound by the law of God, to have a godly
care for the good and comfortable education of their children: yet have they no
warrant, for that cause, to neglect to exercise beneficence, and to show forth
the fruits of common compassion and mercy. For this were the ready
high-waie, for Parents to spoil and undo both them selves, and their
children for ever; rather then to better their estate here in this transitory
world. The best and only sure provision, which Parents can make for their
children, is to leave unto them, as it were a rich patrimony, of true
godliness. The righteous man (as says the holy Prophet) is merciful and
lends, and his seed enjoys the blessing Ps. 37.26. And Ps. 112.2. His seed
shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of the righteous shall be blessed.
It is the faithful parents godliness therefore, and not his covetous aspiring
mind, gasping and breathing after hundreths and thousands, nor any laborious or
cunning and crafty endeavor, the which makes the best and safest provision
for the welfare of children, and childrens children. For as touching the
wicked, the contrary curse of God, is avouched, to be upon their house and
posterity, even to root it up and to destroy it: Prou: 3.33. and chapter 14.11.
He therefore (as one well writes) rather undermines and betraieth his
children, then faithfully provides for them, whosoever is more careful to
leave them an earthly then an heavenly patrimony: and to enrich them with
worldly wealth, by filling their purses, rather then with spiritual grace and
virtue, by furnishing of their souls by holy instructions, by faithful prayers
to God, and by Godly example of life. Yea, herein he commits a double sin;
as well in that he takes not the right course, to leave his children to the
protection of God; as in that by his practice and example he teaches them, to
make more reckening of their earthly patrimony, then of Christ himself, and of
his heavenly kingdom. And further, it is by many degrees better to be a father
to many Orphans or fatherless children, in feeding and cherishing them, of
Christian love and pity for the Lords cause, who professes himself to be a
father unto him, then to leave the greatest abundance that may be to such
children of a man's own, as for want of grace, show themselves so leudly
minded, that they will wantonly and unthriftily mispend all that shall be left
them, as experience does not seldom show it to fall out so. Finally, many,
though they be not Gentlemen themselves, yet do they put forth so far, to
make their children, or at the least their eldest son a Gentleman; that they
make themselves beggars before they die, and make their eldest so mighty above
the rest, that he spoileth and impouerisheth all his brethren.

OBJECTION 2. concerning care for children.
Among my children, God has given me some daughters beside my sons, whom I
can by no means prefer in marriage to any of good degree and countenance in
the place where I dwell, unless I provide for them some round portions. And I
must also bring them up so, as they must have some Gentlewomanly qualities, and
they must sutably be set out in apparel, something according to the fashion,
which, as these days go, is very chargeable: all the world is given to so
great bravery.

ANSWER.
O blind doting and aspiring folly! Do thou seek to marry thy daughters
thus? Do thou not see, that this is the way to procure husbands to thy
daughters portions, rather then to themselves? and to wed all thy daughters to
vanity, before thou find out one good and meet husband for any of them. O
how much better were it for Christian parents to nurture and bring up their
daughters in the fear of God, and true Christian modesty in holy
shamefastness and sobriety, and in good huswiferie, that they being first of
all espoused to Jesus Christ, their heavenly and spiritual bridegroom, and so
made fit for marriage, might have in his due time husbands of his most wise
choice and appointment, with whom they might lead, not a wanton and idle, but
a right christian, godly and comfortable life! Marry thy daughter (says a wise
man) and so shall thou perform a weighty matter: but give thou her to a man
of understanding. Ecclesiasticus. 7.25. Thus much for answer concerning
inordinate care for children. Objections in regard of the pretended
unworthiness of those that stand in need to be relieved, do now follow.

OBJECTION. 1. in regard of pretended unworthiness of those which stand in
need to be relieved.
I think in my conscience (says the covetous and unmerciful man) that I
should do very ill, to give to so many, as are ready to ask of me: for I
should mainetaine many poor folk in their idleness, and to bring up their
children also idlelie. etc. Which should be hurtefull to the Commonwealth.

ANSWER.
For the poor to live idlelie, in a christian commonwealth, and likewise, for
them to bring up their children in idleness, it is verily a great, yea a double
sin: and ought of conscience, to be misliked and condemned of all, seeing it
is condemned of God himself. He that will not work should not eat, as the
Lord by his holy Apostle says. 2. These. 3.10. And the civil magistrate should
fail greatly in his duty, and so sin against God, if he should not by his
authority provide against it. Nevertheless it is no sin for a merciful
man, to relieve any, that be presently in urgent necessity, be they idle or
be they worse; provided notwithstanding, that with the outward relief,
admonition be given, with earnest persuasion, that they will leave their
idleness and wickedness, and follow an orderly and godly course of life.
Nay, this is so far off from the nature of sin, that he who does so, makes
practice of a double virtue and grace; insomuch as at one instant, as it were,
he gives a double alms: the one, to the comfort of the hungry body; the
other, for the health of the surfetted soul. The more full answer to this
objection, may be given from the late excellent Statute made for the
suppressing of idleness, and for order to be taken as well to set the poor to
work, as to contribute to their relief, so far as they shall furthermore be
found to stand in need.

OBJECTION. 2.
Let a man give them never so much, they will be never the better for it: all
shall go through their throat. etc.

ANSWER.
Such as be well and thriftilie minded will be the better. As for the rest, if
they will be nothing the better; yea, though they should be the worse, it may
suffice thee, until thou do perceive it to be so in deed, that thou give
with a mind to do them as much good as thou might. Their evil can no whit
deminish thy goodness. But if thou upon experience perceiuest any to be the
worse, as not knowing how to take the right benefit of relief, thou may
well make a better choice, and so cast the seed, as it were, into a better
soil.

OBJECTION 3.
They are very unthankful, they will not give a man a good word for all that
is done for them.

ANSWER.
All be not so. And though some be unthankful, yet God will be nevertheless
gracious and merciful to thee. Again, if thou should seek after the
thanks and praise of men, what a vain thing were this? For so should thou
loose all praise and reward with God. Furthermore, let it be observed, that
thofe men, which are thus most ready to accuse the poor of unthankfulness,
and to be the more idle because of relief, etc. they are such as can speak
least of all other upon their own experience. Wherefore well may such
Christians be rebuked, and shamed by the sayings of the heathen: who say,
Recompense follows after him that looks not for it. Again, It is the
determination of him that is an excellent good man indeed, and has his mind
enlarged that way, so long to bear with the unthankful man, until thou have
won him to be thankful. But let us proceed.

OBJECTION 4.
There want not examples of some, who make so great a show of godliness, as
one would think that he should do God good service in relieuing of them: and
yet afterward, they are found to be nothing the men they seemed to be. So that
a man knows not to whom he should give. And were it not better to keep a
man's money in his purse, then to cast it away he cannot tell how?

ANSWER.
What though some do counterfeit religion, and play the hypocrites: shall we
neglect good duty, because, it may be, there is such or such a foul sin in
this or that man, which we know not of? And as touching hypocrisy, which is
one of the most secret and hidden sins among the rest, it belongs unto God,
who alone knows the heart, in his due time to discover it. But as for our
selves, none of us must presume to judge any before the time. So long as as any
behave themselves outwardly as beseems Christians, it well beseems us also
to hope the best of them, and therefore also whatsoever we do for such, in the
name of faithful and true Christians, hoping that they are such, whether they
be ministers of the word and doctrine of God, or disciples and scholars in the
school of Christ, God will accept of it, according to our good and charitable
meaning therein, if our own hearts be upright, and not according to their
dissimulation. And furthermore, our Savior Christ, to help us against this
and all other offenses and stumbling blocks, says in the Gospel, Blessed is
he that is not offended in me: that is to say, he that will not fall away from
Christ, nor from any good duty of Christianity, by any discouragement
whatsoever Satan shall throw in his way. Thus far for answer to the
obj^ctions, concerning the pretended unworthiness of those which stand in need
to be relieved. The objections whereby covetous men would excuse one charge by
another, are next.

OBJECTION 1. whereby covetous men would excuse one charge by another.
I find by the count-booke of my expenses, that a great part of my living goes
out to those ordinary civil charges, which I stand bound unto by the law of
the Prince: and in troublesome times (such as these are) we are at many
extraordinary expenses. May not these be reckened for my alms? or at the least
may I not in these respects ease my self by being something more sparing that
other way?

ANSWER.
Shall the same evil of sin, which has had a strong hand to pull upon us
all the evils of punishment which we have been pressed withal, be any fit way
or means to remove them away from us, think we? If the beginning of
unmercifulness, have in a great part, brought in the charges of wars, and
the sharpness of dearth and scarcity among us: shall the continuance and
hardening of our hearts therein, against the corrections of God, remove them
away. It can not be. And as touching ordinary charges, imposed by course of
law in civil respects, they are plentifully recompensed by the benefit of
law, and by the gracious protection of the Prince, whose law it is. Now,
seeing these charges (as is said) are so imposed by civil authority, that
they cannot be avoided, no not of him that is unwilling to yield them; there is
herein no praise or practice of beneficence at all. Only willing freehearted
and merciful dealing, whether by or without prescript of humane law, such as
is yielded for the Lords cause, has praise in the church, and is truly
commendable in the sight of God.

OBJECTION. 2.
Neither can I here forget, that there is ever and anon much to do about
contributions toward the Church, for the maintenance of the ministry, for
bread and wine for the Communion, for reparations of the building, and of the
glass windows, and that all things may be made decent and seemly. God is a
Spirit, and he will be worshipped in Spirit. What needs so much to do about
outward comeliness and decency. And if I might speak what I think (says
the profane covetous man) why should Ministers take tithes in these days,
which, they say, are the days of the Gospel, seeing the Leuiticall Priesthood,
and the ceremonies thereof, have been abolished ever since the death and
passion of Christ, as they themselves affirm? Did not the Apostle Paul also
work with his hands to get his own living? Why then should not our Ministers
do so, to ease the charges of the people. For my own part also, I can take
as much edifiing by a reading Minister, who will be content to compound for a
small stipend, as I can by him that preaches every Sabbath day. And therefore
I think the greater charges of mainteining a Preacher, may well enough be
spared.

ANSWER.
It cannot be, doubtless, that these things should be forgotten of those, that
have no care to store their memory with good and wholesome instructions. For
want whereof, wicked and ungodly thoughts and devises are very rife in the
minds of covetous and profane men, howsouer shame stops their mouths, that
they do not at all times utter and vent them. But that we may vouchsafe the^ an
answer. What though God be a Spirit, and requires no curious nor over
chargeable outward pomp, or superstitious decking to his spiritual service
and worship? Is this any good reason, why all things should not be decently
ordered and disposed? Or rather, is it not in all equity, so much the greater
reason, that all things ought to be disposed in so much the more comely and
reverend manner, because the Lord requires no excessive cost to be bestowed
this way? It can by no color of reason be denied. This therefore is a very
unreasonable and maligna^t objection. And for the same cause also it is the
less to be marvelled at, though this kind of me^ grudge at the Minister of the
Gospel his allowance and maintenance, when they cannot willingly afford God
him self a comely place for the exercise of his divine worship; nor themselves
a small quantity of bread and wine, a few times in the year, for their
special comfort and spiritual nourishment of their souls.

As touching tithes by civil authority alloted for the maintenance of the
Ministers of the Gospel, it is a mere cauil to prejudice them under the name of
Leuitical ceremonies. For there was tithing before there was any tribe of Leui,
yea before Leui the father of the Leuits was borne; and therefore also is it
written of Leui, Heb. 7.9.10. that while he was yet in the loins of his father
Abraham, he paid tithes in Abraham when Melchi-sedec met him. This was before
the institution of the priesthood of the law. But much rather may ye iniquity
of this cavil appear, in so much as tithes are not not now either required or
paid of any of sound judgment, in any ceremonious or figurative respect, but as
a moral duty to the maintenance and upholding of Gods divine worship,
according to the affirmative part of the second commandment of the first
Table: and as a duty of civil honor and justice, according to the fifth and
eight commandment, of the second table of the Law. So that (to speak in some
measure of proportion) as (touching the Lords Sabbath) the ceremony ceasing
(whatsoever might be so accounted in the Jewish observation of it) and
therefore also the day being changed, as it may partly be thought: yet the
moral sanctification of the Lords day, coming in place thereof, does
nevertheless remain to all Christians from the authority of the fourth
commandment: so in like manner, albeit all ceremony in tithes and tithing is
long since ceased, yet in regard of the moral use of them, they may and ought
without all scruple or prejudice to the Gospel, be retained still as
necessary to the upholding of the public practice of Gods divine worship, and
for the maintenance of the public Ministers thereof from the ground and
warrant of the same moral Law of the most high and sovereign Lord our God. At
the least until the sovereign Prince, to whom, next under God, the care of
maintaining and furthering the divine worship of God, does by Gods own
ordinance chiefly belong, shall determine as general and commodious, as equal
and bounteous a course, to the same most holy use some other way. The which, as
it is not lightly supposed of many wise men would hardly be so happily found
out, and so generally agreed upon.

And now further also, how unreasonable a thing is it I pray ye, for any to
urge the Apostle Paul's example, in that he wrought with his hands for his
living, (as though that should be a law for all Ministers of the word so to
do) seeing the other Apostles did not so: neither does Paul himself press any
after his example, unless upon very special and extraordinary occasion, like
to those he met withal, specially at Corinthus: 2. Cor. 11.7.8.9.10.11.12.
etc. Naie rather, he respecting an ordinary course, according to the ordinance
and will of God, does in very Christian and prudent circumspection, prevent
and meet with the same unkind objection of this kind of people, as we see
plainly, 1. Cor. chap. 9, and. 1. Tim. 5.17.18. as has been rehearsed in the
2. Chap. of this our Treatise.

It is nothing material therefore, what profane and corrupt minded men think
or speak; seeing they know not, neither greatly regard, what they either deny
or affirm, but only as may serve their own ungodly turn. Blessed be our
God, that such private worldly and wicked speeches, be rebuked and repressed by
good, holy, and public laws, both of God and of our Christian Princess.

Neither is it finally to be wondered at, though this sort of profane and
covetous minded men, do think themselves as much edified with reading as with
preaching of the word of God: seeing they have no true taste or judgment, what
sound edification in the knowledge and faith of the Gospel does mean, neither
are at all edified by either of them both. Let them therefore, ignorantly both
think and speak according to the erroneous and deceivable opinion of their
own mind: Wisdom (as our Savior Christ afirmeth) shall be justified of all
her children.

The last objection, which ends in wilfulnes and obstinacy, which is a meet
conclusion for so evil premises.
To conclude (says the covetous and unmerciful man) if all that I have said,
and much more which I could alledg (though I will not trouble my self to utter
it now) will not serve for excuse; but I must still be called upon on every
side, to pay to pay, to give and to give, and never to be at an end; I will
surely f^^our my self: for I will break up house, and go soiourne somewhere,
to avoid these incessant charges, and to live more ^t ^eartes case, that I may
eat and drink and be merry with my friends.

ANSWER.
O vain self-loue, o wicked conclusion (I speak of those, who with such a
mind as has been now expressed, and not upon any other more just and
reasonable ocasions then these be, do break up house) what shall thou gain of
all this thy saving in the end? Thou may peradventure save earthly expenses,
but thou take the most prodigal course that may be to loose thy soul. God
will judge thee from thine own mouth. Is thy need so urgent many ways, and
will thou fail both God, and his Church, and the poor of his flock all at
once, and that in time of special need. Nay rather, if thou be not too much
in decay, but art in any measure able to keep open thy doors, thou art so
much the more bound to keep house: unless happily thou see thou may be
more beneficial otherwise. If thou do not thus, by how much thou increasest
in unmercifulness by so much shall thou find thy judgment to be more
merciless, whenever God shall call thee to give account of thy Stewardship.
Thou professest to seek thy ease, and to eat and drink, and to be merry,
as thy covetous and unmerciful brother did in the parable of the Gospel, who
suddenly was taken away from all his riches and pleasure. Luke chapter 12.
Wherefore may thou not justly fear to have the like portion with him? As
also with thy other voluptuous brother, Luke chapter 16. whose soul forthwith
after his death was thrown down into the endless, easelesse, and remediless
torment of Hell?

Thus much, for answer to these profane, worldly, and malignant objections
against Christian liberality and merciful beneficence. For I will not loose
time, in standing any longer about any thing which might be further alleged
to so evil and ungodly a purpose. By that which has been answered, it may
sufficiently be discerned, how vain and frivolous all other excuses or
defenses are. Only this will I say, that by how much flesh and blood is more
inuentiue to find out pretensed excuses, and the Devil also more ready to
prompt and help forward the same: by so much we may upon good ground more
boldly affirm and determine, that Christian and merciful beneficence is a
special duty of godliness, which the Lord our God takes singular delight in;
and which he will undoubtedly bless, to the incomparable advantage of all that
will settle their hearts to continue in the wise, discreet, and dutiful
practice thereof.

Hitherto therefore, of the first part of our Treatis^, concerning Christian
Giving: the second part follows, which is of the christian receiving of that
which is so Christianlie given.

What receiving is.
THE SECOND PART of the Treatise.
CHAP. I.
What Receiving is.

IN so much as it the commandment of God, that such whom he has made better
able the^ others, should give unto those, which stand in need: and to the same
purpose has encouraged them by many gracious and bountiful promises so to
do: it follows that it is likewise the good will and pleasure of God, that
such as stand in need, should neither refuse to bewray and acknowledge their
want, nor make any niceness, scruple or doubt to receive the liberality of
the good and beneficial servants of the Lord.

Only it is required, that as the giving must be in such Christian manner as
God prescribes in his holy word, as has already been laid forth, so the
Receiving must likewise be such a kind of Receiving as God allows of; the
which we are henceforth to gather out of the same his most holy word. Let us
therefore, search out so well as God shall vouchsafe to give us grace, what
manner of Receiving that must be.

Receiving therefore (in such sense as we are here to speak of it) is a sober,
reverend, and thankful accepting of that which is Christianly given, with a
mind to employ it conscionably, and in the fear of God, to the same ends,
whereunto it was of the Christian and godly benefactor intended and given.

This does generally and briefly comprehend all whatsoever is further to be
opened, concerning the particular virtues which are necessarily to concur and
meet together in the Christian heart, to the right manner of receiving a
benefit.

Of these virtues therefore, and of the contrary vices to be avoided in
receiving of benefits, let us now more particularly inquire by a declaration
of the parts of the former description. And so come we to the second Chapter of
this latter part of our Treatise.

CHAP. II.
Of the Virtues required to the right manner of Receiving Christian Beneficence,
and of the contrary vices therein to be shunned.

So many virtues and graces being required, to the right manner of giving a
Gift, as we have seen in the former part of this book: yea, though the gift
be given of the richest and most honorable, to the poorest and basest of the
servants of God: it cannot be imagined by any light of reason, but the gift
being so to be qualified: the receiving must of duty be answerable, that is, A
gift is to be received with a sober mind.
accompanied with graces and virtues proportionable thereunto. It is, as we
know, in a civil course the manner of receiving gifts, or other things that
honorable persons reach forth unto us, to kiss the hand before we take them,
as though we would profess thereby, that we take them with no more ready hand
then with a thankful full and ready mind, heartily glad of that which comes
from them, as a token of that favorable good will which they bear us, willing
also to perform any good service unto them. Howsoever in receuing the gifts
of Christian beneficence, specially at the hands of meaner persons, that
Courtlike courtesy is not used nor looked for, nevertheless (in so much as
they are the most honorable kind of gifts which can be given, seeing they are
given for the Lords cause and with a holy and sanctified affection) it is very
meet that they who are made partakers of them, should in the most holy and
religious manner receive them, even as from the most holy hand of God himself,
whose work only it is, to frame the hearts of his servants, as it were by the
finger of the holy Ghost, to bestow the same upon them.

To this purpose therefore, let us, I beseech you, consider first of all, more
fully of that which stands in the first place, and as it were in the
forefront, of the right manner of receiving a Christian gift: namely, that it
must be a modest and sober receiving. Whereby even in the first onset, not
only all flattery and counterfeiting of poverty, for the procuring of gifts,
is prevented; but also, even the very root hereof, which is a covetous, or
greedy and lingering desire after a gift is plucked up. Both which are very
servile vices, utterly unbeseeming that holy freedom and liberty of mind,
which the poorest of Gods servants, and chiefly the ministers of the Gospel,
ought to retain in this behalf. And hereof we have the Apostle of our Savior
Christ and other of his servants set forth unto us, for most worthy patterns
and examples. And namely Saint Paul, together with Siluanus and Timotheus: as
we read 1 These. chap. 2.5. where the Apostle thus writes, We did never use
flattering words, as ye know, nor colored covetousness, God is record, And
again, 2. Cor. 2.17. We are not as many, which make merchandise of the word of
God: but as of sincerity, but as of God in the sight of God speak we in
Christ. And more particularly concerning himself, he solemnly protests before
the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, and other Christians: Act. 20.33.34.35. in
the words following: I have coueted no man's silver (says he) nor gold, nor
apparel: yea, ye know that these hands have ministered to my necessities, and
to them that were with me. And he adds further for the instruction of others
I have showed you all things, how that so laboring, ye ought to support the
weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how that he said, It is a
blessed thing to give, rather then to receive. In the which words, beside the
example of the Apostle, worthy all imitation of every servant of God, upon like
occasion, so far as they may attain unto: we have furthermore two notable
reasons to dissuade covetousness, and every evil fruit thereof. First,
because every one stands by general bond of Christian duty, straightly
bound to support the weak, and therefore not to be above measure chargeable:
secondly, because (as our Savior Christ has affirmed) it is a more blessed
thing to give then to receive: and therefore consequently, that every Christian
ought to be more desirous in his heart, and accordingly, more provident and
diligent in the ordering of all his affairs, that he may rather be able to
give to others, then to stand in need to receive relief himself. Not that any
through pride and haughtiness of mind, or of any other nice or scrupulous
conceit, should disdain or make over much deintie to take a gift in time of
his need, as was touched in the beginning: for even our Savior Christ himself
received and accepted earthly benefits at the hands of his disciples, who
received more excellent gifts, even spiritual graces, and the most rich gift
of eternal life and glory from him: And besides, he that is not an humble
man, can neither be truly thankful to God, nor yet to man. The meaning
therefore of our Savior Christ, as also of his Apostle Paul, guided by his
Spirit, was no doubt, that no man through sluggishnes and desire of ease, or
through covetousness in seeking to enrich himself, should grow
ouerburthensome, and so discourage weak Christians from continuing in the
fellowship of the Gospel, if by reason of any excessive charge of
contributions, specially in such times, wherein the Churches are impouerished
by affliction and persecution.

Behold therefore, how it is a blessed thing to give rather then to receive:
that is to say, to be diligent Bees, every one in his vocation and calling;
rather then idle and devouring drones: to comfort and refresh the hearts of
others, rather then to seek to satisfy our own insatiable desires: to be
rich to Godward, in the good works of mercy which he requires and will
plentifully reward; rather then to heap up a superfluous mass of riches to
our selves, to the impouerishing, or rather to the utter destruction of our
souls: finally, by doing good to others, to gather people unto God; rather
then by being ouercheargable on the one hand, or by withholding beneficence on
the other hand, if we be able to give, to discourage and scatter the flock, to
the decaie of the public profession of the religion and worship of God, and to
the hazard of many souls, that might stumble and fall hereby. Moreover, as it
is said of the borrower, so may we say of him that hunteth after gifts, that he
is a servant, yea, seruily minded toward him that gives. Such a one is not his
own man, as we may say, much less is he fit to be a free servant of the Lord.
He is in the high way to grow quickly a flatterer, and a man pleaser, to prove
an hypocrit, rather then a sincere and true professor.

But let us return to the excellent example of the Apostle Paul, who in that
he writes to the Philip. chap. 4.10. etc. is likewise a notable president unto
us, how we ought to keep our minds sober and free, against the inordinate and
covetous desire of gifts. He rejoiced indeed, and singularly commended the
Christians of Philippi, in so much as they had a singular care in communicating
with him (as he there writes) in the matter of giving and Receiving
nevertheless, he reioiced not so much, for the supply of his own wantes, as to
enjoy the precious fruit of their faith and love, and to think of that most
excellent fruit, which was redounding to them, from the Lord again. For (says
he as touching himself) I have learned in what estate soever I am, to be
therewith content. I can be abased and I can abound: every where in all things
I am instructed both to be full, and to be hungry: and to abound, and to have
want I am able to do all things through the help of hCrist, who strengthens
me. Notwithstanding (as he further adds) ye have well done, that ye did
communicate to mine affliction, etc. Not that I desire a gift but I desire the
fruit which may further your reckening, etc. And again, 1. Cor. 9.15. though
he mightily presses the equity and morality of ordinary provision and
allowance for the Ministers of the Gospel, at the charge of the people, yet he
professes, in regard of his extraordinary calling of Apostleship, and because
of certain extraordinary occasions in respect of certain false Apostles, that
he used none of those things, neither wrote, that it should be so done to him.

Thus then, if we lay all these things together, we may evidently perceive,
both from the example of the Apostle Paul, and of other the servants of God:
as also from those weighty reasons, wherewith he has instructed us, how
soberly the minds, specially of ministers of the Gospel, as was said, ought to
be prepared and affected, touched the receiving of a gift. According to that
which is expressly required in every one, that is to be accounted meet to be a
minister of the word, that he be not desirous of filthy lucre. Nor have his
affection set upon silver. 1. Tim. 3.3. and Tit. 1.7. Read also Ier. 5.30.31.

And verily, if we do not look diligently to our hearts, that they besober,
yea very wary and circumspect this way; both ministers of the word, and also
all other, are not only in great danger to falt in the receiving of the holy
beneficence and liberality of the good servants of God, which they give to a
right and, even to encourage us to walk on cheerfully in the ways of the
Lord: but we shall be in danger, to offend much more grieuoslie, in accepting
and entertaining the gifts of such, at whose hands we ought not at all to
receive them: either because they give them with a profane and corrupt mind,
desirous thereby to bind us to unlawful gratifications; or else, for that
other weighty circumstances, may make it altogether in expedient, to admit of
any gift from them: As for example; for want of this grace, Gehazi took
gifts of Naaman the Syrian, notwithstanding his Master the Prophet Elisha had,
upon very holy and just considerations, refused the same. As namely to the
end he might the rather leave him to consider the free grace and mercy of God,
in that great cure, which was so miraculouslie wrought upon him. And also,
that Elisha might thereby approve himself to the conscience of that noble
Syrian, that he was a true Prophet of God, seeking the glory of the true God
of Israel; and not one that was led by a covetous and earthly affection.

For want of this grace, as also because he loved and lingered after gifts
(which the Apostle Peter calls the wages of unrighteousness) Balaam that
covetous Prophet, was willing, as a hireling, to have served king Balaaks
malicious desire, that he should curse and practice his s^rcerie against the
people of God, had not the Lord himself, against the will of Balaams false and
deceitful heart, restrained him, and feared him from it.

For the want of this garce, and likewise for the love of the same unrighteous
wages, Judas first played the thief, yea even of that holy beneficence which
was given to the most holy use that might be; to wit for the maintenance of
our Savior Christ in such seemlie manner, as was meet for the son of God, in the
days of his humiliation. John 12.6. and shortly after he betrayed his master
the same our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: which was the most heinous treason
that ever was wrought.

For want of this grace, the Magistrate is easily drawn to pervert justice,
Exodus 28.21. and Deuteronomy. 16 19.

Finally, covetousness and desire of money, whether by gift from other, or by
self inordinate practice, it is the root of all evil, as the Apostle Paul
teaches, 1. Tim. 6.10.

But on the contrary, the Apostle Peter, according to that which we have seen
before in the Apostle Paul, being armed with this spiritual sobriety, and
having his mind set on heavenly things: when he was tempted this way, he was so
far from accepting the gift which Simon the magitian (one of like disposition
to Balaam) offered unto him, that he defied it. Thy money perish with thee
(says Peter) because thou think the gift of God may be obtained with money.
Act. 8.20.

Abraham also shows a right noble mind in freedom this way. Genesis 14.22.23.
For when the king of Sodom would have given him much substance, of that which
he had recovered out of the hands of those four kings whom he pursued and
overcame; he utterly refused, saying: I have lift up mine hand unto the Lord,
the most high God possessour of heaven and earth, That I will not take of all
that is thine, so much as a thread or shoo-latchet, lest thou should say, I
have made Abraham rich. The holy Patriarch had care, that God might have his
glory in the fulfilling of that promise of blessing, which he had made unto
him, without any help from the heathen among whom he lived.

Likewise the Prophet Daniel, chap. 5.17. answers king Belshazzar, who
promised him great gifts, if he could interpret the writing that appeared unto
him: Keep thy rewards to thy self (says Daniel) and give thy gifts to
another. Nevertheless he read the writing, and showed the interpretation
thereof to the King.

The Prophet Samuel, being a Judge in Israel, may worthily be a notable
example to all, both magistrates in civil justice, and also to ministers of
the word of God. For he having the grace we speak of, has obtained this
testimony from the holy Ghost, that he took no bribe or corrupting gift at
any man's hand. 1. Sam. 12.13. etc. Behold here I am (says Samuel in his
Apology, or in way of renderring up an accounte of his office of Iudge-shippe)
bear ye record of me before the Lord, and before his anointed. Whose ox have
I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I done wrong unto? or whom
have I hurt? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes
therewith? and I will restore it you. Then they said thou have done us no
wrong, neither have thou hurt us, neither have thou taken ought of any man's
hand. And he said, the Lord is witness against ye, and his anointed is
witness this day (he speaks of Saul, who^ the people had made king over the^)
that ye have found naught in my hands and they answered, he is w^nes. But why,
may some say, is Samuel thus earnest in his own defense? verily not in desire
of any praise to himself, but that he might cause it to be esteemed a matter
of great respect that the public Magistrate should b^ (...) himself (...)
corruptly in the discharge of his duty before the Lord, and toward his people:
as also that he might let the people see their sin, in casting off him from
the rule and government of them, without cause on his part yea contrary to
that uprightness and fidelity which he had use ^^oward them as appears in
the fa^^^. 1^ ^h^^ q. 18. 19. And according to that which God himself (...)
spoken before chapter 8.7. They have not cast thee away, but they have cast me
away, that I should not reign over them. Thus therefore, Samuel resigned his
office of Iudge-shippe, though he ^^^^seth not to be a Prophet to the people.
For for it follows upon the request which the people make, that he would pray
for them: chapter 12. verse. 23. God forbid that I should sin against the Lord,
and cease praying for you, but I will show you the good and right way. The like
protestation uses Moses Number. chapter 16.15. A Gift must be received reuerendlie.
though not so largly laid forth: but somewhat more directly unto God. I have
not taken (says Moses to the Lord) so much as an ass from them: neither have
I hurt any of the^. Hitherto of the first grace, necessary concerning the
receiving of a gift. From whence easily may it appear, that the general
exhortation of the Apostle, is to great purpose. Heb. 13.5.6. in that he thus
writes to all Christans. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be
ye content with those things which ye have: for he (that is God) has said, I
will not leave thee neither forsake thee. So that we may boldly say, the Lord
is my helper, neither will I fear what man can do unto me. Of like sort is
the counsel of King Solomon Prou. 23.6. Eat thou not the bread of him that
has an evil eye. And the prayer of King David his father. Psalm. 141. Let me
not eat of the delicates of the wicked: etc.

The next grace and virtue, requisite to the Christan receiving of such gifts
and benefits, as may lawfully and expediently be received, for necessary
relief and comfort; it is Reverence. For they must be received, not simple as
from men; but with a reverent regard of Gods spiciall goodness, in moving the
hearts of his good servants and dear children, by his holy spirit, to have
so loving and tender a care over us. Yea, it is the part of all such as are
succored this way, so to consider of Gods own goodness herein; that they may
humbly acknowledge themselves, unworthy of so great a grace and favor:
according to the example of Iaakob. Genesis 32.10. who says unto God, I am less
then any of thy benefits. And as King David says. 2. Sam. 7.18. Who am I o
Lord God, and what is my house that thou have brought me hitherto? etc. Such
humility (I say) ought to be in those, that are succored by the honorable
instruments of Gods bounteous goodness and mercy. It is verily (specially in
times of great distress) no less to be esteemed, then if God should cause the
clouds of heaven to rain down Manna, as he did for the relief of the
Israelites: according to that comparison which the Apostle Paul makes in the
same respect, A Gift is to be received reuerendlie.
2. Cor. 8.15. And the rather is this estimation to be made of it, if such be
in any singular manner beneficial to any, who were before strangers to their
benefactors and had performed no duty, whereby they might be induced thereunto.
Finally, to make this point of reverend receiving of benefits, more familiar
and plain: this we say, that the reverence which is due to benefactors, is
such a reverence, as belongs from dutiful children, to their loving and kind
parents. For in so much as they do the part of parents, to so many as they
do relieve and cherish; it is good reason, that these again, should yield a
childlike duty and honor unto them: according to the 5. commandment of
almighty God: Honor thy father and thy mother. etc.

And thus, we have a good occasion, after this mention of honor to proceed to
speak in the third place, of thankfulness: seeing this (being the third
grace requisite to to the Christian receiving of gifts) is also a fruit of
that honorable and reverend account, which ought to be made of all good and
beneficial Patrons and friends. Of the which duty, it behooves every one
(whom it concerns) to be the more careful, because it is the preservative,
or rather a certain seed for multiplication of benefits. For to such as shall
be found truly thankful, and walk in good duty, the Lord will continue the
beneficence of his servants, yea he will amplify and enlarge them, so far
as he knows to be meet and expedient for any of his obedient children.

But it may be here objected, that we must on all hands, give all our thanks
unto God, seeing all good things come of his bounty alone; and he requires it
also, as a spiciall duty of his worship, saying as we read in the 50. Psalm.
Offer ye praise unto God. And again in the same Psalm. He that offers praise
glorifieth me.

It is true; no man may deny it. God only, is to be thanked and praised with
religions and divine praise, A Gift must be received thankefully.
which do indeed belong only to him that is the author and fountain of all
good things. Yea, most religious and constant regard is to be had of all, both
Giver and Receiver, that God may have his pierlesse and continual praise: as
Ps. 103, My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his
holy name. My soul praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits etc.
And Ps. 146.2. I will praise the Lord during my life: as long as I have any
being, I will sing unto my God. Whereof, the reason is most just and evident,
insomuch, as all does altogether and alone proceed from his most bounteous
hand, whatsoever any either high or low, does enjoy. Nevertheless, this also
is sure and certain, that it is well pleasing unto him, to be honored in the
means, yea to have the means ciuilly honored which he himself honors
first, that is, does give them the honor, to be his holy instruments for his
peoples benefit. Thus, 1. Kings. 8.66. it is not recorded in vain, that the
people thanked, or bessed K. Solomon, for his princely bounty in the
sacrifices and offerings which he offered at the dedication of the holy Temple,
and for that he also at his charge royally feasted them. And Lament. 4.20. The
Prophet Jeremy teaches the Church of God, to account of Josiah their good
King, to have been the breath of their nostrelles: to wit, the comfortable
means of their preservation and defense, howsoever to speak most exactly and
absolutely, God is the alone author and mainetainer of life, And 2. King.
13.14. Elisha the Prophet of God is called the chariot and horsemen of Israel,
in respect of the mighty force of his prayer, although to speak simply, the
Lord only is the munition and defense of his people.

But that we may further perceive, that God allows a certain honor to
those, whom he aduanceth to be his special instruments, for the benefit and
blessing of others: let us consider a little of a few places of the holy
Scripture, where, for honors sake, he makes ioynt-mention of them, A Gift is
to be received thankefully.
together with himself, though there be indeed infinite ods betwixt his divine
nature and them. As Exodus 14. verse 31. It is written, that when Israel saw
the mighty power which the Lord showed upon the Egyptians: they feared the
Lord, and believed the Lord, and his servant Moses. According also to that, 2.
Chron. chapter 20 verse. 20. Put your trust in the Lord your God (says king
Iehoshaphat) and ye shall be assured: believe his Prophets and ye shall
prosper. And likewise 1. Sam. 12.18. when the Lord at the prayer of Samuel,
sent a fearful thunder and rain; all the people are said to fear the Lord
and Samuel exceedingly. In like manner 1. Chron. 29.20. So soon as David had
exhorted all the congregation, after their offering toward the building of the
Temple, to bless the Lord their God: it is said: that all the congregation
blessed the Lord God of their fathers, and that inclining their heads, they
bowed down themselves to the Lord and the king. Finally, Judge. 7.20. The
soldiers of Gideon cry, The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon. Not that it was
the sword of Gideon, in every respect or in the principal respect, as it was
the sword of the Lord. Not that the people had altogether the same respect, in
their bowing themselves to God and to king David. Not that they feared Samuel,
as they feared God. Not that they believed Moses or any of the Prophets, as
they believed God. Finally, not that the people thanked or blessed king
Solomon, as they thanked and blessed the Lord. But as, where it is written of
king Hezekiah and his Princes, that when they beheld Gods bountifulness, in
that provision which the people yielded for the maintenance of Gods worship,
and the holy ministers thereof, by bringnig in their Tithes and offerings,
they did in the beholding the heaps of provision, Bless the Lord and his
people Israel, 2. Chron. 31.8. We must needs understand by their blessing of
the Lord, that they praised him; and by their blessing of the people, that they
did not so much commend them, as wish all peace and prosperity from the Lord
unto them. The like are we to do touching the peoples blessing of God, and
blessing or thanking of their king. They bless God with praises: they commend
their king by their pra^er to God for him. And so the sword is Gideons, as the
Lords Captain; but it is the Lords own sword alone, as he is the Lord of all
Hosts, and the great Commander and General of the field. The people feared
Samuel, in a reverend acknowledging of him to be a true P^ophet of God: but
they feared God, as well perceiving, that he had a sovereign power over them
either to save or to destroy. Likewise they believed Moses and the rest of the
Prophets, as the faithful messengers of the word and will of God: but they
believe God, as the only author and performer of that truth, which they in the
name, and at the commandment of God, published and preached unto them. This
difference and distinction must we carefully and religiously observe in all
things, lest giving unto men, that which belongs to them, we defraud God of
that which is his due: and specially in this duty of praise and thanksgiving.

To this purpose therefore; in so much as it is an usual speech of many, to
say to their benefactors, I thank God and you: left any should stumble, for
want of judgment to discern the difference, betwixt thankfulness to God and
thankefulnes to men; that is to say, betwixt humane or civil, and religious or
divine thanks, as we may call them: let us help as well as we can, to lead
such as want direction, as it were by the hand, that they may know some thing
the better, how to distinguish the one from the other.

This difference is to be considered, partly from the differing definition or
nature of either kind of thankfulness; and partly from the differing
fruits, which according to their several kinds, do spring up and grow from
them. Upon these points therefore let us here pause a while.

The differing nature of thankfulness, is briefly this; that, Thankefulnes
to God is a most reverend, hearty and cheerful acknowledgment of the benefit
received, to the glory and praise of God, as to the chief author and giver of
it. But thankfulness to men, though it be, and ought to be, as has been
declared before, a reverend and hearty acknowledgment of the benefit received;
yet it is not so much to the praise of the instrument, as to profess and
testify, the willingness of our hearts, to perform such duties of
thankfulness, as do belong to such kind of men, by the commandment of God. Here
therefore, is a very great difference, secundum magis and minus, as they say;
in way of more or less: for the one is to be acknowledged the author, the
other the instrument: the one God, the other man: he the creator, this the
creature: he the glorious and almighty Lord, this the poor frail servant,
etc. Whereupon we may easily perceive, how carefully the true servants of
God are to abhor and avoid the gross and profane, or rather the sacrilegious
and blasphemous flatteries, of all wicked Sycophants of the world. For they are
so lavish in extolling the means, that they reserve nothing, as proper and
entire to the Lord. Such was that blasphemous and execrable flattery of the
people, who gave proud Herod divine glory, Act. 12.22. they crying out with
vehement acclamation and shouting, so soon as he had ended his oration: The
voice of God and not of man. Such also was the palpaple flattery of Tertullus
the Orator, in his fawning speech to Felix, against the Apostle Paul, Act. 24.
who in the name of the Jews, ascribes all their peace wholly, and in all
things with all thanks to his providence. For what in effect could he have s^^d
more if he had had a heart to profess his and their tha^kf^lnesse to God
himself? There is great cause therefore, why the faithful servants of God
should abandon this kind of heathenish and sacrilegious gratulation, both from
their hearts, and also from their tongues. For that which is ascribed to man,
yea even to Caesar, the chief among men, it is so only to be ascribed and
yielded, that in wise (as was said a little before) God be defrauded of any
part and parcel of his most just and sovereign due. Excessive thanks to men
is to be avoided.


But not only heathen men have foulely faulted this way, but much rather the
Church of Rome, which boasts it self to be the only true Christian and
Catholic Church in the world, has run it self as it were over head and
ears in this most grievous and unchristian sin. For if we compare the
heathen and them together, we shall easily find that these do exceed them in
most pernicious and deadly blasphemy, lifting up and advancing creatures above
all measure, not only in ascribing to the^ the voice of God, and a providence
concerning all earthly things, as Tertullus to Felix, but even a commanding
power for the eternal peace and salvation of the souls of men in the kingdom
of heaven: as is evident, in that which they do attribute to the virgin Marie,
whom they have made the Lady and Queen of heaven. And further, as touching
their more common or inferior benefactors here upon earth, they would make us
believe, that by the merit of the^r beneficence and good desert toward their
Church, together with the propitiatory help of their Priests, they shall not
only escape Purgatory, but go straight on to the kingdom of heaven, and draw
others also by the surplussage of their works together with them. Yea, further,
they never leave solemnizing of their praises, with an inferior ki^d of
religious worship at the least, to the end they may the rather allure and
bewitch many other to do the like, or rather if it could be, more
plentifully, after the manner of cunning beggars, who at on door commend the
alms which they had at an other, to draw on their good dames to enlarge their
good will and charity toward them. But let us leave them to themselves, and
all their superstitious and idolatrous Co^mendams to the judgment of God. As
touching our own selves, according as we are taught in the holy word of God
let us wisely and discreely determine our thanks unto ^e^, as to the gracious
instruments of God and not otherwise so that the chief glory, yea the only
praise and glory, may be wholly reserved, and entierlie ascribed to his most
blessed majesty, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ alone: to whom with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, one true and everliving, most gracious and
merifull God, be all honor and gorie now and for ever. Amen.

Hitherto of the difference of thankfulness to God and to men, in respect of
the nature and definition of thankfulness it self; whereinto the evil
effects or fruits of excessive thanks have crept, and as it were stolen in,
before we were ware of it.

It follows now, that we do further search out the difference, from the good
fruits which arise from well ordered thankfulness, both unto God and also
unto men. First therefore, the fruit of our thankfulness to God, in
experience of his most provident and fatherly care over us, is so to
acknowledge him to be our God, and the sovereign fountain of our whole
welfare, that we do wholly put our trust in him, and depend upon him, as one
not only to be honored in the means, which it pleases him to use for our
benefit, but also above all ordinary means and helps yea contrary to all
adversary and hurtful means, if need so require. And for the same cause
also, that in all our needs we run to him by faithful prayer and
supplication, as to our neuer-failing refuge: and accordingly, to seek to
approve our selves, even from the secrets of our souls and consciences before
him, according to the direction of his own most holy and perfect commandment;
we never satisfying our selves with that measure of thanks, which we shall at
any time for the present attain unto. But the fruit of our thankfulness to
men is not so, but with the reverent acknowledgment of them to be the gracious
and honorable instruments of God, in all that they exhibit and reach forth
unto us, we are only to perform these duties following.

First, that so long as they live, we do continue our hearty prayers to God for
them. Benefactors are to be prayed for.


Secondly, that we, retaining a blessed memory of them, do also, upon all
meet occasions, make honorable mention of them, and of their beneficence so
long as we live our selves.

Thirdly, that we be willing and desirous to recompense them to our power,
either in whole or in part, to them or theirs: yea even to exceed the benefit
received, if at any time it shall please God to make us able, and to give us
just occasion thereunto.

Finally, that for want of occasions, or necessity on their parts that way,
that we having received beneficence from the hands of other, do learn from
their example, to be as beneficial to others as we may.

Of these duties therefore, let us henceforth treat a little for our further
instruction: seeing these also are to be reckened among the duties which belong
to the Christian receiving of a Gift; and is our matter in hand, still
depending to be be further inquired of.

And first, concerning Prayer, the debt and conscience of this duty arises
from hence, that how rich souer they may be, and abounding in all worldly
wealth, they do nevertheless stand in continual need of the daily blessing
of God; the Factor whereof, as it were, faithful and fervent or laborious
prayer is, and that by assignement and letters of mart from God himself. But
what shall we entreat of the Lord in our prayers? and what may be the
merchandise, that our prayers are to procure for our benefactors? verily the
best commodities above all other: namely, that it may please God to increase
and multiply upon them all spiritual graces and blessings in Christ Jesus;
that their souls especially may fare well, so long as they live here, and for
ever in the life to come. For thus does the Apostle John teach us by his own
practice and example, who left in holy record, what prayer he made for Gaius, a
very beneficial and friendly Host, to all the Christians that resorted to him
for succor in his time. Behold (says Saint John in his third Epistle) I wish
chiefly that thou may prosper, and farewell as thy soul prospers. The
Apostle John prays for Gaius, that he might still, more and more prosper in
all grace and godliness, according to his happy beginnings, and proceedings
also even to the time that he wrote unto him. Likewise, Saint Paul, Philip. chapter
4.17. prays for the Christians of that Church, who had been beneficialll unto
him; that their gift bestowed upon him, might further their reckening with the
Lord. And 2. Tim. 1.16.17.18. he prays in like manner for his very good and
beneficial friend Onesiphorus, and for his Christian family, in the Church of
God at Ephesus. The Lord (says Paul in that chapter) give mercy unto the
house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me etc. The Lord grant unto him
that he may find mercy with the Lord at that day. And if we would have a more
familiar example, I mean one of the more common sort of thankful persons, we
may take Naomi, in the book of Ruth. chapter 2.20. who blesses Boaz, for his
singular kindness to her poor daughter in law, a stranger in Israel. Blessed
be he of the Lord (says Naomi) for he cease not to do good to the living
and to the dead. Her meaning is to note his constancy in doing good, as well
now, as in former times, to those that he has suruiued: and namely (as it may
be thought) to her own husband, and her two sons, before they went down
into Moab, where they died. So then, in her prayer to God, she bewraieth her
thankful heart to Boaz, both in respect of her self, and daughter in law now;
and also in remembrance of his former goodness to her husband, and her own
children deceased.

Neither are such as be any way succored and relieved, to pray only for
Christian benefactors, but also even for heathen and unbelieving men, by whom
they receive benefit: according as King Darius requires it, as a gratulatorie
fruit of his royal beneficence and bounty to the people of God; that they
would pray for the Kings life, and for his sons, Ezra 6.10. Yea, the Jews
while they were in Babylon, though they had small favor showed them, yet
because there they were suffered to live, the Lord commands them to pray for
the peace of the land, because in the peace thereof, they themselves were to
have their peace. Ier. 29.7. Much rather then ought we to pray for Christian
Princes, who are more tender foster-fathers and nursing mothers to the Church
of Christ: and for all other faithful Christians, who do with more sanctified
hearts, and more dear love communicate their good things to their brethren. And
in this respect, it may be accounted a very commendable endeavor of those
Jews, of who^ we read, Luke 7.4.5. in that they furthered, as much as they
could, the suit which the Centurion of Capernaum made to our S. Christ
concerning his sick son rhey testifying and alleging, that he was a friend to
their nation, and had built a Synagogue for the worship of God amongst the^.
Finally, in so much as they which give, or be the distributers of the holy
benefice^ce of others, ought to pray that the same may be well accepted, and so
blessed of God, that it may encourage his servants to cleave constantly unto
him, without any discouragement or fainting in their affliction or wants; in so
much as thereby they may perceive that the Lord has a tender watch over their
necessities: for so does the Apostle Paul pray himself, yea and desires the
prayers of the Christian Romans also, that his service in this behalf might
be well accepted among the Christians at Jerusalem. Romans chap. 15.31. Much more
therefore ought they that receive the benefit, pray for those by whom they are
benefited, that it would please God to give them much joy and comfort, with
manifold recompense for their Christian contribution. And thus prayer to God
for Benefactors is the first principal fruit and duty of Christian and bounden
thankfulness unto them.

A second fruit (as was said) is, that we retaining a thankful memorial of
their beneficence, do upon all meet occasion, make honorable mention of them.
For seeing the Lord says, Benefactors are to be well reported of.
that the memorial of the just shall be blessed. Prou. 10.7. By whom shall
this be performed, rather then by such, as have most plentifully tasted of the
fruit and benefit of their righteousness? And seeing God himself has gone
before us, in solemnizing the memorial of many just and merciful men, in his
holy Scriptures, as we may remember from the former catalogue of them; and so
has made the memorial of them blessed: according to that which our Savior
Christ says of that good woman, who poured her costy ointement upon him, that
wheresoever his Gospel should be preached throughout all the world, there also
should this be spoken of, for a memorial of her. Matthew. 26.13. We may justly
from hence inform our selves of our duty herein. And the rather because in the
remembrance of the beneficence of our good patrons and friends, we may the
better put our selves in mind both of Gods bounteous goodness to us, and also
of our most bounden thankfulness to him for the same. Finally, this
thankful memorial, may be a means of stirring up others, to the practice of
the same virtue, which they shall perceive, to be so acceptable, both to God,
and also to all good men. Let this suffice for a Memorandum of this second
fruit of thankfulness.

The third fruit is, that though we be not able, yet that we have a willing
and settled purpose, to make recompense, yea and to perform it indeed with
advantage, if at any time the need of our benefactors or the need of any of
theirs shall so require, and God make us able so to do. He that has friends
(says the holy Proverb, chapter 18.24.) ought to show himself friendly: for a
friend is nearer then a brother.

In the 21. chapter of Genesis ver. 22.23. etc. Abraham judges the request of the
King of Gerar equal in this respect; in that he says: God is with thee, in all
that thou do. Now therefore swear unto me here by God (says Abimelech and
Phicol his chief captain) that thou will not hurt me, nor my children, nor my
childrens children: thou shall deal with me, and with the country where thou
have been a stranger, Benefactors are to be recompensed.
according to the kindness which I have showed thee. Then Abram said, I will
swear.

And in this respect also, is King Saul commended, as having done that which
was equal and right, in favoring the Kenites, who were the posterity of
Iethro, the father in law of Moses, because more then three hundredth years
before, Iethro had dealt mercifully toward the Israelites, at what time they
came out of Egypt. Go (says Saul to them, when at Gods commandment he made
expedition against the Amalekites, utterly to destroy them with the sword)
depart, and get ye down from the Amalekites, lest I destroy ye with them: for
ye showed mercy to all the children of Israel. When they came up from Egypt.
Upon which friendly watchword of the king, the Kenites separated themselves
from the Amalekites, and were preserved. This was one of those few good
things which K. Saul did; though in truth, because of his false heart, he
neither did this, nor any good thing else very well.

Let us therefore from him proceed to the more worthy example of King David, a
king of the Lords making, not so much a successor of wicked Saul, as the
Ancestor and predecessor of all the holy kings of Judah and Israel: who did
not only many good things; but also, by reason that God gave him an upright
heart, he did them singularly well.

And first of all, let us call to mind, what he did in remembrance of the
kindness of Jonathan, though Jonathan was then dead. The story is reported in
the second book of Samuel chap. 9.1. etc. in this wise: And David said, is
there yet any man left of the house of Saul, that I may show him mercy for
Ionathans sake? Now (as the holy Text says) there was of the household of
Saul, a servant, whose name was Ziba, and when they had called him unto David
(for it appears that the king was earnest in the matter) he said to him, Art
thou Ziba? And he said, I thy servant am he. Then the King said, remains
there yet none of the house of Saul, on whom I may show the mercy of God?
(that is to use a few words of interpretation, the mercy which I stand bound
to show, for my oaths sake made to my faithful friend Jonathan; even singular
kindness and mercy, such as God streightlie requires, and very graciously
esteems, according to that he says (specially concerning such causes as this
is) I will have mercy and not sacrifice). Ziba then answered the King,
Jonathan has yet a son lame of his feet. Then the King said unto him, where
is he. etc. Who when he came to the King, he said unto him, fear not, for I
will surely show thee kindness for Jonathan thy fathers sake, and I will
restore thee all the fields of Saul thy father, and thou shall eat bread at
my table continually. And as it follows in the 10. verse of the chapter, King
David gave Ziba charge, that he and his sons and servants (whereof Ziba had
to the number of five and thirty, that is fifteen sons, and twenty
servants) that they should till the land, to the use and profit of
Mephibosheth, his Master Saules son.

I have set this down the more at large, because it contains an excellent
pattern, of the most kind and holy recompense and retribution, which King
David made to the son of the father deceased. Wherein let us note, and with
the annotation, let us remember, as occasion may require, to imitate this so
memorable and worthy example, of a most godly King, so far as any of us
shall be able to approach near unto him, in these four virtues following.

First, in the care of seeking out the occasion, when it is not brought and
presented unto us.

Secondly, in cheerfulness, when the occasion is found out.

Thirdly, in loving and courteous dealing with the party, who is to receive
the benefit.

Fourthly, in the bounteous performance of the liberality intended.

Yea, and let us add to these, a fifth virtue; that this, the constancy of
King David's kindness, whereof we have a further testimony, in the 12. chap.
of the same 2. book of Samuel, where he excepteth and preserves Mephibosheth,
from that execution, which was done upon the sons of Saul, at the request of
the Gibeonites, even as God himself also would have it, for a revenge of
Saules cruelty against the Gibeonites, contrary to the oath, which Joshua and
the people made to them, for the security of their lives among them. For King
David delivering seven of the sons of Saul, to be executed by the Gibeonites
in way of pacification: it is written, that he had compassion on Mephibosheth,
the son of Jonathan, the son Saul; because of the Lords oath, which was
between them, even between David and Jonathan the Son of Saul.

But (which is yet more) King David was not only mindful to requite kindness
in his life time; but he is careful also, that kindness should not die with
him. And therefore, 2. King. 2.7. he on his death bed charge his son
Solomon who was to succeed in his kingdom, that he should show kindness to
the sons of Barzilla^ the Gileadite, and that he should let them be among
such as should eat bread at his table: for (says King David) they came to me,
when I fled from Absalom thy brother. As though he should say to his son
Solomon, according to Salomons own holy Proverb, chap. 27.10. Thine own
friend, and thy fathers friend, see thou forsake not. etc.

Now that Barzillai and his sons came thus to David; we may read it testified
in the holy story, 2. Sam. 19.31. etc. where also, it is recorded, how
thankful K. David was to Berzillai himself, and would presently have
requited the kindness of that duty, which of bounden duty, Barzillai was to
perform unto him. Nevertheless, because it was done in kindness, and in time
of need; king David was ready to have requited it by and by, as it were into
his bosom. Come with me (says he to Barzillai) and I will feed thee with me
in Heirusalem. The which his offer when Barzillai refused, by reason of his
age, alleging that he was unfit to live a courtiers life: K. David takes with
him his son Chimham, and dismisseth Barzillai, according to his own liking,
and promises him all princely favor and friendship, that might stand him in
any steed. And yet not satisfying himself with all this, he is careful (as
was said before) to prosecute the recompense even after his death, to Barzillai
his children and posterity. Great therefore was the virtue of King David in
this noble point of retributorie kindness and beneficence.

And we will yet the rather say so, if we shall consider that which is
furthermore recorded of him; how he had not only this kind of regard toward
all his friends, of the people of God, as 1. Sam. chap. 30.26.27.28.29.30.31.
but even toward strangers also, yea even to such, as in common account, were
no better then enemies. Nevertheless, he would not forget the kindness, which
any showed unto him, in any time of his need. And therefore, as we read, 2
Samuel. chap. 10.1.2. After that the King of the Ammonits was dead, and Hanun
his son reigned in his steed: I will show kindness (says King David) unto
Hanun the son of Naash, as his father showed kindness unto me. And therefore
he sent Ambassadors to comfort Hanun for his father.

Finally, the praise of King David's beneficial mind shall live, as long as
there shall be any memorial of the death and burial of King Saul and Jonathan
his son: for beside his mourning for their death, although Saul for his part
had dealt very hardly against David: he rejoiced greatly, when it was told
him, that whereas the Philistines had hanged their bodies upon the wall of
Bethshan, the men of Iabesh Gilead had taken them down, and honorably buried
them: Blessed are ye of the Lord (says he to the men of Iabesh Gilead) that ye
have showed such kindness to your Lord Saul, in that you have buried him.
Therefore now the Lord show mercy and truth to you: and I will recompense you
this benifite, because ye have done this thing. 2. Sam. 2.5.6.

As touching the kindness and beneficence of K. David, toward the worship of
God, and his houe, as a fruit of his thankefulnes to him, I omit to speak
here, because, that has been declared at large, in the former part of the
Treatise, where the virtues required to this duty have been laid forth: and
wherein as we may remember king David was an admirable mirror to us all.
Worthy therefore is he to be looked upon of all, as a singular pattern, in
all kind of beneficence; but specially of Christian Kings and Princes, who by
the grace and bounty of God upon them, in their royal estate, may come nearer
to him, in their rich and plenteous beneficence, then any of inferior degree
can do.

But let us (desiring God, the God of all grace, to replenish the hearts of
all Christian Kings and Princes, with that measure of bounty, which is
beseeming their high places, even from his infinite bountifulness) let us (I
say) return with Barzillai, to walk answereable to our own more mean estate
and condition. This is once for all a certain truth, that whosoever receive
beneficence, they are made thereby (as they speak) Beneficiarij, that is,
debtors standing bound to perform all good duty to their benefoctors: and
namely to that duty, which the learned do likewise express, ANTIPELARGIA, a
mutual and interchangeable recompense of a good turn or benefit.
by the greek word Antipelargie borrowed from the name and natural
prosperity, which they write to be in the young Storke, which feeds the damme
when she is old, and stands in need of help. In respect of which property
of the Storke (whereof mention is made Ier. chapter 8.7. Even the Storke in the
air knows her appointed time etc.) it seems, that in the Hebrewe language,
she is called Chasidah of Chesedh which signifies goodness, mercifulness, or a
grateful affection etc. And there is good reason, as has been observed
before; that seeing liberal Benefactors take upon them the affection and
office of Parents; they should have the duty of children returned to them
again, from such as enjoy the fruit of so parentlike an affection.

The equity of this compensation or recompense making, is plainly pointed at
by the Apostle Paul, 2. Cor. chapter 8. verses 13.14. in that, after many other
reasons, alleged to move them to liberality, toward the poor Christians of
Jerusalem; he adds this, which now we speak of, in these words. Neither is
it (says he) that other men should be eased and you grieved. But upon like
condition, at this time your abundance supplieth their lack, that also their
abundance may be for your lack, that there may be equality. As it is
written, (to wit, concerning the Israelites manner of gathering Manna
described, Exodus chapter 16. verses 16.17.18.) He that gathered much, had nothing
over, and he that gathered little, had not the less.

But may not the recompense be made otherwise then in the same kind? If we
had time and authority, here to appoint an Act, and that it might be
philosophicallie disputed and determined; I would desire no better moderator,
then wise Seneca, who in his 3. book De Beneficijs, from the 29. chapter to the
end of the book, very wittily handles this question: Whether children may
not bestow as great benefits upon their Parents, as they have received of
them. And he brings many instances, how near at the least, they may
attain unto it; if not in some cases exceed them. His purpose in this his
disputation, is to very good end, namely to provoke, and encourage or whet
on children hereby, to strive unto all good duty and thankfulness to their
Parents, as to their chief benefactors. Read him as a heathen writer, and (as
Erasmus well judges) thou will say he writes in this, as in diverse other
points, as a Christian Philosopher; howsoever in other things he bewrays
himself to be a Pagan or heathen man. His excellent purpose in this his
delightful and witty disputation, may appear by his determination of the
Question: some of the words whereof I will here, with the good leave (as I
trust) of the Christian Reader, briefly and concisely set down.

These things (says he, speaking of his former discourse, how children may
equal their Parents beneficence, etc.) they do not take away reverence from
Parents, or make their children less dutiful to them, but much better, etc.
Dutiful affection, or godly disposition, will be so much the more chearely, if
in this strife of making recompense, it may set upon it with hope of victory,
etc. And if we do not in this matter think thus, we shall give liberty to
children, and make them sluggish herein, when as we ought to spur them forward,
and to say: Go to, ye well disposed youths, there is an honest controversy
set on foot, betwixt parents and children, whether have bestowed or received
greater benefits. Surely they have not gotten the victory, because they have
made the first challenge: or be on the forehand. Only take ye such courage as
is meet, and faint ye not, that ye may prevail according to your desire. Ye
are not without Captains or leaders in this so godly a fight, who stir you
up to the like enterprises with them, and bid ye march on in their footsteps,
to obtain the victory oftentimes already won from parents. This is in the 36.
chap. And chap. 38. This is the English of his words. No force of words, no
power of wit can express how great a work this is, how commendable, and how
worthy that it should never slip out of the remembrance of men, for any to be
able to say thus: I have been obedient to my Parents, I have submitted my self
to their government, etc. In this one thing have I been stubborn, that I
would not be behind in benefits. I beseech ye therefore to strive stoutly, and
though ye be put to the worse, come again a fresh in battle array: They are
happy who get the victory, they are happy also who are overcome. What young
man is more noble, then he that can say to himself (for to another he may in
no wise speak it) I have vanquished my father by benefits? Who is more
happy, then such an ancient man, who has just cause to tell it, whithersoeuer
he comes, that his son has been more beneficial or done more for him,
then he has done for his son? And what is a more blessed thing, then for a
man to overcome himself? Thus we see how the Philosopher disputes, and how he
determines the question of recompense, betwixt the child and the father. And
he has spoken as much, and to as good purpose, as any of the Philosophers
have spoken in this point. The which also, I have been bold, thus far forth
to set down, hoping that it may be considered with some good profit by
Christians, though from the pen of a heathen man.

But because we have a more certain and sure rule to go by, both in this
particulare, and generally concerning the doctrine of recompense in all cases,
let us now answer the question demanded, from the most excellent and on lie
perfect the wisdom of God, out of holy Scriptures. I answer therefore, by a
concession and granting of the question, that a recompense (through the
blessing of God) may be some other ways then by benefits of the same kind
abundantly made; as for example, when for earthly blessings, any are made
partakers of spiritual graces and blessings, the which unequal co^mutation or
change of benefits, the Lord most usually works, by the hand and ministry
of such, to whom he has committed the preaching of his word and Gospel:
according as the Apostle Paul says, If we have ^owne unto you spiritual
things, is it a great thing if we reap your carnal things? 1. Cor. 9.11.
And again, in his epistle to Philemon, pleading with him for his unfaithful
and runne-away servant Onesimus, that he would upon his repentance, receive him
again for his sake: I will recompense it (says Paul) albeit I do not say
to thee, that thou owe to me even thine own self. Yea further Romans 15.27.
he treating about that great beneficence of many Churches, sent to the
Christians of Jerusalem, then in distress through the dearth; he is more bold
to tell the Christian Gentiles, that they are debtors unto the christian Jews,
even for the inestimable benefits sake of the Gospel, which came unto the
Gentiles from them: according as it is written: The law shall go forth of
Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Isai. 2. v. 3. And Ps. 110.2.
And therefore the Apostle concludes, that in so much as the Gentiles are made
partakers of the spiritual treasures of the Jews, their duty is also to
minister to them in carnal things. But this point has been more fully
handled before, from the beginning of the third chapter of the former part of
the Treatise. Let us therefore, leaving this point, have forward.

Verily Prayer it self, from the faithful and fervent heart of every true
Christian, though they be private persons, and no Ministers and Preachers of
the word; it is such an alms out of such a blessed treasury and storehouse,
that it easily counteruaileth the outward value of that external alms, which
the rich man takes out of his purse or coffer, yea though he open the stringes
of his purse wide, and stretch out his hand very liberally.

Nevertheless, the widest opening of the heart unto Prayer, must not shut out
the care of retribution, no not in the same kind, whereby any stand indebted,
or not in the like measure, if so there be need, and if God give ability to
cause the measure to be pressed down, and to run over, according to that
which was affirmed before. Neither must it shut out the care of benefiting the
posterity, of those which have been good unto us. And here also, for want of
a fitter place, let us consider from the example of the people of Israel, that
it is a duty of thankfulness, to honor special good men, with special
honor even after their death, Benefited men even thereby stand bound to be
beneficial.
in their burial: for so it is written of the people of Israel, to their
commendation, that they buried Iehoiada the high Priest, in the City of David
among the Kings, because he had done good in Israel, and toward God and his
house. 2 Chro. ch 24.16.

Now finally, as a help to this fruit of thankfulness, by care of making
recompense; it is necessary, that every man's heart be a faithful register of
all the kindness and beneficence, which he is made partaker of. Yea, and
because the memory of every one of us is less apt to remember what we owe,
then what we make reckening to be due unto us; it were requisite, that every
one should have some book of record, thereby to be helped, by the sight of
white and black (as they say) to call to mind, from a long repetition of the
years and times that are past, both from who^, and in what measure, we have
been succored, by the beneficence and merciful releife of this and that good
servant of our God. Whereunto well may that serve, which was observed in the
entrance of this treatise concerning the similitude which the Apostle alludeth
unto. Philip. 4.15.

We have been long in this third fruit of thankfulness. The fourth is this,
that for want of occasions to make recompense to benefactors; or for want of
necessity on their parts, or their childrens, that we learn from their
example, and by experience of Gods mercy by them, to be our selves the
instruments of God, to exercise as much goodness and mercy, as we may. And if
we be not able from the purse, yet by good counsel and holy instruction, by
faithful dealing, by that credit we have with others, by earnest suit for them
in good and honest causes, etc For there shall doubtless never want occasions
of beneficence, one way or other, to those that be beneficiallie and helpefully
minded. The poor (says our Savior Christ) shall be always with us. And so
long as sin is in the world; yea in the children of God, though not reigning,
and as long as the children of this world are violent and deceitful, to
oppress and deceive, specially the true servants and children of God; and as
long as the devil their arch-enemie, bears any swaie in the world, and
rules in the hearts of the wicked, to push them forward to malice and
persecute the true worshippers of God, of blind zeal to their own false
religion and superstition: Finally, so long as God himself sees it meet, yea
good and profitable for his children to be humbled, and that their faith and
patience should be exercised and tried (all which both will and shall be, so long
as this world lasts) even thus long therefore, will there be manifold
occasions, for the merciful (who for the time are rescued and spared of God)
to show all kind of mercy and goodness, to those that be in present
affliction. The which occasions al stand bound to take knowledge of, and to
tender and releive all afflicted ones to their power; whosoever will show
themselves kindly children of their heavenly father; specially (as was said in
the beginning) such as have had special experience of Gods mercy, in the
benefi^ence and goodness of many other toward them. As for those, that shall
not regard to do thus; they may see in the parable, of him that takes his
brother by the throat, for a hundredth pence, notwithstanding the king had
forgiven him a thousand talents; what shall be their portion, in the end. For the
king his master, hearing of the outrage, by such of the fellow-seruants, as
were sorrowful beholders of it; he calls him and says to him, O evil
servant I forgave thee all that debt, because thou praiedst me. Ought not
thou also to have had pity on thy fellow, even as I had pity on thee? So
his master was wroth, and delivered him to the iaylors, till he should pay all
that was due to him, Mat. 18.23.24. etc. Such shall be the lot of all unmerciful
and unthankful men; specially of such, as having received mercy themselves
do, in stead of mercy, exercise cruelty against others. But of this more in
the chapter following. Hitherto therefore of the four fruits of true
thankfulness for benefits received, in such order, as they were at the first
set down and mentioned.

Benefits must be used as encouragements to godliness.
Now beside all the former graces, it is yet further requisite and necessary,
according to the last clause of the Definition of the Christian Receiving of
beneficence; that every one, whosoever is a partaker thereof, should be
careful conscionably, and in the fear of God, to employ that which has been
Christianly given, to the same good and holy ends for the which it was given.
It has always been accounted a sin of infamous unfaithfulness, whether
toward the dead or the living, that any put in trust, should break the will and
appointment of either of them, when according to their lawful interest and
power, they have willed and disposed of any thing well. Verily, it is no less
sin, for the parties themselves who are benefited, to violate the godly will
and purpose, either of the one or the other, by abusing that which has been
bequethed or appointed unto them, either to nourish them in idleness, or to
embolden them to riotous and hurtful enterprises; when as their benefactors
intended thereby only to comfort and encourage them in the ways of godliness,
to the honor and praise of his name: they knowing that outward wants, specially
if they be great, are a great hinderance of the good proceedings of those that
be virtuously inclined. If all that we live by, had bin gotten by the sweat of
our own brows, yea and though by our diligence and industry we had obtained
great wealth and abundance; yet were we bound to use all that we enjoy, soberly
and thriftily, without stripe or wast, as they say. But much rather are we to
do so, if above our own care and travel, we be fed and maintained, either in
whole or in part, with so holy a provision, as is the contribution of those,
whom God honoreth with the name and title of his Saints. All the excess which
beseems those, that are thus provided, for it is their abounding in true and
hearty thankfulness unto God. Moreover and above all that thanks, which
belongs unto those, by whom God shows so great favor unto them. For this
is the chief and final end or scope of al liberality, and of all the comfort
and refreshing which it is accompanied withal even the honor, and praise, The
use of Benefits is to encourage to godliness.
and glory of our most gracious and merciful God. And thus the Apostle Paul
teaches us, and all Christians very notably in the latter part of the 9. chapter
of his 2. epist. to the Corinth. from the 11. verse to the end, he there making
this the last and most weighty reason of his exhortation, to the plentiful
practice of this excellent virtue of liberality: That (says he) on all parts
ye may be made rich unto all liberality, which causes through us (that is, by
our ministry) thanksgiving unto God. For hereunto does the Gospel, in the
ministration and preaching thereof, effectually provoke the hearts of the
relieved Christians. And then the Apostle proceeds, and adds to the former
words, these which follow: For the ministration of this service not only
supplyeth the necessities of the Saints, but also is abundant by the
thanksgiving of many unto God. Who (as the Apostle further says) by the
experince of this ministration, praise God for your voluntary submission to
the gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution to them and to all
men. And by their Prayer for you, desiring after you greatly, for the abundant
grace of God in you. Whereupon the Apostle himself, ravished as it were, with
the beauty of this grace, in the last verse of the chapter, breaks forth
into most hearty thanksegiuing, saying, Thanks therefore be unto God for his
unspeakable gift. The Apostle calls the exercise of Christian liberality and
benificence an unspeakable gift of God, because, as we had occasion to observe
before, it is not only in the use exceedingly precious, to stir up those that
are partakers of the sweet fruit thereof, to thanksgiving unto God: but also,
because unless God should by the mighty grace and power of the holy Ghost,
work this grace in the hearts of his children, they could not possibly get
that great victory against self-love, covetousness, distrust in Gods
providence, unmercifulness, yea, against the very power of the devil who
labors with all his might to hinder this work, which he sees to bring so
great glory to the Gospel; which victory notwithstanding must needs be
obtained, The final ^se of beneficence is the glory of God.
before any can be truly liberal and beneficial indeed. Thanks (therefore
may we worthily say with the holy Apostle) yea Thanks (again) be unto God for
his unspeakable gift. And God stir up the hearts of all relieved Christians,
both more and more to be thankful to his Majesty, and also to pray more
earnestly for his blessing upon all good instruments of his, whomsoever be
graceth with this so excellent a gift. Amen.

Thus far therefore, touching the virtues necessary to the right Christian
receiving of holy and Christian beneficence: which are, as we have seen,
Sobrietis of mind, Reverence Thankfulness, and as fruits thereof, Prayer to
God for such as be beneficial, Recompense, Good report, Beneficence to others,
and generally, a Godly and sober life, as a perpetual fruit of so gracious a
watering from the hand of God. Wherewithal we have likewise seen, which are
the contrary vices to be avoided in the same: that is to say, All hungry and
covetous lingering after gifts, or on the other side, a rude Refusal of them,
being freely offered, of a counterfeit or over bashful modesty, and much
more, All obstinate or disdainefull refusal: likewise, Light esteeming of the
liberality and contributions of the Saints of God: Unthankfulness also:
Furthermore, Read Act. 6.1. ^ians ^ng.
Envy against such, as any perceive to be more beneficially relieved, then
they think themselves to be: and finally, A loose and unchristian life,
without special regard of the right use and end of Christian beneficence. The
which sins, they are so heinous in the sight of God, that it cannot be but
his justice must needs take vengeance of them. To the declaration whereof we
have appointed the next Chapter, as it follows, for the conclusion and
shutting up of this whole Treatise.

CHAP. III. The greatness of the sin of unthankfulness.

Of the greatness of the sins, and of the like punishments of unthankful
and irreligious receiving and abusing of Christian Beneficence.

ALthough it be very true (as has been declared in the beginning of this
Treatise) that the nature of a gift requires, that it be very frank and free;
because otherwise, it is rather a mercenarie bribe, or as a secret snare to the
receiver, to indebt and entangle him to the care of some unjust requital, or
to hinder and stay him from the doing of some good duty, which a good
conscience would challenge at his hand. Nevertheless, he that receives the
most free gift, stands bound (as has been showed in the former Chapter) to
perform the best duty he can to the Giver; yea, by so much the more straight
bond of duty, does he stand bound by how much the heart of the Giver is more
free from expecting or desiring any the least recompense again.

The left hand of the Giver must not (as has further bin showed) know what the
right hand does, when he gives his alms, and shows mercy to any: that is,
it must be free from ostentation, and from every other sinister affection: but
not onley the right hand, but also a right heart of the Receiver must
faithfully skore up, and keep an advised register of all whatsoever he
receives.

It i^ worth^lie reckened for a virtue in the ^^^^ifull man, (...) forgets
what good he has already done, and labors still to do more and more good,
acknowledging himsel^^, as has been further alleged, that he is but an
unprofitable servant, accorcing to that of our Savior Christ. Luke. chapter 17.10.
And according to that which the the Apostle Paul professes, I forget that
which is behind; and endeavor my self to that which is before. Philip. 3.13.
Likewise the merciful man in the 25. of Matthew are described to say, Lord when
saw we thee hungry and fed thee. etc. But it is to be at counted a foul vice,
for him that receives a benefit, to forget it, or to make less reckening of
it then it deserves, yea, if he do not upon the sight of former
unthankfulness, labor to be the more thankful afterward.

If a man should have only the experience of Gods goodness and mercy, in
moving the hearts of men, to be favorable unto us, in a ciuell course, and in
external respects only, after the manner of worldly friend^ we could not but
think our selves to be bound to yield duty and thanks, both to God and to men
alike as Joseph acknowledged himself bound, to be faithful to his heathen
master, because he had showed him great kindness and favor, and to the Lord
God especially, who moved the heart of his master so to do. Genesis 39.8.9. But
when as God vouchsafes, to mo^e the hearts of his dear children, to show us
Christian kindness, and to bestow gifts upon us, for the love which they
bear us in the Lord, and for his sake: insomuch as the Lord himself does
thereby confirm his own love, which he bears us, as it were by more choice
and honorable witness: this ought more mightily to affect us, and in the
sweet consideration hereof our hearts ought to be enlarged, to yield forth the
most holy and excellent duties of thankfulness, both unto God, and to every
such one of his good servants, whom we may not doubt to be of the blessed
number of his elect children. For seeing that all unthankfulness and neglect
of duty, even to the unworthiest sort of benefactors, is sinful and
displeasing before God, and so consequently very justly subject to his
curse: much rather then, is that ingratitude and undutifulness, which is called
for, by so sweet and amiable an entreaty, as is that voice as it were, which
the holy and christian beneficence of the Saints of God, sounds in our
ears, condemned of God and all good men; and accordingly, shall be more
severely punished of God, unless those that thus heinouslie sin, prevent
the punishment, by timely repentance.

Ingratitude is very severely condemned by that natural light of reason,
which God has reserved in men: as may appear by the sayings of the heathen.
All men (says Cicero) hate such as be unmindful of the good turn, which
has been done unto them. And again, there is no evil wanting where
ingratitude takes place. Whereupon also, they have judged it worthy to be
punished by death. Why then has it not been so punished among them, may some
say? They themselves render the reason, because of the difficulties incide^t to
the proceeding, which would fall out in course of law against it. For the
number of unthankful persons (as they observed) is always infinite, so that
all courts would not suffice, to hear and determine the causes and actions,
that might this way be commenced. And further, say they, within what space of
time, should a man, neglecting duty, be arrested and attached as an
unthankful man? etc. Therefore (says Seneca speaking in the name of the rest)
we have condemned it, as worthy hatred, and we have left it among those
thinge^, which we commit to the revenge of God. Only (says he) the
Macedonians made ingratiude liable to an action, and to bear suit in law. And
it is observed, concerning Alexander the Macedonian King, and concerning Julius
Caesar, Emperor of Rome; that albeit the one did exceed in the bountifulness
of giving, the other in the clemency and favor of forgiving injuries: yet
neither would the one give, nor the other forgive unto such, as had before
showed themselves unthankful.

Now seeing heathen men are thus severe against this sin; it is less
marvel, though such writers, as have been enlightened and taught from the
holy word, and Scriptures of God, do so vehemently inueigh against it, as we
may read that they do. Ingratitude (says one) seems to me to be a most
grievous vice, an unworthy vice, suerlie, yea full of all indignity. And an
other: Detestable is the forgetfulness of grace and favor showed, and all
concealing of benefits bestowed. But that unthankfulness passes all (says a
third) which makes the good will of him that has deserved well, the occasion
of his unthankfulness. For as experience shows, some are so wicked, that
they delight to speak the worst of those that have deserved best of them. So
true is it, that an other says: It is more safe to offend some; then to
deserve well at their hand. More safe (I say) for the avoiding of their ill
tongue; in so much as they seek to make proof by their hateful dealing that
they are nothing beholding to a man.

But leaving all other writers, let us come to the holy Scriptures themselves;
and from them, learn what judgment the Lord God (who in all things judges
most righteous judgment) has of this sin; and consequently, what
punishment he has awarded against the fame.

And first, let us begin with unthankfulness to his own most bounteous and
divine majesty; seeing unthankfulness to God, is the root of all unthankfulness
to men. And again, unthankfulness to good men, redoundeth from man upon God
himself, whose work only, both the work, and also all affection and
disposition of the heart of man to goodness and mercy is. For, seeing (as our
Savior Christ affirms) None is good save one, which is God: Matthew. 19.17. it
must needs follow, that who soever has any sparkle of true goodness, or
inclination to goodness in him, he has received it, as a grace from the good
spirit of God. Wherefore, I do willingly suppose, that how soever it may seem
not so properly pertinent to this Treatise, to speak of vnthanfulnes to God:
that yet I shall not perform altogether a thanklesse office to begin
herewithall, and so proceed to that unthankfulness which is in man toward
man.

First, therefore to lay forth the haynousnesse of the sin of unthankfulness
to God, the only fountain of goodness, that one place in the first chapter
of Paul's Epistle to the Romans, verses 21.22.23. may abundantly suffice. The
Gentiles (says the holy Apostle) are left without excuse: Because that when
they knew God they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but
became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of
darkness. When they professed themselves to be wise they became fools. For
they turned the glory of the incorruptible God into the similitude of the
image of corruptible man, and of birds, and of four footed beasts, and of
creeping things, etc. Behold here, what a great palpable darkness follows
upon the putting out of the light of knowledge, by miserable unthankfulness:
and also what a flood of wickedness breaks in, by the pulling up of this
sluice as it were. For no doubt, if the Gentiles had been thankful to God, in
any measure of truth, as they ought to have been, considering the Lord left not
himself without witness among them, as the same Apostle testified, Act. 14.
verse 17. in that he did good, and gave them rain from heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling their hearts with joy and gladness: they had surely
prevented all that extremity and outrage of iniquity, which for want hereof
they fell into.

The same thing does the same Apostle give again to understand, in his Epistle
to the Ephesians, chap. 5. verse 4. in that he opposes it unto many sins:
that is, to fornication, and all uncleanness, and covetousness, and
filthiness, and foolish talking, and jesting, all which (as the Apostle tells
christians) are things not comely: in that (I say) to all these vices, he
opposes this one singular virtue of Thanksgiving. As though he should say,
this ought to be as a strong bar against all them; whereas on the contrary,
if thankfulness to God be wanting, and no due consideration had of his mercies;
the door is set wide open unto them.

Not without great cause therefore does the Lord by his holy Prophet Isaiah,
chap. 1. ver. 2.3. etc. so vehemently reprove his people for their
unthankfulness unto him, Hear o heavens, and hearken o earth (says Isaiah)
for the Lord has said, I have nourished and brought up children, but they have
rebelled against me. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters
cribbe, but Isarael has not known, my people has not understood. Ah sinful
nation, a people laden with iniquity, etc. So then, we may easily perceive,
that this sin must needs be a heinous sin, which traitorously lets in so
huge an host of enemies to trouble heaven and earth as it were. What shall we
therefore make less of unthankfulness to God, then to be an utter tra^pling of
all Gods gracious benefits, blessings, and mercies under our feet? what shall
we make it less, then as a whirlepoole, or bottomless pit to sink, and
swallow up, and consume the blessings of God, to no good use, how infinitely
soever they be? Yea how can we make it less then to be a most contemptuous
lifting up of the heel against God himself, after the manner of the pampered
beast, which very mischieuously strikes his master, from whom he has all his
prouender? Deuteronomy. 32.13. etc. He that should have been upright, when he waxed
fat spurned with his heel, etc. Finally, what can any man make less of it
then a most rebellious arming of men, even like Giants, to fight against God in
heaven, as it were with his own artillery and weapons, here upon earth?

The sin therefore being so heinous, how (think we) can it stand with the
perfect justice of God, that the punishment should not accordingly be very
sharp, The punishment of unthankfulness to God.
yea manifold and most grievous and heavy? And verily, so it was upon all
Israel, as follows in that first chapter of the prophecy of Isaiah. For in
respect of the sundry and great plagues, which fell upon them for the same
their unthankfulness to God; they are compared, as it were to some
spittle-house man, who has no part sound in him. For (as the Prophet frames
his description of their pitiful estate) From the soale of the foot unto the
head there was nothing whole, but wounds, and swelling, and sores full of
corruption: and that also without wrapping and binding up, and without
mollifying with oil. etc. Read also Psalm. 78. and Psalm. 106. The Apostle Paul
also, in that his first chapter of the epist. to the Romans alleged before,
shows how horribly the Gentiles were punished for their unthankfulness, he
writing thus of them, from the 24. verse of the chapter. Wherefore also (says
the Apostle) God gave them up to their hearts lusts, unto uncleanness, to
defile their own bodies between themselves, etc. And ver. 28. he opens the
cause of it. For (says he) as they regarded not to know God, even so God
delivered them up into a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not
convenient. They being full of all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousnes, etc. This verily is a most grievous punishment, when
one sin of the wicked is punished with another: that is, when they are given
over from sin to sin, howsoever the burden of this punishment, which makes
way to all plague and punishment, is not discerned of the wicked. The Apostle
therefore adds further, chap. 2. verse. 4.5. They that despise the riches of
Gods bountifulness, and patience, and long sufferance, not knowing (that is,
not regarding to know or consider) that the bountifulness of God leads to
repentance: They do after the hardness of their hearts, that cannot repent,
heap up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration
of the just judgment of God, who will reward every one according to his works,
etc. So likewise in the former place of the Epist. to the Ephesians: For such
things (that is, for such vices as break forth and bear swaie among the
wicked, for want of thankfulness to God, as the Apostle had rehearsed in the
words going before) the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience.
Unthankfulness it self, in that it is a neglect of duty to God, is a great
sin; and that which God punishes sharply, in his own children, like as we
read of King Hezekiah, that good king, that wrath came upon him from the Lord,
because he did not render to the Lord, according to the reward bestowed upon
him, 2. Chron. 32.24.25.26. Howbeit, insomuch as Hezekiah being reproved, did
humble himself, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, therefore they
prevented the extremity of Gods wrath, so as it fell not upon them in the
days of Hezekiah. Now therefore, seeing the Lord cannot spare this sin, when
it is found with neglect of duty, in his best servants for a time: how should
he not punish it in the wicked, in whom unthankfulness is accompained with a
black guard of all kind of foul vices, and abominable sins beside? May it not
be justly said to the shame of all such, as Moses spoke to the unthankful
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye so reward the Lord, o ye foolish people and
unwise. Is not he thy father that has bought thee? he has made thee, and
porportioned thee, etc. And if for all this, they that be unthankful, will be
unthankful still, notwithstanding all the infinite mercies of God revealed
upon us, specially now in the days of the Gospel, both earthly and heavenly
mercies for body and soul, for this life and for ever, upon our selves and all
ours: which ought to inflame our hearts, to power forth perpetual praises and
thanks, to the glory of his most blessed name, may we not justly say further,
as Moses spoke to the people? The fire shall kindle in Gods wrath, and burn to
the bottom of hell, and consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire
the foundations of the mountains. The Lord will send plagues upon them, and
bestow his arrows upon them. They shall be burnt with hunger, and consumed
with heat and bitter destruction. And may not the Lord himself, as it is
written, Psalm. 107. turn a fruitful land into barrenesse, for the wickedness of
the^ that dwell therein? Yea may he not justly take away the hedge of his
vineyard, and break down the wall thereof, when in steed of sweet grapes, it
brings forth those that be sower and wild? That is, when there is oppression
in steed of judgment, and crying out in steed of righteousness. Isa. 5.5, etc.
For seeing unthankfulness, as has been declared, is both the breeder, and also
the nourisher of all sin, carrying all sin, as it were, in the womb of it, like
to those most il-fauoured and lean kine, which did eat up as many well liking
and fat kine, but when they had eaten them up, were still as lean and
ill-fauoured as at the beginning: of the which we read, Genesis 41 19.20.21. Well
therefore may the fullness and perfection of all wrath and punishment be cast
upon all such gurmandizing Cormorants, who consuming Gods blessings, yield no
fruits of thankfulness unto him, but remain continually lean, barren, and
blasted that way. The hope of the unthankful shall melt away as the winter
ye, and flow away as unprofitable waters. Wisdom. 16.29.

And great reason, why unthankfulness to God should be so heinous in his
sight; and why also he should punish it so severely, partly here, but more
fully after this life ended: not only for the causes already alleged, but for
many other, as first, for that God does in vain so often and so earnestly put
such unthankful ones in mind of their duty herein, as Ps. 50.14. Offer unto God
praise. And Ephesians. 5.20. Give thanks always for all things unto God even the
Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Likewise Philip. 4.6. Col. 4.2.
1. These. 5.18. and in many other places.

Secondly, because that which is in all equity a most due debt, is most
unjustly denied and withheld from him, as 2. These. 1.3. We ought to thank God
always, as is meet, etc. and chapter 2.13. We ought to give thanks always to God
for you, brethren, etc. And if for others, the^ also much rather for Gods love
and favor, and all the fruits thereof toward our selves. And Ps. 29.2. Give to
the Lord the glory due to his name.

Reasons of the punishment.
Thirdly, because thankfulness is a special good duty, wherewith the Lord is
singularly well pleased. as Psalm. 92.1.2. It is a good thing to praise the
Lord, etc. And Psalm. 69.30.31. I will praise the name of God with a song, and
magnify him with thanksgiving. The which shall please the Lord better then to
offer a young bullock that has horns and hoofes.

Fourthly, because it is as the singular ornament of our own profession of
Gods holy worship, as Psalm. 33.1. Rejoice in the Lord, o ye righteous: for it
becomes upright men to be thankful. And Psalm. 135.3. Praise ye the Lord,
for the Lord is good: sing praises to his name, for it is a comely thing. And
Psalm. 147.1. Praise ye the Lord, for it is good to sing unto our God: for it is
a pleasant thing, and praise is comely.

Fifthly, because by our thankfulness, we make special profession of our
faith: and give the greatest glory, we can yield unto him, in the
acknowledgement of his providence, and of his truth, in the performance of his
promises, etc. as Psalm. 66.1.2. etc. Rejoice in the Lord ye inhabitants of the
earth. Sing forth the glory of his name: make his praise glorious. And Psalm.
96.8. Give unto the Lord the glory of his name. And Psalm. 50.23, He that
offers praise glorifieth me: says the Lord himself.

But on the contrary, all unthankful persons dishonor God, they justly
displease him: they disgrace themselves: they show themselves void of faith:
they tread under foot the commandment of God, etc.

Thus much of the sin of unthankfulness to God, how hanious it is in his
own nature, and in the sight of God; and accordingly, how greuious the
punishment is, which in the justice of God, belongs unto it. It follows,
that we consider likewise, of unthankfulness to men, both how greuious the
sin is, and also who severely God will punish it, according to the
testimonies of his holy Scriptures, as was propounded and determined before.

Concerning the greatness of the sin of unthankfulness, betwixt man and
man, that place of holy Scripture, 2. Tim. 3.1. among sundry other places, The
greatness of the sin of unthankfulness to men.
may justly be one; where the Apostle rehearses it among those heinous and
noisome sins, by the abounding whereof, the times should grow very
perilous in the last days. For men (says the Apostle Paul) shall be lovers
of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient
to parents, unthankful, etc. unthankfulness therefore, being one special
sin, Whereby the times will grow perilous, or grievous and tedious, yea
even to good and merciful men, while they shall see all beneficence trodden
under foot and perverted, by the which, they would gladly draw many to the
love and obedience of the Gospel of God: it can not be less esteemed, then
for a very heinous sin. And the rather also, because not only the
beneficence of other good Christians, cannot prevail to draw them to the love
of godliness; but even the beneficence and all reverence which is due to
Parents, is easily despised of unthankful persons. For if children shall
despise their Parents, and all that they have done for them, in the care and
cost of their education: whom then will they regard? To whom can they be
ingenuouslie thankful?

And therefore is it also, that in his divine wisdom, our S. Christ does so
vehemently inueigh, and cry out against the Pharisees, who by their blind and
covetous traditions, hindered the thankefulnes, and remuneration and
recompense, which children owe to their poor Parents; they thereby making the
law of God (namely, the fifth commandment, Honor thy father and thy mother)
of no authority as our Savior charge them Mat. 15.3.4.5. etc. And John chapter
10.31.32. and before that, chapter 8.44. he conuicteth many of the Jews, to be
the children of the Devil, and not of God; because they went about to stone
him, who had wrought many good works among them. And verily, infinite was the
goodness, and mercy, and beneficence, which our Savior Christ wrought, above
all other men, that ever were, both to the souls and also to the bodies, of an
infinite number of men, while he was in his humanity here upon the earth;
though indeed, he distributed no great sums of money among them. And yet
behold, al was not able to subdue this fury of unthankfulness, which had
bereaved them of all dutiful regard of his good works wrought among them. See
therefore the strange nature of this sin, which where it takes place,
breeds the greatest trouble and disquietment, yea the greatest malice and
outrage that may be; further then it is curbed and restrained by the almighty
power of God, which only is able to suppress the fury of the wicked.

Here therefore, we are again to observe, that albeit unthankfulness to men,
did rest only in the neglect of the duty of thanks; yet were it to be
condemned much more among Christians, then among the heathen, whose great
hatred against it, we have seen testified before. And so we find it noted, to
the reproof of Pharaohs butler, Genesis chapter 40.23. because he did so long forget
Joseph, who had been so great a comfort to him, while he remained in prison
with him; yea, because he forgot him, although Joseph had entreated the Butler
to show him mercy, and to be a means to Pharaoh that he might be delivered
out of his unjust imprisonment. But we see that unthankfulness to men goes
not alone, likewise as we saw before, that unthankfulness to God, goes not
without an unruly train. And therefore also, it makes it self so much the
more heinous and troublesome or grievous, as the other has showed it self to
be. Whereupon, let this now be noted, for a grave and weighty admonition to
all, that so soon as the heart cease to be thankful, for benefits received
of good and merciful men, so soon does it begin to grow hurtful and
pernicious against men.

The which admonition, that it may the rather take place with us, let us
consider of the warnings which the holy Scriptures of God give us, against this
most wicked practice, both by precept, and by the discovery and rebuke of
those, that have wickedly practiced the same. And so will we come to the
punishment of this sin.

For Precept of admonition against it, we may well call to mind, that which the
Apostle sets down, Romans chapter 12.17. etc. and 1. These. 5 15. where the holy
Apostle according to the instruction of our Savior Christ, Matthew. 5 44.
charge all Christians, to be so far from recompensing good with evil, that
they should not recompense one evil turn with another; but contrariwise, that
they should overcome evil with goodness.

But that it does not seldom fall out otherwise, it may appear by the
complaints of the servants of God, against examples of contrary evil practice,
and also by common experience.

Of these evil examples of most unthankful practice, we have the special
complaints of Job, David, and the prophet Jeremy. Of Jobs complaint we read in
the beginning of the 30. chap. of his book. For after that he had protested
his kind and merciful course of life, all the time of his prosperity, as has
been alleged in the first part of this Treatise, out of the 29. chapter he
breaks into this speech: But now (says he) they that are younger then I,
mock me: yea they, whose fathers I might have despised to set with the dogs
of my flock, that is, to give them a place among my poor shepherds and other
heardmen, to have part of that which they cast to their dogs, etc. And then
it follows, verse. 9. etc. Now I am their song, and I am their talk. They
abhor me, and fly far from me, and spare not to spit in my face. Because
that God has loosed my coard, and humbled me, they have loosed the bridle
before me, etc. This is the complaint of Job.

The complaint of David is set down in diverse places. Namely, Psalm. 7.4. where
he says, he was vexed without cause of him whom he had delivered. And Psalm,
35.12. They reward me evil for good, to have spoiled my soul. He had not
only one such a principal adversary, and as it were a ringleader or captain,
but he had many other, that joined with that chief adversary against him,
though they had no more just cause to do so, then their leader had. And Psalm.
38.20. They also that reward evil for good are mine adversaries, because I
follow goodness. And Psalm. 109.4.5. For my friendship they were mine
adversaries, but I gave my self to prayer. And they have rewarded me evil
for good, and hatred for my friendship. And Psalm. 120.7. I seek peace, but
when I speak thereof, they are bent to war. Hitherto of the complaint of
David.

Now, how the Prophet Jeremy complains against the same kind of most
unthankful men, we read in his prophecy, chap. 18.20. And he puts up his
complaint to God, appealing from such unequal adversaries to the most
righteous Judge. Shall evil be recompensed for good, says the Prophet? For
they have dug a pit for my soul: remember that I have stood before thee
to speak good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from them. Where it is
worthy to be marked, that Prayer is reckned for a singular benefit, to those
that are prayed for, even by the judgment of the Lords high court of heaven;
how lightly soever, they through their own wickedness, esteem of it, and
frustrate the effect thereof. Such is the complaint of the Prophet Ierimiah.
Whereby, together with the former complaints of Job, and David (they all being
very good and merciful men) we may perceive what is the intolerable
unthankfulness of the children of this world, against the children and
servants of God, who do every way seek to procure the greatest and best good
they can unto them.

But what is all this, in comparisone of that unthankfulness of the Jews, to
our Savior Christ, mentioned before; who notwithstanding he was infinitely,
above all other, whether David or Ierimiah, or any other, or all, both
Prophets, Kings, and Priests, most tender in all compassion, and most bounteous
in the exercise of all goodness toward them, and all men: they were
nevertheless most ungrateful, yea most malicious and spiteful against him to
the death, as we saw from the 10. chap. of the Evangelist John: and as the
effect it self confirmed by experience, and most devilish practice in the end.

And touching experience, who is it, even to speak generally, that exercises
himself in doing good, whether to the bodies, and outward state of men, or to
their souls, and true welfare thereof, specially if they make that the end of
all their kindness, to draw them from sin to faith and obedience to God, as
all right good and godly men do. Who has not (I say) some uncomfortable
experience of unthankfulness, yea of bad requital, at the hands of those,
whose benefit and salvation they seek.

The good use now, both of experience, and of examples of unthankful persons,
must not be thereby to discourage the minds of any from doing good, that their
love should be quenched by the vnkinknesse, or hatred and malice of other: but
according to those former good examples of well doing (we looking principally
to the vnweariablenesse of our Savior Christ in most constant continuance of
doing the greatest good, though he was requited at the hands of the most
part, with the most bitter and worst requital that might be) we also, every
one in his measure, may confirm our selves in a good and merciful course
against all offenses whatsoever: yea though they do at any time a rise from
such, at whose hands we should least look for them, even such as any have
reputed to be most faithfully affected toward them. For doubtless, the work
of all such shall be of special account with the Lord; who assuredly, will so
much the more abundantly requite the constant goodness and mercy of his
servants, by how much, they are worse recompensed in this wicked world. But on
the contrary as touching all unthankful ones, by how much they render the
greater evil for the greater good; The punishment of unthankfulness to men.
they shall be sure to have so much the greater portion of the greatest
punishment and vengeance, that may be, from the just hand of God, who
challenges vengeance to belong unto him, and will certainly and fully repay,
Note also the sin of unthankfulness is great eue^ in this, that in dscourageth
many from liberality, and causes the love of many to wax cold, as our Savior
Christ teaches, Matt. chap. 24.12. It should not be so: but experience
shows it to be true by reason of man's infirmity.

Wherefore not without cause have even the heathen condemned unthankful persons
as common enemies to the poor and needy.


as he himself protests, Romans 12.19. and Heb. 10.30. and in many other
places. Of this punishment of unthankfulness therefore, let us now henceforth
come to consider.

Here, first of all, the holy Proverb offers it self, for a plain and
familiar confirmation. For he that rewards evil for good (as says King
Solomon, speaking by the holy Ghost) evil shall not depart from his house,
chap. 17. verse 13. And in that he makes mention of the house of the
ungracious or mischievous unthankful man, which is the highest degree of
unthankfulness; it is more then if the holy Proverb had affirmed, that evil
should rest upon his own person alone. For hereby it is plain, that in so
much as usually the wife, and children, and servants of the unthankful man,
are wrapped in his sin: for naturally we are all of us unthankful, and will
easily be drawn into it: therefore they are partakers of the punishment with
the master of the family: unless happily, they shall by the grace of God,
wind themselves out of the guiltiness of his sin, like as that godly wise
Abigail and her servants did, from partaking with Nabal her husband in his
sin; and so escaped the punishment, hasting toward them all by means of the
same.

Wherefore, to say no more of Nabal, that great and rich churl, save only
this, that in so much as David being with his four hundredth men in the
wilderness of Paran, was very good to the servants of Nabal, so that his men
took nothing from them, but were as a wall of defense both night and day:
thereupon Nabals own servants tell their Mistress, that they feared some
evil would suerlie come upon their Master, and upon all his family, because
of his churlishness: 1. Sam. 25. verses 14.15. etc. Let us take a further view
of some other examples, how God has punished this wicked unthankfulness, and
how also he has armed and authorized many menaces and threatenings against
the same, which shall surely, in their due times and seasons, take place
against all offenders, whether particular persons, or whole people and nations.

Our first example to this purpose, shall be the Egiptians; who because they
forgot that great preservation, which God gave them by the hand of Joseph,
against their seven years of scarcity, dearth and famine; and for that they
dealt very cruelly, against the people of Israel, for whose cause God
vouchsafed to bless them: they were afterward destroyed, both they and their
king, by the mighty and high hand of the Lord from heaven. And the rather,
because they despised the more gentle corrections of the Lord, whereby he
called them to repentance, Exodus 1.8. etc. and chap. 7. etc. and chapter 14.16.

The Ammonits, Moabits, and Edomits, who were favorably dealt withal by the
people of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt, and passed by them
toward the land of Canaan: for according to the commandment of God, they did
in nothing molest or annoy them: in so much as these people, notwithstanding
the favor which Israel showed unto the^, did afterward maliciously conspire to
make bloody and cruel war against Israel, they were for a just reward,
overthrown and destroyed, one by the sword of another, as is recorded in the
holy story of K. Iehoshaphat, who at the same time was king of Judah. For the
good king had prayed to God against them, amplifying the wickedness of their
enterprise, from that former kindness of Israel, though long before showed to
their ancestors, as we read 2. Chron. 20.10.11.12. in these words; Behold
(says king Iehoshaphat, in his prayer against them) the children of Ammon, and
Moab, and mount Seir, by whom thou would not let Isral go, when they came
out of the land of Egypt: but they turned aside from them and destroyed them
not: Behold (says king Iehoshaphat) they reward us, The punishment of
unthankfulness to men.
in coming to cast us out of thine inheritance, which thou have caused us to
inherit. O our God, will thou not judge the^, for there is no strength in us
to stand before this great multitude that comes against us, neither do we
know what to do: but our eyes are toward thee, etc. Such was the prayer of the
godly king: the effect of it is testified in the 20. verse. The Lord laid
ambushments against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, who were come
against Judah, and they slew one another. This judgment fell upon the^
because they went about to recompense evil for good, as king Iehoshaphat
alleged before the Lord in his prayer against them.

And in the same second book of Chron. 24. verse. 22. etc. Because Ioash, king
of Judah, remembered not the kindness which Iehoiadah had done to him, but in a
rage slew his son: yea, and that also very unjustly, even because he had at
the commandment of God, rebuked both him and the people for their sin: the
Lord therefore very shortly after, sent the host of Aram against him, which
destroyed all the princes of the people. Yea, though they came with a small
company of men, yet the Lord delivered a very great army of the people of
Judah into their hand, because they had forsaken the Lord God of their fathers.
A manifest proof whereof was this, that they slew the Prophet of the Lord most
outragiously and tumultuously, for doing his duty, and that also even in the
Court of the Lords Temple: yea, albeit he was the son of such a one, in
remembrance of whose special goodness toward them, and among them, they ought
so much the rather to have taken some pause and deliberation about the matter.
The indignity of this action containing in it so intolerable unthankfulness,
both to God and man, and that even in the face and presence of his divine
Majesty, it causes our Savior Christ mightily to inueigh against it, and
other like dealing of the wicked, among the people of God, from time to time,
Matt. 23.33. O servants, o generation of vipers (says our Savior Christ) how
should ye escape the damnation of hell? wherefore, behold I send ye Prophets,
and wise men, and Scribes, and of them ye will kill and crucify; and of them
will ye scourge in your Sinagogues, and persecute from city to city, that
upon you may come all the righteous blood that was shed upon the earth, from
the blood of Abel the righteous, unto the blood of Zacharias the son of
Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. Verily, I say unto
ye, all these things shall come upon this generation, etc. Among this blood,
thus unrighteously shed, and among the examples of bloody unthankfulness, and
the just revenge thereof by the Lord; we may here take in the example of the
Shechemites, of whom we read in the 9. chapter of the Judges, who because they
showed not kindness to the children of Gideon, according to all that he had
showed unto Israel, were grievously punished of God, by mutinous robbing and
spoiling one of another. For God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech, and
the men of Shechem: and the men of Shechem brake their promise to Abimelech,
that the cruelty toward the seventy sons of Ierubbaal, and their blood
might come and be laid upon Abimelech their brother, which had slain them, and
upon the men of Shechem who had aided him to kill his brethren. Judge, chapter 8.35.
and chapter 9.23.24. etc.

This example thus added to the rest; let us now, from that threatening of our
Savior Christ. Matthew, 23. against all requiters of goodness with evil,
proceed, to take alike view of some of the fearful threatenings of God
against the same kind of wicked men, as we find them recorded in his holy
word: which shall as certainly take effect in time to come, as any of those
judgments, which have already been performed, for the warning of all other,
in the times already passed.

Among these fearful threatenings, determined against wicked and mischievous
unthankful men, that which was alleged out of the Proverbs, many be here
justly called to mind again: that evil shall not depart from his house
whosoever rewards evil for good. Proverb 17.13. And to like purpose, may we
remember the imprecation of the 109. Psalm, once alleged before: Set thou the
wicked over him, etc. Namely because for friendship they were adversaries,
rewarding evil for good and hatred for friendship, etc. And remembered not to
show mercy but persecuted the afflicted etc. verse. 4.5.6. etc. As it
follows in many verses of the Psalm.

The which fearful, and (as it seems to carnal minded men) over harsh and
bitter imprecation, it is no other then that which David wishes even against
himself, as well as against any other, if he had rewarded evil to him that
had peace with him. For then (says he) Let the enemy persecuted my soul and
take it: yea let him tread my life down upon the earth, and lay mine honor in
the dust. Selah. As though he should say, let him lay it deep in the dust, I
crave no mercy, etc. For he acknowlegeth, that he should be worthy to loose
all protection of God, and to fall into the hands of his enemies, so as they
might have their full desire in his utter overthrow.

The like imprecation to that of the 109. Psalm, we read likewise in the
prophecy of Jeremiah, in the place before cited; where he puts up his
complaint unto God against those which recompensed him evil for good: for
there, his imprecation follows in this manner. Deliver up their children unto
famine, and let them drop away by the force of the sword, and let their wives
be robbed of their children, and be widows: and let their husbands be put to
death, and let their young men be slain by the sword in battle, etc. Ier. chapter
18.21. etc. These fearful imprecations contain in them as fearful
threatenings, as they themselves be. For seeing God has by his holy spirit
guided his servants, as lively and sincere interpreters of his holy justice
herein, to set them down: there is no doubt but they are ratified in heaven,
for the perpetual admonition and warning of all men to the end of the world,
whosoever will avoid that vengeance, that is contained in them against this
sin.

Neither let any man flatter himself, because all this (as has also been
observed before) is spoken against the height and extremity of the sin of
unthankfulness; as though negligence, or forgetfulness, or misapplying of
beneficence, came not within the compass of this curse: for even these sins
also, are with great severity condemned of God.

In the new Testament, the Apostle Jude having laid forth the greatness of
their sin, who (communicating in the holy beneficence and contributions of
the Christian Churches, and intruding themselves for guestes in the
loue-feastes) had no care to feed themselves in the fear of God, and to live
as Christians ought to do: he shows first, the greatness of this sin, in
that he says, such were spots in their holy feasts, Clouds without water
carried about of the winds, corrupt trees without fruit, etc. And then
follows the punishment, which the holy Ghost threateneth and pronounces: To
them is reserved the blackenesse of darkness for ever. The like is said of
the Apostle Paul. 1. Tim. 5.12.13. concerning the young widows who abused the
maintenance which they had by the Churches to idleness, yea to prating and
busy meddling, etc.

And now further, let us reason thus against all kind of unprofitable consumers
of Christian beneficence; that in so much, as even they who give not any thing
at all to holy uses, are greatly punished, although they be no sacrilegious
riflers and spoylers of Church goods: yea even they that give, if it be in
hypocrisy, and not with an upright heart, as we have a memorable example in
Ananias and Saphira his wife: for they were both punished by an extraordinary
and sudden death, which caused great fear to fall on all the Church, which
were the beholders of it, and on as many also as heard of it, Act. 5.1. etc.
11. And seeing all that boast of greater liberality, then they do in truth
perform such as King Solomon, says, do boast of false liberality, Proverb.
chap. 25. verse 14. and so being mockers of God, cannot escape unpunished,
according to that of the Apostle, Gal. 6. As a man sows, so shall he reap.
In like manner, how should we think, that he which receives corruptly, that
is, contrary to the virtues required to Christian receiving, neither has care
to use that beneficence Christianly which he has received: how can we think
(I say) that such a one should not be subject to the punishment? For
doubtless, it is no less sin to use good things ill, then not to give them
well. Is it not as great a sin to destroy a field of corn after it is sown,
as Absalom burnt up Ioabs corn, 2. Sam. 14.30. as if Ioab had not caused it
first to be sown? But I will not prosecute this point, it being of it self,
to all reasonable men, as I suppose, evident and plain. Wherefore I come to
make some use of it, and so draw to an end of our Treatise, as one thereunto
called by the importunity of other great and weighty business of the Lord.

To this purpose, I beseech you (I speak to all those that are partakers of
holy and Christian beneficence) let us think, earnestly with our selves, and
weigh the matter, as with equal balance, in our own consciences before hand;
what any of us should answer to the Lord, if we should behave our selves so
dissolutely in the abuse and mispending thereof, that the Lord should be
provoked to bring forth his servants to witness before his judgment seat
against us: that although they had, for his sake, fed us, when we were hungry,
refreshed us with drink when we were dry and thirsty, clothed us when we were
naked, lodged us when we were harbourlesse, visited us when we were sick and
in prison: nay rather, if they should be brought for witnesses (as they might
be touching some of us,) that they had not only, for the Lords sake, kept us
from extreme poverty and misery, prevented our imprisonment, etc. but that
they had fed us deintily, clothed us costly, lodged us in soft bedding, and
every way tendered us charily, for his sake, if notwithstanding all this, any
of us should not be found careful to serve the Lord, and so to rejoice the
hearts of our nursing-fathers and nursing-mothers, answerable to their so
precious and rare kindness and bounty poured upon us. But much rather if we
should idly, profanely, and wickedly waste all that holy provision, and as it
were the Manna of heaven, which has been bestowed upon us, to the dishonor of
the name of God, and to the grief and discouragement of the hearts of our
godly benefactors: let us (I say) earnestly bethink our selves, what any of us
could answer in this case. Nay rather, as the truth is, let us assure our
selves, that whosoever of us, shall be found thus culpable, or much less;
that, out of all question, we should be altogether without answer, as men
dumb and utterly speechless; even like to that unmeet and rude guest, that
at the marriage feast of the Gospel, in so much as he was found there without
his marriage garment, to the dishonor of the feast. And so being speechless,
and convict in our own consciences, of intolerable and sacrilegious
wickedness, what might we possibly look for, but as at the commandment of
the King and Lord of the feast, or of the Judge sitting upon the throne of
judgment, to be taken and bound hand and feet, and so to be cast into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; which was the
righteous judgment of God upon the profane and rude guest, Matt. 22.11.12.13.

O therefore, how much better; yea how much more blessed and happy shall it
be, if according as God of his rich mercy, do make any of us partakers of his
more special grace and favor, in the enlarging of the tender bowels and
compassion of his good and merciful servants toward us; we shall through his
grace awake and stir up our selves, and enlarge our hearts, yea, if we shall
rise early in the morning (as the holy Scriptures use to speak) that we may
speedily and with all diligence endeavor after the performance of every good
duty, of true christian obedience and thankfulness both toward God and man, to
every good beneficial friend, and to the whole Church of God. For hereunto we
are called, yea very honorably invited, and as it were hired. Hereby also are
we made debtours to all, so far forth as God shall vouchsafe to open the door
unto us, and to give us any blessed occasion and opportunity, to perform
any good and right serviceable duty. Thus doing, we shall be so far from the
displeasing and dishonouring of God; and so far also, from the reproachful
and damnable blot of unthankfulness, that we shall give God double honor:
first, in the acknowledgment of his mercy, as it were reached forth, by his
own most gracious and divine hand, out of that fountain and treasury of all
holy and sacred beneficence, which is only with him and from him: and
secondly, we shall honor his divine Majesty, in the work of his special
grace, whereby he causes his own image and glorious virtues to shine and cast
forth the comfortable beams thereof, from the merciful affection and liberal
actions of his dear children. Further also, thus doing, we shall give
encouragement to those that are beneficially and liberally minded, to continue
their liberality: yea, (as they shall increase in ability) to increase their
well doing toward many, when they shall behold it to be well bestowed. And,
finally thus doing, do we not see that even in the receiving, we our selves do
give? we give God his glory, and we give his gracious instruments that which
is their due: yea, we give our selves, and all that God has given us, to God
and his Church; which are the only right ends wherefore God has given us that
which we are, and all whatsoever we do enjoy.

So that although it stands firm as mount Sion, which our Savior Christ
has affirmed, that it is a blessed thing to give and distribute benefits,
rather then to receive them: yet seeing in receiving as we ought to receive, we
do give again that which we ought to give: if we so continue and abide, we
shall also be blessed of God in our deed. Yea, we may be bold to go a step
further, and truly affirm, that if any by the grace of God, shall give better
things then they receive; that is, spiritual things for carnal, as the holy
Scriptures call the tra^sitory things of this world, heavenly for earthly,
eternal for temporal, etc. they shall herein stand more blessed, then if they
had given only the same things of this life which they received, yea though
they had given them to others, in far greater abundance then they have
received them their own selves.

Wherefore, that we may conclude, and present this our Treatise, the best gift
that for the present we have, in as dutiful and thankful manner as we may,
both to God and his Church: would to God most humbly, and with all the heart,
soul, mind and spirit, that these poor labors may be so blessed and
prospered, that not only beneficence may on all hands, in the which there is
any power to help, be encouraged and helped forward to all good ends and
purposes, as may be most to the glory of God, and to the merciful relief of
every necessity and need of the poor of his people: but also that all sorts,
whosoever are partakers of the holy beneficence, whether Ministers of the word
of God, or students in schools of learning, or poor of any other condition,
may be moved to be careful to take such a holy, diligent and profitable course
of life, as may best beseem those, who are nourished in the bosom of the
Church, from the special treasury, allowance, and portion, as it were, of the
Lord himself: that in this their good and godly course of life, they may be
happily and eternally blessed of God. And touching those, that as yet have not
this due regard, my humble and hearty prayer is, that they may have grace, so
speedily to consider in how fearful an estate they are, that they may be
stirred up to prevent the most woeful and everlasting punishments of God, by
true repentance in a blessed change of their life.

The use of the whole Treatise.
Yea, that in the treaty of mercy and goodness, the heart may show it self
enlarged, to all pity and compassion, even to the uttermost bounds of it, as
much as may be obtained: would to God, that it might please him, not only to
give this manifold grace to his Christian Churches, truly professing his name,
and the name of our Lord Jesus Christ his only son; but also that even in
the Church of Rome, which above all other Churches in the world, glories of
most large and abundant donation and gifts, both from Christ himself, and
all sorts of Christians, high and low, Emperors, kings, Queens, Princes,
Nobles, and of all inferior degrees: that so many as in the same belong to
the election and grace of God, may have grace, to see in how lamentable an
estate they stand, even in respect of that wherein they do so greatly glory.
For in so much as, both Priestlie, clergy, and all other beneficiaries and
beadesmen among them, do not only most impiouslie abuse all the latter
excessive and servile gifts, which they have drawn from their blindelie
devoted benefactors (under a false persuasion of escaping purgatory, and of
meriting heaven, etc.) to all blasphemous idolatry and superstition: but also,
in so much as they do likewise abuse all, whatsoever was in the former and
purer times of Gods true religion and worship, given of true believing
Christians, both good Emperors, Princes and others, to the maintenance of the
Gospel and holy ministry thereof: it cannot be, but for this so general,
most heinous and treacherous abuse of all beneficence, against Christ and his
Gospel, they must needs stand most culpable before the judgment seat of
Christ and of God. The Whore (as Saint John was instructed by that revelation
which our Savior Christ gave him from heaven) which sits upon the scarlet
colored beast, and is her self arrayed in purple and scarlet, and gilded with
gold, and precious stones, and pearls, who has a cup of gold in her hand,
full of abominations, etc. she shall be damned. Revel. chapter 17.1. etc: Why so?
It is declared in the same chapter, and in the chapter next following, that
this damnation shall come upon her, that is, upon the adulterous church of
Rome, the mother of the whordomes and abominations of the earth as there she is
called because, in stead of mainteining the purity, and as we may say the
virgine-like or marriage chastity of the faith of Christ, and pure spiritual
worship of God; in stead of procuring the salvation of men, by the right use
of Gods holy ordinances, word, Sacraments, Prayer, etc. in steed of
cherishing his good and faith-full servants, whether poor or rich, noble or
of low degree, king or mean subject: it has not feared to bear, as in the
forehead, many names of blasphemy against God and Christ; to commit infinite
spiritual and gross fornications, against the purity of his worship; to make
merchandise of the souls of men, for filthy lucre and advantage, by the
corrupting of holy doctrine and promises of the Gospel; to make it self
drunken with the blood of the Prophets, and of other good Saints and holy
Martyrs, only because they rebuked, and gave testimony against their most
wicked abominations: all which blasphemous impieties, and most filthy,
treacherous, and cruel practices, were found, both in the chief city, and
also in all other places, where this strumpet has borne any sway, by making
the Kings of the earth drunken with the wine of her fornication. For these
causes therefore (says the Spirit of God) as appears more at large, in those
two chapters of the book of the Revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he
made known by his Angel, to his servant John: this most filthy whore shall
be most woefully judged and condemned of God.

God therefore, (I say yet once again) of his infinite mercy, and most
bounteous goodness, give all that be his, both among them, and among our selves,
and in all Churches, truly professing and honoring the most gracious and
glorious name of our Lord Jesus Christ; that in this so great and weighty a
matter, of Christian giving and receiving of holy beneficence, (which so
generally and so nearelie concerns and blinds all, to dutiful regard in
either respect) that we may avoid all the errors and sins thereinto
incident, (the which as has been declared are many and great) and so escape
the heavy plagues and punishments of God due to the same, both in this world,
and in the world to come. And that on the contrary we may be so guided by the
holy Spirit of God, to proceed according to the straight line, and even and
equal measure of his word, both in Giving and Receiving here for a while; that
for ever we may be partakers, of the most precious and inualuable gift, of
everlasting life and happiness, in the glorious kingdom of heaven, through
the only worthiness and merit, of our Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten
son of God; to whom with the father, and the holy Ghost, three most glorious
and distinct persons, one true, eternal and everliving God, only wise, holy,
righteous, gracious and merciful, most bounteous Lord God, the only author
and fountain, and the only wise distributer and disposer of all good gifts
and graces, both in heaven and in earth; be all praise, honor and glory,
majesty and thanksgiving, ascribed, and acknowledged of us, and of all
creatures, both visible and invisible, both now and for ever and ever, in all
things: and namely for his late gracious succor, against the years of
dearth among our selves, for renewing of our plenty; for the suppressing of
the roguish life, and thereby, for opening of a door, to the more orderly and
comfortable practice of true liberality: who also vouchsafe to give grace,
that on all hands, it may be duly practiced and put in holy and Christian
execution. Amen.

An Addition of choice Sentences gathered out of sundry Writers both Christian
and heathen, which may to good purpose be referred to the Chapters of either
part of the Treatise, according to the direction hereafter specified.
MVlta delectant, pauca vincunt. Excellency of beneficence and liberalite.
Though a few (proofs or precepts) bear the sway, yet variety is delightsome
and pleasant, Sen. de Benef. lib. 7. cap. 1.

Beneficentia ac liberalitate nihil est naturae hominis accommodatius: Nothing
is more beseeming mankind then beneficence and liberality: Cicero Off. 1. And
lib. 2.

Summi cuiusque bonitas commune perfugium est omnibus: As every man is in more
high estate, so ought he to be a more common refuge for a any man to fly unto.

Nihil est tantopere expetendum homini, inprimis diuiti, quam vt ex animo
benefaciat. Nothing is so earnestly to be desired of a man, specially of a rich
man, as that he may have grace to be heartily beneficially Fr. Iunius, annot.
Prou. 19 22.

It is a special blemish to grave and learned men, and of great judgment in
the Scriptures, being also rich and wealthy, if they shall be noted to be
nothing suitable in liberality but on the contrary: For such to abound in this
duty, it gives the^ as great a grace in the eyes both of God and man, as any
knowledge, or speech, or any other, or all their gifts put together: For that
which is to be desired of a man is his goodness. Prou. 19.22.

Read in the very godly and frutfull Lectures of Samuel Bird of Ypswidge, upon
the 8. and 9. chap. 2. epist. Cor. page 26. 27. 28. And again page 82.
Kindness to other gifts is as the face to other parts of the body, etc. I
pray read the places diligently, and all other the godly instructions of that
little book upon those two chapters. For as he truly says, page 33. In hard
times if men would know what regard they should have of their poor brethren,
they should consult with those chapters of the Apostle wherein the holy Ghost
has of purpose set down his holy will and pleasure unto us.

Sentences to be referred to the first Chap. of the first part of the Treatise.
Apud homines moderatissimos quosque praestabilius habetur beneficium dare quam
accipere: Excellency of Giving.
atque antiquior est misericordia quam lucrum. Among all sorts of men, such as
have been of most discreet judgment, it has been accounted a more excellent
thing to give then to receive a benefit: and more honorable to show mercy
then to seek after lucre. Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 27. de Pauperum amore.

And again. (...).

Nihil beneficentia diuinius in hominem cadit. Naz. Orat. 18. ad ciues Trep.

Nulla in re magis Deo similes sumus quam beneficentia: We are in nothing more
like to God, then when we practice beneficence. Pliny and other among the
heathen. Read Calu. Harm. Euang. upon the 45. verse of the 5. chapter of Matthew.

Generosi animi and magnifici est iunare and prodesse: He has a right
Gentleman like and noble mind who is beneficial and helpefull. Seneca.

Demosthenes being asked wherein man resembles God, he answered, that it is
(...) to be beneficial, and to speak the truth.

Quis tam miser, tam neglectus, qui Dei munificentiam non senserit? and ad quem
non aliquid ex illo benignissimo font manauerit? Who is so miserable or
forlorn, that he has no comfort of Gods bounty? and to whom nothing has
issued from that most gracious founiaine? Seneca de Benefic. lib. 4. cap. 4.

Homo nihil tam Dei habet quam benefacere, vt superius dictum est: (...). Yet
God in great matters, man in small things: either of them according to their
power.

Dei proprium est perpetuo saluandi studio teneri, nec hominum indignitate a
benefaciendo absterreri. Gualterus.

Religionis summa est imitare quem colis. It is an abridgement of religion for
a man to imitate God whom he worshippeth. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 17.

Magna certe beneficentiae laus, quod test Spiritu sancto, piae ac perfectae
vitae summam in se continet. It is verily a great praise of beneficence in so
much as (the holy Ghost bearing witness) it comprehends the sum of a godly
and entire life. Caluinus in Act. Apost. cap. 9.36.

Regem, armis quam munificentia vinci, minus flagitiosum. It is not so heinous
a thing for a king to be vanquished in battle as to fail in bountifulness.
Salust. Bell. Lugurth.

Sentences that may be referred to the second Chapter.
Beneficentia ex beneuolentia manare debet. A Gift must be given willingly
Affectus tuus nomen imponit operituo. Weldoing ought to proceed from
well-willing. Such as is the affection, such is thy action. Amb. Off. cap. 30..

Bneneficentia complectitur and cordis beneuolentiam, and operis beneficium.
Beneficence comprehends both the benevolence of the heart, and the benefit
it self, as touching the outward work.

Beneficium nullum est nisi quod amica and benigna voluntas ad nos defert. It
is no benefit at all if friendly good will be not the messenger of it. Sen. de
Ben. lib. 6. cap. 7.

And cap. 11. Voluntas omne officium perficit.

Beneuolentia est co^munis quaeda^ pareus omniu^, Amb. Off. 1. 30
Magnificentissimae bonitatis est vt tuum quoque inimicum diligas. That
goodness is most noble or bounteous when a man can heartily love and tender
his enemy. Aug. Enchirid. cap. 73.

A Gift must be free.
A Gift must be free according to our common speech, What is more free then Gift?

Id just, id pie id humano fit quod sine spe recipiendi feceris. That is
justly, that is Godly, that is courteously done in deed which is done without
looking to receive any thing again. Lactant. Instit. divine. lib. 6. cap. 11.
And cap. 12. Tenendum est omni modo vt ab officio miserecordiae spes recipiendi
absit omnino. Aliter non humanitas erit illa, sed beneficij foeneratio. Danda
autem sunt beneficia non foeneranda.

Non est dubium quin is qui liberalis benignusue dicitur, officium non fructum
sequatur. It is out of all doubt that he which rightly bears the name of a
liberal or kind man, follows not after profit but looks what belongs to
good duty it self. Cicero, lib. 1. de Legibus.

Beneficiorum ratio simplex esse debet: tantum eroga, etc. Ne cessaueris dare,
opus tuum perage, et parts boni viri exequere. The purpose of bestowing
benefits ought to be simple and for it self: only give, etc. Sen. de Ben.
lib. 1. cap. 2. Et lib. 4. cap. 1. Calcatis vtilitatibus ad vertutem eundum
est. And again, Vera beneficentia est ipso benefaciendi opere latiss^na. And
in the same book he disputes earnestly and at large against the Epicure that
Beneficenca is res per se expetenda. Beneficence is to be desired even for the
love of it self. And to speak as the truth is, A gift in that it is a gift
can not be a thing enforced.

A Gift must be cheerfully given.
Aliquando gratius est quod facili quam quod plena manudatur. There is a time
when that is more acceptable which is given with a ready hand then that which
is given with a full hand. Sen. lib. de Benef. 1. cap. 7. Et lib. 2 cap. 1. In
beneficio iucundissima est tribuentis voluntas. And chapter, 11. In munere
conferendo adijcienda est omnis humanitas. Non tantum des opertet, sed etiam
ames. A gift is to be given in a most courteous manner. Thou must not only give,
but also give of love. Alacritas dandi ipsa largitione maius quid and
perfectius est. Cheaefulnesse in giving is a thing of greater perfection then
is the gift it self: Greg. Nazianz. Orat. de pauperum amore.

And Calvin. in ep. ad Cor. 2. cap. 8. verse. Alacritas praeoccupandi facto ipso
superior est. And verse 2. In arctissima paupertate futuri simus liberales, si
quod facultatibus arcae desit, simplicitate animi suppleamus. We may attain to
be very liberal in the greatest straightness of poverty if we make a supply
of that which is wanting in the coffer by the vfeined readiness of the mind.

Laetandum est, non lugendum cum donum dederis. Nazianz. de Paup. amore.

Externa beneficentia nisi oriatur ex cord, nihili est coram Deo. Unless
outward beneficence arise from the inward affection of the heart, it is of no
account before God. Caluinus in Act. 4.34.

Eorundem est and a Deo aliquid habere, and ijs quae habent, secundum Deum vti.
It is a special gift of God for any to have the grace to be beneficial.
They that enjoy any thing from God have this from him also, that they use the
same according to the will of God. Greg. Naz. de pauperum amore.

Diffidentia radicitus in nobis haeret quae nos arcet ab omnibus charitatis
officijs donec Spiritus gratia corrigatur. Distrustfulnesse is so fast rooted
in us, that it withholdeth us from all duties of charity until it be corrected
by the grace of the holy Ghost: Call. in 2. Cor. 8.1.

Quare non das tua Deo? A gift must be given in faith.
Diffidis timens ne non iterum recipias? Quid vero rationis istud habet? Qui
enim dedit tibi a quo nihil acceperat, quomodo non magis dabit postquam
acceperit. Wy give thou not of that which thou have to God? Do thou
distrust, fearing that thou should not receive it again? what reason is in
this? for how should not he who has given to thee while yet he had receued
nothing of thee, give the much rather after that he has received some things.
Chrysostom. in cap. 3. ad Romans Sermon. 7. in morali eiusdem exhortatione.

Nomen gratia posuit Apostolus. 2. Cor. 8.4. ad commendandam cleemosynam. Est
enim gratuitum Dei Patris coelestis donum. Et filij eius benefaciendo, sunt
illius bonitatis, et imitatores ingenni, et oeconomi fideles. The Apostle
speaks of liberality, calls it by the name of Grace, in the commendation
of almesgiuing. For it is a free gift of God the heavenly father. And his
children, in that they practice beneficence, they are both kindly imitators of
his goodness, and also his faithful and trusty Steward, Caluinus.

A Gift is to be given with an humble mind.
Ipse Christus dicit, quando omnia feceritis, dicite inutiles serui sumus, etc.
Cum dilectionem exhibemus, cum pecuniam damus egenis, debitum implemus, non
solum ideo quod Deus prior beneficijs suis sibi nos fecerit obnozios, sed ob id
quod quae sua sunt distribuimus, quandocunque quicquid tandem dederimus. Christ
himself says, when you shall do all that you can, say, we are unprofitable
servants, etc. when we show forth our brotherly love, when we give money to the
poor, we do perform but that which is our duty, not only because God has
first of all made us bound to him by his benefits bestowed on us, but also for
that all things which we at any time give, they are his whatsoever we do
give. A Gift must be thought well bestowed when it is given to the poor.
Chrysostom. in the place before alleged.

To this purpose God honors them with the name of his poor Saints. 2. Cor.
8. and 9.

Hinc ad miseros and inopes non vulgaris redit consolatio, quod licet probrosi
sunt and abiecti coram mundo, non secus tamen filio Dei pretiosi sunt, quam
propria membra. Et certe ille fratres appellans incredibili eos honor
dignatur. Hence no small comfort comes to those that be miserable and
destitute, insomuch as howsoever they be disdained and despised of the world,
they are for all that, no less precious to the son of God then are the
members of his own body. And certainly in that he calls them brethren, he
vouchsafes them greater honor than a man can conceive. Calvin. Harm. in
Matthew. 25.39. And Luke 16.22. Pretiosa anima infoedo et putrido corpore Lazari
latuit, quae ab Angelis in beatam vitam defertur. A very precious soul was
hidden in the foul and putrified body of Lazarus, which is by the Angels
carried into a blessed state of life.

Iustitiae coniuncta est beneficentia quam eandem vel benignitatem vel
liberalitatem appellare licet. Cecero Off. lib. 1. A Gift must be given in
righteousness.
And again, Nihil est liberale quod non sit idem iustum. Nothing is done
liberally which is not done justly.

We must drink the water of our own Cistern, etc. and so let the same flow
forth for the relief of others. If we take not this course, we employ our
riches to no profitable use.

Puteus (inquit Ambrosius) si nihil haurias, inerti otio et degeneri situ
facile corrumpitur; exercitatus autem, nitescit ad speciem, dulcescit ad potum:
ita et aceruus diuitiarum cumularenosus, speciosus est vsu, otio autem inutilis
habetur. Deriuato igitur aliquid de hoc puteo etc. lib. de Nabuthe, cap. 12.
And again Sermon. 81. An nescitis, inquit, quia puteorum aqua si frequentius
hauriatur et salubrior efficitur et abundantior: quod si otiosa remanserit et
immobilis, inutilior et corruptior fit. Sic etiam diuitiae, etc. Lege etiam
eandem similitudinem si placeat, apud Basilium: Concione prima in auaros
diuites. A Gift must be given with discretion.


Liberalitas est decens ac moderata acquisitio et erogatio pecuniae, auaritiae
et prodigalitatis extremis tanquam finibus circumscripta. Namsi non tantum
quantum oportet tribuas, auaritia oritur; sin excedas in dando modum, desque
plus quam oportet, et cui non oportet, et quando et qua causa non oportet, in
vitium laberis prodigalitatis. Speusippus.

Pars optima beneficij est vt datum sit iudicio. A benefit is then best given
when it is most discreetly given. Sen. lib. de Ben. 1. cap. 15. And lib. 4,
cap. 10. Turpissimum genus dandi est inconsulta donatio. Unadvised giving is
the worst giving.

Retinere quod in manum nostram posuit Deus: si modo parce et frugaliter nos et
familiam alentes, partem aliquam pauperibus erogemus, maioris virtutis est quam
omnia dilapidare. It is a greater virtue to keep that which God has put into
our hand, if so be, we maintaining our selves and our family, do give some
portion to the releife of the poor, then if we should rechleslie consume all.
Calu. Harm. enang. in cap. 19. verse, 20. 21.

Posse liberalitate vti, non spoliantem se patrimonio, nimirum est pecuniae
fructus maximus. Cicero Off. lib. 2.

And again, Curandum est vt quod libenter facis diutius id facere possis.
Seeing thou do a thing which is of thy free good will, order the matter so
that thou may continewe the longer in the doing of it.

To this purpose diverse cautions are to be observed. 1. Ne obsit benignitas.
2. Ne mayor sit quam facultas. 3. Vt non ab ostentatione proficiscatur. 4. Vt
pro dignitate cuique tribuatur. Cicer. Off. 1. These cautions are englished
before.

As touching the afflicted also the same author says truly. In collocando
beneficio, and in referenda gratia, si caetera paria sunt, hoc maxim officij
est, vt quisque maxim opis indigeat, ita eum potissimum opitulari. Off. lib.
1. And lib. 2.

Propensior benignitas esse debebit in calamitosos. Mercifulnes ought to be
more inclinable toward such as be in great distress. Praesertim si non sint
digni calamitate. and so much the rather if they have not deserved their
misery. Offic. lib. 2.

To this purpose the saying of another heathen man is not to be neglected
(...). Etiam improbis in necessitate succurrit vir bonus. Debetur enim hoc
officium, si non meritis illius qui iuuatur, certe naturae. Et bonus aliquando
fieri potest qui malus est. He may be a good man hereafter, who is an evil man
now. Humanitati dandum si non ipsi homini. We must give for manhoodes sake, or
because he is one of manikind, though the man himself be unworthy.
Aristoteles. Deus esto calamitosis, Dei misericordia^ imitando. Nazianz.

Where such good discretion is not used, the heathen proverb may justly take
place. Largitio fundum non habet. All is lost that is given: Like as if a man
should pour water into a sieue or any other vessel which wants the bottom.
Cicero. Off. 2. And in his first book.

Beneficia temeritate quadam sieve iudicio vel modo in omnes, vel repentino
quodam impetu animi, quasi vento incitati, non sunt ita magna, atque ea quae
iudicio considerate constanterque delata sunt. These benefits which are
bestowed rashly, without judgment or moderation, hand over head, with a
sudden passion of the mind, violently huffed up, as it were with a violent
blast of wind, they are not so worthy as those which are bestowed advisedly
and in a constant or settled course.

Nec auarum te Deus, nec profusum vult: collocare te vult quae habes, non
proijcere. It is Gods will that thou should be neither covetous nor
prodigal: it is his will that thou should orderly dispose of that which
thou have and not to cast it away at random. Aug. lib. de december chordis. chapter
12. The like speech uses Amb. Deus non vult simul effundi opes, sed
dispensari. Off. lib. 1. cap. 30.

And again, Sermon. 81. Perit omne quod perditis datur. All is lost whatsoever
is given to such as are passe-graces, as we use to speak.

Qui largiuntur indignis ea quae dignis conferri debebant, tria committunt
absurda. 1. Nam and ipsi iacturam faciunt. 2. Et in bonos contumeliosi sunt. 3.
Et malos roborant, materia vitiorum suppeditata. (...). Gesnerus Sermon: 77. They
that give to the unworthy that which ought to be bestowed on the worthy, they
commit three absurd and unreasonable things. For first, they damage themselves
or loose that which they give. Secondly, they are injurious to those that be
good. Thirdly, they confirm the wicked in their wickedness by cherishing them
in their sins.

Liberales non sunt (says Cicero) qui epulis and viscerationibus, gladiatorum
muneribus, ludorum venationumque apparatu pecunias profundant etc. Sed qui suis
facultatibus, aut captos a praedonibus redimunt, aut as alienum suscipiunt
amicorum causa, aut in filiarum collocatione adiuuant. Offic. 2.

And again, Benefacta male locata, malefacta arbitror. Ennius apud Ciceronem,
ibidem. My judgment, says Ennius, is that benefits evil placed may well be
accounted for evil deeds.

Nevertheless, as Ambrose writes in his Offices lib. 2. cap. 28. Necessitates
alioru^ quantum possumus iuuare debemus, et plus interdum quam possumus. We
must succor the distressed as much as lies in us, yea and ere while more then
we are well able. And Calvin upon 2. Cor. 9.1. Sanctos negligere cum open nostra
indigent, plus quam inhumanum est. It is more then discurtesie to neglect to
relieve the Saints of God when they stand in need of our help.

Praecipua est liberalitas (inquit Amb.) redimere captiuos, et maxim ab host
Barbaro qui nihil deferat humanitatis ad misericordiam, nisi quod auaritia
reseruauerit ad redemptionem. lib. 2. cap. 15. Et cap. 16. Modus liberalitatis
tenendus est, maxim Sacerdotibus, vt non pro iactantia sed pro iustitia
dispensent. Nusquam enim mayor aniditas petitionis. Veniunt validi, veniunt
nullam causam nisi vagandi habentes, et volunt subsidia vacuare pauperum,
exinanire sumptum. etc. Ea ergo mensura sit, vt neque humanitas deseratur, nec
distituatur necessitas.

Plerique simulant debita. Sit very examen. Exutos se per latrocinia^
deplorant, etc. Qui modu^ obseruat auarus nulli, largus omnibus est. Non enim
solas aures praebere debemus audiendis precantium vocibus, sed etiam oculos
considerandis necessitatibus. Plus clamat operatori bono debilitas, quam vox
pauperi. Neque vero fieri potest, vt non extorqueat amplius importunitas
vociferantium: sed non semper impudentia locus sit. Videndus est ille qui te
non videt: require^dus ille qui crubescit videri. Ille etiam clausus in carcere
occurrat tibi: ille affectus aegritudine mentem tuam personet qui aures non
potest.

Et paulo inferius, cap. eodem. Sicut modus liberalitatis tenendus est, ita
etiam calcar plerunque adhibendum videtur. Modus igitur vt quod benefacis, id
quotidie facere possis, ne subtrahas necessitati quod indulseris effusioni.
Calcar propterea, quia melius operatur pecunia in pauperis cibo, quam in
diuitis sacculo. Cave ne intra loculos tuos includas salutem inopum, and
tanquam in tumulis sepelias vitam pauperum.

Non ade o timendum est (inquit Caluinus) ne simus in largiendo nimij:
periculum est a nimia tenacitate, in 2. Cor. 8.13. We are not so much to fear
lest we should be excessive in giving: the danger is rather concerning too fast
keeping.

The minds of men are like to a fire of green wood, which will ask much
blowing before it will burn. Lect. of S. B. of Ipsw. page 21. 22. And page 36.
They must like iron have their heating before they can be wrought upon. And
again page 45. Commonly our hearts are like paper oyled, which hardly
receives the print of the pen.

(...).

Benefacito bonis. Pulcher enim thesaurus est apud virum bonum debita gratia.
Isocrates. Quod been fit bonis haud perit. Plaut. Melius apud bonos quam apud
fortunatos beneficium collocari puto. Cic. Off. 2.

Nulla beneficentia nisi (...) coniuncta Deo placet. A gift must be given with
compassion over the needy.
No beneficence pleases God, unless it be done with pity and compassion.
Calu. in 1. ep. Ioh. cap. 3.17. and Harm. Euang. Mat. 5.48.

Misericordia mercenario amori opponitur, Every man of any ability is bound to
give.
qui priuato commodo alligatus est. Mercy is opposed to merchandising love
which is tied to a man's private commodity.

Misericordiae communis est vsus: ideo commune praeceptum omnibus, etc. There
is a common use of mercy, and therefore the commandment is given in common to
all. Amb. lib. 2. Comment. in 3. cap. Lucae. Misericordia est plenitudo
virtutum. ibidem. Dives in misericordia dives est in Deo. Ide^ lib. de Nab.
cap. 14. He that is rich in mercy, is rich in God.

Omnis benignitas properat and proprium est libenter facientis cito facere.
Tarde, nolentis est. Seneca de Benef. lib. 2. cap. 5. A gift is to be given
speedily.
Bis dat qui cito dat.

Gratia ab officio quod mora tardat abest. Delay disgraceth a gift or any other
performance of duty.

(...). Tarditas vitiosum reddet munus. Demorcritus.

Beneficentia virtus est quae moram non patitur. Naz. orat. de Paup. amore.

In exercenda beneficentia, praesenti necessitati consulendum si velimus veram
aequitatis regulam seruare. In the practice of beneficence we must tender
present necessity, if we mind to observe the true rule of equity. Calu. in.
2. Cor. 8.3.

A gift is to be given rather in a man's life time, then to put it altogether
off until he be dead.
They which reserve all their gifts till after their death, do neither give
a^^ ^^^onie that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living Lord:
neither have they the benifit of their prayer to whom they do give. For to
what purpose should men pray for them at such time when prayer will do them no
good. Lect. of S. Bird. of Ipsw. page 96.

Gifts are to be given for the maintenance of the ministry of the word.
Fieri nequit, si verbum habeatur in pretio, quin Ministri quoque honest ac
liberaliter tractentur. It cannot be but if the word be preciously esteemed,
the ministers of it shall be also honestly and liberally dealt withal. Call. in
6. Galat.

Non vult Apostolus congerisine modo superfluam abundantiam: sed ne quid desit
necessarijs vitae subsidijs. Nam and frugali victu contenti debent esse
Ministri: and semper luxuriae pomparumque periculo est obuiandum. Idem.

Tanta merces debet esse euangelizanti regnum Dei vt neque contristetur, neque
extollatur. Non tam vt abundet, quam vt non deficiat. He that preaches the
Gospel of the kingdom of God ought to have such an allowance for his his
maintenance that he be neither discouraged, nor have occasion to be puffed up
or made lofty in his mind. Not so much that he should have any superfluity,
as that he should not be punished with want. Amb. Comment. in cap. 5. 1. epist.
ad Timotheum.

Neglectus Doctorum and Ministrorum verbi, turpissima est ingratitudo. Nam qua
mercede inestimabilem aeternae vitae thesaurum, quem per illorum praedicationem
obtinent, remunerabuntur? It is most shameful ingratitude to make small
reckening of the Teachers and Ministers of the word of God. For with what
recompense shall they reward that invaluable treasure of eternal life, which
they are by their preaching made partakers of: Caluinus comment. in Gal. cap.
6. And in the same place, Astus Satanae hic est, alimentis fraudare pios
Ministros, vt Ecclesia talibus destituatur. This is the very wiliness of Satan
to defraud godly ministers of their maintenance, that the Church of God might
be bereaved or disappointed of them.

Colloca thesaurum tuum secundum mandata Altissimi, The word of God is the rule
of beneficence.
quod vtilius erit tibi quam aurum ipsum: Bestow thy treasure according to the
commandments of the most high: which shall bring thee more profit then can gold
it self. Ecclesiasticus. 29.11.14.

Pro virili part operare iustitiam, sic tamen vt quantum diuitijs inter
caeteros, tantum opere praecellas. Exercise thou justice according to thy
ability; yet so, that by how much thou excellest others in wealth, by so much
thou may go before them in the excellency of thy work: Lactant. Instit.
divine. lib. 6. cap. 12.

Haec sequenda est regula, vt quisque reputans quantum sibi datum sit, tanquam
rationem redditurus, benign cum fratribus communicet. Ita fiet vt qui tenuis
est liberalem habeat animum: and exiguum munus, opimi and splendidi sacrificij
loco habeatur. This rule is to be followed, that every man taking an account
of himself how much has been given unto him, should even as if he were to
give up his account unto God, make his brethren partakers of his liberality.
So shall it come to pass, that he which is of mean estate, shall nevertheless
have a bountiful heart: and a little gift shall be accepted in steed of a rich
and honorable sacrifice: Caluinus in Act. Apost. cap. 11.29. And upon 2. Cor.
^.8. Deus nusquam Summam praefigit. Vnusquisque est sibi propriae beneficentiae
arbiter. God does no where appoint what sum any should give, but every one is
with himself to determine his own beneficence.

Pulcherrime hoc and benignissime facit Deus, quod non ex pretio rei datae, sed
offerentis facultate and animo donum aestimet. Gesnerus Sermon. sentent. 76.

Munus non de pondere sui, sed offerentium voluntate pensatur. Hieron. in ep.
consolat. ad Iulianum.

Non quaeritur quantum, sed de quanto and quo animo. Ambros. Comment. in cap.
9. 2. ep. Cor.

Et Caluinus ibidem. Munificentia non tam aestimatur a Deo ex summa, quam ex
animo. God does not so much estimate the gifts which any give by the quantity
of them, but according to the affection wherewith they are given. And again
upon the 8. chapter of the same ep. verse. 13. Tam in exigua quam in magna
facultate placet Deo liberalis voluntas. A frank or liberal affection, is
acceptable to God, as well touching those that are in a mean, as those that
(...) in a more wealthy estate.

And withal let us here take the occasion to remember the wise saying of
another godly learned man whose words are these as follows. As in strait
hearted men their will is not so large as their gift, though it be but a little
that they give. So in open hearted men, though they give as much as they are
able, yet is their desire larger then their gift. Read Lect. of S. B. of Ipsw.
upon the 8. and 9. chapter of 2. Cor. page 10. And page 11. he does to very good
purpose admonish that, The affection of a rich man cannot be great, except he
gives very much. To wit in comparison of a man of mean estate.

A gift is to be given without desire of vain glory.
Perfecta est liberalitas, vbi silentio quis tegit opus suum, and
necessitatibus singuloru^ occulte subuenit: que^ laudat os pauperis and non
labia sua. Liberality is then very worthy and commendable when a man
concealeth that which he does and covertly relieueth every man's necessity:
even the liberality of such a one (I say) is very commendable, whom the mouth
of the poor man praises, and not his own lips. Ambros. Off. lib. 1. cap.
30. And in the same chapter. Dum mercedem quaeris iactantiae, remunerationis
fructum amittis. While thou seek the reward of humane boasting, thou loosest
the fruit of divine remuneration. Neuerthlesse, we must withal understand,
that this rule of hiding private beneficence, must not hinder the open practice
of public contributions, though that also must be likewise performed with a
right, sober, sincere, and godly mind.

Eleemosyna duplex est. Alms or merciful liberality is of two sorts.

1. Publica, ex aerario, idque ex Magistratus and Ecclesiae praescripto.
Public, and that by the appointment of the civil magistrate and the Governors
of the Church. 2. Priuata, pro cuiusuis arbitrio and necessarijs occasionibus,
quae subinde se offerre soleant ex singulari Dei prouidentia. Private, as every
man thinks good according to those special occasions which God in his
particular providence does now and then offer. etc. Gualterus.
Benefacta benefactis cumulanda. Priora sequentibus oneranda. Merciful men are
to continue yea as much as may be to increase their libera^itie in giving.
One benefit is to follow upon an other.

Longa pietas omne munus nutrire debet Continuance in godliness must cherish
all well doing. Seneca. lib. 2. de Ben. cap. 11. And again, Nisi beneficia
adiuueris, perdes. Parum est dedisse, fouenda sunt, etc. ibidem.

God gives to all men liberality without any vpbraiding (...) James chapter 1.5.
He that gives is not to vpbraid any with that which he has given.
Him therefore ought all men to imitate and follow in their practice of giving.

Odiosum hominum genus est officia exprobrantium. They that use to twitt men
with that which they have done for for them, (specially if they be such as do
not show themselves unthankful) they are a very tedious kind of people. Lege
Gesnerum Sermon. sentent. 77.

Et ibidem. (...). vpbraid not thy friend with thy benefits for thou shall be
as one that had not given at all. Sextus.

Quaerela beneficij amissi non been dati signum est. Sen. de Ben. lib. 7. cap.
29.

Conuenit tum in dando munificum esse, tum in exigendo non acc^rbum. It
beseems a man very well, as to be bounteous in giving, so not to be eger or
harsh in urging or extorting: Cicero off. 2. Et in Laelio. Benefici
liberalesque sumus non vt exigamus gratiam, neque enim beneficium foeneramur,
etc.

Haec beneficij inter duos lex est (says Seneca) Alter, statim obliuisci debet
dati: alter, accepti nunquam. Such is the law of beneficence concerning the
Giver and the Receiver. The one ought forthwith to forget what he has given:
The other never what he has received. Seneca, lib. de Benef. 2. cap. 10. And
chapter 11. Qui dedit beneficium taceat: narret qui accepit. Si quis coram
nobis narrabit (scilicet, quae benefecimus) respondendum est. Dignissimus
quidem ille est maioribus beneficijs: quae ego magis velle me scio praestare,
quam posse. Et haec ipsa non venaliter nec ea figura quae quidam reijciunt quae
magis ad se volunt attrahere, etc.

Equidem (inquit Demosthenes) censeo eum qui beneficium accepit oportere omni
tempore meminisse: eum autem qui dedit continuo obliuisci. A note to be
referred to the particular rehearsal of the examples of beneficence, mentioned
throughout the books of the holy Scriptures


Videte quaeso (sic enim Greg. Nazianz. Oratione 27. de Pauperum amore) quam
constans sit minimeque fucatum mandatum diuinum atque exemplum de beneficentia
misericordiaque erga pauperes. Neque enim hominibus Spiritu sancto impletis,
satis fuit semel atque iterum de pauperibus sermonem habuisse: nec quidam
duntaxat de his verba fecerunt, reliqui minime: aut alij copiosius, alij
parcius, velut de re non ita magna, nec admodum necessaria: verum and omnes in
vniuersum, and sedulo quisque vel primum, vel inprimis ad eam rem nos
cohortantur: nunc admonentes, nunc comminantes, nunc exprobrantes, nonnunquam
etiam eos qui hanc virtutem assequuntur laudibus efferentes: nimirum vt assidua
commenitione, nos ad praecepti huius impletionem inflamment. See I beseech you
(says this learned Father) how constantly, and in how good earnest the divine
commandment and practice of beneficence and mercifulness toward the poor is
laid before us. For men full of the holy Ghost have not thought it sufficient
once only and again to speak of the poor: neither some only and the rest
nothing at all: neither yet some more largely and other more sparingly, as if
it had been no great matter or of any great necessity: but even all
altogether, and every one for his part very diligently, either chiefly or in
order before other things, they do exhort us hereunto, sometime admonishing,
sometime threatening, sometime rebuking, and sometime also greatly praising and
extolling such as do attain to this virtue: and all to this end that by a
manifold and continual or daily commonefaction they might inflame our hearts
to the obedience of this commandment.

Read also Lectur. of S. B. of Ipsw. page 4. When the commandment of God is
only stood upon, answer is went to be made, that we should do so. But who does
it? When therefore we bring forth the parties that have done so, that shift is
taken away.

Auaritia se in admiratione diuitiarum immersit, Covetousness is a chie^e
hinderer of beneficence.
velut quaedam bonorum ariditas officiorum, vt homines damnum putent quicquid
praeter more^ impenditur. Covetousness has so plunged it self in the
admiration of riches, that it is as one may say, a certain drouth, whereby all
good duties are starued, in so much as men are thereby brought to be of mind
that all is lost whatsoever is bestowed above an ordinary or wonted rate: Amb.
Off. lib. 2. cap. 21.

And lib. 3. cap. 6. He mightily inueighing against the covetousness of rich
Farmers and Corne-maisters, he writes thus, to the vehement and just reproof
of their practice in seeking the dearth of corn. Cur (inquit) ad fraudem
conuertis natura industriam? Cur inuides vsibus hominum publicos partus? Cur
populis minuis abundantiam? Cur affectas inopiam? Cur optari facis a pauperibus
sterilitatem? Cum enim non sentiant beneficia foecunditatis, te auctiona^te
preciu^, te condente frumentum, optant potius nihil nasci, quamte de fame
publica negociari. Why (says he) do thou defraud natures industry? why
do thou enuiously repine that men should enjoy the public fruits of the
earth for their use? Why do thou make the people to have less abundance
then otherwise they should? Why do thou go about to make a scarcity? Why
do thou give occasion to the poor to wish the barrenness of the earth? For
when they have no part of the benefit of fruitfulness, while thou increasest
the price and hourdest up corn; they wish rather that nothing might spring out
of the earth rather then thou should make merchandise of a public famine.
After which words he proceeds to reprove all the fair excuses and
allegations which this kind of coueteous and unmerciful people go about to
make for themselves. As namely, that they lay up for a commonwealth to help
in time of need. We urge none to buy, say they, let every man do according to
his necessity. The gain of corn is our living, we travel in tilling the
ground, we have no other recompense, but the fat of the furrowe, etc. The which
excuses he reproves as follows. Tu de omnium miseria congeris opes: and hanc
tu iudustriam vocas, hanc diligentiam nominas, qua calliditatis versutia, quae
astutia fraudis est? Et hoc tu remedium vocas quod est commentum nequitiae?
Latrocinium hoc aut foenus appellem. Captantur tanquam latrocinij tempora
quibus in viscera hominum durus insidiator obrepas, etc. Lucrum tuum damnum
publicum est, etc. That is: thou heapest up thy riches from the gain of all
men's miseries: and do thou call that industry, and name that by the name of
diligence which is the wiliness of craft, which is the subtlety of deceit?
And do thou term that a remedy which is a devise of mischief I may call this
thieuing, or usury. Thou lie as it were in wait for times fit for theeuing,
in the which, as an cruel lurker, thou may suddenly creep into the intrals
of men, etc. Thy gain is the impouerishing of the commonwealth etc. Read more
to this purpose, Sermon. 81. which is worthy thy reading at thy good conuenience
and leisure.

Auaritiae genus est acerbissimum ne pereuntia quidem impertire egentibus. It
is a most cruel kind of covetousness for a man not to give these transitory
things to such as stand in need of them.

And again Tot iniuria afficis, quot largiri potuisti. Thou wrongest so many
as thou art able to give unto. Basil. Sermon. 1. in diuites auaros.

Nihil est (inquit Ethnicus) tam angusti animi tamque parui quam amare
diuitias. Cicero Off. 1. and on the other side he says, Nihil est honestius
magnificentiusque quam pecuniam contemnere si non haheas: si habeas ad
beneficentiam liberalitatemque confer.

Sentences to be refered to the 3. Chapter.
The Lord God is very justly called even of the heathen, They that are liberal
and give as the ought shall be certainly rewarded.
Optimus, Maximus, the best, and the greatest. Optimus,.i. benignissimus and
beneficentissimus: the most gracious and bountiful: Maximus.i. maiestate
magnifice^tiaque supremus: that is, the most high and excellent in the
supremacy of person and magnificencie of all his works.

Dominus vt quam plurimos ad beuenolentiam Discipulis praestandam inuitet, in
suas tabulas acceptum far non grauatur quicquid istis datum fuerit. To the
end, the Lord might move as many as might be to show good will and favor to
his desciples, he thinks not much to enter into his book of account
whatsoever any should give unto them. Caluinus in Matthew. 10.40. etc.

Lucrum est pietatis nomine facere sumptum. It is gain to to be at charges for
godliness sake, when the poor are refreshed, etc. Tertull. Apol. aduersus
Gentes cap. 39.

Deo dare, accipere est. To give unto God is as much as to receive a gift from
him. Greg. Naz. Orat. de Pauperum amore.

Beneficia in alios collata in ipsum beneficij autorem reuertuntur: Benefits
bestowed upon others do redound to the benefit of those that do bestow them.
Theodoretus in Psalm. 49.

Si nudum vestias, teipsum ind^is iustitia, etc. Non mediocris est ista
gratiae. Corporalia seminas and recipis spiritualia. When thou clothest the
naked, thou do apparel thy self with righteousness. etc. This is no mean
favor. Thou sowest corporal things and thou receiuest spiritual blessings:
Amb. Off. lib 1. cap. 11.

Sementis nunc tempus. Dispergamus vt congregemus. Now is the seed time. Let
us scatter abroad that we may gather together. Chrisost. in 3. cap. Ioh. Hom.
24.

Ne parum metamus, plurima seminemus. Let us sow much, lest we reap little.
Cyp. Sermon. 1 de Eleemo.

Foecundus est ager pauperum, cito reddit dominantibus fructum. The field of
the poor is very fruitful, it yeldeeth a quick return of profit to the
owners of it. Aug. Sermon. 25. de verbis Dom.

Quisquis voluerit fieri dives, pauper fiat vt sit dives: consumat vt colligat,
spargat vt congreget. Vide Agricola^, etc. Seminemus itaque and nos coelumque
velut agrum colamus, vt magna metamus abundatia, aeternisque bonis fruamur,
gratia and benignitate. etc. Whosoever would grow to be a rich man, let him be
a poor man that he may be rich: let him make a holy wast that he may
increase, let him scatter that he may gather. Behold the husbandman, etc. Let
us therefore sow also and till the field of heaven as it were, that we may
reap very abundantly, and may enjoy eternal good things, even favor and
bounty, to wit, from the merciful hand of God, etc. Chrisost, in Romans cap. 3.
in morali exhort.

Qui pauperibus benefaciunt, nihilominus sibi consulunt, ac si sua praedia
irrigarent. Eleemosynis enim tanquam canalibus, Dei benedictionem qua
locupletentur, in se diriuant. They that be beneficial to the poor, do no
less benefit themselves then if they should water their farme-groundes. For by
their Almes-giuing they do derive unto themselves the blessing of God, as it
were by conduit pipes, which makes them rich. Calvin. in cap. 9. verse. 8. 2.
ep. ad Cor.

Beneficium largientis praebenti magis permanet quam suscipienti. Sicut
frumentum quod seminatur in terra, ad seminantis potius quam ad suscipientis
lucra redit. Sit ergo tibi finis agriculturae huius initium coelestium
sationum. The benefit of the liberal giver, remains rather with the giver,
then with the receiver. Like as the corn which is sown in the ground,
returns to the gain of him that sows it, rather then of the ground that
received it. Wherefore let the end of this tillage and husbandry, be unto thee
the beginning of thy heavenly sowing. Ambros. Sermon, 81.

Prout tibi aderunt (facultates) in multitudinem, facito ex eis eleemosynam.
Sin parum tibi fuerit, pro paucitate ne metuas facere Eleemosynam. If thou have
great riches give much: if thou have but little yet be not afraid to give a
little alms. For so thou layest up a good treasure for thy self against the
day of thy necessity. Tob. chapter 4.8.9.

And when thou give of that little which thou have. do it in this manner
(says a learned Father) Pray to God in these or such like words: I have
small store as thou konwest o Lord. Yet seeing there is great need, setting
before me thy commandment, I give my needy brother of that little which I
have. Give thou also to thy servant o Lord, whenever I shall stand in need.
I have had good experience of thy goodness, and I have good trust that thou will not long delay to help, etc. Thus doing thy seed no doubt will yield
thee a harvest. Basilius 3. Concione in dinites auares.

Quod Deum precatur Paulus vt mercedem rependat Onesiphoro, 2. Tim. 1.16. etc.
vim habet promissionis. In that Paul prays to God that he would render
Onesiphorus a reward, it contains the warrant of a promise.

Nisi promssio Dei ad benignitatem exercendam acriter nos solicitet ac
stimulet, plusquam stupidi sumus. If the promise of God do not forcibly provoke
and prick us forward to the practice of liberality, we are more then
senseless. Calu. in 2. Tim. 1.18.

And again upon Matthew. 25.39. Plusquam socordes esse oportet, nisi ex
visceribus nostris misericordiam exprimat haec sententia, Christum, sc. vel
negligi vel coli in eoru^ persona, qui auxilio nostro indigent. Itaque quoties
ad miseros iuuandos pigrescimus, veniat nobis filius Dei ante oculos, cui
aliquid negare immane sacrilegium est. We must needs be more then sottish, or
heartlesse, unless this sentence do draw mercy out of our bowels; seeing
Christ himself is either neglected or regarded, in the persons of them that
stand in need of our help. Wherefore, so often as we wax sluggish in
succouring those that be distressed, let the Son of God come before our
eyes, unto whom whosoever should deny any thing, he should commit horrible
sacrilege.

Pauperis est orare, and diuitis erogare: Dei est pro paruis magna pensare. It
beseems the poor man to speak by way of entreaty, and the rich man to
disburse liberally: but it is the property of God to recompense small things
with great. Aug. Sermon. 25. de verbis Domini.

Pro paruis magna recipiemus, and pro terrenis aeterna, tempore quo promisit
Deus. We shall receive great things for small, and for earthly things eternal
at the time which God has promised. Amb. in cap. 6. ad Gal.

Penes Deum mayor est contemplatio mediocrium. God does in special manner
behold the poor even such as are of mean estate. Tertul. Apol. aduersus
Gentes, cap. 39. Behold this in that notable doctrine of our Savior Christ
Luke chapter 14. When thou make a dinner, etc. call the poor, etc. upon the
which words of our Savior Christ, read many fruitful observations of S. B. of
Ipsw. upon 2. Cor. chap. 8. and 9. page 78. 79. 80. 81. 82. And again, page
88. This is more acceptable to God (to wit) to bid the poor, etc. for it is a
better proof and argument of sound love, etc.

Qui miseretur pauperi foeneratur Deo. Vide vsurae raram naturam and
admirabilem. Alius est qui accepit, nempe pauper: and alius qui se foenore
obligat, scilicet Deus. Nec hoc solum nimirum, sed quia in hoc vsurae genere,
non est locus ingratitudini, aut vlli damno, sed certissima and c^piosissima
manet compensatio. He that has mercy on the poor, lends unto the Lord, as
it were upon usury. Wherein behold a rare and admirable kind of usury. He
that receives, that is, the poor man, is altogether another from him who
binds himself to pay the lone, to wit, God. Neither is this only to be
marvelled at, seeing in this kind of usury th^re is all security against
unthankfulness, and every the least damage or loss. Yea the full
recompense abides most sure and certain. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in cap. 1. Genesis

Magnificus est Deus in dando foenore. God is very bounteous to all those that
lend to him upon the usury of liberality. Basil. 3. Conc. in auaros diuites.

And in the same sense Nazianz. Orat. 18. ad Ciues trepidantes: Largus est Deus
in remunerando. God is a very liberal rewarder.

Caluinus in Act. cap. 10. verse. 4. Hinc colligimus (inquit Caluinus) virtutes
and benefacta non tantum placere Deo, sed ornari etiam splendida hac mercede,
quod in eorum graetiam cumulat nos amplioribus donis and locupletat: iuxta
illud Matthew. 13.12. Habenti dabitur. Item, euge serve bone and fidelis: fidelis
fuisti in paucis: super multa te constituam. Sic enim continua donorum suorum
serie, Dominus, suos quasi certis gradibus euehet, donec ad summum perducat.
Nec tame^ sequitur, vlla esse in nobis, propria virtute opera preparatoria ad
fidem acquire^dam. vel, fide acquisita, meritoria, Omnia siquidem dona omnisque
remuneratio est a Deo, eaque maxim gratuita. This notable servant of God,
writing upon these words of the holy Angel to Cornelius, that his alms and
prayers were come up into remembrance before God. Hence (says he) we gather
that beneficence and other virtues, do not only please God, but that they are
likewise set forth and beautified with this goodly recompense, that in respect
of them he does increase and enrich us with a greater measure of his gifts:
according to that Matthew. 13.12. To him that has shall be given. And likewise,
well, good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in little, I will
make thee ruler over much. For thus does the Lord, by a continual course of
his gifts, lift up those that be his, as it were by certain steps, until
he brings them to the top of their advancement. Nevertheless, it does not
hereof follow, that there are in us any works of preparation, by any
selfe-vertue or power, that thereby we should ataine to faith, or after faith
attained, that we should merit by them. For assuredly all gifts and every
recompense, is not only from God, but also from him most frank and free. Read
also his comment. upon the 6. verse of the 11. chapter to the Heb.

Pijs hominibus beneficentia est pro omnibus latifundijs. The beneficence of
the Godly, is in stead of large possessions unto them. Beza in mayor. annot. 2.
Cor. cap. 9.

Beneficence preuenteth much sin.
Malesuada fames and dura paupertas animum reddit improbum and audacem. Hunger
as an evil counselor, and poverty, if it lie sore upon a man, it makes his
mind wicked, yea bold to sin. Musc. in 6. Matthew.

But by the beneficence of merciful men, the evil is graciously prevented, or
stayed: and no doubt God will reward it unto them, even because they do
thereby hide a multitude of sin. That which is Christianly given, is the
surest part of any man's goods and possession.


Est quidem vox hominis Ethnici, Quas dederis solas semper babebis opes. Ratio
est, quod locatur extra fortunam quicquid amicis donatur. It is in deed the
saying of an Heathen that of all his riches, a man has only that always,
which he has given. The reason is that this is no more subject to casualtie,
etc. Caluinus in ep. ad Cor. 2. cap. 8.10. Illud possidemus quo vtimur: quod
autem vltra vsum est, non vtique habet possessionis fructum, sed custodiae
periculum. We possess that which we do well employ: the rest has not so much
profit in the possession, as danger of loosing. Amb. Off. 2. cap. 26.

Hoc habeo (inquit Marcus Antonius) quodcunque dedi. Marcus Antonius was wont
to say. This I am sure of, that all which I have given is mine own. Sen. lib.
6. de Benef. cap. 3.

And in the same place: Dono dando tua facis: and possessionem inexpugnabilem
paras. Thou assurest to thy self that which thou give for a gift: and
thereby thou obtainest an invincible possession.

(...).

It is a very commodious thing to defeat the moth and the fretting of envy.
This can no better way be compassed then by the excrcise of liberality. Gesn.
Sermon. sentent. 76.

Mete ergo vberes pecuniae tuae fructus, Beneficence intituleth a man to the
effectual prayers of the poor whom God promises to hear.
orationes dico pauperum, etc. Reap thou therefore the abundant fruit of thy
money, I mean the prayers of the poor, etc. Amb. Sermon. 81.

The Lord has put a blessing into the hands of distressed persons for them to
bestow upon such as do relieve them: as is well observed from the 29. chapter of
Job. verse 13. Lect. of S. B. page 95.96.

Basil. Magnus in his 3. Sermon against covetous rich men. He shows this to
be the cause why God turns ple^tie into scarcity, and cheapnes into dearth.
Quod cum ex Deo accipiamus, alijs non damus. Because when we receive of God we
do not give unto men. Beneficentiam (inquit) laudamus, nos hac carentes,
egentibus desumus. Serui existentes liberamur, and conseruos non miseramur.
Esurientes nutrimur, inopibus alimenta negamus. Cum indeficientem Promu^ ac
Thesaurarium Deum habeamus, nos erga pauperes perparci ac tenaces sumus, etc.
Hac igitur de causa minatur nobis iustum Dei iudicium. Hac de causa Deus
omnipotens manu^ non aperit, quonia^ fraternitatis charitatem occlusimus. Ob
hoc and ca^pi steriles, quoniam charitas friguit. Supplicantium vox frustra
clamat ac in aere euanescit and dissipatur: nam and nos rogantes minime
audimus, etc. We commend beneficence (says the godly father) but for want of
using it we are wanting to the poor. Though we being servants are delivered,
yet we have no compassion over our fellow-seruants. We are fed when we are
hungry, but we deny food to the needy. Though God be unto us as a Butler or
Treasurer that never fails us, yet are we over sparing and niggardly toward
the poor, etc. For this cause therefore does God in his justice threaten his
judgment against us. For this cause does not almighty God open his hand
because we have shut up our compassion from our brethren. For this cause also
are the fields barren, because charity is waxen cold. The voice of our
supplications cries in vain, and vanishes, and is scattered in the air,
insomuch as we do not hear those that entreat us, etc. The whole Sermon is
worthy every Christians reading.

Quae vtilitas in aliena regione (h. in isto mundo) multas diuitias relinquere,
in propria autem and in patria necessarijs carere? Itaque oro, festinemus dum
adhuc tempus est, vt illuc transferamus etiam quae in hac aliena habemus, etc.
Facilis est transuectio, scilicet, per manus pauperum, etc. What profits it
to leave abundance of riches in a strange country (that is, in this world) and
to want necessaries at home in our own country (that is, in the kingdom of
heaven.) I pray ye therefore let us make have while yet there is time that we
may co^uey thither eue^ those things which we have in this strange place. The
transportation is easy; to wit, by the hands or help of the poor, etc.
Chrisost. in Genesis cap. 23. Homil. 48.

Ostendam tibi horrea iam parata (inquit Amb. Ser. 81.) sc. esurientium
pauperum ventres: in ipsis tuos conclude the sauros. I will show thee (says
Amb. in his 81. Sermon, he speaks there to the rich man straited for want of
barne-roome) barnes already made fit to thy hand, that is to say, the bellies
of poor hungry people: in these barnes lay up thy treasure, let them be the
lock and key for them, etc. The whole Sermon is worthy thy reading. Lege
etia^ Bas. Mag. in eade^ diuitis auari verba Lucae 12.3. Concione in diuites
auaros.

And Ecclesiast. cap. 29.15.16. Concludito misericordem beneficentiam in
penuarijs tuis, etc. Lay up in the storehouses that which thou mindest to
imploie to merciful beneficence, etc.

Sentences which may be referred to the Doctrine of the 4. Chapter.
Those professors which do not relieve their poor brethren, are called in the
Scripture, clouds without rain. And therefore, they are subject to the curse
which was denounced by Christ against the fig tree, Never fruit grow on
thee hereafter. Read Lectures of S. B. of Ips. page 20.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautu^. The use of all the threats and
punishments contained in the 4. chapter of the Treatise.
He is a happy man whom other men's dangers can make circu^spect or wary.

Ne expectes dum in te ipso discas quantum malum sit inhumanitas, quantumque
bonum viscera egentibus aperire. In alienis calamitatibus haec discito. etc.
Delay not the time, till thou learnest by thine own experience, how great an
evil unmercifulness is, and how great a good thing it is to open the bowelles
of compassion to those that stand in need: Greg. Nazianz. Orat. de Paup. amore.

Seeing God accouteth the duty of love which at his commandment is performed
to men to be a spiritual sacred service done unto himself, woe to our
sottishnes if we shall not only consume in profane but also in wicked uses
those things which should serve for holy oblations, etc. Calvin. Heb. 13.16.
and Philip. chapter 4.18. comment.

Sentences to be referred to the fifth Chapter: and first of all to the answer
of the first Objection.
Recordare o homo quis est qui largitus est tibi teipsum: and qui sis in
memoriam reuoca. Seruus es Dei, and dispensatio tibi commissa est Dominicae
facultatis. Recordare ergo quis est qui tibi iniunxit officium dispensandi
familiam suam. Quid est quod multis praelatus es? Non est vtique sine causa,
quod tibi a bono and iusto Deo officium tribuitur largiendi, alijs necessitas
imponitur indigendi. Dispensatorem igitur conseruorum tuorum, te ex dominicis
facultatibus esse, cognosce. Ne existimes quod omnia ventri and delitijs tuis
terra producat. Quae in manibus habes commissa tibi magis quam concessa
cognosce. Paruo tempore aliquantulum super ijs laetaris, and abuti ijs
voluptuosius delectaris. Cum vero haec pariter cu^ vita nostra defluxerint,
rationem dispensationis nostrae, vocamur Domino reddituri.

Haec Amb. Sermon. 81. and ibidem in fine.

Non minus est criminis habenti tollere, quam cum possis and abundes,
indigentibus denegare. etc.

Tot te ergo scias inuadere bona, quot possis praestare quod velis.

Remember o man who it is that has given unto thee even thine own self: and
call thou to mind who thou art. Thou art a servant of God, and the stewardship
of the Lords riches is committed to thee. Remember therefore who it is that
has enjoined thee the office of a Steward to his family. What is the cause
that thou art preferred to many? Surely it is not without cause that the
merciful and just God has given to thee the office of distributing, and that
the necessity of wanting is laid upon other. Know therefore, that thou art a
disposer of the Lords riches, to thy fellow servants. Do not think that the
earth brings forth all for thy belly, and to serve for thy deliciousness. As
touching the things which thou enioyest, consider that they are committed to
thee as of trust, rather then granted to thee to do with them as thou list.
Thou reioycest a little for a short time, and take delight to abuse them at
thy pleasure. But when these things, together with our lives, shall slip away,
we are called to give an account to the Lord of our stewardship, etc. And
again: it is no less crime to take away from a man that which he has, then
to deny succor to the distressed when thou art able to do it of thy
abundance, etc. Know thou therefore that thou do bereave so many of their
goods, as thou might relieve if thou would.

Thus much out of Amb. Sermon. 81.

The Lord has given the rich man his riches as it were by a letter of
administration to give where there is need. Lect. of S. B. page 60.

Qui metuunt ne liberalitate res minuantur, Answer to the 3. object
ipsi nescientes miseriminuuntur, amatores magis Mammonae quam animae suae:
They that are affraide lest they should waste their goods by liberality, they
themselves, miserable men that they be, are at unawares consumed, for that they
love their riches more then their own souls, Cyprian. Sermon. 1. de Eleemos.

And again, Qui timent ne patrimonium been agendo perdant, ipsi male agendo
pro patrimonio pereunt. They that fear lest they should destroy their
patrimony by doing that which is good, they themselves do perish is in steed
of their patrimony by committing that which evil.

Eleemosyna non est diuitiarum dispendium, sed ditescendi potius compendium,
quastusque omnium vberrimus. Almes-giuing is not the way to wast riches, but
rather a compendious or ready way to grow rich: yea in it self it is the most
plentiful gain that may be. Gualterus in Matthaeum. 6.

Non ita claudenda est res familiaris vt eam benignita^ aperire non possit, nec
ita rescranda vt pateat omnibus modus adhibeatur, and referatur ad facultates.
Cicero Off. 2. Englished before.

Beneficijs quae maxim societatem alligant, danda est lex, ne sub specie
benignitatis inconsulta facilitas placeat: neue haec ipsa obseruatio
liberalitatem restinguat dum temperat. Sen. de Ben. lib. 1. cap. 4. Englished
before.

And the same Seneca in the beginning of his first book: Inter multos ac
varios errores temere inconsulteque viuentium, nihil propemodum nocentius, quam
quod beneficia nec dare scimus, nec accipere. This is also Englished before.

Pro viribus suis quisque faciat. Non sic faciat vt ipse angustias patiatur.
Non hoc dicimus. Superflua tua, necessaria sunt alijs. Let every man do
according to his ability. Not so that he should overmuch streighten himself.
We do not teach so. Thy superfluous things are other men's necessaries: August.
Hom. 13.

Non vult Deus in angustias nos redigi, vt alij nostra liberalitate diffluant:
It is not Gods will that we should bring our selves into straites, that other
men should have more then enough by our liberality: Call. in 2. Cor. 8.13.

Sanctorum vsibus est communicandum, vsibus inquam non autem voluptatibus aut
delitijs: his enim homines redduntur deteriores: deinde etiam sumptibus
huiusmodi supercaneis, posset alijs quoque pauperibus subueniri. It our part to
contribute to the necessities of the Saints, necessities I say, but not to
their pleasures and delicacie: for thus are men oftentimes made worse then they
were before: and moreover, by such superfluous charges other poor people might
be relieved. Pet. Mart. in octauum Praeceptum.

Answer to the Object. concerning care for children.
Parents consulere viui ac prospicere debent, vt liberorum solitudo and
pueritia quam firmissimo praesidio munita sit. Parents while they are yet
living ought to take order and provide that when their children should in their
childhood be bereaved of the^ they might be fenced with as sure a defense as
may be, Cicero 3. Act. in Ver. It is true. But what may be this most sure and
safe defense? Verily godliness only is that most sure and safe defense.

Multitudo filiorum non debet tollere diuitiarum communicationem. Patrimonium
Deo creditum, nec resp. cripit, nec fiscus inuadit, nec calumnia aliqua
forensis euertit. In tuto haereditas ponitur, quae a Deo custode seruatur. Hoc
est charis pignoribus in posterum prouidere, hoc est futuris haeredibus paterna
pietate consulere. The multitude of children ought not utterly to take away the
communicating of our goods to others. That patrimony which is committed to God,
neither can it be taken away under coulourable pretense of service to the
commonwealth, neither has the exchequer or confiscation to the Princes use
any thing to do against it, neither can any quarrelling or wrangling action at
common law overthrow it. That inheritance is settled in most sure estate,
whereof God is made the Gardin or keeper. This is indeed to provide for thy
dear children for the time to come, this is in a right fatherly and godly
course to take order for those which shall be thy heyers after thee. Cyprianus.
Sermon. 1. de Eleemos.

And again, Praeuaricator and proditor Pater es, nisi filijs tuis fideliter
consulas, nisi conseruandis ijs, religiosa and vera pietate prospicias. Thou
art but a deceivable and treacherous undermining father, unless thou do
provide for thy children, in that course which beseems a faithful man, and
unless for the preservation of them, thou acquaintest thy self before hand with
the practice of religion and true godliness.

Now a special part of this true religion as the Apostle James teaches, is
to visit the fatherless and widows in their adversity, etc. chapter 1, 27.

Si filijs tuis Deum cohaeredem and Tutorem constitueris, innumeros simul etiam
thesauros illis vere reliquisti. Quemadmodum enin Deus, cum nos ipsos
vlciscimur, nos ipse non tutatur: cum vero illi vindicta^ permittimus, plura
quam expectabamus, nostri gratia facit. Ita and cum pecunijs facit, etc. Non
igitur huc spectemus, quomodo liberos diuites relinquamus, sed quomodo
relinquamus vertute conspicuos, etc. Et iterum. Si vis filios diuites
relinquere, relinque illis debitore Deum, illi sc. testime^tariat ipsoru^
literas concedens, etc. Contemnamus pecunias, ne Christu^ co^te^namus:
conte^namus inqua^ pecunias, vt and pecunijs fruamur.

If thou will make God the joint heir and protector of thy children, thou
shall therwithall leave innumerable treasures unto the^. For like as when we do
revenge our own wrongs, God does not take upon him our defense. but when we
leave vengeance to him, he works more on our behalf then we looked for: so
deals he in the matter of money, etc. Let us not therefore aim at this, how
we should leave our children rich, but how we may leave the^ to be of worthy
note for their virtue. And again. If thou mindest to leave thy children rich,
leave the Lord a debtor unto the^, and leave in his hands the letters
testimentarie or will of thy legacies which thou have bequeathed them, etc. Let
us set light by money, lest we grow to set light by Christ: let us (I say) set
light by money, that so we may use money as it should be used, etc. Chrisost.
in cap. 3. ad Romans in morali exhortatione.

Read also if you please August. lib. de december Chordis. cap. 12. which is the
last of the book, where very pleasantly he confuteth the inordinate care which
Parents pretend for their children, conuincing them of a manifest lie, as he
plainly demonstrateth his charge against them: and shows that it is their
infidelity and covetousness in respect of their own selves principally, which
suppresseth their beneficence and mercy toward the poor.

Finally, for this point, consider well the excellent saying of Calvin in his
Comment. upon 2. Cor. 8.10. Sola benedictio Dei pluris centuplo aestimanda est,
quam omnes mundi thesauri. The blessing of God is of it self alone to be
esteemed a hundredth fold more then all the treasures of the whole world. Answer
to the 2. and 3. Ob. concerning the pretended unworthiness of the poor.


Post malos meliores quaeras. If thou perceiuest any to who^ thou give, to be
very unthrifty and unthankful, etc. make choice of better. Yet think of that
which the same author says further: Satius est prodesse etia^ malis propter
bonos, quam bonis deesse propter malos. It is better to be beneficial even to
those that be evil, for their sakes that be good, then to fail those that be
good, because other are evil. Sen. lib. de Ben. 4. cap. 28. And again,
Beneficia fere sequuntur non reposcentem. And yet again. Propositum optimi
viri and ingentis animi est, tamdiu far ingratum donec feceris gratum. lib.
5. cap. 1. Englished before. Read him also, lib. 7. cap. 31. Vincit malos
pertinax bonitas. Unweariable goodness overcomes evil men. And further he
adds: In caeteris rebus ad spes bonas animus pertinax est. Terra marique
humana opera cessarent, nisi male ruentia iterum tentare libuisset. In other
matters the mind is stiff and unweariable, because it is still in hope of good
success. And all the businesses of men should cease, both by sea and by land,
unless they should attempt the same things again and again, though ere while
they fall out very ill. Wherefore as it follows in the next chap. Tanquam
bonus agricola cura cultuque sterilitatem soli vince. Ingratus non mihi
iniuriam facit, sed sibi. Non est magni animi beneficium dare and perdere: hoc
est magni animi, perdere and dare. That is, do thou the part of a good
husba^dman, overcome the barrenness of the ground by diligent manuring of it.
He that is unthankful, is not so much injurious to me, as to himself. And
again: This is not the property of a very liberal mind, to give and to lose,
but to lose, and yet for all that still to give.

But specially call to mind that which is said of the Christian Doctor.
Seminatur in terra, germinat in coelo. Plantatur in paeuperes, apud Deum
pullulat. What therefore though some be unthankful? Thou sowest on the earth,
but it springs up in heaven. Thou plantest among the poor, but it grows up
with God. Amb. lib. de Nabuthe cap. 12.

Qui pendet a benedictione Domini, animum habet explicatum his tricis: and
simul manus solutas ad beneficentiam. Answer to the last Object.
He that depends upon the blessing of God, has his mind loosened from these
snarlings: and he has his hands also at liberty to the actions of
liberality. Caluinus in 2. Cor. cap. 8. verse. 2.

The Sentences follow which may be referred to the second part of the Treatise:
and first to the first Chap.
Iniquissimum est, pecuniam sub gloria egestatis, acquirere. It is a most
unequal thing that any man should go about to get money, glorying in his
poverty. Or bearing this mind, as though it were a credit to him to be a poor
man. Sen. de Benef. lib. 2. cap. 17.

And well may the Philosopher say so, because poverty is a public conviction
or open badge and cognizance as it were of our sin.

Moreover in the same chapter. There are many (says Seneca) of such a crooked
nature, that they had rather lose whatsoever kindness they have showed, then
they would seem to receive any thing, they being proud and vpbrayding men.
Multi sunt tam prauae naturae, vt malint perdere quae praestiterunt quam videri
recepisse, superbi and imputatores. Quanto melius quantoque humanius id agere,
vt illis quoque suae parts constent, etc. and gratias agentem, non aliter quam
si referat audire, praebere se facilem ad hoc, vt quem obligauit, etiam exolui
velit. How much better, and how much more courteous is it, to take such a
course, that they that receive may have their time to give, etc. Yea, and for
one to hear another giving thanks, even as if he did make a full recompense;
and herein to show himself ready to release him, whom he has bound as it were
by an obligation.

And yet again in the same chapter: Beneficium tam recipiendum est quam non
exigendum. A benefit is in like proportion to be received as it is not to be
exacted.

Non minus regium and humanum est, exigua beneuole and placide accipere, quam
magna dare. It is no less princely and courteous to accept small things readily
and with gentle good will, then to give things of great value. Plutarchus.

Sentences that may be refered to the 2. chapter of the 2. part.
Non minoris est animi, beneficium recte debere, quam dare. Great grace is
required to the receiving of a gift.
Eo quidem operosius hoc quam illud, quo maiore diligentia custodiuntur accepta
quam dantur. It is no less virtue, to be rightly indebted for a benefit, then
to give it. Yea so much the more labor belongs to this, then to that,
according as things received, require more diligence to the keeping, then to
the giving of them. Sen. de Beneficijs lib. 6. cap. 43.

Non patitur auiditas quemquam esse gratum. Nunquam enim improbae spei quod
datur satis est. Et maiora cupimus quo maiora venerunt. If any man be
couetously lingering after gifts, it will not suffer him to be thankful. For
inordinate hope is never satisfied with that which is already given. For by
how much the gifts that have been bestowed are greater, by so much, greater
gifts are still desired and longed after. Seneca de Beneficijs lib. 2. cap. 27.

But as touching the good disposition of a mind well disposed, the same author
says. Optandum est non recipere beneficia potius quam non dare. It were to be
wished, rather never to receive benefits. then never to give any at all. lib.
1. cap. 2. And lib. 12. cap. 18. Maiore delectu quaerendum est cui debeamus,
quam cui praestemus. Greater choice is to be made, to whom we mind to be
indebted, then whom we will make indebted to our selves.

Vir nemo bonus ab improbo se donari vult. No good man will willingly be
indebted to a wicked man. Cicero de Legibus lib. 2. Platonis sententiam
referens. A G^ft must be received thankfully.


Qui grate beneficium accepit, primam eius pensionem soluit. Et quod superest
soluendae gratiae securior debere potest. He that has thankefullie received a
benefit, he therewithal paieth as it were the first payment: and as touching
that recompense which is further more to be made, he has the longer day or
respite for the paying of it. Sen. lib. 2. de Been. cap 22. and 35.

Qui vero beneficium dantis, grata mente non suscipit, iniuriam facit
benefacienti. But he that does not intertaine the benefit of his benefactor,
with a grateful mind, he does him great wrong. Amb. Comment. in cap. 10. ep.
ad Heb.

Gratiarum actio est ad plus dandum inuitatio (...). Thankfulness is an
inducement to provoke to the bestowing of greater gifts. Chrisost. And again,
Si cum ab hominibus beneficium aliquod accepimus, illud grati praedicamus
beneuolentiores illos reddimus: quanto magis Dei beneficia celebrantes, ad
maiorem erga nos beneuolentiam eum inuitabimus? Seeing when we receive any
benefit at the hands of men, if we speak thankfully of it, we make them more
kindly affected toward us: how much more shall we provoke the Lord to show his
more great favor toward us, if we will celebrate his praises for his benefits
bestowed on us?

We must be specially thankful to God.
Gratitudo nulla assequi potest magnitudinem beneficiorum Dei. Deo debemus omne
quod possumus, omne quod viuimus, omne quod sapimus: and quis habet quicquam
non tuum. No thankfulness can be proportionable to the greatness of Gods
benefits. We owe unto God all that we are able to perform, and whatsoever our
whole life and wit may attain unto: and who has any thing (says August.)
which is not thine o Lord. Medit. cap. 17.

Nunquam Dei liberalitatem and munificentia^ vinces, qua^uis omnium facultatum
tuarum iacturam feceris, quamuis te ipsum etiam facultatibus adiunxeris. Nam
hoc quoque ipsum, Deo aliquid donare accipere est. Thou can never exceed the
liberality and bountifulness of God, although thou should loose al
whatsoever thou enioyest for his sake, yea although thou do join thy self
also with all that thou art worth. For even this also To give any thing to God:
it is to receive a gift of him. To wit in that it pleases him to accept the
same. Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 27. de Pauperum a more

Quicquid sumus and quicquid habemus, Deo debemus. We owe unto God whatsoever
we are, and whatsoever we have. Calu. in 2. Cor. 8.13.

(...). All good duty is to be performed to benefactors.


It is our duty to perform all thankfulness to those that have deserved
well of us. Basilius.

Ostendit Paulus suam (Onesiphoro) gratitudinem, quum remunerandi vices in Deum
transcribit, quia impar est soluendo. Benefactors are to be prayed for.
Paul shows his thankfulness to Onesiphorus, in that he being unable to
make recompense, (to wit, with worldly requital) he puts over the office of
rewarding unto God. Calu. in 2. Tim. 1.16. etc. And in the same place. Tantus
est etiam Dei amor erga suos, vt se ad omnes qui cum illis sunt coniuncti
diffundat. So great also is the love of God toward his servants, that he does
extend his love unto all that are joined in communion with them.

Beneficiorum acceptorum commemorationem honestam laudandi occasionem esse:
dixit Basilius. Benefactors are to be well spoken of.
The rehearsal of benefits received, is an honest means of yielding them
their due commendation, as says Basil.

Nullum officium referenda gratia magis necessarium est. Benefactors are to be
recompenc^d.
No duty is more necessary, then is this of thankful requital. Cicero Off.
1.

Quid tamlaudabile? quid tam in omniu^ animos receptu^, quam refer
benemeritis gratiam? What is so commendable? what so generally allowed in the
minds of all, as that thanks is to be rendered to those, that have deserved
well of us? Sen. de Benef. lib. 4. 6.

Quae natio non comitatem, non benignitatem, non gratum animum and beneficij
memorem diligit? quae superbos, quae maleficos, quae crudeles, quae ingratos
non aspernatur, non odit? What nation is there that loves not courtesy and
liberality, as also a grateful heart, and such one as is mindful of a
benefit received? Likewise what nation is there, where proud, mischievous,
cruel, and unthankful persons are not despised and hated? Cicero de Leg.
lib. 1.

Xenophon alijque Ethnicorum Graecorum dixerunt, (...).

Xenophon, and sundry other of the heathen Grecians were wont to say, that it
is every where accounted a just thing, that such as have benefits bestowed
upon them, should likewise have care to make some recompense again.

Recompense is to be made with advantage if it may be.
Hesiodium illud (inquit Cicero) laudatur a doctis; quod eadem mensura reddere
iubet, qua acceperis aut etiam cumulatiore, si possis. That saying of Hesiodus
(says Cicero) is commended of the learned, which wills thee to render
according to the same measure whereby thou have received; or if it may be, with
a more full and heaped requital. Lib. de claris Orat.

Non tantum animo aequare, sed, si fieri potest, vincere debemus. Sen. de
Benef. lib. 1. cap. 4.

And among Christians: Quid tam contra officium (inquit Ambrosius) quam non
reddere quod acceperis? Nec mensura pari, sed vberiore reddendum arbitror, and
vsum pensandum beneficij. What is so contrary to good duty, as not to
recompense that which thou have received? Neither do I judge that thou
should do it with equal measure only, but more abundantly: and that the
use of the benefit should be requited according to the time it has been
enjoyed: Off. lib. 1. cap. 31.

But what if a man be not able so to do? Quid si nulla reddendi facultas
suppetit? He answers in the next chapter: In reddendo beneficio, plus animus
quam census operatur: magisque praeponderat beneuolentia, quam possibilitas
referendi muneris. In that case (says he) a good mind or desire to do it, is
of better worth then silver: and a ready will or affection is more to be
esteemed then all possibility of any other recompense.

And among the heathen Cicero in his 3. Philippica, thus he determines this
point: Cum gratia referri non potest, quanta debetur, habenda tamen est quantam
maximam animi nostri capere possint. When the thanks deserved are greater then
we can repay, we are yet to acknowledge them with as earnest affection as our
minds are possibly able to attain unto.

Nescit virtus mensuram gratiae, nec contenta refer quod acceperit, vult
cumulare quod sumpserit: ne inferior sit beneficio licet aequetur officio.
Virtue is of this nature that it cannot abide to be scant in thankfulness,
and not contented to yield that which it has received, it desires to return
heap measure: not liking to be inferior in the benefit, though it be matched
in like dutifulness of the mind. Amb. Comment. lib. 5. in cap 6. Lucae.

Magni viri magnifice egerunt non vt in vnam tantum aetatem prodessent:
Benefactors are to be recompensed in their posterity.
ita and nos non per vnam tantum aetatem grati esse debemus. As men of
excellent virtue have done notable things, respecting the benefit of more ages
then one; so ought thankfulness to continue from one age to another toward
those that descend from them.

Gratus esse non potest nisi qui beneficij meminit. To move unto this
recompence-making it is necessary that benefits be well thought of and
remembered.
He can not be a thankful man that is not mindful of the benefit. Obliuio
facit ingratum, nec excusat ingratitudinem. Forgetfulness makes unthankful,
but it is no excuse of unthankfulness. Sen. de Benef. lib. 3. cap. 1. etc.

And again, Quis tam ingratus est, quam qui quod in prima part animi, positum
esse debuit and semper occurrere, ita seposuit and abiecit, vt in ignorantiam
verteretur? Apparet illum non saepe de reddendo cogitasse, cui obrepsii
obliuio. Who is so unthankful, as he which has so put aside, yea cast away
that which ought to be chiefly remembered, and often thought upon by him, that
it is turned into mere ignorance whether any such thing had ever been or no?

This forgetfulness is the rather to be carefully watched against, because we
are very apt to forget a benefit soon after we have received it: according to
the sentences following.

Beneficij memoria breuissima: at iniuriae solet esse tenacissima. The
remembrance of a benefit is very short: but an injury is kept very long in
mind.

And again, (...) Nothing in this life does sooner wax old, or loose the
vigor of it, then does thankfulness. Socrates. Aristoteles.

And not only is it so concerning men, but even concerni^g God also. Nihil enim
procliuius est quam donorum Dei obliuio. Nothing is more ready with us then
the forgetfulness of Gods benefits. Caluinus Comment. in Ioh. cap. 4.44.

Wherefore worthy is the admonition of a more ancient Father: Vt pretiosum
quoddam depositum gratiarum actionem in anima tua custodias: and recipies tu
quoque duplice^ illius iucu^ditatem. Keep thou thankfulness in thy heart, as
thou would keep a precious pledge committed unto thee: and thou thy self
also shall receive a double pleasure thereby. Basilius Sermon. 3. in diuites
auaros.

Neither is the saying of the heathen Philsopher to be lightly passed by, in
that he sets down this sentence: Multum is dat ei, cuise fidelem and gratum
amicum dederit. That man gives much unto him to who^ he will give himself a
trusty and grateful friend. Sen. de Benef. lib. 6.33.

There are many ways of exercising beneficence.
Alium re, alium fide, alium gratia, alium consilio, alium praeceptis
salutaribus adiuua. Be helpeful to one with thy goods, to another by trusty
dealing, to another by that favor which thou have with any, to another by
advise and counsel, and to another with wholesome instructions. Sen. de
beneficijs lib. 1. cap. 2.

Envy hinders all thank^ulne^.
Vehemens and importunum malum est inuidia, quae nos inquietat, dum comparat.
Hoc mihi praestitit, sed illi plus, sed illi maturius, and deinde nullius
eausam agit, contra omnes sibi fauet. Gratitudini denique inimicissima est. Non
potest quisquam inuidere and gratias agere. Quia inuidere querentis and moesti
est, gratias agere gaudentis. Envy is a fierce and troublesome evil the which
disquieteth us while we enter into comparison: to wit, after this manner: He
has done this for me indeed, but more for him, and that also more seasonably:
and thus he pleads on no man's side, but against all, he is partial for
himself alone. To conclude, it is the sorest enemy that thankfulness has.
It is impossible that any man should be both envious and thankful. For envy
is the property of him that complains and is sullome: but thankfulness
belongs to him that is joyous and cheareful. Sen. lib. de Benef. 2. cap. 27.
and lib. 3. cap. 3.

Res conuiu^ctae sunt Dei gloria and Ecclesiae munificentia. The chief end and
^se o^ beneficence i^ the glory o^ God.
Neque haec cessare potest, quin illa tantundem minuatur. The glory of God, and
the liberality or contributions of the Church, are linked together. Neither
can this cease, but accordingly is that diminished. Calu. in cap. 8. verse 19.
2. Cor.

Nothing can be said or conceived sufficiently concerning this grace of
beneficence: in which respect the Apostle calls it an unspeakable gift of
God. Lect. of S. B the last page

Sentences that may be referred to the third chapter. 2. part of the Treatise
Omnes immemeres beneficij oderunt. All men are wont to hate such as are
unmindful of the ben^fite or good turn which has been done them. Cicero
Offic. 2. Unthankfulness to men i^ a very hainou^s^n.
And again, lib. 8, ep. ad Atticum. In ingratitudine nihil non mali inest.
Ingratitude is accompained with all kind of evil and mischief.

Non refer beneficijs gratiam, and est turpe, and apud omnes habetur. Ideo de
ingratis ingrati queruntur, cum interim, hoc in omnibus haeret, quod omnibus
displicet. It is a very shameful thing, and so is it acccunted of all men, for
a man not to be thankeful for benefits received. And for the same cause even
unthankful men themselves complain of those that be unthankful, though in
the mean while, that sticks in all, which seems to be disliked of all. Sen.
de Ben. lib. 3. cap. 1 And chapter 6. and 7. of the same book. Cum diff^cilis
esset incertae rei aestimatio, odio damnauimus. and inter ea reliquimus quae ad
vindices Deos mittimus. When we perceived (says Seneca, in the name of many
other Philosophers) that the matter was so difficult that we could not
certainly determine it, we condemned it as an odious thing, and have left it
among those things that we put over to be reue^ged of God.

(...). Vitium maximum ingraetitudo videtur mihi, indignum profecto, and
perquam indignum vitium. Chrisost.

(...). Detestabilis est obliuio gratiae and beneficiorum reticentia. Theod.

(...). Admiranda illa quidem ingratitudo est, quae benemerentis beneuolentiam,
ingratitudinis occasionem facit: Gesner. Sermon. sentent. 58. These Sentences are
Englished before.

Argumentum nihil debentium odio quaerunt. Some seek by their hateful
dealing, to make proof, that they think themselves nothing beholding to their
friend. Sen. de Ben. lib. 2. cap. 24.

Sunt hi non solum Christiano nomine indigni sed ne homines quidem
dicimerentur, cum monstra naturae sint, quae creaturis omnibus gratitudinis
sensum inseuit. Agnoscit bos herum suum, etc. These verily are not only
unworthy to be called by the name of Christians, but the name of men is too
good for them, seeing they are mo^sters in nature, the which has seeded a
certain sense of thankfulness in all creatures. The ox knows his Master,
etc. Isai. 1. Gualt. in 5. Mat.

Unthankfulness to God is the root of unthankfulness to men.
Ab ingratitudine erga Deum, manat ingratitudinis erga homines: hoc est
detestabilis vitij, audacia. Cui enim respondebit grate? Quod munus existimabit
magnum, aut reddendum, qui summa beneficia spernit? From unthankfulness to
God, issues the shameless boldness of unthankfulness to men, that is to
say of a most detestable vice. For to whom will such a man show himself
thankful? What benefit will he esteem great, or worthy to be recompe^ced,
which despises those that be the greatest of all other? Sen de Been. 2. cap.
30.

Finally, the unthankful man is not only injurious to himself, but also a
common enemy to all that stand in need, insomuch as he discourageth many
from the continuance of their liberality. In which respect it is said, as was
partly alleged before, Omnes immemorem beneficij oderunt, eamque iniuriam (as
it follows) in deterrenda liberalitate sibi etiam fieri, eumque qui faciat
communem hostem tenuiorum putant. Off. 2. The words of Seneca exhorting
children to recompense their Parents, yea if it may be to exceed their
beneficence toward them.


Haec (inquit Seneca) non destruunt parentum venerationem, nec deteriores illis
liberos faciunt. imo itiam meliores, etc. Alacrior erit pietas, siad reddenda
beneficia, cum vincendi spe venerit, etc. Nisi hic ita iudicamus, excusationem
damus liberis, and illos segniores ad referendam gratiam facimus, quibus
stimulos adijcere debemus and dicere, Hoc agite optimi inuenes, proposita est
inter parents and liberos, honesta contentio, dederint maiora an receperint.
Non ideo viceruut, quia occupauerunt. Sumite modo animum qualem decet, and
deficere nolite, vt vincatis optantes. Nec desunt tam pulchro certamini duces,
qui similia vos cohortentur, ac per vestigia sua, ire ad victoriam saepe iam
partam ex parentibus, iubeant. Ca. 36. lib. 3. de Benef. Et cap. 38. Nulla vi
verborum, nulla ingenij facultate exprimi potest, quantum opus sit, qua^
laudabile, quamque nunqua^ a memoria hominum exiturum, posse haec dicere.
Parentibus meis parui, cessi imperio eorum, etc. ad hoc vnum contumax fui ne
beneficijs vincerer. Certate obsecro vos, and fusi quoque restituite aciem.
Foelices qui vicerint, foelices qui vincentur. Quid eo adolescente praeclarius,
qui sibi ipsi dicere potuit (neque enim fas est alteri dicere) Parentem meum
beneficijs vici? Quid eo fortunatius seen qui omnibus vbique praedicabit, a
filio suo se beneficijs victum? Quid autem est foelicius, quam sibi cedere? A
sentence concerning humane sentences and their authority both Christian and
heathen.
These words are englished before.

Like as we esteem the special sayings of the learned among the heathen, in
such matters, as by the special gift of God they give testimony to that
light, which he has reserved in nature, above the authority of the more rude,
for that more special light of natures sake, which God has reserved unto
them: so, yea much rather, do we worthily esteem the sentences of learned
Christians whether more ancient Fathers, or any of latter times, whom God has
specially enlightened by the holy Ghost, from his sacred Scriptures, to give
testimony to his truth, so far as we find they do it according to the
Scriptures and right interpretation thereof, above the opinions or sayings of
common Christians, whosoever have not as yet their wits so well exercised and
acquainted with the Scriptures, as by the singular blessing of God, the other
have had.

And thus good Christian Readers, whether more or less learned, one and other,
ye may all by that which has been remembered and laid before ye in this
Treatise, evidently perceive, that, as was said in the beginning, the duties
herein declared, are every way so plentifully testified and commended, that
whosoever will not make practice accordingly, he can not be but as one left
altogether most woefully convict both from heaven and upon earth, in his own
conscience, which of it self is as a thousand witnesses, and before God, and
all men, without all shadow of excuse, by the verdit of infinite thousands of
witnesses against him.

But as touching you that vouchsafe to read these things with honest and godly
minds, better fruit is to be expected and hoped for; even such as will
through the grace of God accompany and help forward your euerlastting and most
happy peace and salvation, both here and in the kingdom of heaven. The which I
humbly beseech God our heavenly father to grant unto ye as well as to my own
soul, of his infinite and most bounteous mercy, for his well beloved son our
Lord Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with the holy Ghost one only true God be all
glory and praise Amen.

FINIS.
The Errata to be corrected as follows
Page 5. lin. 6. read, This no doubt. p. 23. l. 4. mourning. and 25. 27. read
Mat. 25. p. 28. 21. righteous p. 48. 23. it is to be. p. 57. 22. at that time.
and I 35. lain. p. 60. l. 18. 19. read, And after this the same Darius, as we
read chap. 7. now called Artashasht. p. 81. 7. God will bless such. p. 88. 35.
fewer examples. p. 98. l. 17. read, Consider your own ways in your hearts page
125. 5. unto them. p. 134. 8. Is the need. p. 152. 1. read, only divine praise
p. 159. 1. that is. p. 161. 29. property. p. 163. 24. goodly. p. 168. of Gods
name. p. 172. 9. men. p. 176. 25 infinite. p. 180. 32. how severely. p. 188. 36.
read, o serpe^ts the generation, etc. p. 199. 21. but on the contrary for such.
p. 203. 8. read ver. 10. p. 204. 1. thing. and l. 7. read, The Apostle
speaking, etc. and l. 12. stewards. and l. 16. obnoxios. p. 305. 34. is the
worst kind of giving. p. 206. 6. read. ver. 20. 21. Mat. p. 208. 1. profundunt.
209. l. 1. 2. Modus ideo, vt. and l. vlt. Tarde velle. p. 210. 4. reddit. p.
213, 32. liberally. p. 221. 10. read, mirum for nimirum. and l. penult. euehit.
and l. vlt. praeparatoria. p. 223. l. pen. miseremur. p. 225. 10. Lay up in thy.

As touching other escapes, which we trust are neither many nor great, we
crave the courteous Readers favorable aid, to whom we have yielded the best
and most helpefull diligence we could.


