EPIGRAMMES

MIRROVR OF NEW REFORMATION, WHEREIN REFORMERS, by their own acknowledgement,
are represented ad viuum.

The beauty also of their handy-worke is displayed.

Second Edition, augmented.

Printed by John Cousturier.

M.DC.XXXIV.

THE PREFACE TO THE IMPARTIAL Protestant Reader.
HOWSOEVER, Courteous Reader, this manner of writing may at first seem strange
unto thee, as not being warranted by the like example of any formerly known
Author, yet if preiudicate passion, the chief Nurse of heresy, forestal not
thy judgment, I make no doubt but thou may gather hence some light, for thy
better direction, and guiding out of those intricate labyrinths of Nouellisme,
wherein either thy education, thy coldness in searching, or the insatiable
malice of misinformation of thy own woluish Pastors have already entangled
thee. Neither would I have thee therefore the less to regard it, in that the
front thereof is prescribed by the name of Epigrammes, for many good things
have been imparted to the world under that title, and more perhaps in this,
then (if I were not my self the Author I would say so) in most thou have seen:
but mis-conceiue me nor, I speak not here of a style, for it is a thing which
I least regard, knowing my self as far behind many in that, as I am beyond
them in my intention and See Epig. 2.
scope whereat I aim: it is the manner only of my writing whereof I speak, and
in regard of that, I dare confidently bid thee expect more, then by the title
thou can expect. For I have not through the whole produced any material thing
against the professors of thy pretended Church, which I have not satisfied
from their own undeniable confessions, either their own words (as for the
most part they are) set down in the margent, or else, where that is not capable
thereof, a faithful refere^ce being made unto the place, where they affirm the
thing I infer against them: and all this (notwithstanding the multiplicity of
the citations) with that care and diligence, that thou shall not, I hope, have
much cause to except against it; sure I am with that sincerity, as not to
become an adversary unto my self, by erring against my conscience: for (to use
yet further thy own so much esteemed D. D Morton's App. in ^r f.
Morton's words in the like case) to say that I have not possibly erred
wilfully in any thing, were to be less then a Christian.

But here methinks I hear my self accused not to have in some places so
strictly observed the chief laws of an Epigramme: I grant I have not; yet has
not this fault, if here it be a fault, proceeded forth of ignorance, for I know
an Epigramme should be brief and acute: the first rule I acknowledge my self to
have sometimes transgressed, the second not so much as perhaps some of your
Ministers could have wished: but howsoever, it is not upon such exact laws that
I have stood; al my study was how I might best frame the^ to do the most good;
which if they effect, I have what I wish. Neither do I doubt but among so many
several dispositio^s of men, they may find some fit subject to work on; since
al are not moved with one manner of arguing, nor every one takes delight in the
same method of writing. For as those who are by the sting or bite of the
Tarantula distract of their senses, though music be the best phisike for them
al, yet are they not al helped by the same tunes, but by such particular
lessons only, as by some hidden quality best agrees with the nature of every
one. So those who are infected with the poison of heresy, though they be al to
be cured by the heavenly music of that Joan. 14.16. Isay. ^9.21.
Spirit of Truth, which Truth itself promised to his Church for ever, yet not
al after one manner; Some as we find by experience, are most moved by
considering the confessedly See Epi. 7..2.3.
virtuous lives of Catholics, and the (in like sort acknowledged) dissolute
See the same Epigr.
courses of their brethren; Other by our undoubted miracles; Many by perusing
the Ecclesiastical histories; Not a few by studying our books of Controversy;
And some again by hearing our sermons, and reading our spiritual books. Why
may I not then, since there be yet diverse who are not moved by any of these,
justly make a trial if by the help at least of this tune, this manner of
writing I mean, they may recover their senses, especially since it is not the
skilfulnesse of the Musician, but the direct hitting the patients vain, which
works the cure? If this take effect, it shall not be the last lesson, which (if
God spare my life) I will tune to this key. Mean while (freindly Reader) I
refer this to thy impartial and careful perusal: in hope thereof I rest,
committing thee to the protection of the Almighty, and earnestly beseeching him
that he would vouchsafe to Luc. 1 79.
illuminate thee, that as yet sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
to direct thy feet in^o the way of peace.

FAREWELL.
I. TO THE PROTESTANT READER.
I Seek not here by curious words and phrase
To catch the vain air of uncertain praise,
Those ends are base: let servile spirits choke
Their best endeauours with that puff of smoak^;
I only aim in all that I have done,
By winning of thy soul, to gain a^mes 5.20.
my own.
II. Another to the same.
REad, search, compare, quote, weygh, examine, al
I wish thee, is, to be impartial.
III. On the censuring Minister.
ME thinks I see some captious Minister
Take up my book, and with a thought as far
From upright judgment, as my lines from lies,
Viewes every page, and each citation tryes;
But finding al exact, he carpes my style,
Censures my verse, and with a scornful smile
Fie on this Priest (says he) what rhyme is this?
What words are here? this couplet is amiss;
That phrase is of his own invention, new;
This ouer-harsh, that England never knew.
Have patience, good Aminadab, here is none
Gaynsayes your censure; for to France alone,
Whose air has sed me from a child, I owe
The little of this little which I know.
How then should I in foreign countries gain
That, to whose height few can at home attain;
I grant my lines are harsh, and do not fall
To please your ears, but yet I hope they gal.
IV. On the same.
ALthough it were true that these my lines contain
No good, no right, or well applied strain,
It Were not my fault, for what good can be wrought,
Where the whole subject of the whole is naught?
V. LVTHERS CHANGE. To his much honored friend W. T.
WHile in the Roman Church your Luther staid,
To tame his flesh he I punished my poor body (says Luther) with fasting,
watching, praying, and other exercises. Luth. upon the Galath. Englished. fol.
37.
fasted, watched and prayed,
Affected ^^ue I kept Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience. Luth. ib. fol. 38.
obedience, lived poor,
And carefully from carnal ^cts forbore.
All that he did was with a Whatsoever I did, I did it with a single heart, of a
good zeal, and for the glory of God. ib. fol. 37.
single heart,
An unfeigned zeal, empo s'ned on no part
With fond vain glory, but directed whole
T'e^crease God's honor and secure his soul.
But thence gone forth, he suddenly became
So I am burned (says Luther) with the great flame of my untamed flesh; I who
ought to be fervent in spirit, am fervent in the flesh, in lust, and sloth,
etc. Luth. tom. 1. epist. Latin. fol. 334.
burned with his fleshes raging flame,
As he grew almost He confessed himself to have been almost mad through the
rage of lust and desire of women. Colloq. men's. fol. 526. see also fol. 400.
mad through lust; eight days Eight days are now past, wherein I neither
write, pray, nor study; being vexed partly with the temptations of the flesh,
partly with other troubles, Luth. tom. 1. epist. Latin. fol. 334.

He now will spend, and neither studies, prays,
Nor writes, disturbed with inflamed veins
Of burning leacherie, and other pains.
Say, is not this (speak freely worthy friend)
Galat. c. 3. v. 3.
TO begin in the Spirit and in the flesh to end?
VI. Luther no Reformer.
LVther still vaunts himself to be the We dare boast (says he) that Christ was
first published by us etc. Luth. epist. ad Argent. an. 152^.
first,
That by truth's beams the Romish clouds dispersed.
Yet is it Luther confesses (says the learned Protestant Hospinian) that he
was taught by the devil, that mass, and chiefly private mass is naught, and
that being overcome by the diuel's reasons he abolisht it. Hist, Sacram. part.
vlt. fol. 131. See more hereafter IX. 2.
granted, Satan was the cause,
Which moved him first the sacred Mass to oppose.
Why's Satan not Reformer then? it is true,
He is indeed: Let Us give the devil his due.
VII. The fruits of Reformation.
PRotestants tell us that before the light
Of their new Ghospel men When we were seduced by the Pope, (says Luther)
every man did willingly follow good works; and now every man neither says,
nor knows any thing, but how to get al to himself by exactio^s, pillage,
theft, lying, usury etc. Luth. Dom. 26. post Trin. See M. Stubbes motive to
good works. p. 44. 45.
were more upright,
Of better life, more truly virtuous,
More Certainly to speak the truth, there is many times found co^scionabler
and plainer dealing amongst most of the Papists, then among many Protestants:
and if we look narrowly to the Ages past, we shall find more godliness,
devotion, and zeal (though blind) more love one toward another, more
fidelity and faithfulness every way in them, then is now to be found is us. M.
Stubbes motive, p. 43.
real, faithful, and Religious,
And every way more given Is it not a shame unto us that our forefathers living
in time of superstition etc. should notwithstanding so far pass us in good
works, as that we may not once be compared to them in any measure* M. Stubb.
ib. p. 72.
without compare
To al good works, then in their Church they are.
For now, (say they) such as have late embrace't
Our Reformation do repair more fast
To See before at 1.
theft, exactions, lying, usury,
Excess Another sort of Germans give indeed place to God's word, that it may
be preached, but there is not found among them any amendme^t of life, but
horrible Epicurisme, and a beastly life in their behavior, drunken
assemblies, lustful desires etc. in lieu of fasts they give themselves night
and day to riotous banquets and continual drinking. Iac. And. ad c. 21. Luc.
See also Melancth. ad c. 6. Matthew.
in drinking, What eye so blind, that it does not gush out with tears to
behold the misery of our supposed glorious Church? I mean the great
ignorance, the superficial worship of God, the fearful blasphemies and
swearings in houses and streets etc. the dishonor of Superiors, the pride,
cruelty, fornication, adulteries, drunkenness, coueteousnes, vsuries and
other like abominations etc. O behold and pity the woeful and lamentable
state of our Church in these things! See this in M. Powels book of things
indifferent, p. 136. See likewise next before at 5.
swearing, gluttony,
And such foul vi^es as from hence proceed,
Then did the former to any virtuous deed.
So that (thus still themselves go on) who would
A If any be desirous to see a great rabble of knaves, of persons turbule^t,
deceitful, coseners, usurers, let him go to any city where the Ghospel is
purely preached, and he shall find them there by multitudes. For it is more
manifest then the daylight, that there were never among the Ethnicks, Turks,
and other Infidels, more unbridled and unruly persons, with who^ al virtue and
honesty is quite extinct, then are among the professors of the Ghospel. Andr.
Musc. domin. 1. Adu. See him also l. de prophet. Christi. and sym. Paulus in
sermon. dom. 13. post Trin. See hereafter at 17.
rabble of cheating, factious knaves behold,
Let them but unto any City go
Possessed by Reformers, it will show
Whole shoales of such; yea Pagans, Jews, and Turks,
With other Infidels do better works,
Detest sin more, show greater honesty,
Are fair more patient and less proud then we.
In lieu of fasts we See before at 5.
haunt excessive feasts
Drink heal^hs to make our selves and others beasts,
Wrong See before at 7. and see likewise Sylu. Czecanonius de corruptis
moribus, and Wygandus de bon. and mal. Germani.
marriage-beds, haunt stews, and for our prayer
In every place we curse, Prayers they turn into swearing etc. and all this
manner of life they term the ordinance of the Ghospel. Iac. Andr. Conc. 4. in
c 2. Luc. See before at 6.
blaspheme, and swear.
Our children they grow The children of them of the reformed Ghospel grow
every day worse, more intractable, and dare commit such crimes as even the
able men of former times were scarce subject unto. Io. Wygand. l. de bon. and
mal. Germ.
worse, and dare such crimes
As were scarce known to men of former times.
Our Preachers labors, which should be assigned
Only to truth, are If you cast your eyes upon Protestant Doctors, you shall
find that some of them moved through vain glory, envious zeal, and a
preiudicate opinion, disorder the true doctrine, disperse and earnestly defend
the false. Some of them without cause stir up contentions, and with
inconsiderate spite defend them: many wrest their doctrine every way, of
purpose to please the Princes and people, by whose grace and favor they are
maintained. There are more, who with their evil and wicked life overthrow all that which by their true doctrine they had formerly built. Paul. Ebec prefat.
comm. Philippi in epist. ad Corinth.
guided with the wind
Of popular applause, attended still
With hate and envy: their malicious will
N^er gives them rest, but makes them seek out ways
How they debates and causeless iarres may raise.
In their disputes they See next hereafter at VIII. throughout.
wrest, pervert, and lie,
Oppress the truth, and from the point still fly.
Many besides are There are found no small number of the Ministers of the Word,
who are flatterers etc. Io. Wygand. de bon. and mal. Germ.
flat'rers, and believe
As please the Sea before at 12.
Prince or country where they live.
But more with their vile wicked life do shame
Their Ghospels doctrine and themselves defame.
So that we see, since we rejected Rome
The world does daily worse and It is a wonderful thing and full of scandal,
that from the time in which the pure doctrine of the Ghospel was first recalled
to light, the world should daily grow worse. Luth Ser. conu^^ Germ. f. 55. See
him also in postil. sup. Euan. dom. 1. Aduent.
worse become:
For I may freely speak what I have seen in the course of some travels and
observation of some courses, that in Flanders was never more drunkenness, in
Italy more wantonness, in Jury more hypocrisy, in Turkey more impiety, in
Tartary more iniquity, then is practiced generally in England, particularly in
London, all this is seen etc. M. Rich. Ieffrey sermon. at Paul's cross. October. 7.
an. 1604. and printed an 1605. p. 31. See before at 7.
n'ere in Flanders was more drunk'nes seen,
The Italians ever have less wanton been,
In Jury n'ere was more hypocrisy,
Turkey is freer from impiety,
And Tartary less wicked is then those,
Who even in England now Rom's Church oppose,
All this themselves affirm, this few deny;
T'weer not good manners here to say they lie.
VIII. An other upon the same.
I have read (says that learned Protestant Za^chius) the Latin copy of the
Apology, and diligently read it over, not without choler, when I perceived
what manner of writing very many, let me not say for the most part al, do use
in the Churches (as they are called) of the reformed Ghospel; who would seem
notwithstanding to be Pastors, Doctors, and Pillars of the Church. The state
of the question that it may not be understood, we often of set purpose
ouerclowd with darkness: things which are manifest we impudently deny; things
false we without shame avouch; things plainly impious we propose as the first
principles of faith, things orthodoxal we condemn of heresy; scriptures at our
pleasure we detort to our own dreams; we boast of Fathers when we will follow
nothing less then their doctrine; to deceive, to calumniate, to rail is
familiar with us etc. So as we may defend our cause, good or bad, by right or
by wrong, al other things we turn vp-side-downe, o times! o manners! Zanch.
epist. ad Io. Sturm. this in fine lib. 7. and 8. Miscellan.
THE question's state we Ministers, to shroud
Our falsehood, do with darkness ouerclowd;
Things that are plain we shamelesly deny;
Things false we al maintain, yet know we lie.
Impious things we as faith's grounds propose;
And true things still, as heresies, oppose.
The scriptures we to our own dreams do wrest;
We boast the Fathers, but their faith detest:
To cheat, calumniate, gloss, deceive, and rail
Is our chief practice: so we may prevail
Against our Opponents, al things we avouch
But greatly care not what: I think not much,
IX. ON ZVINGLIVS.
WHen into Zuinglius Satan had infused
Himself, and by those Zuinglius confesses himself to have been instructed
against the Mass by a certain Admonisher, to use his own words, whether black
or white he remembered not. See this at large in Zuing. his own works tom. 2.
fol. 249. See the same derided as an illusion by the learned Protestants Iac.
And. confut. Grina^, p. 120. 254. 304. by Schluss. Theol. Calu. 6. 1. in pro^m.
fol. 3. Bened. Morgenst. de Eccl. p. 68. Heilbran. in Swenks. Calui^. presat.
Giesek enius de coena. p. 64. and others.
engines, which he used
Before against See Luthers like instruction from the devil against the Mass,
by conference largely by himself set down tom. 7. Wit. f. 228. and tom. 6.
Germ. Ienens. fol. 28. See more heretofore, VI 2.
Luther, drawn him to I ingenuously confess (says Luther) that I cannot
henceforth place Zuinglius in the number of Christians. Tom. 2. Germ. f. 190.
and further in fol. 182. he affirms that he has lost whole Christ.
forsake
Christ, and al true Religion; and betake
Himself to schism, his never settled brain
^uting Zuinglius, (says Schlusselburg) takes his name with his condition
(...), which signifies often to shake and move: because Zuinglius has moved
many vproares and troubles in the Church of God, by his heresy: or otherwise
Zuinglius is derived from giddiness, von them Schwindel: for he was struck with
the spirit of giddines and blindness, after the manner of al Heretics, daring
to deprave the Testament of the Son of God by putting the word (significat)
for (est) Theol Calu. l. 2. act. 1.
his name, did in a trice contain
such swarms of heresies, as one might see,
But such a Master could his Master be.
The first thing he does is to For whereas the Evangelists say, This is my body,
Zuinglius translateth, This signifies my body, both in his latin new
Testament, which he dedicated to the French King, and likewise in the dutch.
See this affirmed by Schluss. Theol. Calu. l. 22. act. 6. fol. 43.44. See
Zuing. himself also, tom. 2. fol. 210. and see next before, 4.
correct the lin^s
Of sacred writ: his second work declines
To liberty of life, affirming al
Christ's promises were These are superfluous and hyperbolical sayings: If thou will enter into life keep the commandments etc. and so are al such promises
likewise as are made to our works. Zuingl. tom. 1. fol. 137.
hyperbolical.
The flood-gate thus set wide he keeps no measure
But frames al grounds of faith to his own pleasure*
As, that original sin though others please
To term it sin, is only Zuinglius, speaking of original sin says: How
is it possible, that what is a disease and contagion, should deserve the name
of sin, or truly be so etc. this disease cannot damn us. tom. 2. f. 90. See
f. 89. 115. 116. and in epist. Oecol. and Zuing. l. 1 p. 25^.258.
a disease.
Baptism is so The baptism of infa^ts is a certain external and ceremonious
thing, which the Church may, as well as other external things, worthily and
honestly use, or else omit, and lightly take away. Zuingl. tom. 2. f. 96.
indifferent as it may
Be done, omitted, yea or taken away.
The path to heaven is so broad and plain,
As even Here (in heaven) thou shall see Abel, Enoch, Noe, Abraham, etc. Here
Hercules, Theseus, Socrates, Aristides, Antigonus, Numa, Camillus, the Catoes,
the Scipioes. Zuingl. tom. 2. f. 559.
Infidels thereby attain
TO eternal bliss: when sin we do commit
God as the Sea this hereafter. xij. 11.
Author moves and forces it.
Al Kings and Princes when they are disposed;
To persecute the truth may When Princes shall deal perfidiously and contrary to
the rule of Christ, they may godlily be deposed. tom. 1 f. 84. see 85. and l.
4. Epist. Zuingl. and Oecol. p. 868. 869.
be deposed;
For which himself assumes the sword and Gualterus grants that Zuinglius is
termed by some Protestants, The most unjust author of the war, and violent
disturber of the public peace, who moved by pride and cruelty, caused the
Tigurins to take in hand a new and strange attempt against their fellows, that
he might force them by want and famine to follow his doctrine, who before would
not. Hitherto he in his Apolog. pro Zuingl. before the first the 1. tom. of his
works. fol. 30. See 31. and Osiand. epist. Cent. 16. p. 203.
stirre^
Even his own Contrymen to civil wars:
And there an Zuinglius died in war, and died armed. See Gualt. vbi supra.
fol. 31. and Osiand. as before. See next hereafter. Ib. the 2.
armed rebel feels the proof
Of treachery, and dies; end good enough.
X. ANOTHER.
ZVinglius, himself in open field did See next before, ix. 13. See 12.
bear
Against his Country trayt'rous arms, and there
Zuinglius died like a thief because he would compel others to his error, and
for this cause he went into war, and was slain etc. Luth. colloq. Lat. tom.
2. cap. de Aduers.
Like to a thief, But these our notable Censurers (says Gualterus meaning
certain Protestants,) are not afraid: to pronounce him dead in sin, and so
consequently to have been the son of hell. in Apol. fol. 31. see Hospin. hist.
de Sacram. part. vlt. fol. 187.
hell's son, in sin did die;
And Luther I could wish that Zuinglius were saved, but I fear it has fallen
out otherwise: for Christ commanded that we should judge al such as denied him
to be damned. Luth. Colloq. lat. tom. 1. c. de Damnat. and Inferne. See Hospin.
vbi supra.
doubt's he is damned; so do not I.
XI. LVTHER'S CATECHISM.
The Divinity is threefold (says Luther) or of three kinds, as there are three
persons, upon which words Zuinglius inferrs against him the same that we now
do, to wit, that he makes three natures in the Divinity, and three Gods.
Zuinglius. part. 2. fol. 474.
THree God's there are; yet like I not the name
Of Trinity; This word Trinity, is but a humane invention and sounds very
coldly. Luth. postill. maiore Basil. apud Heruag. enarr. Euang. dom. Trinit.
my Soul makes full disclaim
From My soul hates Homousion, and the Arians did very well in expelling it,
least so profane and new a word should be used in the articles of faith. Luth.
l. Cont. Latom. tom. 2. Wit. imp. an. 1551.
Homousion: the Antientest of times
Is the true See hereafter. XII. 10.
Author of our greatest crimes.
Christ, whom I first revealed, See before. VI. 1.
has ever been
Clothed How can Christ be said (says Zuinglius to Luther) to be made of a
woman, if as thou affirmest he was from al eternity, according also to his
humane nature. Zuingl. part. 2. fol. 402.
with that flesh which here on earth was seen;
Yet that was a mere Spirit, Thou make (says the same Zuinglius to Luther)
contrary to al truth, the humanity of Christ a certain naked and mere Spirit,
because he was conceived by the holy Ghost, though thou perform it with mad
and Marcion-like reasons. Zuingl. ibid. fol. 411.
while he the rod
Of God's just wrath felt for us, Son of God
He was no more: but of al men the chief
All the Prophets foresaw this in spirit, that Christ was to be of al men the
greatest Robber, Homicide, Adulterer, Thief, Sacrilegious person, Blasphemer
etc. For he being made a sacrifice for the person, and without sins, not the
Son of God borne of the virgin Mary, but a sinner etc. Luth. tom. 5. Epist.
ad Galat. see him also in Psalm. 22.
Blasphemer, leacher, murderer, and thief.
His c^nscience then was Christ upon the Cross suffered great fear, and the
horror of a troubled conscience, and tasting the eternal wrath. Luth. in Psalm.
22. tom. 3. fol. 330.
troubled as impure;
He did being dead hel's pains, in Christ as he dyed with great pain, so he
seems to have sustained pains also in hell after death. Luther tom. 3. fol.
279.
hell endure.
His If the Divinity did not suffer in Christ, he were not my Christ. See
Zuingl. tom. 2. f. 458. and Hospin. hist. Sacram. part. 2. fol. 76. and Luther
himself. lib. de Council. part. 2.
Godhead suffered, otherwise he never
Had been my Christ: nay he a Savior were
Vile, When I believe that only the humane nature suffered for me, Christ is a
Savior of a vile and small account, yea he himself needs also another
Savior. Luth. confess. ma. de coena. tom. 3. Ien. fol. 454. See Zuingl. tom.
2. fol. 458. and Hospin. vbi supra, fol. 3. 76. 172.
base, and abject, not to be esteemed,
Yea a new Savior should have him redeemed.
The real body and true blood of Christ,
According to the substance is Luther held (says Hospinian) that the body and
blood of Christ both is and may be found according to the substance, not only
in the bread and wine of the Eucharist, but also in the hearts of the faithful,
yea in all creatures, in fire, water, and in the halter or rope wherewith
desperate persons hang themselves, Hospin. vbi supra. f. 44.
comprised
In every place, yea in the rope which eyes
A wretches, neck when in despair he dies.
Those books we Job and Ecclesiastes call
This rides Luther auerreth of Ecclesiastes, that it has never a perfect
sentence, and that the Author thereof had neither boots nor spurs, but rid
upon a long stick, or in begging shoes as he did when he was a Friar. Luther.
conuiual. sermon. tit. de lib. noui. and vet. Testam. Rabenstock. lib, 2. colloq.
lat. Luth. c. de vet. Test.
without boots, the other's but Of Job ( Luther says) that the argument thereof
is a mere fiction, invented only for the setting down of a true and lively
example of patience. Luth. Ser. conuiual. tit. vt supra, and tit. de Patriarch.
and Prophet.
a tale.
It is a fond and false It is a false opinion and to be abolished, that there
are four Ghospels; for the Ghospel of John is the only fair, true, and
principal Ghospel. Luth. praefat. in nou. Test. and lib. de script. and Eccles.
auth. c 3.
opinion
TO affirm there are four Ghospels; only John
The only true prime Ghospel did set forth.
James his The Epistle of James is contentious, swelling, dry, strawy, and
unworthy an Apostolical spirit. Luth. praef. in Epist. Iac. edit. Ienensi.
Epistle is of no great worth.
It Is strawy, dry, contentious, and unfit
To be accounted an Apostl's writ.
The Apocalypse Doctor Martin Luther (says Bullenger) has as it were sticked
this book by as sharp preface, Bulleng. on the Apoc. Englished. c. 1. Ser. 1.
fol. 2.
is not Canonical;
Moses his lips were full of wrath Moses had deep, unpleasant, stopped and
angry lips, in which the word of grace is not, but of wrath, death, and sin
etc. they were full of wrath and gal. Luth. tom. 3. Wit. fol. 423. See likewise
fol. 421. 422. where he calls him a Jailer, Executioner, and a cruel Sargeant.
and gal,
Nothing delightful, angry, stopped, wherein
No word of grace was, but of death and sin.
The more men do their souls with vices slain,
The See hereafter. xxx. 2.
sooner they God's favor shall obtain.
For Just offend, We constantly say, that even in praying a Just man sins
Luth. ser. de Ascens. Domini.
even when they seek to win
God's grace by prayer; A good work done even after the best manner, is a
veni^l sin. tom. 2. Wit. fol. 110.
their best good deeds are sin.
The ten Command'ments do^ The ten Commandments belong not to us, for God did
not lead us, but the Jews forth of Egypt. Luth. ser. de Mose. See epist. ad
Galat. c. 4. and cap. 20. Exodus
not appertain
Unto the free state of a Christian,
Whose cheifest art and way is not The chief art and wisdom of Christians,
is, not to know the law, to be ignorant of works, and of al active Justice,
especially when their conscience strives with the judgment of God. Luth. tom.
5. fol. 272.
to know
Good works, nor active justice, nor the law:
For faith Faith, unless it be without even the least good works, does not
justify; nay it is no faith. See Luth. cited and condemned for this saying by
M. Couel. def. of M. Hooker page 42.
unless without good deeds it be,
It is no faith, nor does it justify,
Let Us but believe, and A Christian or baptized person is so rich, that
although he would, he cannot loose his salvation by any sin, how great
soever, unless he will not believe. Luth. 2. tom. fol. 74.
though by greatest sins
We strive to be damned, our faith such forces winnes
As it alone from hell will set us free;
For there is As nothing iustifyeth but faith, so nothing sins but unbelief.
Luth. loc. com. class. 5. p. 68. See him also part. 2. postil. Germ. Argentor.
An. 1537. fol. 140.
no sin but incredulity.
Let Us not debase our selves, al Christians are
Able in worth and honor to We are equal in dignity and honor to S. Paul,
Peter, the B. Virgin Mother of God, and al Saints. Luth. tom. 5. Wit. fol. 442.
compare
With Christ his Mother, Peter and the rest
Of heauen's most Saint-like Citizens, whose best
And purest actions, might as well by dogs
Have been Al their holiness consists in that they have prayed and fasted much,
endured great labors, chastized their bodies, lived hard, and used an austere
kind of habit; al their holiness a dog or a hog may daily perform. Luth. praef.
in Alex. lib. de Eccles.
performed, or by filthy hogs.
A In absence of the Priest, a boy or a woman, yea any Christian can absolve.
Luth. tom. 2. fol. 103.
woeman, or a boy, the Priest away,
May give true absolution: only they
Whose They only communicate worthily, who have sad, afflicted, disturbed,
confused, and erroneous consciences. Ibid. fol. 73.
conscience filled with confused care,
Afflicted, troubled, and erroneous are,
Do worthily receive: who is baptized,
Under the name of A Priest, especially in the new Testament, is not made, but
borne, not consecrate^, but created etc. al Christians are Priests, and al
Priests Christians. Ibid. fol. 367.
Priest is straight comprised.
All The first office of a Priest is to preach the word etc. but this is common
to al, next it is to baptize, and this also may al do, even women etc. the
third is to consecrate bread and wine, but this also is common to al, no less
then Priesthood; and this I avouch by the Authority of Christ himself etc.
Luth. ibid. fol. 368. 369. vid. de abrog. Missae. fol. 249. and capt. Babyl. c.
de ord. item Hospin. hist. Sacram. part. 1. p. 22. fol. 14.
Christians may Christ's body consecrate;
Al preach the word, and al administrate
Effectual Sacraments; yea I can show
That, though the Devil do it, it were true.
To fight against the Turk is to Luther (says Hospinian) proceeded so far as
to say, that the Sacrament were true, though it were administered by the Devil.
Hist. Sacram. part. 2. fol. 14. See Couel. def. of Hook. p. 101.
oppose To war against the Turk is to resist God, visiting our iniquities by
them. Luth. to. 2. Wit. fol. 110.

Even God: none can be Among Christians no man can or ought to be Magistrate,
but each one is to other equally subject etc. among Christian men none is
Superior save one, and only Christ. Luth. tom. 6. Germ. de saecul. potest.
Vide Luth. c. 2. Caes. mand. An. 1524.
subject unto laws
Of earthly Magistrate, for all men share
Like power, like place on earth, al equal ar^.
Be sure you have regard that none be stayed,
When the wife will not, for to Luther counsel's the husband in case his wife
refuse his bed, to say to her: If thou will it not another will, if the Mistress
will not, let the Maid come. Luth. tom. 5. fol. 123.
take the maid;
The Magistrate The Magistrates duty is to bridle such a wife, and to put her to
death: this if the Magistrate omit; the husband must imagine that his wife is
stolen away by thieues and slain, and consider how to marry another. Ibid.
fol. 123. See also the 111.
must bridle such a shrew,
Yea put her to death, which if he will not do,
Let the husband then suppose her to be dead,
And slain with thieues, and straight another wed:
Nor is he bounded here, o no, he is free
To do it, as We can not stop S. Paul's mouth, nor strive with them who as often
as need requires, will make use of this doctrine, his words are plain: that a
brother or a sister are free from the law of wedlock, if the one depart or do
not consent to dwell with the other: neither does he say that this may be done
once only, but leaves it free, that so often as the case shall require, he may
either proceed or stay. So that (says he a little before) we may have in this
case, ten or more wives, fled away, and yet living. Luth. tom. 5. fol. 112. 113.
often as he shall urged be;
So that one man by this occasion may
Have ten or more wives living on a day.
The offending The adulterer may fly into another Country, and if he cannot
contain, marry again. Luth. ib. fol. 123.
person if he cannot tame
His fleshes pride, may likewise do the same.
The Ghospel no more excludes Poligamie is no more abrogated, then the rest of
Moses law, and it is free, as being neither commanded nor forbidden. Luth.
propos. de Bigam. Epis. An. 1528. propos. 62. 65. 66. see also in.c. 16. Genes.
edit. An. 525.
Poligamy,
Then the rest of Moses law, it still is free;
This world has nothing that can Nothing is more sweet and loving upon earth
then is the love of a woman, if a man can obtain it. Luth. in Proverb. 31.
verse. 10. marg.
equalize
A woeman's love: he who would be so wise
As to live without one, let him He that resolves to be without a woeman, let
him lay aside the name of a man, making himself a plain Angel or spirit. Luth.
tom. 7. Wit. fol. 505.
cease to be
Of flesh and blood, for it is as necessary
TO enjoy a woeman, as (my self best knows)
To eat, drink purge, watch, sleep, or wipe the nose. As it is not in my
power that I should be no man, so it is not in my power that I should be
without a woman and it is not in our power that it should be either stayed or
omitted, but is as necessary as that I should be a man, and more necessary
then to eat, drink, purge, make clean the nose, sleep, or watch. Luth. tom.
5. fol. 119. There is another like saying of Luther to this purpose, which
because it is so beastly, and vnchristian-like a speech, I will forbear to
translate it. Perinde faciunt (says he) qui continenter viuere instituunt, ac
si quis excrementa (o shameless beast!) vel lotium contra natura impetum
retinere velit. Luther. in suo glossem. in decret. Noriberg.

When we are dead, our souls must still remain
All The scripture says that the dead do sleep. I am of opinion that they are
cast into such an unspeakable and a kind of wonderful sleep, that they feel
and see less then others who sleep, and when they shall be raised, they shall
not know where they are, nor how they are so suddenly borne again. Luth. tom.
4. fol. 417. see him also ib. f. 36. 37. and tom. 6. 321. 322.
cast on sleep, until we rise again.
And whether then they must, exempt from death,
For ever live, I permit that the Pope make articles of faith to those that are
his faithful: As bread and wine to be transubstantiated in the Sacrament; The
essence of God neither to beget nor to be begotten; The soul to be a
substantial form of the body of man; That himself is the Emperor of the
world, and the King of heaven, and an earthly God; I he soul to be immortal;
and al these infinite monsters contained in the Roman dunghill of decrees, that
like as his faith is, such is his Ghospel, such his faithful, and such his
Church. Luth. tom. 2. f. 107.
it is no point of faith,
If any Papists do this doctrine blame,
Tell Doctor Martin Luther (says Luther himself) will have it so, and says
that a Papist and an Ass are directly the same. So is my will, so I command,
let my will be my reason etc. And not much after, Luther, says he again, will
that it be so, and says that he is a Doctor more excellent then all that are
in the Papacy. Tom. 5. Germ. fol. from 141. to 144.
them, a Papist and an ass are the same.
But, if they do persist and urge thee still,
Make answer that my reason is my will,
Who am a Doctor greater far then al
Those, who themselves the Roman Church do call.
My I will have you to know that I will not hereafter vouchsafe you the honor,
as that I will suffer, either you, or the very Angels of heaven to judge of my
doctrine etc. nor will I have my doctrine judged by any, no not by the Angels
themselves; for I being certain thereof, will by it be judge both of you and
the Angels. Luther aduers. falso nomin. Eccl. stat. prope init. See the same
words, though somewhat altered, in to. 2. Wit. fol. 306. See also tom. 5. fol.
290. and tom. 2. fol. 333.
faith of error they shall never appeach,
Nor shall the Angels judge of what I teach;
For I am sure this doctrine is most true.
So Luther says: now, Reader, what say you?
XII. Upon that fearful Atheism of Luther, Zuingliu^ and Calvin, that God is
the Author of sin.
SOme now a-dayes, when into sins they fall,
Like Eue's undoubted children, first of al
Themselves excuse, and without further stay
The fault on another, as the inforcer, lay.
But who is he, on whom they do impose
So great a burden? Genes. cap. 3. verse. 13.
Eve the serpent chose;
It Is not sure he: o no, I quake to tell;
He Is greater then the greatest power of hell:
He (though even faythlesse We must by all means have a care that God be not
said to be the cause of evil: nor let any one, who is to live under just laws,
utter these words in his city, nor give ear unto another that shall speak
them: for it is the plain corruption of honesty, sociable life, laws and
cities. Plato dial. 2. de Republ. sieve iusto. Item Plutarchus aduersus Stoicos.
heathen do disclam^
From such a thought) who all this Al did frame
Must, as the Author, that they may be clear
From fault, the poize of their offenses bear.
The egg, whereof this monster first was made,
Was got in hell, and since by Satan laid,
Oll Lyrinensis in commonit. aduersus profan. vocum nouit.
Simon Magus and the Tertull. lib. de prescr.
Cerdonistes,
Irenaeus lib. 1, aduersus haereses, c. 26.
Marcionistes, August. haeres 49.
Manicheans and Leo Epist. ad Turbium.
Priscillianistes,
With the August. haeres. 59.
Seleucians, did (the Church to spite)
Keep it, yet n'ere durst bring it forth to light.
The infernal Sire of this cursed rabble chose
His misshap't ^ub ^dem, haeres. 66.
Florinus, to disclose
This poysnous Hydra: he, 'twas he, who first
Armed with audacious pride and malice durst
Attempt to hatch it, and profane the light
Of sacred truth by it is unhallowed sight.
Long, as unseen, did unregarded lie
This hellish prodigy, straight sure to die
For want of food, had not through cursed remorse
Of it is just misery How can man prepare himself to good, seeing it is not in
his power to make his ways evil? for God works the wicked work in the
wicked. Luth. tom. 2. Wit. an. 1551. assert. art. 36. see also de seruo arbit.
edit. an. 1603. fol. 195.
Luther played the nurse.
He careful framed it steps, he did it draw
Ta haughty pass, as scorning al it saw.
Then When we commit adultery or murder, it is the work of God, being the
mouer, the author and inciter etc. God moves the thief to kill etc. he is
forced to sin etc. God hardened Pharo, not speaking hyperbolically, but he
truly hardneth him, yea although he resist. Zuinglius tom. 10 de prouidentia
Dei fol. 365. 366. 367. by which, and other of his sayings, he does so plainly
teach God to be the author of sin, as he is therefore particularly
reprehended by the learned Protestant Grawerus in Absurda Absurd. c. 5. de
praedest. fol. 3. 4.
Zuinglius takes it, and for diverse years,
The charge thereof himself, most joyful, bears.
'Til God is the author of al those things, which these popish Judges would
have to happen only by his idle sufferance. Inst. l. 1. c. 18. sect. 3. see
him also affirming our sins to be not only by God's permission, but also by
his decree and will. ib. sect. 1. 2. and l. 2. c. 4. sect. 3. 4. and l. 3. c.
23. sect. 6. which blasphemy is so evidently taught both by Calum and most of
his followers, that they are expressly condemned for it, by their famous
brethren, Feming. l. de universe. great. p. 109. Osiand. enchir. controuers. p.
104. Schassmanus de peccat. causis. p. 155. 27. Sitzlinus disput. Theolog. de
prouid. Dei, sect. 141. Grawerus Absurda Absurd. in frontisp. l. and the
protestant Magistrates of Berne likewise made it penal by their laws, for any
of their territories to preach Caluins doctrine thereof, or for their people to
read any of his books, containing the same. Vide litteras Senate. Bern. ad
Ministros etc. ann. 1555.
Calvin, much enamoured of it is grace,
(So Apes do think their young al creatures pass)
Handled the matter, with his brother so
As soon he got it, o how it did grow
Under his hand! in few years it became
The cheef support of it new Master's name.
He brought it to full growth: and, having first
A world of rare destructions rehearst,
He sent it forth, where now (alas!) we see
Scarce any place from it is infection free.
Great Irenaeus did so much dislike
Florinus act, as Eusebius, hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 5. cap. 19.
more then heretic
He long since censured him: if so, what may
We then of these our latter Rabbis say?
XII. UPON MELANCTHON.
MElancthon holds there are There are three diuinities as there are three
persons. Melanct. loc. com. an. 1545. c. de Christo; for which he is
reprehended by Stancarus l. 4. de Trinitate.
three Gods, and strives
Mainly to prone Melancthon in behalf of Henry VIII. (whose divorce from his
first wife he held unlawful) advises, saying: If the King be desirous to
provide for succession, how much better were it for him to do it without the
infamy of his first marriage: and this may be performed without peril of any
man's either conscience or fame, by poligamy etc. because poligamy is not a
thing altogether unusual; Abraham, David, and other holy men had many wives,
whence it appears that polygamy is not against Ius diuinum. Melancth. council.
Theol. p. 134.
plurality of wives.
He teaches that in case of just divorce,
If either (the offending parties) be of such an age as they be yet strong and
lusty, or that they complain that they cannot without danger live in
widdowhood, if they show signs of penance, marriage is to be granted them.
Council. Theol. part. 1. p. 648.
The offend^ng party may, without remorse,
Again contract: and under zeal's pretense
The inferior powers he If the Magistrate command an^ thing against the law of
God, do not obey him, but peremptorily resist: as if he co^man s to war
against the Turks. ad c. 13 ep. ad Romans See him also Council. Theol. part. 1.
p. 314 where he enabled the inferior Magistrate to alter Religion, against the
contrary edicts of the Superior. See him further, ib. p. 249. 302. 303. 315.
arms against their Prince.
The Son of God did The Son according to his divinity resists his Fathers
wrath against our sins. Loci comm an. 1558. p. 40. and in Epist. ad Elect.
Forgae dat. 3. Octobr. an 1552. further he teaches that divine nature of the
Son was in his passion obedient to his Father. loc. comm. an. 1561. page 41
See more in Pelarg. his Admon^t. de Arianis p. 43 and 24.
eu'en as God (he says)
Obey his Father and resist his wrath,
Yea Pelargus confesses of Melancthon, that he says, that the Son makes
intercession, is his Fathers Minister, Priest, and Mediator, answering in
excuse thereof that he meant the same especially of his humane nature, implying
so thereby, that he meant it also (though not so principally) of his divine
nature Pilarg. Admonit. de Arianis. page 45.
pray unto him; whence he does infer
He is his suppliant, Priest and Minister.
About the Sacraments he held -- but what?
It Is yet unknown; for still as well in that
As other points so Concerning his inconstancy about the real presence, see in
lib. 3. epist. Zuingl. and Oecol. p. 603. where he flatly disclaymeth from
Zuinglius doctrine herein; and the same more fully, ibid. p. 618. 644. 645. see
also Hospi^. Histor. Sacr. part. 2 fol. 68. and yet of his change afterward,
see the same confessed by Hospin. vbi supra, fol. 115. 141. and by Osiand.
Epit. cent. 16. p 615. 667. See ibid. 8^^. 703 where it is said of him, If this
man's constancy in the true Religion had been answerable to his learning, surely
he had been an incomparable man. See further of his inconstancy, in Schluss.
Theol. Calu. l. 2. fol. 91 92. 94. 95. and colloq. Altemb. fol. 377. 402. 424.
425 463 520. 524.
wau'ring he appears,
As no side dare securely call him theirs:
For which respect eu'en they who most would raise
His name, Ioach. Morlinus Melancthon's scholar, commending him for some
things, yet in regard of his other bad deseruings, he says: In these points
let the devil praise thee (O Philip) and not l. Morl. in publ. lect. See this
in Schluss. Theol. Calvin. l. 2. art. 10.
refer him to the Diuel's praise:
Yea If I could redeem the salvation of our Master, Philip Melancthon, with the
peril of my life, I would do it; but he is taken out of this world, and
carried to the Judgment of the horrible tribunal of God, to plead his cause
there. See Schlusselb. vbi supra.
doubt of his salvation. What could frame
For such a man a more befitting name,
Then this of Black-earth? o, it suits him well
For nothing that is whyt can enter hell.
XIV. UPON BVCER.
BVCER, as I do not absolutely affirm this, though it is without question
true, by reason of my undertaken course to prove al by the sayings of
Protestants; and for this I have not as yet found the testimony of any of them.
But it is reported by that temperate writer Vlenberg. in his causae, causa 12.
some affirm, was first a Jew;
But doubting that, his mind he did imbew
With Christian rites, and, upon just dislike
Of Iudaisme, became a That he was a Catholic, it is affirmed both by Osiand.
Epist. cent. Ib. p. 88. and al others that write of him.
Catholic;
Yet stayed not there, but soon did that reject
For See Peter Martyr in his treatise of the Lords supper annexed to his comm.
places in English. page 138.
Luther's, then new raised, licencious Sect.
Yet that he held not long, but changed again,
And vowed himself a perfect See Bucer himself in Epist. ad Noremb. and
Esseingenses.
Zuing ian.
From hence he back to See the acts of the Synod holden at Luther's house in
Wittemberg anno 1536. and Osiand. Epist. cent. 16. page 246. Schlusselb. Theol.
Calvin. l. 2. fol. 17. and 129. Lauath. hist. Sacr. p. 1. Mart. Crusius p. 3.
Annal. Sur. l. 11. c. 25.
Luther made repair;
And there, for his offense, by humble prayer
He Bucer in edit. 1. comment. in 6. Joan. and 26. Math. asked pardon of God
and the Church, for his having bewitched many with the heresy of Zuinglius.
pardon craved: but this he soon forgot,
And straight resumed his former Lauath. hist. Sacr. f. 37. Pet. Mart. of the
Lord's supper, annexed to his comm. places in English. p. 138. and Schlusselb.
theol. Calvin. l. 2. fol: 17. and 70. where he says: Yet the same Bucer at
Cambridge in England an. 1551. revolted again to the heresy of the Zuinglians.
Zuinglian's coat
Nor want there See before at 1. Yet it is affirmed by Posseuint in not. verbi
Dei, and Vlembergius, Causa 12.
some, who dare auerre for true,
That, after this, he died, as first, a Jew.
Who Will not admire this man? sure he does miss it,
Who his Religion cannot like, what is it?
XV. UPON REFORMERS Sacraments.
YOUR Sacraments, you say, do only sign,
Witness, and seal the promises divine;
And, even to him who faithfully repents,
Confer no grace; o graceless Sacraments!
XVI. THE REFORMERS Oath of Allegiance.
I A. B. truly from my heart protest
That if Priests be not by the King represt,
My self will raise the If the Magistrates shall refuse to put Masse-mongers, and
false Preachers to death, the people in seeing it performed, do show that
zeal of God, which was in Phinees destroying the adulterous, and in the
Israelites against the Beniamites Good Man. p. 196.
people to effect
What he will not: and if he do erect
Himself against God, I Will not regard his place,
But, rather then obey him, Earthly Princes do bereave themselves of authority
when they erect themselves against God, yea they are unworthy to be accounted
in the number of men, and therefore we must rather spit in their faces then
obey them. Calvin. in c. 6. Daniel. verse. 22.25.
spit in's face,
If he himself There are vices inherent in the persons of Princes, though they
be lawfully established by succession, or election, viz. ungodliness,
covetousness ambition, cruelty, luxury, leachery, and such like sins which
Tyrants delight in: what shall be done in this case to these Princes? I answer
that it belongs to the Superior powers, such as are the seven Electours in
the Empire, and the Statesmen of the Kingdom almost in every Monarchy, to
restrain the fury of Tyrants, which if they do not, they are traitors to
their Countries, and shall before the Lord give an account of their treachery.
Beza confess. an. 1560. p. 216. see. Calvin. Inst. lib. 4. c. 20. Sect. 31.
give over to the vice
Of lust, of riot, pride or avarice,
Or wilfully Kings and chief Magistrates, are the vassals of the Kingdom, and
of the Commonwealth where they rule; wherefore they may be dispossessed and
dejected when they shall obstinately attempt any thing against the feudal Laws
of the Kingdom, and this (says he a little before) may be done with a good
conscience. Danaeus lib. 3. Pol. Christian. c. 6. Beza Epist. 24.
infringe our feudal laws,
And play the Tyrant, I will straight dispose,
As best I can, the inferior Magistrate
By peace or The Peers of the Kingdom or the public assembly of States ought
to destroy him, either by peaceable practizes or open war. Fenners sacra
Theol. l. 5 c. 15. p. 185.
war his fury to abate.
Which if, through want of courage, he refuse,
The If the Noblemen and other inferior Magistrates for fear should refuse to
reform religion, the rest of the people might do it in that case themselves.
Goodm. p. 196. 87. 34. 35. 185. 180. 184. etc. See also Knox hist. Scot. p. 49,
50.
people shall attempt it: they shall use
Al means they can to work his overthrow,
Take him, The people may arraigne their Prince. Buch. de iure regni, page 62.
arraigne him, and Evil Princes ought by the Law of God to be deposed, and
inferior Magistrates ought chiefly to do it. Goodman, p. 144. 145. examples
allowed of Kings deposed. Edw. Rich. 2. Christian of Denmark etc. Obed. 100.
See more in Knox hist. p. 371. appel. p. 28. 30. 56. and in M. Sutcliff's
answer p. 71. it is said, that this Doctrine (of punishing, deposing, and
killing of Kings) was commended by the most learned in those parts, which were
(says he) Calvin, Beza, and certain Englishmen: affirming moreover that the
same doctrine, or (to use his own words) disobedience rather against Princes
was taught by Buchanan, Knox, Hotroman in his Francogallia, Beza de iure
magistratuum in subditos, vindiciae cont. Tyrannos, Vrsinus, etc. See also page
95. and the same likewise auerred by D. Bancrofts Survey, p. 48. and Dang.
posit. p. 18. See more before at 4.
depose him too.
But if these fail, we, in our just defense,
Will Subjects when they endure public and manifest wrong, may lawfully become
suppliants to foreign States, and crave their aid against their Princes, and
other Kings ought to take upon them their defense and protection. Bucanus, loc.
com. Theol. loc. ^7. p. 845. and this doctrine says the learned protestant M.
Owen, was published at the earnest request of Beza and Gonlarrius. Herod. and
Pil. p. 13. and 5^.
suppliants be unto some foreign Prince
TO assist us with his aid, that pulling down
Our King, he, if The people have right to bestow the crown at their pleasure.
Buchan. de iure regni p. 13.
we please, may take the crown.
But if yet al these means desectiue prove,
Then I my self, By the word of God a private man (having some special inward
motion) may kill a Tyrant, etc. or otherwise a private man may do so, if he be
commanded or permitted by the Commonwealth. Obed. p. 10. See more ib. p. 99.
103.
inspired from above,
Either by poison, pistol, sword, or knife,
Or such like ways, will take away his life.
A deed so far from treason, as I swear,
That It were good that rewards were appointed by the people for such as should
kill Tyrants, as commonly there is for those that have killed either wolves or
bears, etc. Buchan. de iure regni, p. 40.
he who kills a raging Wolf or Bear
Deserves less pay, for from this act proceeds
The whole Kingdom's good; o it is the I am of opinion with the old people of
Rome, that of al good actions the murder of a Tyrant is most commendable.
Eusebius. Philad. dial. 1.
best of deeds!
For all such Kings as do God's laws transgress,
And to the same their fearful subjects press,
Of their due honor still If magistrates transgress God's laws themselves,
and command othets to do the like, they loose that honor and obedience, which
otherwise is due unto them; and ought no more to be taken for Magistrates, but
to be examined, and punished as private transgressors. Goodman p. 119. 139.
See more before at. 2.
deprived be,
And the subjects from their used allegiance If Princes be Tyrants against God
and his truth, their subjects are freed from their oaths of obedience. Knox, to
Engl. and Scotland. fol. 78.
free.
And then we scourge them may with their That is, arraigne them, examine and
punish them as private transgressors: whereof see before at 7. and 14. and
Obed. page 111. where it is said, That Judges ought by the law of God, to
summon Princes before them, for their crimes, and to proceed against them, as
against al other offenders.
own rod.
Al these and more I swear; so help me God.
XVII. TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT Majesty my dread Sovereign.
PArdon, most Gracious Sovereign, if my verse
Distaste thy ears; what I above rehearse
Is not mine own: I only do relate
The tenets of such foes unto the state,
As would (if they had power) assail the crown,
And in thy blood al our best fortunes arowne.
My prayers, are [as likewis^ of the rest
Of my dear brethren) that thou may live blessed
Above thy wishes; al disasters chase,
And still look smiling fortune in the face.
May peace by thee with that same throne be graced,
Wherein thy Royal Father has her placed:
And al such wretches as bear any part
In hate to thee, put-off their traitrous heart,
That no tumultuous or disloyal strain
May e're disturb the quiet of thy reign.
Be foreign and homebred injurious scopes
Against thy person strangled in their hopes:
And who knows treason and reueales it not,
Be food to beasts, and branded with the note
Of Traitor; yea, let those so censured be,
Whose only thoughts are false to thine or thee,
This, al true subjects wish, this each implores,
Who Will not subscribe to this, is none of ours.
XVIII. CALVIN'S CREED.
If the Father have his essence of himself, the Son his essence of the
Father, and the Spirit from them both, does not (says Calvin) three essences
hereupon arise? Tract. Theol. p. 793. besides this, in act. crueti he often
writes that the Son has his substance distinct from the Father, whereupon
follows, that he is a distinct God from the Father. See act. Seru. p. 249.
250. 871. 872. and passim.
THree Gods there are; He teaches that the Father can neither wholly, nor by
part, communicate his nature to Christ* but must withal be deprived thereof
himself. Tract. Theol. p. 771. 772. and he denies that the Son is begotten of
the Fathers substance and essence; affirming that he is God of himself, not God
of God. See M. Whit. 8. Camp. rat. and Call. himself l. 1. Inst c. 13. sect.
23.29. and tract. Theol. p. 774 by which it follows, that if God have no Son
begotten of his substance and essence, he can be no Father, and Christ, if he
received no essence from the Father, he cannot be his Son.
no Father; That dream of the absolute power of God which the Schoolmen have
brought in, is execrable blasphemy. Calu. ad c. 23. Ezech. gallice script. See
him Instit. l. 3. c. 23. sect. 2.
nor can he,
Who made of nothing al, Almighty be.
Christ is to God, as God, The Father is greater then I, has been restrained
to the humane nature of Christ, but I do not doubt to extend it to him as God
and Man. Tract. Theol. page 794. See also p. 792. and 2. Inst. c. 14. sect. 3.
and in c. 17. Io. v. 12. etc. 22. Math. v. 44. and cap. 26. v. 64.
inferior,
And does, It is no absurdity etc. if Christ according to his divinity makes
intercession to the Father. Tract. Theol. p. 791.
as God, for us God's aid implore.
He How are we just before God? Sure as Christ a sinner was just. 1. Cor. c. 5.
and in another place: Christ (says he) in that humane nature which he had
taken upon him, was truly a sinner, and guilty of everlasting malediction. Id.
c. 3. ad Galat.
truly was a sinner, See before at 2.
not God's Son,
His birth made Mary of a Virgin Our Lord spared Mary til she had well recovered
her weakness in childbearing, that she might take her journey. in c. 2. Matthew.
v. 13.
none.
She was She was hasty out of time, intempestiue festina. in c. 2. Io. v. 4.
etc. 8. Luc. v. 19.
too busy, of a While she gives scope to her motherly grief, she through lack
of consideration preferred herself before God. In c. 2. Luc. v 18.
haughty vain,
And She seems no less spightfully to restrain the power of God, then did
before her Zacharias. In c. 1. Luc. v. 34.
spightfully God's power did restrain.
Christ not one only, but For he seuereth the person of the Mediator from
Christ's divine person, maintaining, with Nestorius, two persons in Christ; the
one humane, the other divine l. 1. Inst. c. 13. sect. 9. 23. 24.
two persons has,
And was endew'd, as other men, with Though the sense of Christ's flesh did
apprehend destruction, yet faith remained firm in his heart in c. 26. Matt. See
besides, his attributing of the like faith to Christ, which holy men are used
to have when they are tempted. In Matthew. c. 4. v. 3. and in c. 27. v. 46.50
faith.
He, as in years, so did in wisdom Christ as he did grow in body, so likewise
did he profit in soul; and a little before: The gifts of his mind did
increase with his age. In cap. 2. Luc. v 40.
grow,
Yet did not, when at wisest, Christ's soul was subject to ignorance: this only
difference is betwxit us and him, that our infirmities are of necessity, his
voluntary: in c. 2. Luc. v. 40. It is evident that ignorance (says he) was
common to Christ with the Angels in c. 24. Math. v. 36. and in particular he
avouches that he knew not the day of judgment ( in c. 24. Matthew. v. 36.) nor
what that tree was which he cursed. In c. 21. Matthew. v. 18. see also Ib. c. 9.
v. 2.
al things know.
He used no grounded method to We must remember that Christ did use the common
received proverbs, not that they should solidly prove any thing, but only that
they should be as probable conjectures. Calu. in c. 12. Matt. v. 25. and 2. 10.
Luc. v. 17. and thereupon he is not afraid to censure certain words of Christ
to be but a weak confutation of what he sought to refute. In c. 12. Mat. v. 25.
and in another place: Christ (says he) seems here not to reason solidly. Id.
in c. 9. Matthew. v. 5.
confute
The adverse part, but when he did dispute,
He his opponents either did amuse
With This seems to be a harsh and farre-fetcht similitude; and after: The
similitude of sifting does not hang together. Calu. in c. 16. and 22. Luc.
far fetched similitudes, or else abuse
Their faith by some When Christ inferred, Al things therefore whatsoever you
will etc. Calvin gives it this gloss: It is a superfluous or vain illation.
In c. 7. Matt. v. 11.
superfluous inference,
Harsh This metaphore of Christ is somewhat harsh. I^ c. 9. Matt. v. 4^.
phrase, and words not in a That Christ promises from God reward to fasting is
an improper speech, in Matthew. c. 9. v. 16.17.18. See him likewise taxed for
improper speeches by Calu. in c. 12. Matt. v. 5.26.33. in c. 15. v. 18. in c.
20. v. 26 and in c. 1. Joan. v. 32. in c. 6. v. 29. 35. in c. 17. v. 12. and in
c. 3. v. 21. he writes of a saying of Christ, that it seems to be spoken
improperly and absurdly, in French, sans raison.
proper sense.
To vicious passions he sometimes obeyed,
Was disobedient, cowardly, rash, dismayed;
For through base fear he did to his power He refuses and denies, as much as
in him lies, to perform the office of a Mediator ( ^n c. 26. Matt. v. 39.)
and manifests his own effeminatenes by his shunning of death. In c. 12. Io. v.
27.
deny
To be the world's Mediator, and to dye,
And more afraid of death was, then we see
Thieves Thieves and other evil doers do obstinately have to ^eath, many with
haughty courage despise it, some others do mildly suffer it, but what
constancy or stout courage were it for the Son of God to be astonished and in
a manner stricken dead with fear of it? etc. how shameful a tenderness, as I
say, should this have been to be so far tormented with fear of common death,
as to melt in bloody sweat, and not to be able to be comforted but by sight of
Angels? l. 2. Instit. c. 16 sect. 12.
now, or other wicked persons be.
Yea he then quite The same vehemence took from him the present memory of the
heavenly decree, so that he forgot at that instant, that he was sent hither to
be our Redeemer In c. 20. Mat. v. 39.
forgot and did not deem
Himself to be, who should our souls redeem.
His prayer was This prayer of Christ was not premeditate, but the force and
extremity of grief wringed from him this hasty speech, to which a correction
was presently added; and a little before: He chastises and recalleth that vow
of his which he had let suddenly slip. Id. ib.
not advised, but such as did
A more proportioned correction need.
Nothing had been effected if his death
Had been but corporal; for, e're his breath Christ's death had been to no
effect, if he had suffered only a corporal death. Inst. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 10.

For sook him, he was Thus do we see Christ to be on al sides so vexed as
being overwhelmed with desperation, he ceased to call upon God, which was as
much as to renounce his salvation. And this, says he a little before, was not
feined, or as a thing only acted upon a stage. In c. 27. Matthew. v. 47.46.
truly in despair,
And did the death of He was afraid of something more horrible in his death,
then the separation (only) of soul and body. In c. 26. Matthew. v. 37. see 39.
more then body fear.
His guilty soul was It behooved that Christ, to satisfy for us, should be
conuented, and that guilty, before the tribunal of God In c. 27. Matthew. v. 46.
cited for to come
Before the Eternal, to receive her doom;
And was Christ in his soul suffered the terrible torments of a damned and
forsaken man. l. 2. Inst. c. 10. sect. 10.
tormented with the infernal pains,
Which for the damned forsaken souls remains.
And, to be breef, no other signs there are
In all his death, but tokens of In the death of Christ occurres a spectacle full
of desperatio^. In c. 27. Mat. v. 57. And again: ^n this spectacle there was
nothing but matter of extreme despair. In c. 14. Joan. v. 6.
despair.
He went to hell, that is, It is no marvel if it be said that Christ went
down to the hels, since he suffered that death wherewith God in wrath strikes
wicked doers l. 2. Inst. c. 6. sect. 10.
God did impose
Those pains on him, he does upon his foes;
Whence he became in horror with the fright
Of black damnation, and with It behooved that Christ should as it were hand to
hand wrestle with the armies of the hels and the horror of eternal death. Idem
ibid. See him also in c. 26. Matt. v. 39.
that did fight.
His body dead, alive again was made;
Not of himself, but Calvin holds it to be absurd, that Christ should challenge
to himself the glory of his own resurrection, when the scripture (says he)
every where teaches it to be the work of God the Father. In c. 2. Joan. See
him also in c. 8. ad Romans
by his Father's aid.
He sits at God's right hand; that is, he holds
Next Christ is said to sit at the right hand of the Father, because being
ordained chief King (who in his name may govern the world) he as it were
holds the second degree from him of honor and Christ therefore sits at the
right hand of his Father, because he is his Vicar. In c. 26. Matt. v. 64.
under him, cheef rule; and al controls.
We need We need not fear least our sins come to be judged by God, from
which the Son of God has by so precious a price absolved us. In c. 27. Matt.
v. 29.
not fear to have our sins awaite
For Judgment, ransomed at so high a rate.
The holy Ghost is God, See before at 1. and besides read Calu. l. 1. Inst. c.
13. sect. 23. and 25.
as I have shown,
Distinct from both the Father and the Son.
It Is false to say, the Church can never fail,
For then it The matter came to that pass, that it was manifest and evident to
the learned and unlearned, that the true order of the Church then perished, the
Kingdom of Christ was thrown down, when this Dominion (of the Pope) was
erected. Calu. resp. ad Sadolet. p. 132. 128.
fell, when Popes did first prevail.
Penance is At what time soever we baptized, we are at once washed and cleansed
for all our life; and a little after: They err, who think that by the benefit
of repentance, we do after baptism obtain forgiveness. And not much before:
In baptism is obtained perpetual and continual forgiveness of sins, even
unto death. l. 4. Inst. c. 14. sect. 3. 4. etc. 19. sect 17.
needles; every sinful fall
In baptism is remitted once for all*
It is a foolish madness to Upon the 26. of Mat. he affirms that they are mad
who teach that the blood of Christ is now joined with his flesh. Which opinion
Schlusselburg detesting both in Calvin and his fellows, says: Hence it
appears that the Caluinists, albeit they affirm in word and writing, yet in
heart they do not believe the resurrection of the dead. Schluss. Theol. Calu.
l. 1. art. 20.
maintain
That after death our flesh shall rise again.
In heau'en itself Christ being entered into the Sanctuary of heaven, unto the
end of the Ages of the world, he alone carries to God the prayers of the
people (of the Saints) abiding a far off at the portch. l. 3. Inst. c. 20.
sect. 20. and els-where: The souls of the godly having ended the labor of
their warfare, do go into a blessed rest, where with happy ioyfulnes they
look for the enjoying of the promised glory; and so al things are holden in
suspense til Christ the Redeemer appear. Ib. c. 25. sect. 6.
no Saints have yet ar al been.
Who speaks these words, a Christian? See Aegidius Hunnius his Caluinus
Iudaizans, etc. printed Wittenb. 1593. and John Modestus his Demonstration
forth of holy Scripture, that the Sacramentaries are not Christians, but
baptized Jews and Turks, print. Tubingae. 1583. both which Authors were
learned Protestants.
no John Calvin.
XIX. UPON SAINT PAVL and Luther.
PAVL in his writings S. Paul repeates this sacred name of JESUS in his
Epistles near 500. times.
ofttymes JESUS names,
Luther the Diuel's name So frequently does Luther use the name of DEVIL, that
the learned Tigurine Divines speaking but of one of his books only, say, that
it is full of Devils; and in another place: How wonderful (say they) is Luther
here with his Devils, what impure words he uses, with how many Devils does he
burst? Theol. Tigur. confess. Germ. fol. 3. and part. 3. fol. 134. and
Zuinglius says to him: We fill not our books with so many Devils, nor do we
bring so many armies of Devils against thee etc. Zuingl. tom. 2. fol., 81.
more often proclames.
What is the reason? sure, on either part
The mouth speaks from the abundance of the heart.
XX. Upon the late peace betwixt the King of France and the Hugonots.
WArr's storms are past, the gentle breath of peace
Has forced in France al noisome vapors cease.
The Rochellers and their adherents now
Their humble necks unto the King do bow.
They now no more vil As they have done for the space of oboue 40. or 50.
years together, and that for Religion, as evidently appears by the
Protestant writer I. de Serres in his general Inuentory of the history of
France, transl. into Engl. by Edw. Grimston; and by Osiander, who writing of
those wars says: Civil war for Religion was renewed etc. Epit. 116. p. 804.
for Religion's sake
Rebellious arms against their Sovereign take.
No more The King caused certain Edicts to be published against them of the
Religion, who stood upon their guard, seeing their Prince threatened them so
openly. Crispen. Est. of the Church. p. 613. see Osiand. ep. cent. 16. p. 8^8.
de Se^res p. 625. 658 etc.
contemn his Edicts, and no more
Against his powers As without further testimony, it is sufficiently known
they have done, by their often sending, besides other Countries, hither
likewise into England. Read De Serres.
foreign power implore:
Henceforth they will never, under fair peten^e
To show their faith, come As they did, when under color of exhibiting a
Confession of their faith, they came armed to the Kings Palace. Osiand. Epit.
cent. 16. p. 698.
armed to their Prince,
Nor armed treat with him, As they did when they treated partly as humble
servants, partly as armed subjects, like to such who beg for alms with their
swords in their hands. De Serres p. 660.
like such as stand
To beg an alms with threatening sword in hand.
They Will never contend by open force again
From him his sacred Churches They having before by many petitions required
temples for the exercise of their Religion, do now take them by force in many
places, and without further approbation of their demandes they assemble at
diverse times. Thus de Serres p. 588. see Pet. Mart. Epist. annex. to his comm.
plac. in English p. 157.
to detain:
Nor will their Preachers, As Beza did in a seditious vproare at Orleans,
whereat he preached with his sword and pistol, and exhorted the people to show
their manhood rather in killing the Papists then in breaking images. M. Fulk.
answ. to P. Frarnes declam. p. 44. see Anton. Fagus devita Beza. p. 45.
armed with pistols, prove
(...) them to greater treasons they may move.
Religious persons, Abbeys, Monasteries,
Priests, Altars, Vestments, Relikes, Images,
And whatsoever else, may now be free
From the For at Meaux, transported with indiscreet zeal, grounded upon their
numbers, they did fly to the Churches, beat down images, and make the Prists
retire. de Serres p. 593. See their like insolences used in the same kind in
Grenoble (16. p. 610.) and else where p. 589.
profane reach of impiety.
Th^y'l cease. But stay; a further clause remains;
I had forgot my self, they are Puritans.
XXI. UPON CAROLOSTADIVS.
AS Car'lostadius first begin's to preach,
The Devil courteously takes pains to Carolostadius was wont to boast (says
Chemnitius lib. de caena. p. 214.) that the exposition of This is my body, came
to him by revelation, but he that appeared to him, if we may believe Luther (
tom. 3. Ien. Germ, fol. 68.) was either the Devil, or the Devils Damme. See
also Chemnitius de caena p. 214.
teach,
Guide and direct him; and to make him still
Better observe the proiects of his will,
He kindly creepes This miserable man was not possessed with one Devil only.
Luth. loc. com. class. 5. c. 15. p. 47. see him also tom. 3. Ien. fol. 61. and
Alb. cont. Carlostadianos z. 4. p. 1. and y. 2. p. 2. where affirms that the
Devil possessed Carolostadius corporally.
into him, Let no man wonder that I call him (Carolostadius) Devil; for I have
nothing to do with him; I have only relation to him, by whom he is obsest, who
also speaks by him. Luth. tom. 3. Ien. fol. 61. see also colloq. men's. fol.
367. 373.
and directs
His tongue to al Hel's most desired effects.
So that, when e're this Doctor silence breaks,
His lips and tongue move, but the Devil speaks.
And while he lies, expecting every hour
To try the force of death's al-forcing power,
The Devil This last apparition of the Devil to him, which was three days
before his death, is affirmed by Albert. cont. Carlost. f. 1. 6. and Io.
Schutz. lib. 50. cause. c. 50. see more of Carolostadius hereafter. XXXIV. 2. 3.
4. 5.
visits him. Monster of men!
The Devil left thee not til death; nor then.
XXII. UPON BEZA, BETWIXT HIS Candida and Andebert.
WHat? is not Beza yet resolved? nor yet?
Still does he doubt on whether part to set
His spacious lusts, his lusts as hard to fill
As is the gulf of his insatiate will?
See, see, o, how he, fearful to distaste
Either damnation, his loosse eyes does cast
A like on both, as if he feign would gleane
Equal Amplector quoque sic and hunc and illam, vt totus cupiam videre
vtrumque, integrisque frui integer duobus, etc. Beza his own words vbi supra.
acceptance both from Boy and Queen,
Now her he courts; then fearing least that act
Displease his Ganimed, he seems t'retract
His former error, and assures the Boy
That he alone shall be is only joy.
His jealous punke at last perceaueth this,
And storms thereat; he calmes her with a kiss:
Then, to his Priores tibi desero Andeberte: Quod si Candida forto conqueratur,
quid tum? basiolo tacebit vno. ib.
Boy: thou sweet (says he) art mine,
Thou art my cheef delight. O rare Divine!
Among other wanton Epigrammes which Beza writ, there is one extant of his
inordinate liking to his Ganimed called Andebertus, and his woman Candida,
wherein he debateth whether sin be may prefer, and finally m^kes choice of
the boy before his woman. See this in Beza's Epigrammes print. at Paris an.
1548. In so much as Schlusselberg confesses saying, that it is evident that
Beza did write most obscene verses to Germanus Andebertus, whom he chose at
Orleans, and that Beza made him his Adonis. Theol. Calu. l. 1. f. 93. see more
in proem. p. 4. and 92. 93. and l. 2. f. 72. and hereafter XXXIV. 20. 21. 22.
23.
XXIII. UPON REFORMERS DOCTRINE of Predestination.
E'RE Rome, the words then Empress, did embrace
That sacred truth, whose path she now does trace,
Metal and stone, S. Austin de Ciu. Dei; Lipsius and many others.
her own works, she adored,
And help, of what required her help, implored.
The joyful reapers of the fruits of Nile
Worshiped Strabo lib. 17. Stackius de sacrif. q. gent. Philo Iuda^^ de 10.
praec. Ios. cont. App. Orig. cont. Cells. l. 3. etc.
a Cat, Dog, Bull and Crocodile,
Ibis and Hawks; yea offered up their groans
To Beetles, Aspes, Garlic, and Onyons.
Snakes, Adders, Tigers, Skrich-owles, Bats, and Trees,
Herbs, Beasts, and Birds are Purchase his pilgrimage. l. 6, c. 9.
Congo's Deities.
To the Ludouicus Patrich. Romans nauig. l. 5. c. 2.
Devil Calicute does prayer assign,
Yea to an Maff. hist. Ind. lib. 1. p. 24. see Loopez.
Ape, Elephants, and Kine.
But bolder Caspar Balby. Gor. Arthus hist. Ind. p. 321.
Pegu does in this excel,
In sacrifice she feeds the Devil well,
And gives him music: spacious (g) Tartary Io. de plano Carpini. c. 2.

And fair Cathaga much devoted be
To a God of Felt, in whose conceit Earth, Fire,
Sun, W^ter, Stars, the like respect require.
The Vertomannus lib. 6.
Philippina's do adore an Ox
Peru amount Acosta lib. 5. cap. 5.
of sand, a Cieza c. 50.
Cock, and Fox,
An Emerald and Acosta lib. 6. c. 21.
Thunder: Purch. Pilgrimage. lib. 8. cap. 11.
Mexico
Before a living Slave as God does bow;
Yea to a mass of Pass which long has stood
Tempred in Childrens and in virgins blood.
The lands Ib. lib. 5. cap. 8.
betwixt Cambaia and Malabar
The first thing they meet, after the morning-starre
Has told the Sunn's approach, be it Bull or Boar
Or any Creature else, they low adore,
Rude misshap't Stones industrious Maffeus hist. Ind. l. 6.
China makes
Her Gods, with heaven and Hel-hags wound with snakes.
To a Flint The Estates etc. of the world, in English, p. 778.
Narsinga; the farthest Ortel. theatro. Miechonius de Sarmat. Europea. lib. 2.
Moschi fall
To an old wiue's shape; Gagninus descript. Lithuaniae.
Lithuania to a Mal.
And in this sottish manner diverse more,
For their Creator, creatures do adore:
Al foolishly, I grant; yet al hope The Calicutians adore the Devil, who is
appointed (say they) by God to reward every man according to their works.
Lodou. Patrich. Romans nauig. l. 5. c. 2. The Virginians likewise hold that the
soul is rewarded after this life according to her works. Purch. pilgrim l. 8.
c. 6. the like may be also seen in the rest, whosoever shall peruse their
histories.
to gain
Some good by this their superstitious pain;
And think, that in reward each God proceeds
With every one according to his deeds.
But Protestants serve such a Tyrant God Let not any of the Tyrant-worshippers
accuse me here of blasphemy, for I do not in this place speak of the God of
Catholics, Jesus Christ: for he will (as himself says) render unto every one
according to his works. Math. 16. v. 27. Luc. 6. verse. 38. Romans 2. Cor. 1.3.
Gal. 6. Apoc. vlt. Psalm. 65.

As does (say they) The God of Reformers does ordain by his counsel and
decree, that among men some be borne destined to certain damnation from their
mothers womb, who by their destruction may glorify him ( Calvin. Instit. l. 3.
c. 23. s^ct. 6.) and this without any respect had to their works either good or
evil. M. willet. Synop. p. 554. See also for this opinion Calu. Instit. print.
Argentorat. p. 253. Luther lib. de ser. arbitr. Beza respons. ad acta colloqu.
Montisberg. part. 2. p. 233. 165. Pet. Mart. comm. places, part. 3. p. 12. and
many more.
inflict the dreadful rod
Of his eternal wrath, no care once had
Of any of their actions good or bad:
Yea though they be the chief in Virtue's school,
They must be damned: Which is the greatest fool?
XXIV. A LETTER TO A MINISTER from one of his Pupils, concerning S. Austin's
Works.
SIR,
Since I saw you last, though many a hill,
Plains, woods, and groves our bodies do divide,
Your best part has been present with me still,
Distance of place that from me nere could hide.
The ghostly good derections, which by you
It pleased the Spirit to me then impart
Straight in my soul to such perfection grew
As they nere shall, nor can from thence depart;
You taught me then to know Rom's scarlet-whore
And other points, which then I held amiss:
Wherewith emboldned, now in one thing more
Your grave advice I crave, and this it is.
I doubt not but you know in what esteem
With our best Authors Austin's writings are.
To some so free from error he does seem^
As After the sacred Scriptures there is no Doctor in the Church who is to be
compared to Austin. Luth. loc. com. class. 4. p. 45.
none but Scripture may with him compare.
Others do style him the po^f;und'st Divine
And great'st of Fathers, since the Apostles were. M. Field of the Church lib.
3. f. 170. See Luth. tom. 7. fol. 405.

Others affirm he did in learning shine
Far D. Couel in his answer to Io. Burges.
above all that did or will appear.
Others M. Jewel in his so well known public challenge at Paul's Cross,
appealed to S. Austin as a true and Orthodoxal Doctor.
appeal unto him, some him call
The Fathers M. Forrester Non: Tessagraph. etc. in prooem. p. 3.
Monarch, one more Austin of all the Fathers is holden most pure in the opinion
of al. Gomar. spec. verae Eccles. p. 96.
free from taint
Of error then the purest of them al,
And say, he doubtless was a M. Whitak. answer to F. Camp.
Protestant.
Yet I, perusing of his Works, can see
(Thus much the Spirit has given me to descerne)
Nothing but rules of wicked Popery
Nor ought by him but superstition learn.
To instance some; he holds the I would not believe the Ghospel, unless the
authority of the Catholic Church moved me thereto etc. The authority of
Catholics weakened, I cannot then believe the Ghospel. S. Austin tom. 6. cont.
Ep. fundam. c. 5.
Church-decrees,
Which are the books we ought true Scripture call.
Toby, The whole Canon of the Scriptures, says S. Austin, is contained in
these books following: and then among the rest he names these books. Tom. 3.
de Doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 8. vide Conc. Carth. 3. c. 47. to which S. Austin
being present subscribed.
with Judith, Hester, Machabees,
He, Papist-like, does hold canonical.
General These things which we observe, not written but delivered, which are
kept al over the world, are to be understood to be observed, as decreed either
by the Apostles themselves, or general Councels. Tom. 2. ep. 118. ad Ianuar. c.
1. See hereafter at. 40.
Traditions are to be observed,
Christ's true Church We must hold the communion of that Church, which is named
Catholic, not only of her own, but also of her enemies; for will they, nil
they, heretics and schismatikes, when they speak not with their own fellows
but with strangers, call the Catholic Church nothing else but Catholic Church;
for they could not be understood unless they discern it by this name
wherewith she is called by the whole world. tom. 1. de vera relig. c. 7.
only called Catholic.
None must It is a point of most insolent madness to dispute against that which
the universal Church thinks. tom. 2. ep. 118. c. 5.
gainsay her; she is still preserved
From S. Austin answering the Donatists, who affirmed with our Reformers that
the Church was perished, says: This they say who are not in the Church, o
impudent speech! etc. why do thou say that the Church has perished out of al
countries? tom. 8. in Ps. 102. con. 2.
fall; Rom's Church is To which Church of Rome not to give the primacie is
truly either the greatest impiety or headlong arrogancy. tom. 6. de vtil.
cred. c. 17.
chiefest, and the like.
The holy Sacraments do grace confer From whence is that so great virtue of
the water, that touching the body it washes the heart, but the Word working it?
tom. 9. in Joan. tract. 118.

And with the Unless the sign of the cross be applied either to the forehead
of the belieuers, or to the water wherewith they are regenerated, or to the
oil wherewith they are anointed, or to the Sacrifice wherewith they are
nourished, none of these are rightly administered. tom. 9. in Joan. tract. 118.
Crosse's sign applied be:
He does moreover seriously auerre,
That such are It may truly be said that children dying without baptism are
to be in the easyest state of damnation: Yet he deceives and is deceived who
teaches that they are not to be damned. To. 7. de pecc. mer and remiss. l. 1.
c. 10. and tom. 7. de anima and eius orig. l. 3. c. 9. and tom. 10. de verb.
Apost. sermon. 14. and tom. 2. ep. 28. ad Hieron.
damned as unbaptized dye.
He holds the real S. Austin writing upon these words of the Psalmist, He was
carried in his own hands, says: Christ was carried in his own hands, when
commending his own body, he said: This is my body; for then that his body was
carried in his hands. Tom. 8. in Psalm. 33. Conc. 1. and see Conc. 2. and ante
exposit. Psalmi.
presence, which the It was the body and blood of our Lord, even unto them to
whom the Apostle said, He that eats unworthily, eats judgment to himself.
Tom. 7. de Bapt. cont. Don. l. 5. c. 8. and again: The traitor Judas received
the good body of Christ. tom. 7. cont. Eulgens. Donat. c. 6.
bad
As well as good receive, and does it call
A Of his body and blood he ordained a Sacrifice according to the order of
Melchisedech. To. 8. in Ps. 33. Conc. 2. ante exposit. Psalm. See tom. 5. de
Ciuit. Dei lib. 17. cap. 20. and that he held this to be also a propitiatory
Sacrifice, it is confessed by Crastouius lib. 1. de opis. miss page 167. and
Hutteru^ de Sacrificio missal. page 525.
sacrifice, whereof he ever had
A care no With what great care do we observe when the body of Christ is
ministered unto us, that nothing thereof do fall out of our hands upon the
ground. Tom. 10. l. 50. hom. 26. See sermon. ad infantes.
piece upon the ground should fall.
It ought by all to be Because he walked here in that flesh, and gave us that
flesh to eat for our salvation, now none eats that flesh, but first adoreth
it. etc. we may not only not sin by adoring, but sin by not adoring, etc.
Tom. 1. in Ps. 98. and see in Ps. 21. conc. 1.
adored (says he:)
And holds the Papists Let man make known his life to God by the Priest, let
him prevent the judgment of God by confession. Tom. 4. de vera and falsa
poenitentia. c. 10. and more fully tom. 9. l. 2. de visit. infir. c. 4.
now Confession;
Orders Both Baptism and Order are Sacraments etc. Tom. 7. cont. epist.
parmen. l. 2. c. 13. and de baptismo contra Donat. l. 1. c. 1. and tom. 6. de
bono coning. c. 24.
besides, a Sacrament to be
He shows, and teaches Extream-vnction.
His sentence still against our Faith proceeds
In all these so much controuerted Heads, Let him (the sick) ask of the Church
holy oil, wherewith his body may be anointed, according to the Apostle, James.
5. Tom. 9. de rect. cath. conuers. and tom. 10. sermon. de temp. 215. and tom. 9.
de visit. infir. l. 2 c. 4.

Justification, The grace of God etc. brings to the life of the second man,
not only by blotting out sins, but also by helping not to sin. Tom. 2. ep.
106. 105. tom. 7. de not. and gratia. c. 26.
Free Will, It is in our will to consent to God calling, or to dissent from it.
Tom. 3. de spir. and lit. c. 34. and tom. 2. ep. 47. tom. 6. in act. cum Fael.
Manich. l. 2. c. 4. and passim.
Merit Are there no merits of the just? there are truly, because they are just
etc. as to the demerits of sin death is given as wage, so to the merits of
justice, as wage, life eternal. Tom. 2. ep. 105. and 46. 47. 52. and tom. 3.
Enchir. c. 1^6. 107. and tom. 7. de not. and gratia, etc.
of deeds;
Which faith perhaps through him now so far spreads.
In Prayr Let him ( S. Cyprian he means) help us with his prayers etc. that
our Lord granting, we may imitate his goodness as much as we are able. Tom. 7.
de bapt. c. Donat. l. 7. c. 1. See l. 5. c. 17.
to Saints, their We honor their memories as of holy men of God. Tom. 5. de
ciuit. Dei. l. 8. c. 27.
Worship, I think it was because they had seen in many places them ( SS. Peter
and Paul) pictured together with Christ. Tom. 4. de consens. Euang. l. 1. c. 10.
Images,
Prayer It is not be doubted but that the dead are helped by the prayers of the
holy Church, etc. Tom. 10. de verb. Apost. ser. 32. c. 2. and tom. 4. de cura
pro mort. c. 18.
for dead, material Incorporal spirits may, by strange yet true means, be
tormented with the punishment of corporal fire. de ciuit. Dei. l. 21. c. 10.
fire in hell,
And Some suffer temporal punishments only in this life, others after death,
some in both. Tom: 5. de ciuit. Dei. l. 21. c. 13. and after the English
translation l. 21. c. 16. p. 857. etc. 21. p. 860. etc. 24. p. 863. and l. 20.
c. 25.
Purgatory-paines; he n'ere does cease
Our now-held Doctrine to his power to refel.
With our blind Papists There are certain venial sins which are loosed daily
by our Lord's prayer etc. but others which are to death, are not so loosed, but
by the fruits of penance. Tom. 4. de vera and falsa poenitentia. c. 4.
a main difference.
'Twixt Mortal sins and Venial unfolds:
A If he shall marry after the vow, which he has promised to God, he shall be
condemned etc. If a Nun shall marry, she shall be reputed to have committed
adultery against Christ. Tom. 8. in Ps. 83.
vowed Chastity, Fastes, Not to keep (the fast of Lent) at al, is sacrilege,
and in part to break it, is sin. Tom. 10. de temp. sermon. 77. ser. 62. and
tom. 2. ep. 86. ad Casul.
Abstinence Catholics do abstain not only from flesh, but also from certain
fruits of the earth: not that they think them unclean etc. and almost al in
Lent observe this abstinence. Tom. 6. cont. Manich. l. 30. c. 5. See tom. 1. de
morib. eccles. c. 31.

From certain meats on certain days he holds.
In brief what holds For the other Catholic points which he holds, see the
treatise of S. Austins religion throughout; where you shall find both them and
this which I have already set down al for the most part acknowledged to have
been S. Austins doctrine by the learned Protestants themselves.
he not? scarce do I know
One part of him from superstition free;
His doctrine to approve, his rules t'allow
Were M. Cartwright answering to S. Austins opinion about traditions, says: To
allow S. Austins saying, is to bring in Popery again. M. Whitg. def. p. 103.
to reduce expulsed Popery.
Which makes me wonder, why we say, that he
The Calvin grants that Austin only is sufficient to show the judgment of
the ancient Church. l. 3. Inst. c. 3. sect. 10.
judgment of the ancient Church does show;
For grant but that, and since we disagree
From him, our Doctrine must of force be new.
Feign would I know, how best I might defend
Our faith, if any Papist should object
And ask: why, since his writings we commend.
We their authority as weak reject.
So hoping to receive ere long your best
And soundest counsel in this case, I rest.
XXV. The Minister's Answer to the former letter.
Dearly beloved,
I have read your lines,
Wherein above the common course of youth
As in a spotless mirror clearly shines
A perfect zeal to search and find the truth.
Now as concerning briefly your demand,
What is Augustine? who will compel us to believe him? by what authority is his
word an article of faith? Luth. contra Regem Angliae.
Of Hippo's Austins so much urged faith:
Why's al he writes pure Ghospel? what command
Have we to credit whatsoever he says? See next before XXIV. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
7.

I but, say you, some do him much commend,
And unto him as a sure ground appeal.
I answer, such appeals He granted overmuch and yealded more then of right
unto you (Catholics) and injured himself overmuch etc. and in a manner
spoiled himself and the Church etc. What have we to do with the Fathers, with
flesh or blood? D. Humfr. de vita Iewelli. p. 212.
too far extend,
They hurt themselves and the true Church's weal.
They give too great a scope, themselves they show
Too much obsequious to Rom's Popish brood,
Their cause they injury: what have we to do
With man's inventions now, with flesh or blood?
For though some praise him, some there also are,
Perhaps as zealous of the Word as they,
Who will not doubt, before they do impare
The grounds of truth, his errors to display.
Be there not many of our learnd'st Divines
Who in some places of his works suspect
His S. Augustine tom. 5. de ciuit. Dei. c. 8. is to be suspected, for he
speaks there of miracles done in Africa etc. whereas himself Tom. 2. ep. 137.
says that in Africa there were not any miracles wrought in any place. M.
Moulin def. of the cath. faith Englished, art. 17. p. 323.
sincere dealing, and by diverse signs
His Austin wants the testimony of Scripture, neither agrees he with
himself, he contradictes himself etc. Hosp. hist. sacr. part. 1. Indice 3.
Patrum at the word Augustinus see also Tossanus Syn. de Patr. p. 34. Hutt de
Sacrificio Missal l. 2. c. 7. Muscul. loc. comm. de Decal. p. 39.
contradicting of himself detect?
One you shall find his reasons I cannot allow S. Austins reason which he makes
etc. Cartwr. in Whitg. def. p. 619.
disallowes,
Another marks his gross absurdity, Austin in his book of holy virginity
belieues that B Marie vowed virginity etc. which al easily know how absurd it
is. Pet. Mart. de Euchar. and vetis, col. 1609. see M. Whitg. def. p. 516.

Another his So Austin and some Fathers thought, but without ground. etc. Dan.
resp. ad tom. 2. Bellar. p. 281.
ungrounded speeches shows
And some his furthring of Idolatry. M. Brightman having named among other
Fathers S. Austine, says that they were in words condemning Idolatry, but in
deeds establishing it, by invocation of SS. worshipping of Relikes, and such
other like wicked superstitious, in Apoc. in c. 14. p. 382.

Nor want there some who dare affirm, he erres Not only Austin but other
fathers also erred in the vowed Chastity by mutual consent (even) of married
persons. Hosp. de orig. Monach. f. 102. item Beza in resp. ad acta coll.
Monteth^^. part. 2. p. 143.

And is Ambrose and Augustine were both of them corrupt in lent-fast. 2. reply
part. 1. p. 83.
corrupt, and Neither is that quirck of Austin to be approved etc. Calvin. l.
4. Instit. c. 15. sect. 7.
uses quircks; and some
Anouch that to believe what he auerres,
Were See next before in the former letter XIIII. 40.
to set up the faith again of Rome.
What should I say? how many do Although thou, Austin, affirmest that the
Church al over the world observes this etc. yet I will bring the contrary
against thee. Hamelin de Apost. trad. part. 3. col. 815
oppose
Against him, his authority The authority here of Austin (about material fire
in hell) is known. Danaeus resp. ad Bellarm. disput. part. alt. ad 6.
controuer. p. 1337.
despise,
And doubt not on him this foul taint t'impose,
That leaving Scripture he does Austin did this without Scripture, yealding to
the time and custom. Chemn. exam. part. 3. p. 211.
temporize?
Nay more then that, some will not stick to say,
His words These things brought out of Austin do not agree with the sacred
Scriptures. Pet. Mart. de Euchar. and vo^. col. 1608. 1609.
repugnant to the Scripture be,
And on his back the imputations lay
Of It was spoken inconsiderately by Austin. Musc. loc. comm. p. 266.
rashness, boldness, Here I entreat your indifferent judgments that you freely
speak, whether this saying of Augustine may not be thought more audacious then
meet, or to have been uttered imprudently. Zuinglius tom. 1. f. 135
and imprudencie.
The sower, It is manifest that S. Austin did either sow the seeds of no small
errors, or else increase and confirm them being sowed by others. Theod.
Schnepf. lib. de Euchar.
or increaser some him call
Of seeds not grateful in the Almighty^'s sight;
Some style him S. Austin, among other Fathers, is called a doting fellow, a
block-head, destitute of the Spirit of God, and therefore unworthy to be
credited, by Bartholom. Causaeus Clyp. fider gallit. impr. Geneuae, dial. 11.
fool and dolt, and not at al
Inspired with the Lord's al-guiding Sp'rit.
If so, why should we on his words rely
To find that truth which only Scriptures show?
No, let us this pernicious Some are now come to that, that they fill al things
with the Fathers authorities, which I would to God they had as happily
effected, as they hopefully attempted etc. Surely I hold this to be a most
pernicious custom and to be by all means shunned, etc. Iac. Aconc. in Stratag.
Satanae, l. 6. p. 296.
custom fly
If e're we mean the undoubted truth to know.
Nor would I have you from this man alone
But from al other Fathers to refrain,
For amongst them al scarce can you find me one
But does maine Almost all the Bishops and learned Writers of the Greek Church
and Latin also, for the most part were spotted with doctrines of free will, of
merit, of invocation of Saints, and such like, etc. Whitg. def. p. 472. 473.
points of Papistry maintain.
So that as long as we on them insist So long as we do insist upon Councels
and Fathers we shall be always conversant in the same errors. Pet. Mart. de
Votes. p. 476.

Still in the self-same errors shall we stay:
God's only Word can only chase this mist,
No Sun but that, that only shows the way.
Now to your last demand; make answer still
Your faith's not tied unto each man's tongue;
TO Austin you are ready to resign your will,
As long as he does to the Word no wrong.
Say thus and they are mute: be not intic't
To leave this n'ere-forc't hold: farewell in Christ. Lay aside al such weapons
as the ancient orthodoxal Fathers, Schools of Divines, authority of Councels
and Popes, the consent of so many Ages and of al Christian people does afford;
we receive nothing but Scriptures; but so, that we alone may have the approved
authority of interpreting them etc. Luther l. de seru. arbitr. contra Erasm.
edit. prima.

XXVI. A REPLY TO THE precedent letter.
YOurs I have read, and since you cannot give
Better solutions to my doubts, I grieu^
To have so long insisted on the path
Of your so much esteemed, so empty Faith.
For, if We do not depend (say many) on the Fathers, but on the words of God,
etc. But I wonder whether these men ever read over the writings of those
Fathers, whom they railingly condemn for Sophistes. For if they have read
them, with what face dare they oppose them to the word of God, whom it is
evident to have only relied upon God's word? but if they have not read them at
al, or but negligently read them, what a shame is it, that the scholars should
become their Master's judges, yea and that before they hear them? Thus far
Beza in lib. Epist. theolog. Epist. 81.
(as Beza did himself reply
To such as did the same with you deny)
Austin and other Fathers did maintain
Those points for true, which you reject as vain;
Why, as if you alone could never err,
should you your judgment before their's prefer,
And never cease their writings to oppose
Against the Scriptures, since they every clause,
No less then you, but with a more profound
And deeper sight, did on the Scripture ground?
The question therefore, as I thought before,
Is not here whether we should credit more
God's word or them, each child can that decide,
But whether now men's judgments should be tide
To what you hold the Word's true sense to be,
Or that whereon they jointly al agree.
Here lies the doubt: when you do them excel
In this, I Will then return; til then farewell.
XXVII. Upon Peter Martyr.
WHen pale Simlerus in the life of Peter Martyr (says Schlusselberg) affirms
that he dyed in the Sacramentary heresy, and said to Bullenger and others a
little before his death, That he would not be in Brentius heaven, for that was
nowhere. Therefore, o Martyr, thou must stay in Zuinglius heaven, with
Hercules and Socrates, (to wit) in hell; where thou, o Martyr, shall be the
diuel's everlasting Martyr. Theolo. Calu. lib. 2. act. 1.
death summond Martyr to appear
Before the Eternal's dread tribunal-chaire,
In Brentius heaven is of that nature, that (to use his own words) not only
holy men, but Satan and his Angels are to be found therein. Brent. lib. de
May. Christi p. 160. see more of Brentius heaven in Hospin. hist. Sacram.
part. alt. fol. 308. 321. 322.
Brentius heaven he vowed he would not come,
He long before renounced the heaven of Rome.
In See before IX. ^.
Zuinglius heaven sure he then would stay,
With Theseus, Numa, Scipio etc. where are they?
XXVIII. ON OECOLAMPADIVS.
OEcolampadius still in outward show
Vowed himself confident that al was true
He either preached or writ: but in his heart
He Ioannes Cellarius, who by reason of this doubtfulnes of Oecolampadius
forsook the Sacramentaryes, heard him pray thus in his Chamber: O Lord God, if
my cause be not true, do not advance it, I beseech thee. See Colloq. men's.
Germ. fol. 356. see also John. schutz. lib. ger. 50. causar. cause. 15. H. 2.
doubted still of some and no small part.
Which private doubt (although he did pretend
Outward assurance) Nicolaus Selneuerus, who witnesses this his doubtfulnesse
of the truth of his doctrine to have remained with him even til his death,
writes that he said thus in his sickness: O Lord Jesus Christ, reveal to me I
beseech thee the truth, whether I have hitherto spoken and written rightly of
thy supper, or no; which shows (says Selneuerus) that hitherto he has built
upon the sand. Seln. part. c. Enarat. Ger. in psalm. fol. 215.
lasted til his end;
I mean til Satan, for his goodly merits,
Vouchsaf't to I am fully persuaded (says Luther) that Emser and
Oecolampadius, and such like were Suddenly slain by those horrible blows and
shaking of the Devil. Luth. tom. 7. fol. 2^0.
quit him of his vital spirits.
Shame not hereat; Luther thy ancient friend
Will tell thee, 'twas an I had rather be slain by the devil, says Luther, then
by Caesar: for so I should be slain by a great Lord. Luth. colloq. men's. Sermon.
fol. 259,
honorable end.
XXIX. Upon the familiarity of Luther, Carolostadius, Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza,
and others with the Devil.
SOme Protestants, as they themselves rehearse,
Have with the Devil often had great commerce.
Luther with Devils often did See herafter XXXIII 20.
lie and Ib. and of his further familiarity with him, See VI. 2. and IX. 2. and
XXXIII. 21. 22. 23. 24.
walk;
With Devils See before; XXI. throughout.
Car'lostadius often did talk;
Zuinglius Before in IX. 1.
received from the Devil this fa th;
Calvin on Devils Herafter in XXXIX. 2.
called at his death;
Beza's preferred to be the Devils Schlusselberg affirms of Beza his
Creophagia, that without doubt he writ it against the Testament of the Son of
God, while the Devil did dictate it unto him. Theolo. Calu. lib. 2. art. 1.
scribe;
And some are full Luther says (say the Tigurine Divines) that the Devil
dwells both now and ever in the Zuinglians, and that they have a blasphemous
breast, in-Sathanized, super-Sathanized, and per-Sathanized, and that they have
besid's a most vain mouth, over which Satan bears rule, being infused,
perfused, and tra^sfused into the same. Tigur. tract. 3. cont. suprem. Luth.
confess. p. 61. See also hereafter XLII. 32.
of Devils. A Diu'lish Tribe?
XXX. REFORMERS IVBILIE.
AL you who hate the idle smoke
Of Romes good-workes, and scorn her yoke;
You proud disturbers of al peace,
You Tyrants, you who never cease
Of your oppressed subjects still
T'exact for law your lawless will.
You who with traytrous arms withstand
You lawful Sou'raign's just command,
And to molest and vex the King
Pretend the State's reordering.
You wanton wits, you who profane
The Sabaoth's rest with servile gain,
You who attempt by magic spel
To your behests to summon hell:
You cutthroat Thieves, you Usurers,
You Forgers, you Extortioners,
You disobedient children, you
Who in man's blood your hands embrew:
You Leacher, Pandar, Bawd and Whore,
You who afflict and starve the poor:
You froward wretches, you false teachers,
You bribed Judges, you Truce Breakers:
You who murd'red have your brother,
Stabbed your father, killed your mother:
You Drunkards, Gluttons, Sycophants,
You impious scoffers at the Saints,
You guileful gamesters, you who be
Justly condemned of Simony:
You false Informers, you who still
IN vnmeasur'd pride direct you will:
You who suck after other's blood,
You who envy your neighbor's good,
You Cursers, you who still afford
A bloody oath to every word,
And you by whom are daily sold
Laws, justice right, and al for gold,
Lands in lust and riot lauish't,
Wives defiled, Virgins rauish't,
The lawful Rulers had in scorn,
Vice ouerpriz'd, false-witnes borne,
Servants wronged, Masters cheated,
Tales to others hurt repeated,
Churches robbed, the weak oppressed,
Widows, Orphans, al distressed.
And finally, al you, whose crimes
Exceed the measure of our times,
Cheer up your selves, my noble Geux,
And lend your ears; I bring you news
Of a more easy Jubilee
Then ever did the Roman See
Bestow on hers. For when as she
Presumes to set her Papists free
From their offenses, first of al
They straight forsooth to mind must call
Their forepast sins, and then stir up
Themselves to sorrow (o this cup
Has no good relish:) then again
All this their labor's spent in vain
Unless they mean with all their might
T'amend their lives; I, there is the spite.
Nor will this serve, but they must go,
And to a Priest al humbly show.
Besides, they must both watch and pray,
The world's loosse pleasures cast away,
And if their sins be greater then
The lighter faults of other men,
They must be penanc't, and for that
Give alms, fast, and I know not what.
Al which I Am sure, if that you be
Luther's ttue offspring, you will see
To be but deeds, which may by See this before; XI. 29.
dogs
As well be compassed, or by hogs.
But you my Roaring desperate, Boys,
Are freed from al these tedious toys.
The great and general Pardon, which
I now proclaim is nothing such.
O no; you may still murder, swear,
Steal, cheat, and still fals-witnes bear,
You need not leave your drunken feasts,
You still may use maids, boys, yea beasts,
Still envy others, still be proud,
Take vsse by God nor man allowed,
Be mad through rage, use wanton diet
Apply yourselues to sloth or riot,
Curse, damn, and have your magic spells,
Your punke, or whatsoever else:
And yet as soon or sooner win
This general pardon for each sin,
Then if you left them: for you know
Our Luther does most plainly show,
That By how much thou art more wicked, by so much art thou nearer to grace.
Luth. Sermon. de piscat: Pet.
the more we do ourselves deface
With sins, we nearer are to grace.
This Jewel now, this precious gemme
This costly pearl, this golden stream
Of heavenly grace (because I know
You wish to have me shew't, and so
Your thirsty hopes at last relieve)
Is this, and only this, See before XI. 26. 27. and 25. and besides you may
find this doctrine of only faith maintained by Zuingl. tom. 1. f. 204. Calu.
in Romans c. 10. v. 17. Lib. Concord. c. 3. de Iustif. fidei. p. 691. etc. 4. in
epit. art. p. 589. 590. Auth. Respons. ad these. Valent. p. 928. 958. Paraeus.
l. 4. de Iustif. c. 2. Danaeus controuers. de bapt. c. 17. page 396. Perkins in
3. Galat. col. 157. tom. 2. Beza in sum. rei Sacram. p. 207. M. Whitak. de
Eccles. cont. Bellarm. controuer. 2. q. 5. and generally by all Protestants.
BELIEVE
XXXI. On Andraeas Musculus.
MVsculus held that Christ's divinity
Upon the Cross did with his body Andraeas Musculus was not afraid openly to
teach that the Divine nature of Christ, which is God, died upon the Cross with
his humane etc. neither did he desist etc. publikly to profess and spread
abroad this Doctrine of the death of Christ's Divinity, and that by the help of
Ioannes Islebius. Thus far Syluest. Czecanorius dial. de corrup. mor. art. 3.
fol. 5. and see Anar. Musculus and Isleb. in refut. Simleri.
dye:
And in his profane books plain grounds did lay
To make the Ghospel It is manifest (says Simlerus) forth of the writings of
Brentius, Myricus, and Andr. Musculus, that they make nothing of the Ascension
but a vanishing away and disappearing, etc. what is this but to make a way for
Mahomet, etc. So he in vita Bulling. fol. 55.
give the Alcoran way;
Al which he ever did, no less then sound
And orthodoxal points, on Scriptures ground.
How well his Name his inclination shows!
Who't feed such Monsters, chatters, tears, and gnawes
With such fond glosses, as himself thinks fit,
The sacred volumes of the Eternal's Writ:
For Musculus to al imports the same
That little mouse in English: hence thy name
Thou take Musculus. Take heed, and watch
The infernal Cat; she has a diu'li^h scratch.
XXXII. Look beyond Luther.
Look beyond Luther, what espy you there?
I find the Fathers then possessed were
With the now censured doctrines of The error of Freewil flourished ever since
the Apostles times in a manner every where, til Martin Luther took the sword
in hand against it. Discover. of cont. in D. Bancrests ser p. 25. see Centur.
cent. 2. col. 58. 59. cent. 4. col. 291. Hamel. de tradit. Apost. l. 2. col.
9^. Calu. Calvin. Just. l. 2. c. 2. sect. 4.
Free Will
Merit See before XXV. 23. see in D. Couels exam. p. 120. and Inst. l. 3. c.
15. sect. 2.
of works, I can not altogether excuse the ancient Fathers in this respect,
but that they laid some seeds of superstition etc. the observation of
superstitious Lent was then euery-where in force. Calu. Inst. l. 4. c. 12.
sect. 19. 30. the Centurists also charge the Fathers of the 4. Age with
superstitious fasting upon Wensday and Friday. Cent. 4. col. 440.
Fastes, S. Cyprian is reprehended by D. Humfrey, S. Hierome by Luther and
Calvin, and S. Austin by Melancthon, for holding that the commandemens are not
imposble. D. Humfrey I^suit. part. 2 p. 540. Luth. tom. 2 f. 26. Calu. Inst.
lib. 2. c. 7 sect. 5. Melancth. l. 1. ep. p. 290.
Power to fulfill
Gods sacred Precepts, The Fathers did allow vows of perpetual C^astity,
affirming them to be obligatory. Chemn. exam. part. 3 p. 1. Calu. Inst. l. 4 c.
13. sect. 17. Wottons def. of Park. p. 491.
Vows of Chastity,
S. Peter's Many of the ancient Fathers were deceived to think something more
of Peter's prerogative, and the B. of Rom's dignity then by the word of God, was
given to either of them. Fulk. confut. of pap. quar. p. 4. Calu. Inst. l. 4. c.
6 and Fulk. retent. p. 284.
and the Pope his Primacy
The The ancient Fathers, and chiefly Hilary and Cyril, w^nt further herein
then was fitting. Calu. l. epist. ep. 208. see sundry of the Fathers blamed in
particular for our doctrine by D. Humfr. Jesuit. part. 2. p. 626. Cent. cent.
5. col 985. 295. Ad Francis. Margar. theol. p. 256. Anton de Ad. Anat. of
Mass, p. 236. 221. etc.
Real presence, In mingling water with wine a necessity and great mystery was
placed, as may appear both by Justin Martyr and Cyprian. Whitg. def. p. 525.
see M. Jewels reply p. ^^4.
Water mixed with wine
The Eucharist Calvin grants the reservation of the Sacrament to be the
example of the ancient Church. l. 4. Inst. c. 17. sect. 39. Pet. Mart. cont.
Gardin. object. 88. Chemn. exam. part. 2. p. 102. Fulk. ag. Hesk. Sand. p. 77.
reserved and yet divine,
I mean still Real, The Fathers should not with so much liberty have seemed
here and there to have abused the name Altar. Pet. Mart. comm. pl. part. 4. p.
225. Cartwr. 2. Reply. part. vlt. p. 264. and see part. 1. p. 517.
Altars, They forged a sacrifice in the Lords supper without his commandment,
and so adulterated the supper with adding of sacrifice. Call. in omnes Pauli
epist. in Hebr. c. 7. v. 9. see Inst. lib. 4. c. 18. sect. 1. and tract. theol.
p. 389. and Fulk. reioined. to Brist. reply. p. 28. D. Field of the Church l.
3. p. 107 see also the Fathers charged even with propitiatory sacrifice by
Crastou. de opif. Miss p. 167.
Sacrifice,
That Sacraments It was a great error of the old Doctors in that they
supposed the external water of Baptism to be of any value toward the purging
of sin. Zuing. Tom. 2. de Bapt. f 70. see Centur. cent. 2. col. 47. cent. 3.
col. 82. Muscul. loc. comm. p. 299.
give grace, the Church It was a great error of the old Doctors in that they
supposed the external water of Baptism to be of any value toward the purging
of sin. Zuing. Tom. 2. de Bapt. f 70. see Centur. cent. 2. col. 47. cent. 3.
col. 82. Muscul. loc. comm. p. 299.
comprize
Both good and bad, We confess in the Catholic Church both the good to be and
the evil, but so as corn and chafe. Aug. tract. 6 in Joan. and l. 3. c. 2. 9.
12. 18. cont. Petil. and Donat. post collat. c. 4. 6. Cypr. l. 4. ep. 1.
Fulgent. lib. de Fide ad Petr. c. 43. Hieron. dial. cont. Lucif. etc.
with Not Cyprian only but almost all the most holy Fathers of that time,
thought by their external discipline of life to pay the pains due for sins,
and to satisfy Gods Justice. Whitak. cont. Camp. rat. 5. Calu. l. 1. Inst. c.
4. sect. 38. Cent. cent. 4. col. 294. 231. see Calu. again l. 4. Inst. c. 12.
sect. 8. and l. 3 c. 4. sect. 38.
Satisfaction,
Tertullian does greatly urge confession, and it appears by certain places
of s. Cyprian that private confession was usual, wherein they confessed their
sins and even wicked thoughts. Centur. cent. 3. col. 127. and cent. 4. col.
425.
Confession, I am not ignorant how ancient the use of Chrisme is. Calu. l. 4.
Inst. c. 17. sect. 43. and the ministers of Lincoln diocese charge Tertull.
Cypr. Amb. with error of using the Cross in confirming those that were
baptized. Abridg. p. 42. Confer. Hampt. Court. p. 10. Downh. def. l. 4. p. 23.
Cent. 4. coll. 478. Buc. script. Angl. p. 570. Chemn. exam. part. 2. p. 58. 64.
65.
Chrisme or Confirmation:
That we may pray to Saints, I confess that Ambrose, Austin, and Hierome held
invocation of Saints to be lawful. Fulk. reioynd. p. 5. see him ag. the Rhem.
Testam. 2. Petr. c. 1. sect. 3. and Chemnitius exam. part. 3. p. 211. 200. see
before at 2.
yea and assign
Unto themselves, their Paulinus, Lactantius, S. Bid, S. Leo, and S. Gregory
are condemned for worshipping of images by Fulk. ag. Hesk. Sand. p. 672. 675.
Centur. cent. 4. col. 1080. cent. 8. col 850. Simons reuelat. p. 57. Bal's page
of Popes p. 24. 27 33.
Images, and From translations were presently made circumgestations of relikes,
as is to be seen in Hierome, S. Austin etc. they made pilgrimages to the places
where they hard there were relikes famous for miracles, etc. Chemn. exam. part.
4. p. 10. Centur. cent. 4. col. 456. 457.
shrine
Religious worship, that the Da^aeus auerreth that S. Cyril and sundry other
Fathers were plainly superstitious and blinded with this enchantment of the
Crosse's adoration. 1. part. alt. part. ad. Bellarm. 5. contr. resp. p. 1415.
see M. Fulk ag. Hesk. etc. p. 657. Parkins problem. p. 8^. Centur. cent. 4.
col. 302. 459. cent. 3. col 121. 240.
Cross may be
Honored, with This corruprion (of praying for the dead) was general in the
Church long before the days of Austin etc. it was the practice of the Church
in general, and the corruption so ancient, that Tertullian says it was
observed by Tradition from the Apostles etc. the doctrine of Purgatory was
crept in also. M. Gifford demonstr. ag. Brownists, p. 38. Fulk. confut. of
purgat. p. 313 320. 326. 161. 194. 78. and in his retent. ag. Brist. p. 106.
Calu. l. 3 Inst. c. 5. sect. 10. see M. Cartwr. 2. reply. part. 1. p. 619.
Prayer for dead and Purgatory,
With All the Fathers with one consent do affirm, that Christ delivered the
souls of the Patriarchs and Prophets out of hell at his coming thither, and so
spoiled Satan of those that were then in his present possession. M. Jacob in
M. Bilsons full redempt. p. 188. 189. and in his suruay of Christ's suffer. p.
6^6. D. Barlow def. ^f. art. of. Protest. p. 173. D. whitak. cont. Duraeum. l.
8. p. 567.
Limbus Patrum, and that The Centurists speaking of most ancient Fathers say,
that it seems that for the most part this chiefest article of justification
was obscured, for they attributed to works justice before God. Cent. 3. coll.
79. see also col. 78. 265. 266. and cent. 4. col. 292. 293. cent. 5. col. 1178.
Bulling. on the Apoc ser. 87. fol. 270. see also M. Whitak. resp. ad 5. rat.
Camp.
Faith alone
Produces not Justification.
But these are Papists Heads: what? then behind
Your famous Luther can we nothing find
Which you may challenge and securely vant
To be the true badge of a Protestant?
Yes; at his heels, scortcht in lascivious fire,
Lies the cast habit of a perjured Friar.
XXXIII. Look upon Luther.
Look upon Luther, what is he? a man
Confessedly attended with a train
Of Luther, as he excels in rare virtues, so is he infected with many vices
etc. I would he had been more careful in correcting his vices. Calvin alleged
by Schluss. Theol. Calu. l. 2. fol. 126.
many vices; one that bears a sense
By much too deep of his Luther cal's himself a more excellent Doctor, then al
those that a^e in the Papacy: with many more such like Thrasonical brags, in a
certain epistle which he writ ad Anonymum. Tom. 5. Ien. and 9. See tom. 3.
Ien. p. 330. See before XI. 47. 48. and next hereafter at 3.
self-excellence,
The God for the sin of Pride, wherewith Luther exalted himself, took away
his true Spirit. Conr. Rheg. l. germ. cont. Io. Hess. de caena Domin. See him
further accused of pride and arrogance by his own learned Brethren Oecolamp.
resp. ad consess. Luth. by Sym. Lythus resp. ad alt. I. Gretz. Apol. p. 333. by
Zuingl. resp. ad confess. Luth. by Naogeorg. in Schluss. Theol. Calu. l. 2.
fol. 131. by Conr. Gesn. in universe. Biblioth. de Luth. by the Tigur. Divines
resp. ad lib. Luth. cont. Zuinglium etc. in so much that the same is
acknowledged by himself to be the worlds opinion of him, in his loc. com.
class. 4. fol. 35.
pride of his ambitious mind is such,
Yea so vnmeasur'd, as't can brook See hereafter ad 13.
no touch.
Among his heads of says, some do appear
Deceitful, We have found in the faith and confession of Luth. 12. articles,
whereof some are more vain then is fitting, some less faithfully and
ouer-guilefully expounded, others again are false and reprobate, but some
there are which plainly dissent from the word of God and the articles of
Christian faith. Oecolamp. resp. ad Luth. confess. See Zuinck feld praef. Super
praecip. fidei artic. and Hospin. hist. sacr. pare. 2. f. 5. and see heretofore
at XI. throughout.
others vain, some not sincere,
Some false, some reprobate, which with the light
Both of Gods word, and Christian faith do fight;
Where he presumes the Scriptures to expound,
His errors and Thou, o Luther, art seen by all men to be a manifest and
public corrupter and adulterer of holy Scripture, which thou can never deny
before any creature. Zuing. Tom. 2. fol. 413. See more fol. 374. 475. 377. 412.
corruptions often are found
Like to the Thou (o Luther) corrupt'st and adulterat'st the word of God etc.
imitating therein the Marcionites and Arianes Zuingl. ib. f. 412. See also f.
400. 401. 407. 411.
Arians, and Marcionites
To be both plain and In translating and expounding of Scripture his errors
are manifest and many. Buterus dial. com. Melancthon.
many: when he writes
Like to a scoffing cheater he does Whereas Luther affirms now this, now that,
of one and the same thing, nor is ever at one with himself, doubtless he
supposes that it is lawful to use that inconstancy and lightness in the word of
God, which impudent Scoffers are accustomed to use in playing at dice. Zuing.
Tom. 2. f. 458.
bring
Now this, now that, forth of the self-same thing,
Never with himself Hospinian in the Alphabetical table of the 2. part of his
Sacramentary history under the word Lutherus, charge Luther with great
inconstancy in Doctrine saying: Luther his inconstancy in doctrine 4. 6. the
causes of his errors and inconstancy in doctrine, 5. his first opinion of the
Supper. 5. 6. his second 7. 6. his third. 8. his fourth. 12. his fifth ibidem,
with much more to the same purpose in that table, which for breuity I omit.
at one: and when he Luther, when he has once conceived an opinion endeauours
obstinately and eagerly to pursue and sustain it: neither does he use much to
care what he say of any matter, though he be found to contradict either
himself, or the oracles of Gods word. Zuingl. Tom. 2. resp. ad confess. Luth.
See this Schlusselb. Theol. Calu. l. 2 fol. 122.
gets
Once an opinion, instantly he sets
Others at naught; that now to hold he will try,
Though from himself or scripture he do fly.
Yea, I did know the elevation of the Sacrament to be Idolatrical, yet
nevertheless I did retain it in the Church at Wittemberg, to the end I might
despite the devil Carolostadius. Luther parua Confess. See him also tom. 3.
Germ. fol. 55. and col. men's. Germ. f. 210. See this condemned in him by his
own brother Amand. Polonus. in Syllogeth. Theol. p. 464. and the like examples
alleged by Hosp. hist. Sacr. part. 2. f. 8. 13. and 14.
's spite his so, when he the truth has mist,
Against his conscience he will still persist:
And yet this man does still himself prefer,
And Luther presently sends al to the Devil that will not forthwith subscribe to
his opinion. Tigur. conf. Orthod. 122. 123. Luther cannot endure any but such
as agree with him in all things, (says Gesnerus) and Bucer says that he will
not suffer himself to be contradicted by any G^sn in vniuers^ Biblioth. de
Luth. and Mart. Bucer dial. cont. Melancthon.
damnes al those, who with him will not err,
Besides, he is, as sure as God is God,
As sure as God is God, so sure and Diu'lish a liar is Luther. Io. Campanus
colloq. latin. Luth. Tom. 2. c. de aduers. fol. 354.
A Diu'lish liar; yea and almost mad
Through rage See before. v. 5. 6. 4.
of lust: he is as liberal
Of his air Luther at the very first powers forth al his curses. See Tigur.
confess. Orthod. s. 122. 123. See himself also, Tom. 7. Wit. fol. 382. and
here before at 13.
execrations unto al,
As frantic men of stones; and still affoards
Such storms of Many of Luthers writings contain nothing but railing and
reproaches, in so much (sa^ they a little before) as it makes the Protestant
religion suspected and hated. Tigur. vbi supra. See also Theol. Casimir. adm.
de lib. Concord. Berg. c. 6.
railing and inuectiue words.
Against private Of his immoderate railing against private men see al his
writings against the Sacramentaries: and in particular here before at XXIX. 7.
men, and Kings He calls Henry the Eight more furious then madness itself,
more doltish then folly itself, endued with an impudent and whorish face;
without any one vein of princely blood in his body, a lying Sophist, a
damnable rotten worm, a basilisk, and progeny of an Adder, and lying Scurril,
covered with the title of a King; a clownish wit, a doltish head, most wicked,
foolish, and impudent Harry: And further he says that he does not only lie
like a most vain Scurre, but passes a most wicked knave. Thou lie in thy
throat foolish and Sacrilegious King. Lut. tom. 2. f. 333. 334. 335. 338. 340.
and of his like insolent railing no less against other Princes, and namely
against the Duke of Brunswick, see his book called Wider hanse woorst written
in particular against him: and of his railing against the Archbishop of Mentz,
Prince Electour see him tom. 3. Germ. fol. 533. 339. 360. in colloq. men's. fol.
342. 343. and against the Princes of Germany see him tom. 2. Gem. f. 190. 200.
and tom. 3. f. 195.
as one would swear
The How merueilously does Luther bewray himself with his Devils? What filthy
words does he use, and such as are replenished with all the Devils in hell.
Tigur. tract. 3. cont. supra Luther. Confessio.
Infernal furies in his speeches were.
He I have eaten (says Luther) a heap or two of salt with the Devil: I know
the Devil well and he again knows me. Lut. conc. de turb. Sedand.
Satan knows, and Satan him again,
They are of long acquaintance; through his He confesses of himself that the
Devil sometimes passes through his brain so that he can neither write nor
read. tom. 3. Ien. Germ. f. 485.
brain
He sometime runs while as he reads or writes,
Sleeps with him The Devil does more frequently sleep with me and more near me
then my Catharine. Luth. colloq. men's. Germ. f. 281.
nearer then his Kate a-nights.
He has a Devil He confesses that in his bedchamber he many times walks
with the Devil; and further, that he has one or two wonderful Devils, by which
he is diligently and carefully served: and them he esteems to be not vulgar
Dives, but great ones; yea Doctors of divinity (says he) among the Devils.
Luth. 16. fol. 275.
or two, not of the throng
Of vulgar Diu'ls, but such as are among
Hel's great'st Divines, on al occasions still
Prompt and obseruant to perform his will.
He uses See before XI. 44. and 42. and see himself tom. 4. Ien. p. 381. and
the Ti^u^. praefat. Orthod. Confessio and Casimir. vbi supra at 17.
scurril and immodest words
Names See before XIX. 21.
often the Devil, It is most clear, and can not be denied, but, that never any
man writ more filthily, more uncivilly, more lewdly, and that beyond al bounds
of Christian modesty and temperance etc. then did Luther. Tigur. Theol. Orthod.
Gonfess. f. 10. and then immediately after some of his obscene books, as his
Heintzius Anglicus against our King of England, his Hans Wurst, and another no
less beastly against the Jews: besides these there is extant (say they on the
same place) his Schem Hamphorus, a prodigious book, filthy and stinking
through his frequent mentioning of hogs, and his often and loathsome repetition
of turd and dunghils. But would thou hear (Gentle Reader) the swine himself
grunt? If I were in hope thou would not condemn me for wronging out English
tongue so much as to pollute it with so beastly phrase, thou should. Yet
this, upon better consideration, concerns only my-self. Thou shall hear him
whatsoever censure thou afford me, in hope thou may reap benefit by it, and
judge whether it be probable, nay possible for the Spirit of God to dwell in so
loathsome a place, yea and blush to have been so long seduced (if thou be a
Protestant) by such a hog. Of what mouth (says he) O Pope do thou speak? is
it of that from whence thy fartes do burst? That which comes thence keep thou
to thy self: or is it of that mouth into which wine of Corsica is powered? let
the dog fill that with his excrementes etc. Is it lawful to contemn the 4.
first Councels etc. for your farts and decretales? etc. If they be angry let
them fi^^ hose with dirt and hang it about their necks, it will serve them
instead of a perfume or kiss etc. But proceed o litte Paul (the beast means
Paul the 3.) good Ass do not Ki^k: o Kick not my little Pope: o my dear Ass
do not so: the ice this year by reason there have been no winds is very
smooth and slippery, and thou might come so to have a fat and break thy
thigh: and if in falling thou should let a fart, every one would deride thee
and say, Fie how this little Pope has berayd himself. Lut. cont. Pontif. Romans
a diab. fund. in tom. 8. Ien. p. 207. 208. In another place he affirms the
Canon law to be a turd of the Popes, which together with the Canonists sticks
al on a heap in ipsius posterioribus. Col. Germ. fol. 419. He calls the
Archbishop of Mentz Cacando maculatum Sacerdotem, a berayd Priest. See Col.
men's. fol. 84. 83. tom. 1. and f. 231. Let this be my general answer (says he
to Henry the 8.) to all the sinkes of this foolish Hobgoblin etc. these are our
forces, against which the Henry's, the Thomistes, the Papists, and al such
dregs, sinks, priuies etc. tom. 21. Wit. f. 333. 336. 337. etc. May not we
here justly say of him with the Tigurine Divines, did ever man hear such
speeches pass from a furious devil himself? Tigur. tract. 3. cont. Suprem.
Luc. Confess. p. 61. But we have overmuch stirred in this puddle, and yet not
produced the hundred part of that which may from thence be raked. Wherefore no
longer to offend the modest and Christian ear for this time (that I may say
with Sr. Thomas More) furiosum hunc fraterculum and latrinarium nebulonem, and
cum suis furijs and furoribus, cum suis merdis and stercoribus, cacantem
cacatumque relinquam.
talks of dung and (........)
Beraying, priuyes, durty puddles, sinkes
Windy gut-cracks. Fie take him hence he stinkes.
XXXIV. Look on this side Luther.
Look now on this side Luther, and relate
What you can find in his reformed State.
The See before XIII. and peruse the whole Epigramme.
inconstant weak Melancthon first I see;
Next him that channel of impiety Carolostadius was a barbarous fellow, without
wit, without learning, without common sense, in whom is no sign of the Holy
Ghost, but manifest tokens of impiety. Melancth. Epist. ad Freder. Micon. See
Hospin. hist. Sacr. part. alt. f. 114.

That barbarous, doltish, ignorant, impure,
Possessed See before xxi. 2: read the whole.
heretic Carolostadius being indeed an heretic was a man so corrupt and evil
in religion etc. See the author of an answer for the time unto the def. of the
Censure. fol. 106.
and Epicure That Epicurean Ghospeler Carolostadius says Fulk in his reioind.
to Brist. p. 420.

Carolostadius: near to him do pass
That Ape Beza (says Schlusselberg) calls Heshusius Polyphemus, Ape, and
Dog, and Sycophant, and two-footed Ass, and Cyclop etc. Theol. Call. l. 2. a. 1.
that Cyclop, and two-footed Ass,
The Sycophant, the dog Heshusius,
And the Eutychian Let me be a brawler, o Bullenger, (says Brentius)
Eutychian, a Sophist etc. Brent. Recognit. doctt. co^t. Bulling.
lying Brentius,
Next the heretic See Schlusselberg in haeres. Osiand.
Osiander hand in hand
With that See before ix. 3.
vnchristned wretch, that Ib. 4. 12. See likewise x.
factious brand,
Zuinglius, who had his doctrine from a See 9. 1.
spright,
Which but since death he knew if black or white:
Perfidious Luther complains of Bucers perfidiousnes in an Epistle to Io.
Secerius the printer. F. bric. loc. Com. Luth. clas. 5. c. 15. p 50. See also
Lauath. hist Sacra. f. 12.
fickle See before XIV. throughout.
Bucer next does go,
Then James Andraeas, who Selneu^erus (says Hospinian) the indiuidual
companion of James Andreas in his iourneys, is reported often to have said of
him before many good men, and those worthy of credit, that he had no God at al
except Mammon and Bacchus: and that he never heard, nor could ever so much as
suspect etc. that either at his going to bed, or vprising, he either said the
Lords prayer, or made any mention of God: and that in the residue of his life,
words, actions, or counsels he could never find any spark of piety, but
exceeding great lightness. hist. Sacram. part. alt. fol. 389.
no God did know
But Gold and Bacchus; nor by night, or day,
Was ever this Smidlen (says Lauatherus) otherwise called James Andreas, is
reported with us to have been taken in Adultery with a woman servant etc.
Tanch. his Epist. l. 5. p. 340. See him taxed likewise with adultery in Hospin
vbi supra.
Adult'rer seen to pray,
The Angel I suppose that Angel of darkness, Io. Calvin, is sufficiently
detected etc. Hunnius in Calu. Iudaiz. f. 181.
of darkness Calvin now appears,
Who See hereafter. XXXIX. 21.
on his back the shameful token bears
Of a hot iron, for the unnatural vice
Of Sodomy, who after died Ibid. and 40. throughout.
of lice,
And See hereafter. XXXIX. 2.
in despair exhaled his hateful breath,
Cursing and calling Devils til his death.
Here comes another of this vertu^us Tribe
That Whether Beza deserve this title or no, let any man judge who shall peruse
only this ensuing testimony, which his own fellow Protestant Hutterus
affords of him: I am ashamed to translate it, therefore take it in latin:
Beza in fine libri de absentia corporis Christi in caena scribit: Candidae,
sieve Amasiae suae culu^ (parce tu Christ blasphemias istas mihi referenti) imo
partem diuersam (o beast) magis adhuc pudendam, mundiora esse, quam illorum ora
qui simpliciter verbis Christi inherentes, credant se praesens Christi corpus
in caena sacra, ore suo accipere. Hut. Explic. lib. Concord. art. 7. page 703.
profane bawdy Scurre, that Devils See before XXXIX. 6.
Scribe
Lascivious Beza by his most filthy manners was a disgrace to honest
discipline, who in sacrilegious verse published to the world his detestable
loves, his unlawful carnal acts, his whoredoms, and foul adulteries, not
content that himself only should like a hog wallow in the dirt of wicked lusts,
but he must also pollute the ears of studious youth with his filth. Tilm.
Heshusius ver. and sanc. Confess.
Beza, in indecent sort
Betwixt See before XXII. through al.
his Candida and Andebert.
Now Allemannus the blaspemous Alemannus (says Schlusselberg) before times
Beza's most familiar friend, and a stout Caluinist, bad a long farewell to
Christian religion, and became an Apostata, and a blasphemous Jew. Theol. Calu.
art. 21. fol. 10. and 9. see Beza Epist. 65.
Jew
Beza's great friend: then the Authors of the new
And later Arians, the undoubted None in our time I have known (says
Neuzerus) became an Arian, who was not first a Caluinist, Seruetus, Blandrata,
Paulus Alciatus, Franciscus Dauidis, Gentilis, Gribaldus, Syluanus and others:
therefore whosoever fears to fall into Arianisme let him beware of Caluinisme.
And Gerlachius has this Manuscript of Adam Neuzerus (says Osiander.) Osian.
Epit. cont. 16. and 209. see him also 206. 207. 208.
Spawne
Of Calvin, whence was al their doctrine drawn,
Syluanus, David, Gentil Blandrata,
Gribald, Seruetus, with the That impure Apostata Bernardin Ochin (says Beza)
de polygam. p. 4. see also Schuls. Theol. Calu. lib. 1. f. 9.
Apostata
Bernardin Ochin, joined to whom here lurkes
Alciate, with Neuzer, circumcised See hereafter XXXVII. 331. 33.
Turks,
With many more such zealous Protestants
Al Luthers offspring, yea and al prime Saints
In his new Church. Who'ld not embrace this faith
Which such rare Doctors, such strong pillars has?
XXXV. On Bullinger.
THou writest, Bullinger, (omitting much,
Which can no more then these abide the touch)
That the three Persons The 3. Persons in the divinity do differ not in state
but in degree. Bulling. resp. ad lib. Cochlei de script. and Ecclesast.
authoritat. c. 7.
in the Trinity
Do differ not in state but in degree.
That Christ to hell, his sufferings at an end,
Did not in person We shall more plainly understand this article of Christ's
descent into hell, if we hold that the virtue of Christ's death did extend even
to the dead, and help them, that is, that all the Patriarchs and other faithful
people living before the coming of Christ, were by Christ's death preserved
from damnation. Bulling. decad. 1. in exp^sit. symb. see him also in cap. 21.
but in power descend.
That In his Commentaries upon the 19. chapter and 22. of the Apocalypse, he
accuses this B. Apostle to have fallen into the sin of Apostasy, and that he
sinned as much as did either Peter by his threefold denial, or Thomas through
his infidelity.
John did an Apostata become
That infants lying in their mother's womb
Are truly This is evident in his 3. decade and 7. Sermon.
iustifi'd: that some now live
In heaven See Bullinger's allowance of Zwinglius his beforementioned doctrine
(IX. 9.) concerning the salvation of the Heathens in Zwing. Tom. 21. f. 550.
see also Symlerus in vita Bullingeri.
who never did in God believe;
And to conclude that any Christian
Holding faith's grounds, though he besides maintain
Blasphemous points of stiff-necked Iudaisme,
Or Infidelity, much more of schism,
May This is to be seen at large in his Firmament.
come to heaven. Perhaps thou have deprau'd
This Point, to prove that thou thy self art saved.
XXXVI. THE LIE.
PApists do First this is the principal article of that secret divinity that
reigns amo^st the Popes, and that whole College of Cardinals, that there is
no God: the second, that al things that are written and taught concerning
Christ are lies and deceites:the third, that the doctrine of the life to come,
and of the last resurrection are mere fables. Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 7 sect. 27.
hold (thus prate al Ministers
Whom to the pulpit their glib tongue preferr's)
That there is no God, that al which Scriptures show
Concerning Christ are fables, and untrue;
That after this, there is no life, nor must
Our flesh, once tot, return again from dust:
The The Papists make the Virgin Mary a God, attribute to her almightines both
in heaven and earth etc. In the Papacy al have made recourse to Mary, and have
expected more favor and grace at her hands then from Christ himself. Lut. ad
Euang. de fest. Annunt.
Virgin Mary is their chiefest God,
She has al power, she rules the dreadful rod
Of Heauen's dread wrath, for her they Christ reject,
And more at her hands, then at his expect,
The Papists do not only adore Saints instead of Christ, but also their bones,
clothes, shoes, and images. Calu. de necessit. reform. Eccles. see also the
Magdeburg. praefat. in 6. centur.
Saints they do, in lieu of Christ, implore,
Their shoes, clothes, images, and bones adore.
Christ's death, they Rogers accuses a Jesuit and some other Catholics to hold
that Christ came into the world to save no women but men, and that one Mother
Jane is the savior of women. Rogers upon the 39. articl. of the Church of
England. p. 183. 14.
hold, for men did pardon gain,
Women are saved by one Mother Jane.
A man with them may Gods' commandments keep
Without Papists teach that man, by the proper force of nature, may without
God's grace keep the Comma^dments. Luth, ad lib. Duc. Georg. an. 1533.
his grace: al Papists in their penance made no mention of Christ and faith:
their opinion and hope was only in their own works, whereby their sins were
before God to be blotted out; and a little after: In their confession there was
no faith, no Christ. Artic. Smalcald. part. 3. art. 3.
faith is laid to sleep
When they do penance; yea Our Babylon (meaning the Church of Rome) has so
extinguished faith, as with an impudent forehead she denies it to be necessary
in this Sacrament: yea with Antichristian impiety she defines it to be an
heresy, if any one affirm faith to be necessary. Luth. de capt. Babyl. cap. de
poenitent.
to is heresy
TO affirm that faith therein is necessary.
No Papists hold that God is appeased and made propitious unto us by
traditions, and not for Christ. Apolog. confess. August. cap. de tradit. human.
one of them by Christ, but by bare strains
Of man's invention, unto heaven attaines.
And when they pray In all their litanies, hymns, and proses, where no honor
is left vngiuen to dead Saints, there is no mention of Christ. Calu. l. 3.
Inst. c. 20. sect. 21.
no mention's made of Christ,
But of his creatures. Minister, thou lie.
XXXVII. The Godly industry of reformers to bring there handiwork to
perfection.
LVther pretending clearly to reform
The Roman Church, did raise his firster stor^^
Against See Luth. Tom. 2. fol. 63. and Sleydan. l. 6. f. 232.
Pardons, Luth. Tom. 2. fol. 63.
Pope, and See Luth. de votis monast. Tom. 2.
Monks: but not content
With that, he straight his second forces bent
Against the Sea before. XI. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18.
Scriptures, See his cutting of four Sacraments at a blow. Tom. 2. f. 63. see
likewise before. XI. 13. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34.
Sacraments, and Luth. Assert. artic. 1. and conc. de penit. and de capt.
Babyl. cap. de Baptism.
grace,
Justification See acts and monuments p. 402. and before. XI. 25. 26. 27.
Works, The doctrine of works is the doctrine of Devils. Luth. de vot. monast.
see him also sermon. de piscat. Petri ad c. 2. ep. ad Galatas, sermon. de nou.
Test. ad Euang. in die Not. Christi, and Passion. see next before. 7. and
besides at XI. 22. 24. 29.
Free Will See his book de seruo arbitr. Tom. 2. f. 424.
and See him de abrogat. Miss. private. Tom. 1. f. 244. see also f. 720. see
likewise before. VI. 2. and IX. 2.
Mass;
Yet was he judged scarce to have vntyl'd
The roof of Babylon Zuinglius compyl'd The Anti-Trinitarians (says Osiander)
do boast that Luther did scarce uncover the roof of the Babylonian tower.
cent. 16. p. 209. see hereafter at 17.

A second Reformation, and complained
Of diverse things, which Luther still retained,
As the M. Parker confesses that Luther crossed himself morning and evening,
and is seen never painted praying, but before a crucifix. against symbolis.
part. 1. c. 2. sect. 30. p. 105. see Io. Creuel. refut. cerem. Miss. p. 118.
and Io. Manl. loc. comm. p. 636.
Real presence, with the Zuingl. Tom. 2. fol. 375. 416.
Cross to bless,
Saints As touching the invocation of Saints (says Luther) I think with the
whole Christian Church, and hold that Saints are to be honored by us and
inuocated. purgat; quorund. art, and in Ep. ad Georg. Spalat.
honor, I never denied Purgatory (says Luther) and yet I believe it, as I
have often written and confessed. Tom. 7. f. 132. aduersus bullam. see him also
in disput. Lips. c. de purgat. and resolut. de Indulg. conclus. 16. see
likewise Zuinglian. Tom. 2. fol. 378.
Purgatory, If it was lawful, says Luther, for the Jews to have the picture
of Caesar upon their coins, much more is it lawful for Christians to have in
their Churches, crosses, and images of Mary. See this cited forth of Luther by
the protestant Hospin. histor. Sacramen. p. 2. f. 33. and see Luther in
consolat. prolab. c. 6.
Images.
Yet was he censured nothing to have done
But slightly M. Hooker affirms of the Anti-Trinitarians, that following the
course of extreme reformation, they were wont in pride of their own
proceedings to glory, that Luther did blow away the roof, and Zuinglius batter
but the walls of superstition etc. Eccles. pol. l. 5. sect. 42. p. 89.
battred superstition.
Calvin, with Beza and their fellows tried
To make the Church yet purer, and denied
Lay See this affirmed of Calvin, by Schlusselb. theol. Call. lib. 1. f. 60. and
61. and see himself in Append. ad lib. de Eccles. reform. and Epist. 1.
persons Baptism in a needful case,
Saints feasts, See Whitg. def. 548. 549. 550.
universality This, though as al know, it be denied by the Caluinists, yet is
it defended by Zuinglius. l. ep. Zuingl. and Oecolamp. l. 1. p. 274.
of grace,
Power See the Caluinists reproved for this doctrine by Lobethius disput.
theol. p. 301. by Andr. Althamerus council. loc. scrip. pugnant. loc. 164. by
Iac. Helbrun. in Swenck f. Calvin. p. 55. and others.
of Priests t'absolue the penitent,
Church-vestments See M. Whitg. def. 216. 286. 291.
, ceremonies, Ib. p. 270. see also M. Couel. exam. p. 63. 64. Zanch comp. loc.
16. p. 639.
Christ's See this impugned by M. Willet Lymbe-mast. in his special book that
Christ descended not into hell by M. Fulk alleged by M. Willet, synops. p. 605.
606.
descent
To Hell, See M. Whitg. def. troughout.
al Churches Headships to reside
In Bishops, and to their wills law's to be tied.
Yet did not here this reformation rest,
Others condemned this, as a So far does M. Barrow and his disciples
disclayme from this third pretended reformation of Puritans, that (as M.
Bernard reports) Barrow calls their way in contempt, A silly Presbitory and
Eldership, Perfidie and Apostasy, the building of a false Church to the Harlot,
a second Beast, etc. Wretched disciples of Calvin, Counter-faith Reformists,
tra^sgressours of the worship of God etc. And further Barrow and Greenwood do
avouch the Puritans doctrine as new, strange, and Antichristian, etc.
second beast,
A fained Church unto the Harlot built,
Reformists al with forged colors guilt,
Sinful prouokers of the Eternal's wrath,
A fond, new, strange, and Antichristian faith.
These say, that the heyght of reformation,
Is to throw al See M. Hall's Apology ag. the Brownists sect. 45. 46. Hooker
Eccles. pol. l. 5. sect. 17. Dove in def. of the Chapter govern. p. 68.
material Churches down,
Raze See Barrow his own book impugning universities.
Universities, Ibidem.
reject the prayer
Our Lord (we say) did for his Church prepare.
Neither does yet this reformation please;
To make the Church most pure, and from disease
Of al corruptions clear, the The Arians in the reformed Churches of Poland,
think the very belief of the Trinity to be a part of Antichristian
corruption, and that the Popes triple crown is a sensible mark, whereby the
world might know him to be that mysterial beast spoken of in the Revelation, in
no respect so much, as in his doctrine of the Trinity. M. Hooker in his Eccles.
poli. l. 4. p. 183.
Trinity
Must be impugned, with Christ his Deity. Zuinglius, say they, battered but the
walls of Popish superstition, the last and hardest work of al remained for
them, which was to raze up the very ground and foundation of Popery, even the
doctrine concerning the Deity of Christ. Id. l. 5. sect. 42. and 89.

Stay, stay, great Sages of this wondrous Church,
Whither at last will your admired torch,
The spirit, conduct you? whither will you go?
For what coasts are you bound? o, now I know;
Belike y' are bound with your reformed couple
Alcyate Alcyatus became a Mahometist, says Osiander, as Gentilis himself
relates. epit. cent. 16. p. 207. see also Beza ep. 81.
and Neuzer, Adam Neuzerus, (says Schlusselberg) sometimes chief Pastor of
the Church of Heidelberg, passed from Zuinglianisme, through Arianisme, to
Turcisme, with many other Caluinists. Theol. Calu. l. 1. art. 2. fol. 9. see
Osiand. vbi supra p. 208. 818. where he affirms that he fell into Turcisme,
and was circumcized at Constantinople.
for Constantinople.
XXXVIII. On Math. Flaccus Myricus.
THy brethren He is honored with these and more such like titles by his own
Brethren the Divines of Wittenberg in respons. ad calumn. Plac. to which book
for breuity I refer the Reader, having only given him these for a taste to
encourage him (if he please) to a further search.
term thee, Flaccus, a profane
Foe to al truth; as impudent as Cain,
A Dunghil-cock, a Snake, a Dog, a Scurre,
A loathsome Cancer, Fury, Epicure,
Ungrateful cuckoo, perjured, wicked, base,
Impugner of the virtuous, doltish Ass,
Foul grunting sow, who with her filthy nose
Furrow's al grounds, where any goodness grow's,
Vain Thraso, faithless Sinon, impudent
Thersites, Harpax, hayre-brain'd Sycophant
Blaster of freindship, kindler of debate,
Sower of discords, envy, iarres, and hate;
A ful-blowne bag-pipe, which when any tryes
To press, or squeeze it, squeaketh naught but lies;
The Diuel's lively organ, and his son,
Deserving, as Christ's enemy, a throne
In He^'s damned Court. If in this manner those
Who are thy Brethren, speak, what say thy foes?
XXXIX. ON CALVIN.
Calvin, in pay of that despairing sin
He See before XVIII. 26.
laid on Christ, himself did dye therein.
And God in the rod of his fury visiting Calvin, did horribly punish him before
the fearful hour of his unhappy death; for he so struck this heretic with
his mighty hand, that being in despair, and calling upon the Devil, he gave up
his wicked soul, swearing, cursing, and blaspheming. He dyed upon the dissease
of lice and worms, increasing in a most loathsome ulcer about his privy parts;
so as none present could endure the stench. These things are objected to Calvin
in public writing, in which also horrible things are declared concerning his
lasciuiousnes, his sundry abominable vices, and Sodomitical lusts, for which
(last) he was by the Magistrate (at Noyon) under whom he lived, branded on the
shoulder with a hot burning-iron; unto which I yet see not any sound and clear
refutation made etc. I have read Beza, and I know that he writes otherwise of
the life, manners, and death of Calvin; but since he himself is infected with
the same heresy, and almost the same sin, as the history of his strumpet
Candida witnesses, no man can in this matter give credit to him. Thus far
Schlusselberg. Theol. Calu. l. 2. fol. 72. The which is likewise confirmed by
John Herennius in lib. de vita Calu. who there affirms himself to have been
an eye-witnes thereof.
while from forth his vlcerous flesh did burst,
Worms, stench, and lice, still swore, blasphemed and cursed,
And on the Devil without rest did call:
Which argues his good nature, and that al
His wits were perfect, since so near his end
He had so clear remembrance of his friend.
XL. An other on the same.
Calvin, your faith's chief Patriarch, did dye
Of See next before XXXIX. 2.
worms, and lice: nor need you to deny,
The truth hereof: great men have dyed thus,
For thus dyed Acts. 12. v. 23.
Herod and Machab. c. 9. v. 5.9.10.
Antiochus.
XLI. Jar of Reformers.
NO sooner Sectaries, drunk with the pride
Of their own wits, begin for to deride
Their Mother Church, and leave that steadfast rock,
Against which no power nor Matthew. 16.18.
Infernal shock
Can e're prevail, but they begin to reele,
And their small forces, and great weakness feel.
And like to Cadmus brawling serpent-brood
Against So it is necessary that rent and divided into small pieces they perish,
who have preferred the swelling pride of their haughty stomach before the most
holy hand of Catholic peace and unity. S. August. con. Parmen. lib. 1. cap. 4.
one another in a frantik mood
Convert their weapons. Hence did S. Ireneus, l. 1. c. 21. and sequent.
Magus first
Into Menandrians, and Saturninians burst,
With Basilidians: from the S. August. tom. 6. de haeres. ad Quod-vult-deum,
haer. 46.
Manichees
The Catharists and Macharians did arise:
Appellians, Seuerians, Lucianists,
Were branches al sprung from the S. Epiphan. lib. 1. tom. 3. c. haeres.
Marcionists.
Montanus Id. lib. 2. tom. 1.
spawned the Phrygasts, Pepuzians,
And Artotyrists: The Martyrians,
With the Enthusiastes from Messalus Id. haeres. 80. and Theodor. lib. 4. de
haer. fab.
came,
As those that do from Satan take their name.
And from Ruffinus lib. 10. hist. cap. 25.
Arius sprung the Acacians,
With Macedonians, and Eunomians.
But al these joined in one show no effects
Of discord, equal to our modern fects;
They are divided into Lutherans,
And Sacrament-blaspheming Zuinglians
And these again both subdivided, The Lutherans are divided principally into
the Antinomi, Osiandrians, Maiorists, Synergists, Stancarians, Anisdorfians,
Flacciaens, Substantiarians, Accidentarians, Adiaph^rists, Musculans,
Pfeffingerians, Vbiquitist^. Al which how they dissent and persecute one an
other, and many of them not so much as permit their Adversaries to abide in the
same Town with them, the Histories of Osiander, Mayor, Zuinck feldius,
Illyricus, Spangenbergius, Stancarus, Heshusius, and others do sufficiently
manifest. For the yet more full declaration whereof, I refer you to the
catalogue of the Lutherans books against Lutherans, in the end of the
Protestants Apology. Upon due consideration of which their divisions,
Oecolampadius doubts not to tell them, saying: If we reflect upon your
dissentio^s, surely there are almost found among you seauenty seven changes,
not only in your explanations of scripture, but also in certain imaginary
fantasies. Lib. germ. aequae resp. ad Luther. praef. and Illyricus says, that
they dissent among themselves like the Sacramentaries and Babylonians, and no
otherwise then the Idol-makers in Esaias. Illyr. declar. artic. doctr. Christ.

The Sacramentaries are rent into Zuinglians or old Sacrame^taries, Caluinists,
or the new, or with us called Puritans, and in France Hugonots; Formalists,
Familists, Brownists, Arminians, and infinite more, which (for that they are
commonly known) I will for breuity likewise omit. But the dissension of
Sacramentaries was such even in Luthers time, that he affirmed of them, That he
scarce ever read of any a more deformed heresy, which presently in the
beginning was divided into so many heads, such a number of sects, not one like
another, and such variety of disagreeing opinions. Luth. tom. 7. f. 380. and
els-where he avouches, six or seven sects of them to have risen in only two
years space. t. 6. f. 335. what may we then think have sprung up in so many
years since that time. See also Hospin. hist. sacr. part. 2. f. 187. and
Theol. Mansfild. confess. lat. p. 120.


make
More seu'ral branches, then Lernean snake
Sprouted forth heads: al whose contention spring's
About There are no small conflicts among us, and those about no trifles, but of
the eminent articles of Christian doctrine, of the Law and Ghospel,
Justification and Good-workes, the Sacraments, and use of ceremonies, which can
by no means be composed, concealed, or covered, for they are mere
contradictions which brook no concord. Nic. Gallus superint. Ratisb. in these.
and hypothes.
Fayth's grounds, and not in triuial things.
Christ's The reformed Churches differ not about the supper of our Lord alone,
but they also contend with such heat and fervor of disputation about the
Person of Christ our Savior, the union and distinction of his divine and
humane nature, the vbiquity of his body, his corporal eating, which is
performed with the mouth and teeth and is common as well to the good as bad, his
ascension into heaven, and sitting at the right hand of his Father; that many
old heresies, damned by our Ancestors, as they were recalled from hell, lift up
their heads again. Tigur. praefat. apolog. praefix. orthod. consens. an. 1578.
Natur's, Union, and Distinction,
His See hereafter. 21.
Incarnation, and See before 11.
Ascension,
Baptism, See hereafter 21.
Good-workes, As touching the public discord in the Church, thou needst not
enquire thereof: but I speak not here of the discord which we must of
necessity have about the doctrine of faith with the Papists and other
heretics; but of that which is among our selves, who brag that we have the
true light of the Ghospel; for there are co^tentions and varia^ces among us of
Adiaphoraes, of good works, our justice before God, free will, the presence and
participation of the body and blood of Christ in the supper, the humanity of
Christ, his ascension, and sitting at the right hand of God, his vbiquity, and
other matters; there is neither end or mean of brawling and contending. Nic.
Seln. in Psalm. 131.
Man's justice before God,
Christ's See before 11.
corporal eating by the good and bad,
Justification, See before 10.
which by their Church still
Is held the very It is the groundwork, form, and soul of Christian
religion. Genen. praefat. sytag. confess. See the same more fully proved from
the confession of Protestants in the Author and subst. of Prot. relig by R.S.
l. 1. c. 6.
soul of says, See before, 15.
Free Will,
Christ's Real presence, his Vbiquity,
See before, 10.
Ghospel, Law, Sacrament, and Beware, Christian Reader, and especialy al you
Ministers take heed of Caluin's books, and chiefly in the article of the
Trinity, the incarnation of Christ the Mediator, about the Sacrament of
Baptism, and predestination, for they contain impious doctrine and Arian
blasphemies. Stancarus cont. Calu. N. 4.
Trinity,
With many more, which to be brief I spare,
Of their distinctions the maine subject are.
Nor be these iarres Many wars about many articles have been waged, from the
first reforming of the Church through Germany, even to these times, and those
surely not by common and light-harnisht soldiers, but by Standard-bearers, old
expert warriers, compleat-armed Horsemen, and the most renowned Captains on
both sides, and that sometimes with exceeding great heat. Iezl. de diuturn.
belli Euchar p. 1.
maintained among the base,
And common smal-shot; they of chiefest place
Are the prime agents, and with so great hate
Nourish the raging flame of their debate,
As they by mutual sharp proscriptions
Banish Touching banishment and the many examples thereof see Apol. mod. ad
acta 15. Theol. Torgae, p. 3. 4. 5. Osiand. epit. cont. 16. page 803. 860. 609.
735. Crispinus Est. of the Chapter Schluss. catal. haeret. l. 13. and vlt. p. 828.
847. Iezle^us de diut. bell. Euchar. p. 100. p. 697.
each other from their several towns,
Sear them with the odious brands of See hereafter. XLII. troughout.
Heretic,
Infidel, Jew, Turk, Devil and the like,
Erect strict Inquisitions, See in Hospin. his Sacram. history the 4. articles
of visitation ordained for examination of suspected Caluinists, and a litte
after, the execution of the same, part. vlt. f. 394.
fill the Sea examples of imprisonme^ts in Hosp. vbi supra. f. 393.
geoal
With their susprized bodies, There was an Edict (says Hospinian) proclaimed,
whereby not only the reading, but likewise the selling of al Caluinists books was
forbidden. Hosp. vbi supra. f. 393. see also, ^94. Iezlerus de diut. belli
Euchar. p. 79.
stop the sale
Of al their books, uncivilly See examples hereof in the Lutherans against the
Caluinists, in Hospin. vbi supra, fol. 399. a 6. and 354. and Osiand. Epist.
cent. 16. p. 608. and Iezl. de bello Euch. p 79. and again in the Caluinists
against the Lutherans, reported by Schulss. in his catal. haeret. l. 13. and
vlt. p. 828.
deny
The usual rights of hospitality
Even to strangers; take See examples of the Lutherans falling to arms, and
assaulting the Caluinists in Hospin. vbi supra. f. 397. and see again other
like examples of the Caluinists against the Lutherans, in Gerard. Gtes^ken. l.
de verit. corp. Christi in caena, p. 256. see also Osiand. epit. cent. 16. p.
735. 803.
offensive arms;
And in confuzed and tumultuous swarms
Assail each others; nor be See a most barbarous example hereof reported by
Hospin. vbi supra. f. 398. in the relation whereof, among others he has these
words: The Lutherans rushing violently in brake the beer and coffin, and
handled the dead body of the Caluinist after a most savage manner, and cast it
to the dogs, provoking them to tear it in pieces; and again: They rush upon
the dead body etc.
dead corpse free
From their never equaled savage cruelty.
And what is most worth note, themselves confess
They have The Papists have the Pope as a common Father, Aduiser, and
Co^ductour, to reconcile their iarres, to decide their differences, to draw
their religion by consent of Councels unto unity etc. whereas on the contrary
side Protestants are as severed or rather scattered troops, each drawing a
diverse way, without any means to pacify their quarrels, no Patriarch, one, or
more, to have a common superintendance or care of their Churches for
correspondency and unity; no ordinary way to assemble a general Council of
their part, the only hope remaining ever to aswage their contentions. Sir Edwin
Sands in his relat. of religion. sect. 47. at fol. 5. 2. 8.
no means these discords to redress
Or hope to be atton'd (for that intent
Having so many There have been some Synodes or Colloquies, says
Schlusselberg, had with the Sacramentaries, but without any success: and then
presently after he reckons up many of such their fruitless Synodes. Theol.
Calvin. l. 2. art. 15. see also his catal. haeret. l. 15. p. 873. see this more
at large in the Protest. Apology, tract. 3. sect. 7. versus sin. marg. at 6.
fruitless meetings spent)
Before The Lutherans and Zuinglio-Caluinists have for the space of 60. years
and more so vehemently impugned one another, as unless the great day of our
Lord do in the mean time come and end the debate, they seem more likely to
be overcome by their mutual wounds then the Papists oppression. Schlusselb.
proem. l. 1. Theol. Calvin.
that day, when the Eternal shall
Al men, al causes, unto trial call.
So as some of them with amazement have
Stumbled Castalio, reflecting upon the dissensions of Protestants, professed
himself to rest doubtful, whether that the most clear truth shined with them
or not. Castal. praefat. bibl. Lat. ad Edw. 6. With the same scruple was
Duditius likewise troubled, if we may give credit to Beza, who was also
deceived himself with the like cogitations. Beza epist. 1. Of many others who
were moved with the same read A mirror for Martinists, p. 24. Melanch.
consili. theol. part. 1. page 249. Georg. M^ior. orat. de confus. dog^^. Luth.
loco comm. class. 5. c. 13. p. 39. Bulling. fundam. firm. part. 1. c. 1. p. 5.
thereat, and others for to save
Their souls from shipwreck on such stormy seas,
Have Staphylus revolted to the Catholics, says Dresserus, by reason of the
disagreements amongst the Protestant Divines. Dresserus in millenar. 6. p. 214.
made repair unto the calmer Bays
Of Rome's never shaken Church. By which we se^
That she alone is from al error free,
Which, void Luther himself grants that Catholics do not contend about
scripture, but al with one consent give credit to the Fathers, adhere to the
Councels, and submit themselves under the obedience of the holy See of Rome,
and that these divisions which are amongst them, are only humane dissentions,
about honor, preeminence etc. Tom. 7. f. 380. the like is confessed by
Duditius (Beza epist. 1. M. Whitaker de eccles. cont. Bellarm. cont. 2. q. 5.
p. 327.) M. Fulk ag. Hesk. Sand. etc. p. 293. and Sir Edwin Sand. as before, 31.
confessedly of al such strife,
Shows one, and but one way to eternal life.
So Heretics by their dissensions confirm our faith. Just. quaest. 4. ad
Orthodox.
by this means the Prouerb's truth is known,
When Thieves dissent, true men regaine their own.
XLII. ON VAFER.
INgenious Vafer can with special grace
Suit his religion unto every place;
When he is in England he himself does vant
A Parlament-Prince-pleasing Protestant;
And Cambden affirms Holland to be a fruitful Province of Heretics.
Elizabetha p. 300.
Holland holds to be a fertile place
Of faithles Heretics, In Hungary and Boheme (says our late Sovereign) there
are infinite diversities of Sects, agreeing in nothing but in their union
against the Pope. K. James his works. p. 371.
Behemia's race
Of Sectaries has no united scope
In any point, but how to spite the Pope.
Amongst al translations of the sacred Word
That of The conference at Hampton Court testifyeth, that King James professed
that he could never yet see a Bible well translated into English, but the worst
of al his Majesty thought Geneua to be; to which he affirmed that there were
some notes annexed very partial, untrue, seditious, and sauouring too much of
dangerous and traiterous conceits. p. 46. 49.
Geneua's most to be abhorred;
Whose factious Ministers not by word Since the time that they of Geneua
deposed their Bishop, their Liege-Lord and Prince, (as M. Sutcliff confesses
in his answ. to call. petit. p. 194.) it has been a Principle (says M.
Bancroft) as I suppose with some of the chief Ministers of Geneua, that if
Kings and Princes refused to reform religion, the inferior Magistrates, or
people, by direction of the Ministry, might lawfully, and ought (if need
required) even by force of arms to reform it themselves. Dang. pos. p. 9. See
further M. Bancrofts in his Suruay p. 48. Where he affirms that they
maintained in their books desperate points of deposing Princes, and of putting
them to death in diverse cases of resistance against reformation.
alone
But by their They of Geneua (says M. Sutcliff) deposed their Bishop, which
was also their Liege-Lord and Prince, from his temporal right etc. albeit he
was by right of succession the temporal Lord and owner of that City and
territory, Calvin. petit. p. 194. See the Suruay p. 11. 12. Dang. posit. ^2.
deeds teach subjects to dethrone
Their lawful Sovereigns. Those in The Puritans of Scotland (says M.
Bancroft) were published in a proclamation by his Majesty to be unnatural
subjects, seditious persons, troublesome and unquiet spirits, members of
Satan, enemies to the King and the Commonwealth of their native country etc.
Dang. posit. 22.
Scotland are
Seditious persons, men who never spare
Their King or country, troublesome, uncivil,
And restles spirits, yea members of the Diuil.
The Puritans in general are I protest before the great God (says his late
Majesty) since I am here upon my testament, it is no place for me to lie in,
that you shall never find with any. Highland or Border-theeues, greater
ingratitude, and more lies, and vile periuries, then with these phanatike
spirits. King James his works page 161.
liars
Heady See this sufficiently proved by M. Bancroft in his Dang. posit.
throughout the 3. 4. 5. and 6. Chapters of the 1. book.
aduancers of their own desires,
Cross, wayward When we feast (says M. Ormerod) they (Puritans) will fast; and
when we fast, they will feast. See further diverse answerable examples hereof in
Ormer. his pict. p. 20. 21.
Spirits, Ib. page 75.
prone to loosse delights,
Scripture-corrupters To prove their devices they have offered great violence
to the holy Scriptures, expounding them contrary both to ancient Fathers and
histories, and common reason etc. M. Sutcl. answ. Calum. petit. p. 141.
perjured See before at 7.
Hypocrites, The purity (of Puritans) neither consists in life nor doctrine
(for none therein can be less pure, unless it be in bare conceit) but in
outward shows, false semblance, vain protestations of reformation, gogling of
eyes, and painted hypocrisy. M. Sutcl. answ. Calum. pet. p. 90.

Detracting Al these attributes and more are given them by M. Sutclif. in his
answ. Calum. petit. in Epist. Dedic. and p. 10. 13. 24. 33. 52. 54. 55. 56. 6^.
69. 72. 73. 89. 93. 99. 103.
Satyrists, dogs, Schismatikes
Murmurers, Vultures, yea and Least any man should think (says D. Couel) out
contentions with Puritans were in smaller points, and difference not great,
each side has charged one the other with heresies, if not infidelities, nay
even with such as quite ouerthow the principal foundation of our Christian
faith. Just and temperate def. art. 11. p. 67.
Heretics
Equal to The Puritans have joined with the Pharisees, Aerians, Apostolikes,
Pepuzians, Petrobuzians, Florinians, Cerinthians, Nazerens, Bigardins,
Ebionites, Catobabdites, Enthusiasts, Donatists. Ormer^^ discou. of Purit.
papisme. p. 9.
the Pharisees and Donatists,
Arrians, Ebionites, and Catharists,
Florinians, Beguardins, Pepuzians
Apostolikes, and Petrobusians.
Yet if to Amsterdam he hence do sail,
Or to Geneua go, he then does rail
At the English Church. The Archbishops and Bishops are unlawful, unnatural,
false and bastardly Governors of the Church, and the Ordinances of the Devil;
petty Popes, petty Antichrists etc. Bishops callings are meer^ Antichristian
etc. Danger posit. p. 59. with much more there to the same effect.
Bishops are (says he)
An Antichristian Popish ministry.
Their Their prescript form of service is full of corruption etc. Ib. 55.
prescript form of service wholly full
Of fond corruptions; The Communion-book is an imperfect book, culled and
picked out of that Popish dunghill, the Portuisse and Masse-book; and many of
the contents therein be such as are against the word of God. Ibid.
from the mass they cul
Their new Communion-bookes, dissenting far
From the Lord's word it never failing square.
The The Sacraments are by the Church of England wickedly mangled and
profaned. Ibid. p. 56.
Sacraments they wickedly profane,
Their rites and habits Their garments and ceremonies are Antichristian pompes,
rites, laws, and traditions. Ibid.
Antichristian.
Their ministries are The Ministers are neither proved, elected, called, nor
ordained according to Gods word. Ibid. p. 60.
neither proved nor called
Nor right according to the Word instal'd:
The most The most part of our Priests are either Popish Priests, or Monks, or
Friars, or Ale-ha^ters, or Boys and lads, drunkards and dolts; they will wear
a fool's hood for livings sake etc. Ibid. p. 61.
are Monks, Friars, drunkards, dolts, or boys
They The public Baptism is full of childish and superstitious toys. Ibid. p.
96.
baptism profane with childish toys
And to conclude, they are, he yet believes
Soule-murd'ring You shall find amongst this Crew of Ministers nothing else but
a troup of bloody soule-murderers, and sacrilegious Church-robbers. Ib. p. 61.
Heretics, See before, at 15. See also Rogers in his pref. to his art. n^^.
31. and 13.
Sacrilegious thieves.
Nor does he there the Lutherans respect,
Them he condemns for a damned sect
Of wilful We see by these words of Danaeus (says Schlusselberg) that the
Caluinists account us Lutherans for damned and excommunicated heretics. Theol.
Calu. lib. 2. art. 1. and in the same place, Calvin [sayth he) in his last
admonition against Westphalus keeps no measure in his railing, he proclames al
those heretics, who refuse to reject Luthers doctrine to obey Calvin.
Heretics; and still them Some of the Zuinglians (says Iezlerus,) have called
the Luthera^s, haters of men, flesh-eaters, drinkers of blood, Thyests,
Ha^gmen, killers of Christ, breadworshippers, adorers of a breaden God, denyers
of the Redemption which Christ performed upon the altar of the Cross,
Eutychians, Suenk feld^ans, and lastly ouerthrowers of many articles of the
Apostolic faith, de diuturn. belli Euchar. fol. 93. See 92. also where they
called also Caphernaites, Localists, etc. But far more then all this may be
found in the writings of Zuinglius, Calvin, and Beza against the Luth^rans, in
Tossanus. Schuiz de serp. antiq. Georg. Hansfeld in via Monstrat. Wegweiser.
Alb. cont. Carolost. Oecolampad. aequ. respons. charta quaedam Zuinglij an.
1527. and in general al Caluinists who have writ against the Lutherans. For the
more easy discovery of some of which Authors, I refer you to the 2. Catalogue
in the end of the Protestants Apology.
cal's
Drinkers of blood, Flesh-eaters, Cannibals,
Auerse from Christian faith, Christ's murderers,
Destroyers of the Creed, Idolaters,
Reiecters of Christ's death, Zuenck feldians,
Hang-men, Caparnaites, Eutychians,
Localists, men prodigiously blind,
False, wicked, proud, of an ambitious mind,
Impudent Asses, more illiterate fools
Then simple children that frequent the schools. Al these brotherly attributes,
and many more such like, are afforded them by Calvin, Admonit. 3. ad Westphalum.

But from these towns this Rouer scarce is got
To Wittenberg, but sing's another note;
He now auerr's, We seriously censure the Zuinglians and al Sacramentaries for
heretics, and alienated from the Church of God. Luth. tom. 2. f. 503. and tom.
Ien. p. 578.
and seriously, that they
Who from the true faith do with Zuinglius stray,
And likewise such as Calvin do respect,
Are a most damned Luther forgetful of God and divine Honor, calls us a
damned Sect, say the Tigurine Divines in confess. Germ. part. 3.
and execrable sect
Of The Lutherans have called, and to this day still call the Zuinglians
convicted heretics, possessed with devils, obsessed on every side, before,
behind, above, below, within and without with Devils, Martyrs of Devils, to be
refelled rather with the sword of the civil Magistrate then with words, to be
restrained from holy things, to be wholly rooted out of the Church, shunned by all good men, unworthy for whom God should be prayed unto, to be excluded forth
of the leagues of Kings and Princes, to be reckoned amongst the Anabaptists,
Nestorians, Arians, Turks, and in a word worse then al mortals that ever the
earth bore, and damned for all eternity. Iezl. de diut. belli. Euchar. f. 93.
See before, XXIX. 7. who yet would find more of these freindly Epithets,
wherewith the Lutherans set forth their fellow Protestant-Zuinglians, need but
repair to Luthers books against the Sacramentaries. Io. Schuiz. Serp. antiq.
and 50. cause, Riuand. lup. excor. Alber. cont. Carolost. Selneccerus and other
Lutherans (a Catalogue whereof is in the end of the Protestants Apology) and
they shall find much more then I have here expressed; for (to use Iezlerus his
own words) there is no end at al among them in contending, writing,
declaiming, disputing, condemning and excommunicating one another. p. 80. yea
every mart (as the learned Deane of S. Paul's M. Dun ingenously confesses) we
se more books written by these men against one another, then by them both for
Christ. In the first sermon preached by him to King Charles, at S. James. 30.
April. 1625. p. 15.
convict Heretics; on every part
About their body, and within their heart,
Above, below, behind them, and before,
Obsest with Devils; men deserving more
To be refelled by the aw-ful swords
Of civil Magistrates, then force of words.
They are (he now affirms) to be restrained
From holy things, their company refrained
By all good men, most fitting to be expelled
From forth the Churches bosom, yea and held
Not worthy to be prayed for, and unfit
That Kings should them into their leagues admits
He vows they are for either faith, or works,
Nestorians, Arians, Anabaptists, Turks.
And in a word, the worst of men, yea he
Proclaims them damned for all eternity.
Yet into Frizeland if he take his flight
Then the Anabaptists only teach aright;
There, as amongst the Caluinists again,
He against Luther slack's his passion's rain,
And with a quau'ring head, and half-shut eyes
As if forsooth of zeal his words did rise,
In verity he offers to detect
Infinite faults in now false Luther's sect.
With You yourselues are they who lead a dissolute and carnal life, who
crucify Christ again, who blaspheme his spirit, and contemn his grace etc.
Menno Sim. fundam cap. de doctrine. Concionat.
carnal ways, says he, their souls they stain,
And Christ himself they crucify again,
Blaspheme his spirit, and contemn his grace,
Affect I know certainly that they have not the spirit, mission, and word; and
that in their doctrine and actions they seek no less then Papists the favor
of men, honor, pride, revenues, beautiful houses etc. Ibid.
fair houses, and a wealthy place;
They climb the pulpit there to preach, yet none
Has either Spirit, Word, or Mission.
There They lead a quiet, idle, slouthful, and merry life, by seducings and
flatteries they maintain themselves with the robberies of Antichrist, and
preach no more then an earthly and carnal Magistrate will permit and hear etc.
they by their dissolute and carnal doctrine have brought dissolute and carnal
people to such dishonest manners, and so licentious a life, that among the
Turks and Tartars there are not so ungodly and abominable people to be found.
Id. de Christian. fide tit. de fide Luth.
will they utter naught that may appear
At al distastful to their Princes ear.
They idly live, and to relieve their need
On Antichrist's rich spoils through flattery feed;
And to such loosnes al their flocks allure
As Turks and Tartars are by much more pure.
But when this man, who with such zeal now burn's
Unto Geneu' or Wittenberg returns;
The Anabaptists straight, unfit to be named,
Chimera-like The heresy of the Anabaptists of our age is a variable and
monstrous chimera, bred of many heresies etc. Schlusselb. Catal. haeret. epist.
Dedicat. l. 12.
of diverse sects are framed,
Muntzer, Muntzer, Carlostadius, and such like of their sect are mere incarnate
Devils, etc. Luth. Colloq. Germ. fol. 153.
and those who of his doctrine share,
No men, but mere incarnate Devils are.
Scarce any one but Scarce can there be found any one Anabaptist, which holds
not some one opinion or other contrary to the rest. Calu. Inst. aduers. Anabapt.
still dissent's from other.
And will of error charge his purest brother.
If after this he go to Rome or Spain
He Proteus-like transformes himself again
Then he is a Roman Catholic, and says,
That Rome's the Mother Church: Her only faith
Is Orthodoxal, others doctrines he
Most iusty al condemned for heresy.
Yet after al these changes if he come,
A new Ulysses, to his native home,
He lays fast hold again where he began.
Say, Is not Vafer a Religious man?
XLIII. ON FVRBO.
FVrbo the Caluinist does much complain
On Luther and his followers railing vain
Against his Church; but yet, says he, I think,
They do not dant us much, nor make us shrink;
O no, we pay them home! Then he affords
A See next before XLIi. thoughout.
roll of al their mutual scurril words
And base inuectiues; and refers it straight
To al men's judgments whether's in the right.
Believe me, Furbo, if without offense
I might my judgment give, t'auoyd al sense
Of partial censure, and my debt defray
To Christian charity, I sure would say,
Not to offend here either them, or you,
But to content you both, That both say true.
XLIV. Reformers railing against the Apostles and Fathers.
IF either Father or Apostle cross
Your Ghospel so as you can find no gloss
T'inuert their words, their evidence to rail,
Against their writings, y'on their persons rail.
Peter though he by the Holie-Ghost had been
Confirmed, you say, Whether Peter did in this sin, as they say, mortally,
let others judge. This I know, that those, who were by this dissimulation
enforced to Iudaisme, unless they had been reduced by Paul, had perishcd.
Luth. ad c. 2. Epist. ad Galat.
committed mortal sin,
Yea S. Peter chief of the Apostles, and also Barnabas after the Holy Ghost
received, together with the Church of Jerusalem, erred. Brent. Apol. Confess.
cap. de Conc. p. 900. And D. Goade likewise in the Tower disputat. with Fa.
Campian the 2. days confer. argum. 6. affirms, that S. Peter did err in
Faith, and that after the sending down of the Holy Ghost upon him. See more in
M. Fulck. ibid. and ag. the Rhem. Testam. in Galat. 2. fol. 322. and Luth.
Epist. ad Galat. c. 1.
erred in faith, which See Caluin's Commentary in omnes Pauli Epist.
concerning S. Peter's supposed error, to the schism (as he says) of the
Church, the endangering of Christian liberty, and the overthrow of the grace
of Christ. In Galat. c. 2. v. 14. p. 510. and 511.
error did import
Loss of Christ's grace, and Christian freedom hurt.
The Apostle Paul did not a little Paul does turn to James the Apostle; and a
Synod of all the Presbyters being called together, he is persuaded by James and
the rest, that for the offended Jews he should purify himself in the Temple,
whereunto Paul yealdeth; which certainly was no small sliding of so great a
Doctor, etc. Magdeburg. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10.
slide,
He was possessed with As though Paul (when he writ his Epistles) did then
attribute so much to his Epistles, that whatsoever was contained in them was
sacred etc. which thing were to impute immoderate arrogancy to the Apostle.
Zuingl. tom. 2. f. 10.
immodorate pride;
And Calvin speaking of S. Paul already an Apostle, says, that creeping upon
the ground he was defiled with much filth. in c. 7. Roman. v. 25.
wallow'd in the dirt of slavish sense,
Subject to rashness and froward confidence. Paul was a man subject to the
common passions of men, not to cold only and heat, but to perverse confidence,
rashness, and the like. Id. in 2. Cor. c. 1. v. 9

James P. Moran accuses S. James of 3. faults: 1. of making a wicked argument.
2. of concluding ridiculously, and 3. of citing scripture against scripture.
Ad. c. 8. Romans
did produce a wicked argument,
Scripture against Scripture cite, and gave Calvin fears not to affirm, that
S. James approved superstitious vows and brought Paul to consent with him in
the same faults. In c. 21. Act.
assent
To superstitious vows, yea moved Paul
Into the same erroneous zeal to fall.
Matthew Calvin writes that Matthew did improperly, and often cite the sentences
of the old Prophets, against their true and proper sense. In c. 2. Math. v. 15.
in c. 4 v. 13. in c. 8. v. 17. in c. 27. v. 9.
not truly still, but from the right
Sense of their words, the Prophets often did cite.
John The Evangelist John improperly calls that faith, which is only a
preparation to faith. Calvin in c. 8. and 17. John
used improper speeches, and became
A false See this before XXXV. 3.
Apostata; Mark Mark was a forsaker of his vocation, and an Apostata; neither
does infirmity excuse his perfidiousnes, whereby the holiness of his vocation
had been violated: he had filthily through his own fault falen from his
charge. Marlor. in c. 15. Act. v. 40.
was the same,
And most perfidiously himself bereft
Of his great charge, and his vocation left:
Yet for their books, Clebitius impugnings S. Luks report in the history of
our Sauiour's Passion, says: Matthew and Mark deliver the contrary; therefore
to Matthew and Mark being two witnesses, more credit is to be given then to one
Luke. Clebit. Vict. Verit. arg. 5.
more credit is to be shown
To him and Matthew, then to Luke alone.
Thus you the Apostles censure, what then are
The Fathers? them I doubt you will not spare,
Yes, as the former: Ambrose Ambrose writ six books upon Moses, but they were
meager ones. Luth. Colloq. Men's. 6. de Patr. Ecclesiae.
you affirm
TO have writ but meager lines, you Leo ^earme
A haughty I do freely without courtesy of titles and excepting of persons
profess, that I mislike these haughty speeches in Leo etc. Reynolds c. 1.
diuis. 2. f. 17. in conference.
speaker. Austin See the Protestants malepert Inuectiues against this holy
Father before XXV. throughout.
did decline
To more faults. Cyprian In the writings of Hierome there is not a word of true
faith in Christ, and sound Religion. Tertullian is very superstitious; among
the Doctors of the Church he was a second Carolostadius; I have holden Origin
long since accursed; of Chrysostom I make no account; he is nothing but an
idle and prating Rhetorician; Basil is of no worth; he is wholly a Monk; I weigh
him not a hair. Cyprian the Martyr is a weak Divine etc. The Apology of
Philip. Melancthon does far excel all the Doctors of the Church, and exceed
even Austin himself. Luth. Collog. Men's. cap. de Patr. Eccl.
is a weak Divine.
Basil of no worth, Chrysostom a vain
And simple Chrysostom alleged indeed scripture, but he applies it madly:
and yet he often applies it to the same purpose; alas good man. M. Fulk ag.
Purga. p. 237. see the rest next before 18.
tatling Rhetorician.
Maximus Father Maximus did dote. Isidore ouer-shot himself by slip of memory.
Theodoret served his own cause. Reynold c. 4. diuis. 3. f. 132. and diuis. 2.
f. 123.
doted. Isidore was rash.
Old Irenaeus Irenaeus upon the foundation of the Apostles doctrine built much
stubble and straw. Ad Schult. Medul. Theol. l. 31. c. 8. see the Magdeburg.
Cent. 2. c. 10.
builded straw and trash
Upon truth's grounds. Bold Epiphanius (the Prolocutour in the 2. Council of
Nice) was a prattling Deacon, of more tongue then wit, more face then learning.
Bilson, of Christ. subject.
Epiphanius was
A prattling Deacon, and so far did pass
Al limits, as he showed in what he writ
More face then learning, and more tongue then wit.
Gregory, Will you give me leave (says M. Reynolds) to think of Gregory, as
Christ of Peter, that he knew not what he said. Reynold. c. 7. diuis. 9. f. 285.
like Peter, knew not what he said,
And with Fulgentius to yutly passage made
For blind In the sixth Age, besides Pope Gregory, and Fulgentius, you have few
other famous Doctors of the Church, who notwithstanding etc. were the cause,
fountain, and seminary of Idolatries, and innumerable errors to the ensuing
ages. Magdeburg. Praefat. in Cent. 6.
Idolatry, yet he alone
Was Gregory the Great the Architect of superstitions, says Peucerus in
Chrom. See more against this Saint in Bulleng. de orig. err. Missae. in Luth.
ad. c. 49. Genes. in Bugenhag. ad c. 3. Ionae. in Melancth. ad c. 14. Epist. ad
Roman. in Calvin ad cap. 2. Habac.
the Architect of superstition.
Bernard, Bernard worshipped the God Moozim al his life etc. was an earnest
defender of the state of Antichrist; he adored strange Gods in his preserving
of Relikes. Magdeburg, Cent. 12. c. 10.
adored Moozim to his end,
And stiffly did proud Antichrist defend.
Hierome Hierome is not worthy to be numbered among the Doctors of the Church;
for he was an heretic: yet I believe, that through faith in Christ he is
saved. He was a man of no judgment not diligence; he writ many things
foolishly etc. I am not so displeased at any of the Doctors of the Church as
at Hierome etc. there is not in his works any mention of faith, nor of hope,
nor of charity, nor of the works of faith. Luth. Colloq. Men's. f. 478. see
before at 18. more of their inuectiues against him in Luther Epist. ad Brent.
praefixa Com. Brent. in Oseam. and ad c. 22. and 31. Genes. and passim in all
his Comment. upon Scripture. in Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 19. sect. 17. and ad c.
4. Iona. in Beza de Polygam. in Magdeburg. Cent. 5. c. 8. in Causae Clip. Fid.
Dial. 6. 7. 8. in Brent. Apol. Confess. Wit. c. de innoc. Sanctor.
of right should not reputed be
Among the Fathers, since with heresy
He is infected, and no judgment has,
Nor care, nor writes as he ought of faith.
And to conclude, the Fathers Our Fathers, whether holy or not holy it
imports not, were blinded with Montanus his spirit, through humane traditions
and doctrines of devils, etc. they teach not purely of Justification etc. nor
take they any care to preach Christ truly by his Ghospel Pomer. in ^on.
blinded were,
With wretch'd Montanus spirit, nor did fear
To preach false doctrine, al their life they erred
So that, Luther affirms the Fathers of so many Ages to have been plainly
blind and most ignorant in the Scripture; to have erred al their life time, and
that unless they were amended before their death, they were neither Saints,
nor pertaining to the Church. Tom. 2. Wit. lib. de seru. arbitr. p. 434.
unless before their death they clear'
Their consciences from those erroneous taynts,
They were not of the Church, nor now are Saints.
Thus do the Church's glorious Lamps become
Subject to your even See before XVIII. from 4. to 34.
Christ-controlling doom.
While by the same (more partial) Protestants
Are the See before XVIII. from 4. to 34.
mouths of Christ, Luther is the mouth of Christ, a certain God of Divines,
the only chief Divine among Divines, the prime and greatest Doctor of the
Church etc. Mich. Neander in Explicat. part. Orbis, lib. 8.
great See Luther to be affirmed a Prophet in Sleydan in English. f. 222. and
read the margents besides. Luther terms himself a faithful Prophet, an
Apostle, an Evangelist, a living Saint etc. Tom 2. Ien. Germ. f. 522. and 79.
see also Tom. 3. f. 334. and Tom. 4. f. 186. and 280.
Prophets, Luther was a man of God, and truly that Angel which flew through the
midst of heaven with the eternal Ghospel, Apoc. 14. Mich. Neand. Theol.
Christian. p. 333. see Schluss. Catal. Haeret. l. 13. p. 314. 316. and 489. and
Amsdorf. Sacer. Matthes. and others in their books passim.
Angels, Holy S. Luther, says etc. M. Gabr. Powel. Consid. of the Pap.
suppli. p. 70. see more 32. and after at. 37.
Saints,
Lights O you Tigurins, you have received into Tigure Peter Martyr, and
Bernardin Ochin; what two lights? etc. Happy England whilst it had these,
miserable when it lost them. Bale Praefat. in Act. Romans Pont.
of whole Nations* Peter Martyr calls Melancthon a man incomparable, and most
instructed in all kind of virtue and learning, Dial. de Corp. Christi in loco,
f. 107. cont. Gardener. de Euchar. page 768.
men adorned with all
Virtue and learning, Christus habet primas, habeas tibi, Paul, secundas,
At loca post illos proxima Luther habet,
which I have Englished thus: The first place Christ, the second Paul obtaines,
The next for Luther after those remains.


These two verses, says Spangenbe^gius, were composed in honor of our most
dear Master S. Luther; and al Papists must suffer them, will they nil they,
for true verses, etc. Spangenberg. in his Dutch book against certain
Catholics, and in that part which is against Stephen Agricola c. 4. 6. v. a.


next to Christ and Paul,
Worthy Divines, M. Jewel is by M. Hooker termed the worthiest divine that
Christendom bred for some hundred years past. Eccles. Pol. l. 2. sect. 6. p.
150.
whose books deserve a place
In The Luther judges Melancthon's book of Common Places worthy to be placed
in the Ecclesiastical Canon of holy Scripture. Tom. 2. de seru. arbitr. f.
424. see him in Colloq. Conuiu. c. de Patr. Eccles. see more here before at 18.
Church's Canon, whose learned Authors trace
Truth's footsteps, righter, and in faith more Surely you are not able to
reckon in any Age since the Apostles times, any company of Bishops, that
taught and held so sound and perfect doctrine in all points, as the Bishops of
England do at this day. Answ. to the Admonit. p. 472. 473. see Call. Secund.
Cur. de ampl. regni Dei, l. 1. p. 43. see also Beza Ep. 1. p. 5.
sound
Then since the Apostle's times have yet been found.
The ancient Fathers of the Church, you say,
Were far to you inferior Beza makes two kinds of interpreting scripture,
the one touching only the words etc. the others is (says he) by unfolding the
matter itself in more words, and annexing of reasons thereunto, in which kind
of interpreting (in my opinion, and I think in the judgment of al learned
men, who have looked into his books) the great John Calvin will be found far
to have surpassed al both the ancient and new Interpreters. Beza Praefat. in
Nouum Testam. see him l. Icon. R. iij. a. See Nic. Amsdorf. Praefat. in 1. Tom.
Luth. and Alber. cont. Carlost. l. 7. 6. see also Stigel. l. 2. poemat. N. 4.
every way,
In clearing of the Scripture's hidden sense,
'Twixt whom, and you, there is that difference
As is 'twixt Sun and Moon. I know it well,
Nay more; as much as is 'twixt Heaven and Hell. Since the Apostles times there
lived not, or came into the world any greater then Luther, and it may well be
said, that God powered al his gifts into this one man; and that there is as
great a difference betwixt the ancient Doctors, and Luther, as there is
betwixt the light of the Sun and Moon, and there is no doubt but the ancient
Fathers, yea the prime and best amongst them, as Hilarie and Austin, if they
had lived and taught at the same time with Luther, would without blushing, as
his servants, have carried the lantern before him. Andr. Muscul. Praefat. in
lib. Germ. de Diab. tyrannide.

XLV. Luther's respect to S. Hierome.
WHile Luther lived, he would not to have gained
Ten thousand If any man would give me 10000 Crowns, I would not be in that
peril and extreme hazard of my salvation, wherein Hierome is. Luth. Colloq.
Men's. f. 377.
Crowns, have had his soul so stained
With sins black guilt, as Hierom's was, and be
In as great peril to be damned as he.
Sure now to be but so, he would become
More tractable, and take a lesser Sum.
XLVI. The dutiful children.
NOt any Protestant, but still auowes
The Church to be his These are so generally holden by all, that they require no
further proof.
mother, and Christ's Spouse;
And yet, against the square which cannot err
Of My spirit that is in thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouths of thy Seed, and out of the
mouth of thy Seed's Seed, says our Lord, for this present and for ever. Esaias.
c. 59. v. 22. And further: I have espoused you to one man, to exhibit you a
chaste virgin unto Christ. 2. Cor. 11.2. See more in Coccius tom. 1. l. 8. art.
1. Bellarm. tom. 2. Controu. 1. l. 3. D. Nor. his Antid. part. 3.
Scriptures, yea and The Spouse of Christ cannot play the aduoutresse, she is
immaculate and undefiled; she knows one house; she keeps with chaste
bashfulnesse the sanctity of one bed. S. Cypri. de unit. Eccles. See more
testimonies of the Fathers alleged for the Churches infallibility and
freedom from error in Coccius, Bellarm. and D. Nor. vbi supra.
Fathers, they auerre,
She of her Faith has so regardlesse been,
As since the Apostles she scarce It is granted by Protestants themselves, that
presently after the Apostles times al things were turned vpside-downe etc. and
that for certain, through the work of Antichrist, the external Church
together with the Faith and Sacraments vanished away presently after the
Apostles departure (Sebast. Franc. Epist. de abrog. stat. Eccl.) and that the
true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles times ( M. Fulck Answ. to a
Counterf. Cath. p. 35.) yea and that this general defection of the visible
Church (foretold 2 Thessalonians. 2.) began to work even in the Apostles times. M.
Downh. of Antichrist. l. 2. c. 2. p. 25. See also M. Whitaker Resp. ad Rat.
Camp. rat. 7. and cont. Dur. l. 7. p. 490. and 461. where he seeks to prove
that presently after the Apostles times the true Church was no longer a chaste
virgin, but became adulterous and corrupt. See more in the Protest. Apol. p.
129. 130. 131. 222. 223. 301. 490.
e're was seen
But taynted, and impure; did wholly loose
Not only the The Pope of Rome, has most plainly rooted out the Ghospel truly
oppressed and overthrown. Luth. Epist. ad Freder. Elect. tom. 7. fol. 506. See
him likewise tom. 2. f. 249. 387. and tom. 5. f. 306. 322.
Ghospel, but even So by little and little true Christ was taken out of the
world, and Antichrist put in his stead. Cel. See Curie de amplit. regni Dei l.
1. p. 33. See the like in Luther tom. 3. f. 126. 345. tom. 4. f. 1. tom. 5. f.
306. 376. tom. 6. f. 660.
Christ her Spouse;
No With great distress went they scattering about, seeking some sparks of
heavenly light to refresh their Consciences withal, but that light was
already thoroughly quencht-out, so that they could find none. This was a rueful
state; this was a lamentable form of God's Church: it was a misery to live
therein without the Ghospel, without light, without al comfort. Apol. of the
Chapter of Engl. part. 5. c. 13. diuis. 1. See more in Melancthon or Curion in
Chron. l. 4. p. 439. Chemnit. in locis, part. 2. p. 246. Sadl. de vocat.
Minist. p. 552. Hospin. hist. Sacram. part. 1. l. 4. p. 291.
spark of true Faith, heavenly fire was cherisht;
Al was The knowledge of Christ was truly abolished and destroyed. Luth. tom.
7. f. 230. See him tom. 1. f. 387. and M. Bale Apol. ag. Priests. f. 3. and
Calvin. l. de vera Reform p. 322. Danae. in l. August. de haeres. c. 9.
destroyed, The Pope's tyranny has many Ages agone extinguished the Faith.
Luth. tom. 1. f. 77. and 249. and tom. 3. f. 348. 568. to. 4. f. 1. See Sleidan
l. 11. f. 240. Melancth. or Carto^ in Chron. p. 439. see before at. 7.
extinguished, Under Popery that doctrine without which Christianity cannot
consist, was al buried and shut out. Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 2. sect. 2. see
Luther tom. 6. f. 199.
buried, Certain it is that our Apostolical Bishops reigning, God's faith
perished. Luth. tom. 1. f. 375. see M. Bal^ Cent. 4. cap 6.
perished,
Yea even her See before xi. 1.18.
soul was In times past certain absurd opinions horribly overwhelmed this
doctrine (of justification.) Confess. Aug. p. 25. see Sleidan f. 240. Melancth.
to. 2. respons. ad Cler. Colon. p. 96. 97. 99. Calu. resp. ad Sadol. p. 125.
and passim omnes.
ouer-whelmed quite
Polluted, Schoole-diuinitie quite trampled and extinguished the least sparkles
of pure doctrine touching the Law, the Ghospel, Faith, and Justification before
God. Melanct. or Carrion in Chron. p. 439.
and deuoyd of al true light.
So that in lieu of being true, say they,
And faithful to her Spouse, she fell away
To soul It is true, that all the Church was corrupted, al adultresse, al
Idolatresse. Boisseul Confut. Spond. 742. s^^ before at 4.
adultery. Did er'e fools before
Strive in this sort to prove their mother whore?
XLVII. THE IVDGE.
HVsse What did the Popish faith decree (says M. Fox) concerning
Transubsta^tiatio^, which he (John Husse) likewise did not confirm? M. Fox in
Apoc. c. 11. p. 290. See him further acknowledged by the same M. Fox to have
maintained Transubstantiation, in Act. and Monum. p. 209. and 197. I have here
the rather given instance of Husse for this doctrine of Transubstantiation,
then of any learned Catholic, because he is generally by Protestants received
for one of their own Church.
holds whole Christ does in the Eucharist
Under the forms of bread and wine consist.
Luthers Of the Sacrament of the Altar we decree that the bread and wine in the
supper is the true body and blood of Christ; and that it is not only given and
received by the godly, but likewise by bad and wicked Christians etc. We
respect not the sophistical subtilitie of Transubstantiation, wherein they
feign etc. that true bread does not remain. For it agrees best with
scripture, that the bread is present and does remain etc. Luth. artic.
Smalkald. part. 3. art. 6.
opinion is, that we are fed
With Christ's true real flesh, but joined with bread.
Zuinglius maintains, that the bread and wine The Eucharist, Communion, or
Lord's supper (says Zuinglius) is nothing else but a Co^memoration etc. ( tom.
2. f. 212.) it is nothing but a sign or figure, to make us keep in mind the
memory of Christ's body, which was delivered for us, etc. This is, that is to
say, this signifies my body; which is, as if any woman showing a ring, which
for this end her husband had left with her, should say, Behold, this is my
husband. Ib. fol. 293. see f. 477. and here before IX. 5.

Are not Christ's body, but a naked sign.
Calvin We may see therefore (says Calvin) wherein Luther erred, and in like
sort Zuinglius and Oecolampadius. Calu. lib. de Caena Domini Argent. edit. an.
1540. see him further condemning the Lutherans for Consubstantiation, and the
immensitie of Christ's body, charging them therefore with the error of
Marcio^. Inst. l. 4. c. 17. sect. 16. 17. 18.
dissenting from the former, says
It Is In the mystery of the Supper (says Calvin in Instit. l. 4. c. 17. sect.
11.) by the signs of bread and wine is truly delivered to us Christ's body
and blood. And again: In his holy Supper he commands me to take, eat, and
drink, under the Symbols of bread and wine, his body and blood. I nothing
doubt, that both he does truly deliver them, and I do receive them. ibid.
sect. 32. But I deny (says he a little after) that it can be eaten without the
taste of faith. ib. sect. 33. and a few lines after: That Christ should be
received without faith is no more agreeing with reason, then seed to bud in the
fire.
truly Christ, but to the mouth of faith.
Al these were learned Doctors, and supposed
To be by the Spirit to al truth disposed;
These Bohemia for the most part follows the opinion of John Husse, says M.
Grimst. in his Translat. of the Estates of the world. p. 580. The Marquis of
Brandenburg, the Dukes of Saxony, Brunswick, and Wittemberg, the Eearles of
Mansfeldt, and the Free-townes, which confine with the Sea and France, follow
the profession of Luther. ibid. p. 159. to which we may add out of the same
Author Denmark paeg. 666. In Switzerland the doctrine of Zuinglius, as al
know, has possessed 5. of the better Cantons; and as for the Grisons (says M.
Grimston) they of the League, called Grise, are for the most part Catholics,
and the rest in a manner al Protestants, which follow Zuinglians doctrine. ib.
p. 280. As for the doctrine of Calvin, it is so generally known to be
maintained in England, France, and Holland, as it needs no further testimony.
al have Colleges, and men of name,
Yea Towns, or Nations, which maintain the same;
The Scripture's words they did acknowledge al,
Al used the same endeauours, which they call
The best approved way, and means most fit
To find the true sense of the ETERNAL'S Writ;
They al had skill in tongues, they al perused
And weighed the Text, they al (they thought) still used The assured means
assigned by Protestants to find out the undoubted truth by the infallible
interpretation of Scripture, is their reading thereof, their conference of
places, their weighing of the circumstances of the Text, their skill in the
tongues, their diligence, prayer, and such like. See D. Reynolds Confer. p. 83.
84. 92. 98. 99. and M. Whitaker de sacra Scrip. p. 521. 522. 523.

Due diligence, with prayer, and places hard
And doubtful speeches carefully compared:
Yet did they al in this and many more
Chief heads of Faith, which I have touched before, See before, XLI. throughout.

Dissent so far, as by a mutual style
In greatest heat each other to revile
With the name of Heretic; and still did grudge
To be opposed by any: Where Is the Judge? See XLII. throughout. Whereas some
may here dema^d of me, where I find that Husse is so severely censured by the
other three; I answer, that the doctrine of Transubstantiation, which Husse
maintained, is by the^ condemned in us Catholics for such; as likewise the
other Catholic opinions, which he is confessed to have believed, as seven
Sacraments ( Fox Act. Mon. p. 216.) the Pope's Primacie ( M. Jacob Def. of the
Chapter of Engl. p. 13. and Act. Mon. p. 2^7. 216. Luther Assert. art. 30.) yea and
the Mass itself, as Luther grants in colloq. Germ. cap. de Missa. See more
in M. Jacob, vbi supra.

XLVIII. Of the Cross, to Ananias.
SAY, Ananias, whence does it arise
That in this sort thou should the Cross Luther says, if he might recover
any parcel of the Cross, he would cast it into the darkest and rankest sink.
Luth. in Postilla Ecc. Wit. fol. 148. 6. and 149.. 2. Beza from his heart
detesteth the image of the Crucifixe. Beza in Colloq. Montispil. and in Ep. 8.
12. Puritans term the cross the mark of the beast, not to be tolerated in
Baptism by a timorous conscience. See the survey of Common Prayer page 100.
102. 103. and their short Treatise of the Cross in 8. Amsterd. 1604. page 21.
despise?
When those Divine Divines, those more then men,
Those saint-like Sages Austin, Nazianzen,
Ambrose, both Cyrils, Athanasius,
^oth Clements, Hierome, Epiphanius,
and all the rest of this grave learned troop
With reverence still before the Cross did stoop,
and in their actions to prevent al fear
Of Sathan's snares, the Cross chief place did bear.
By the mystery of this Cross the rude are catechized, the font of Baptism
consecrated; with the sign of the same Cross, by imposition of the hand, the
baptized receive the gifts of graces; with the character of the same cross
Cathedral Churches are dedicated, Altars consecrated, Sacraments with the
imposition of our Lords words accomplished Priests also and Levites by this
are promoted to holy Orders, and generally all the Ecclesiastical Sacraments are
by the virtue of this performed. Aug. ser. 19. de Sanctis Chrifost. hom. 55. in
Mat.
Then with the Cross the rude were catechized,
The font was blessed, the faithful al baptized,
Churches therewith they still did dedicate,
Altars, and Christ his body With this sign of the Cross the body of our Lord
Jesus Christ is consecrated. Aug. ser. 101. de tempore.
consecrate,
By the mystery of this Cross the rude are catechized, the font of Baptism
consecrated; with the sign of the same Cross, by imposition of the hand, the
baptized receive the gifts of graces; with the character of the same cross
Cathedral Churches are dedicated, Altars consecrated, Sacraments with the
imposition of our Lords words accomplished Priests also and Levites by this
are promoted to holy Orders, and generally all the Ecclesiastical Sacraments are
by the virtue of this performed. Aug. ser. 19. de Sanctis Chrifost. hom. 55. in
Mat.
The Priest received Orders, and in fine,
By power and virtue of this sacred sign
Al Sacraments (our bucklers against hel's might)
Performed were, without Which sign of the Cross, unless it be applied to the
forehead of them that believe, or to the water itself whereof they are
regenerated, or to the oil wherewith they are anointed, or to the sacrifice
wherewith they are fed, not any of them is rightly performed. Aug. trac. 118. in
Joan. ser. 19. de SS. etc.
it nothing right.
Let us not be ashamed to confess Christ crucified but let the sign of the
Cross be confidently imprinted with our finger in the forehead^, and in all
things else: Let there be made a Cross when we eat bread, when we drink, when
we go forth, when we come in, before sleep, when we lie down, and when we
rise; when we go and when we rest. Cyril Hierosol. Catech. 13. At the table,
when we see lights, in our chamber, when we sit, what conversation soever we be
busyed in, we still make the sign of the cross in our forehead. Tertul. de
Corona militis c. 3.
Before they went to sleep, when they awak't
Before they rose, when they their rest forsak't,
When they were dressed, before they took the air,
When they began to study; or prepare
To eat, or drink, or talk, or light to see,
Or what soever they did, immediately
They with the Cross^ against al future harm,
Then forehead, breasts, and other parts did arm.
When the soldier of Christ had thus said, he fortified himself with the sign
of the Cross, and with constancy of mind and undaunted countenance, without
changing color at al, he joyfully went to punishment. Basil. in magn. orat.
Gord. Mart.
Did ever Tyrant seek by threats or pain
TO enforce t^em from Christ's holy truth refrain?
Lest they perhaps unarmed should loose the field
Against threats and pain the Cross was still their shield.
By the sign of the Cross al magike is depressed, sorcery made of no effect
etc. Athanas. de Incarnat. Verbi.
Did any e're by magike art intend
To trouble them? The same Cross was their friend.
Making the sign of the Cross, he without any fear drunk the poison. Greg.
Mag. de Sabino Episcopo. Idem lib. 2. Dial. c. 3. where he writes that a
poisoned glass was broken by the sign of the Cross; as with a stone.
Did any to them, under fair pretense
Of love, give poison? The Cross was their defense
They ever he^d. Good Zealous, do not grudge
Here to admit now an impartial Judge,
Whether it is fitter I my self resign
To their so general judgment, or to thine?
What do the devils fear? What do they tremble at? Doubtless at the Cross of
Christ, in which they were subdued, in which etc. Fear therefore and trembling
will surprise them when they see the sign of the Cross faithfully fixed in us.
Orig. Hom. 6. in and Hom. 8. in diuersos Euangelij locos Cyrillus Hieros.
Catech. 13. Ephrem. ad Monachos paren. 2. Hieron. ad Psalm. 85.
They h^ld, I say, that Devils ever fear
Before the Ensign of the Cross t'appeare;
That Crosses can even with their very sight
A man using the sign of the Cross does drive away the deceits of the devil
etc. Athana. de Incarnatione Verbi and in vita Antonij
Detect their slights, and put them al to flight:
A certain man called Joseph, a Patriarch among the Jews, become a Christian,
did take a vessel of water before them al, and with a loud voice, imposing with
his own finger the sign of the Cross upon the vessel, and calling upon the
name of Jesus, said thus: In the name of Jesus of Nazareth, whom my forefathers
crucified, be there power in this water to confound enchantments and magike
etc. which done, all the enchantments were forthwith dissolved. Epiph. Her. 30.
cont. Ebionitas.
That crosses can to water power impart
Straight to dissolve the slights of devilish art,
The Bishop Donatus came not armed against the Dragon with sword, spear, or
dart, but made against him the Cross with his finger in the air, and spit in
his face. The Dragon no sooner received the spits into his mouth, but instantly
dyed. Sozomen. l. 7. c. 23. and Chrisost. hom. 55. in Mat.
That Crosses had wild beasts to mildnes brought
Of miracles wrought by the Cross read Theodoret. in vita S. Iuliani, and vita
S. Martiani, and in Philotheo cap. 9. Hieron. in vita Hilarionis, Tert. de
scorpiac. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 22. c. 8. Victor Vticens. de persecutione
Wand. lib. 2. Gregor. Mag. lib. 2. Dial. c. 3. Sulpicius in vita S. Martiani
with infinite more.
That Crosses diverse miracles had wrought:
How great a terror this sign of the Cross is to the devils, he may well
know, who has seen how, adjured by Christ, they fly forth of the bodies which
they had possessed: for as he with a word etc. so now his followers cast those
foul polluted spirits forth of men, both with the name of their Master, and
with the sign of his passion. Lactant. lib. 4. Instit. cap. 27.
That Crosses without doubt can d spossesse
The impression of the vital sign freeth us from carnal desires, and frames
our life to the imitation of God. Dionys. Areop. Eccl. Hierar.
That Crosses can our loose desires repress.
That such as ere to Crosses have recourse
What do thou think the devil will suffer, if he see thee hold that sword
wherewith Christ quaild his power? etc. Chrisost. hom. 55. in Mat.
Need not to dread the power of hellish force.
Be not thou therefore ashamed of so great a good, lest when Christ shall come in
his Majesty he be ashamed of thee: for then shall thou see this sign more
brig^t then the sun beams before Christ etc. Idem in hom. 55. in Mat.
They gave us counsel not to be ashamed
To use that Cross, wherewith hels pride was tam'ed,
Lest when that Christ shall in the fearful day
That glorious Ensign in the air display
He our disdain with death shall prosecute
And be ashamed to hear our shameless suit.
The Cross is become more famous then diadems or crowns; neither is there a
crown greater or ornament to the head, then is the Cross, which is more
worthy of al honor. Idem. ibidem.
They prized a Cross more highly far then gemmes
Then gold, then pearl, then Crowns, or diadems,
And thought the Cross which on the ground was worn,
More then the Crown which Princes heads adorn.
Theodorus and Valens added the cause of this their statute to be Ne sacrum
signum pedibus calcaretur, Lest the holy sign should be trodden underfoot. l.
1. Codi. tit. leg. cum fit nobis. We ought to bless our forehead and breast
with the Cross of our Lord, and we tread it under our feet. Paul. Diac. lib.
18. rerum Roman. It was a saying of the Emperor Tyberius 2.
So that the Emperors for reverence sake
Gave special charge none on the ground should make
The Cross, because they held it far unmeet,
That blessed sign should be defir'd with feet.
But it was then (though nowhere now at al)
Wherefore let us with gentle diligence ingraue the Cross in our cha^bers, in
the walls, in the windows, in our foreheads. Chrisost. Hom. 55. in Mat. And in
an other place he says: It is on the walls and tops of howses, in books, in
Cities, in towns inhabited and not inhabited. Quod Christus sit Deus. Ruffinus
Eccles. hist. lib. 2. c. 29.
First on each window, and on every wall.
The same Cross then the top of houses crowns
Adornes great Cities, graces country Towns;
Shines bright in holy Churches, no place free
From that deuotion-stirring mystery;
Which to confirm since scriptures were not found,
Of these (to wit the making the sign of the Cross in the forehead) and other
such like doctrine, if you expect authority from scripture you shall find none:
tradition shall be alleged to be the author, custom the confirmer, and faith
the obseruer. Tert. de corona militis cap. 3. the same says S. Basil de
Spiritu Sancto c. 27.
They thought Tradition a sufficient ground.
And yet thy, Brother, zeal does never doubt
At this so much respected sign to flout,
Others use to make the sign of the Cross upon them with their fingers, to
the end that by this sign they may be safe from the Devil etc. this is not
piey but magike Ioannes Brentius in Catechis. explicans symbolum Apostolorum.
And say that when the devil does depart
At sight thereof, it is by magike art:
Christ crucified is better represented by a Cow then a Crucifixe. Who belch
forth this blasphemy see in Beza Colloq. Mompelgar. page 406.
And (thou, good Reader, here auert a while
Thy face, lest that this clause thy eyes defile,
And thou, sweet Jesus, pardone the words I hate,
I but thy foes blasphemous words relate)
And that more truly then a cross, a Cow
Does to us al Christ crucified show.
Tell me be ey and nay (for unto thee
The spirit reueals al truth) how can it be
That such great men should walk so far astray
And only thou find out the near highway?
Perhaps they al were fools, thou only wise,
Thou to the blinded world a sun did rise,
To chase al misty shades thou wast elect,
As worthier far then they for to detect
Their faults, and best deseru'dst that unto thee
The spirit should show the truth. Yes verily.
FINIS.

