THE SOVLES HEAVENLY EXERCISE

Set down in diverse godly Meditations, both prose and verse, by Nicholas
Breton Gent.



Imprinted at London, for William Leake, 1601.

TO THE Right honorable William Rider, Lord Mayor of the city of London.
RIght Honorable, I have read, that newely after the Coronation of Alexander
the great, diverse of his subjects, as well of the Nobility, as meaner
condition, did present his greatness, with such gifts as their abilities
could purchase, to manifest the na ture of their love, or service: among all
which, a poor Mason, not so rich as cunning, in his Art; and yet as willing
as any, in some token of his service, to make some manifestation of his humble
love, brought into the Court a bag full of stones; but what they were, or how
they were wrought, was not known to any, neither would he let any man see
them, till he was brought unto the Emperor: where, upon a table, he laid
before him his own Image, but in so dead a color, as if he were to be laid
in his grave, with these words written upon his breaste, Talis eris. Diverse of
his Court, at the beholding thereof, began to frown at the poor Mason, that
he durst at such a time of pleasing triumphs, present his Majesty with a
picture of such melancholy: but the Emperor, taking by the inspiration of Gods
holy spirit, a gracious apprehension of the poor man's love, not only did
thankfully accept the present, which he caused to be set up in his own
chamber, ever after, as a continual glass for him evening and morning, and at
all hours to look upon, but after a bountiful reward, entertaining him for
his own Mason, used these words of him unto al those that did attend in his
presence: Here are many of ye, that I am beholding to, for many tokens of your
love and service, but chiefly unto this man: for some of ye have been sent
by your fathers, some, by your friends, some from your own spirits, with such
things as ye have presented: but this man neither from father, friend, nor
from himself; but only from God of heaven was sent unto me, not with a toy
to delight me, nor a Jewel to enrich me, but with a continual warning, not
to sink in the delight of vanity, nor to trust in the dross of this worldly
treasure, but in the greatest of my greatness, to humble my self, to him that
is greater than I, and who having made me great, can bring me to nothing at
all; and whatsoever, I am, or may be, does she we me what in the end I shall
be. Thus far of this history I have set down for my purpose. Your Lordship,
newly stepped up unto the state of Honor, I know shall be followed with many
friends, and gratified with many presents, which I know you will not receive
unthankfully: but among all, I beseech you not to refuse, at the hands of an
humble heart, the passionate meditations of a patient spirit: which, in the
Evening, and Morning, and at all hours, if your Lordshippe will vouchsafe at
your leisure to look upon, ye shall see, that whosoever has come to you, and
whatsoever is brought you, GOD that set me to work, has sent me unto you,
to present you with such a glass, as will show the great comfort of his
grace. By which I humbly beseech his eternal Majesty, to guide your
thoughts, words, and deeds, to his infinite glory, the contentment of her
Majesty, the increase of your own Honor, and the comfort of all that love
you: among whom, the least worthy to be named, I humbly rest

Your Honors, in all humbleness, N. B.

THE SOVLES EXERCISE.
A prayer for the Lord Mayor. In the Morning.
OH blessed, gracious, most merciful and glo rious good GOD, whose only eye of
mercy beholds all the dwellers upon ye earth, and out of the bounty of thine
only blessing, do elect thy creatures to thy service, my dear GOD, that
tookest Moses out of the water, to lead thy people through ye wilderness,
David from ye sheepefolde, to sway the scepter over thy people Israel, and
Joseph from the prison, to be governor over many people; and now out of mean
estate have advanced me, among many, thy most unworthy servant, under ye
scepter of my gracious Sovereign, to sway the sword of justice over this thy
blessed city, let not sweet Lord, this great blessing of thy goodness be lost
in my unthankfulness, but so inspire my heart and soul with ye grace of thy holy
spirit, yt by the rules of thy direction, I may discharge the care of my duty,
by thy mercy, and my soueraigns bou^ty committed unto me; yt thy name may be
glorified, her Majesty pleased, and thy people preserved. Blessed God, bless,
I beseech thee, all thy people of this cyty and land; but especially, thy
gracious and chosen servant, and our most gracious and Sovereign Queen,
Elizabeth: inspire her with the special grace of thy holy spirit, that in the
wisdom of thy will, she may direct the course of her happy days, and by the
mercy of her Justice, she may so carry the Scepter of her government, that thy
glory may be increased, her Majesty admired, and under thee, her people be
blessed. Bless oh GOD all her honorable Counsel, that they may unfeignedly
discharge the care of their duties, in the true honor of their places: Bless
the preachers of thy holy word, with the true knowledge and delivery of thy
holy word, and give them that inward care of thy holy will, that, by the
faithfulness of their loves unto thee, they may be lights of good life unto
thy people. Bless all the Magistrates, not only of this place, but
wheresoever, with a good and dutiful care of their charge committed unto them:
and give me, in the grace of thy holy spirit, that true feeling of thy
goodness, that in the sway of Justice, I may not swerve from thy law, but
with continual care of thy will, I may so discharge the duty of my service,
that in all my courses I may seek to glorify thy holy name, the contentment
of my gracious Sovereign, and the benefit of this, thine, and her city. Oh
gracious GOD, hold thy hand of mercy over it, destroy it not with Sodom and
Gomorrah, for the sins that reign in it: but like Niniue reform it, and in
thy mercy, preserve it: make many good governors over it, and thy people
obedient unto authority: oh gracious God, increase the happy days of our
gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, not as thou did Hezekiahs, with
fifteen years, but many fifteens: continue her faithful, and honorable
Counselors, this and all her cities and towns, discreet and careful
Magistrates, and every where, true loving and obedient subjects: preserve not
only this city, but the whole Realm, with yt gracious plenty and blessed peace,
wherein it now lives, and give me grace to my uttermost power, to labor for
the preservation of this place. Oh Lord let not this my advancement make me
unthankfully forget thee: but acknowledgeing thy goodness, be ever mindful
of thy mercy, neither let the pride of authority, the mass of treasure, nor
any worlds felicity, have power to draw me from thee, but that thankfully
accepting thy blessings, and carefully discharging ye duty of thy servant,
whenever it shall please thee to call me, I may willingly leave the world
for thy love: oh god hear me I humbly beseech thee, be thou a wall unto this
city, to defend it from foraine force, and bless it with that joyful peace,
that may continue the concord of thy people. Grant this oh God, and
whatsoever else thy glorious Majesty, in thy gracious mercy, shall think
needful for me; that after I have passed my pilgrimage in this vale of
misery, I may by the merit of thy mercy, obtain a place, in that true
Paradise, where, with thy Saints and Angels, in the train of thy beloved,
though the least in thy kingdom, in thy heavenly Jerusalem, I may be one of
thy blessed citizens, where in the joy of my soul, I may sing to thy glory.

Amen.
Another for the Evening.
OH gracious God, with most humble, tha^kfulnesse to thy holy glorious Majesty,
for thy heavenly preservation of me, this day, and all the days of my life, I
humbly beseech thee receive me with all the Magistrates and members of this
city, into the heavenly guard of thy holy grace, be thou a continual watch
over it, that none of thy people do perish in it: awake those that sleep in
their sins and take them again unto thy grace, confound the devises of the
wicked, that seek the destruction of thy people. Bless the labors of the
virtuous, preserve my gracious Sovereign, and withal her faithful
Counselors, and loving and obedient subjects, bless me and my house, make
us, and continue us, thy humble and faithful obedient servants, and in the
peace of thy mercy, receive us into the Almighty hand of thy holy
preservation; yt waking or sleeping, vprising, downelying, going forth and
coming in, being preserved by thine only goodness, we may glorify thy holy
name, thorough our only Lord, and Savior, Jesus Christ.

Amen.
O Almighty God, and heavenly father, from the hand of whose only bounty
flows the River of all comfort, and, in ye fou^tain of whose grace, is found
ye only water of life; D eternal God, father of all mercy, and God of all
glory, who knew me before I was, have made me that I am, and art not
ignorant what I shall be, in ye work of thine only will, to the only glory of
thy holy name; how shall I vile and wretched worm of this earth, and wicked,
sinful creature of this world, humble my self enough at the feet of thy
mercy, to offer up unto thy holy Majesty, with ye tears of my heart, the
sacrifice of my soul? Sweet Lord, I am foul, and polluted with iniquity,
and am therefore ashamed to come before thee: I have been a Rebel to thy
laws, and am therefore worthy to be banished from thy presence: Yea, I have so
delighted in sin, that I am afraid of thy judgment. Oh Lord, I am full of
fear, my sins are before me, my conscience does condemn me, and thy
Justice falls heavily upon me, and whither then shall I fly to help me? if
to heaven, I know the Angels will abhor me, if to the world, it will but
further infect me, and if to hell, it will but torment me. Is there then no
help for me? Yes sweet Lord: in judgment has Justice her grace, but in
mercy has Justice her glory: in ye glory therefore of thy mercy, I humbly
beseech thee look upon me: of nothing thou made me, and being worse then
nothing without thee, let me joy in nothing but thee: be thou the strength of
my heart against the enemies of my soul, and the life of my love in the joy of
my spirit; that, being defended by thy mighty arm, and preserved by thy bolie
spirit, in ye gladness of my heart, I may sing to thy glory.

Amen.
MOst merciful, and Almighty glorious everliving and euerlouing God, ye
comfort of thy sorrowful, the joy of thy faithful, and life of thy beloved,
hear, I humbly beseech thee, the humble prayers, of a penitent sinner, from
the high Throane of thy holy mercy, cast one good look of thy comfortable
pity, upon the wounded soul of thy unworthy servant. O dear Lord, thou
know my sins, and my sorrows are not hid from thee: what shall I do to be
rid of this foul evil? no Surgeon can lance it, Physic can cure it, nor
salve can heal it. Oh the wound of sin, that corrupts the heart, cankreth
the flesh, and eats into the very soul: is there no way to kill it? shall thy
servant live in it? and his life die in it? sweet Lord say no, for thou only
can say no: thou have conquered the author of it, thou have a remedy against
it, and can wholly consume it: sweet Christ therefore, that know my
hurt, and have my help, hear my cry, and send me comfort* in thine vnspeake
able good nesse look mercifully upon me, with one drop of thy dear blood,
wash me clean from my iniquities, with one spark of thy grace, enter into my
soul, and rebuke the wicked fiend that he follow me no more: save me out of
the ye claws of the serpent, keep from the assaults of the devil, and deliver
me from the malice of the wicked: Let me humbly seek thee, truly find thee,
faithfully love thee, and continually live to thee: make me hate the world
for thy love, and forsake my self to follow thee: dissolve me intoteares, to
fill the bottle of thy mercy, consume me into sighs to make a sacrifice to thy
glory, make me nothing my self to be wholly thy servant: do with me what thou will* so I may be to thy holy will, Let me die to sin, and live to grace,
that in ye true fruits of repentance, I may glorify thy holy name: and in the
joy of my soul, I may sing to thy glory.

Amen.
O most merciful and almighty God, Lord of all comfort, love, and life, in
whose holy sight is no ma^righteous, whose wrath no man is able to abide, and
whose power no man is able to resist: O glorious king, before the feet of
whose eternal majesty, the very Angels do tremble, the powers of Heaven do
shake, and the mountains are ready to melt, how shall this sinful and
wretched soul of mine, that with so many horrible sins has offended the
glory of thine unspeakable goodness, presume before the seat of thy sacred
pity, with the least hope of thy mercy. In my self is nothing but sin, and ini
quity, both hateful in thy sight: to my sin belongs nothing but horror and
confusion, by ye judgment of thy impartial justice: and how then can I look
for any thing in my self, but hell, and damnation! Dear god, I confess unto
thy divine Majesty, such is ye nature of my corruption, as gives me no other
expectation, whiles I look upon mine own desert: but when again, with the
humble eye of a penitent heart, I behold the bleeding wounds of the blessed
body of thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, and see in his merit a
present help for all my hurt, in his death, my life, and in his love, my
eternal consolation; how can I despair of one drop of comfort? where I see
a fountain of so much grace, as quenches ye thirst of all yt come unto it,
ioyeth ye hearts of all that taste of it, and reuiueth the souls of all that
drink of it: No, my dear Lord, in him alone, I humbly beseech thee, look
upon me, in his wounds let me hide me, till in his merit, thy mercy heal
me: I dare not speak to thee: let him only speak for me, behold his
goodness, and not my wickedness, look on him that has pleased thee, and for
his sake forget me that have offended thee: it is I that have deserved death
for my sins; but it is he that has dyed for the^; and since he has
satisfied thy justice, in him let me beg mercy: mercy good Lord, Lord of all
mercy be merciful unto me, in Christ his passion forgive me, in his love look
upon me, let his blood wash me clean from my sins, and his kindness be a
Mediator for my comfort* that, being by him redeemed to thy service, I may in
his love, live to thy glory, and in the comfort of thy holy spirit, in the
blessing of his merit, and joy of thy mercy, I may sing to thy holy Majesty,
the eternal Halleluiah.

Amen.
O Blessed Lord, father of all goodness and mercy, who see the very
thoughts of men, before they be effected, and know the world before it was
created; O incomprehensible GOD, whose unsearchable wisdom is unspeakable in
all goodness, who have made the heavens for thy beloved, and beholdest on
earth the tears of thy afflicted; who only can do all things at thy good
pleasure, and art plesed in nothing but goodness: sweet Lord yt have mercy over
al thy works and art the only worker of all mercy, who have commanded al to
come unto thee, hear all that cry unto thee, and helpest all that trust in
thee; dear god among the humble hearts of those penitent souls, that, with
the tears of true repentance, in the faith of thy sons merit, fly only to
thy sacred mercy, I most humbly beseech thee, vouchsafe thy gracious ear, to
ye grievous complainte of my tormented spirit: oh Lord, that have enlightened
my soul with the shining beams of thy grace, that has taken away the scales
from mine eyes, that would not let me see the heaven of thy holy love, have,
in the precious blood of thy dear beloved son Jesus, cleansed me from my
sins, and in the sweetenes of thy love given me a taste of thy self, have
reformed my soul to thy service, and anewe molded my mind to thy mercy,
sweet Lord I humbly beseech thee, let not all this good be lost in me, that
thou have done for me; give me not over to my self, that sin do not
overcome me, but keep me so under thy wings, that no wicked spirit may have
power over me. Thou know my temptations, oh deliver me from them: rebuke
those wicked spirits, that I may be rid of them, and confound their
illusions, that I be not deceived by them. O Lord consider my miseries, I am a
wretched sinner, dust and ashes, f^^ of nothing but corruption, weakness and
iniquity, and thou art a glorious God, spirit and life, creator of al comfort,
and only full of al power, goodness, and glory: sweet Lord therefore in thy pity
look upon me, make me strong in thee, yt am weak in my self, wise in thee, yt
am foolish in my self, and holy in thee, yt am wicked in my self; be merciful
unto me, and help me, plague the^ yt seek ye hurt of mysoule, and confound
them yt seek to draw me from thy love. From the love of this world, from the
delight of sin, and from the assaults of the devil, good Lord deliver me:
from presumptuous sins, and despair of thy mercy, sweet Jesus preserve me.
Hate me not for my sins, but pity me for thy self; oh save me, for I am
thy servant: behold the sorrows of my soul, I have roared for the very
disquiet of my heart; oh bless me with the peace of thy holy spirit, that I
may sing to the glory of thy mercy.

Amen.
O Blessed God, father of all power, mercy, and comfort, whose graces are
infinite, and whose glory is unspeakable: O God of all goodness, who can
not be but good, whose goodness is almighty, and whose power is full of mercy:
sweet Lord that see the misery of man, without the comfort of thy grace, the
weakness of man, without ye assistance of thy holy spirit, and the sorrow of
man, without the joy of thy love, let not the burden of sin, lie so heavy
upon the wounded conscience of thy wretched creature, that hearty prayers may
obtain no hearing, true repentance may gain no comfort, nor bitter tears move
any compassion; let not the wicked fiend so hau^t ye soul of a sinner, yt he
have no thought of thy grace: let not the cares of this world, ye fear of
death, the sorrow of sin, nor the suggestion of the devil drive him into
despair of thy mercy: look on him whom thou have made, hear him whom thou
have called, and save him whom thou have redeemed, heal the heart that is
wounded, and comfort the soul that is full of sorrow; in thy power fight for
me against the enemy that does assault my soul, in thy goodness cure me of
theill wherewith he has infected me, and in thy mercy defend me from the
temptations, wherewith he seeks to destroy me. Thou art my life, oh let me
live in thee: thou art my love, let me never be from thee: thou art my Lord,
let me live but to thee: thou art my God, oh let me ever be with thee: I have
sinned, and woe is me, but I am sorry, and well is me: for in the sorrow of
my sin, is my hope of thy mercy, and in the hope of thy mercy, is the joy
of my soul. Thou biddest me repent, and I shall have mercy, ask, and I
shall have, knock, and it shall be opened unto me: O my dear God, with the
deep sighs of unfeigned sorrow, and the true tears of my hearts repentance,
have I knocked at the gates of thy gracious mercy, begging an alms from ye
hand of thy blessed bounty, one crumme of comfort from the table of thy
mercy, one look of pity from the eye of thy love, one drop of thy blood
to cleanse me from my sins, one drop of thy grace to feed the lamp of my
love, and one look of thy love to make me live for ever. Sweet Jesus seem not
deaf to me, who hear all that cry unto thee, but open the gates of thy
mercy, and let in the soul of thy unworthy servant: that being ravished with
the joy of thy prese^cc, I may sing aloude, to thy glory.

Amen.
O Most merciful God, the fountain of all goodness, and glory of mercy,
who see ye joys of the soul, that is touched with the finger of thy love, and
know the sorrows of the heart, that languisheth in the grief of thy
displeasure: I humbly beseech thee have mercy upon the afflicted spirit of thy
poor unworthy creature: who sometime is ravished with the admiration of thy
goodness, but no sooner falls from the hand of thy mercy, but is ready
through the illusion of sin, to drown in the sea of iniquity; where, how
deep are the sorrows of the repentant, let thy servant Peter be a witness.
But, what is a plant, that has no earth to grow in? What is a fish that has
no water to swim in? what is the heart that has no love to live in? and what
is the soul, that has not thy spirit to joy in? Oh, when thy servant Peter
was ravished, in the sweetness of his joy, he forgot ye greatness of thy
goodness* when presuming of his own power, he remembered not the gift of thy
grace: who then said, he would die for thy love, but shortly after denied
thee, and thy love: in the feeling time of thy love, death was sweet to his
imagination, but in ye withdrawing time of thy mercy, life was sweet to his
corruption; in ye joyful time of thy love, he was like a plant yt flourished
by the river side, who, in the ground of thy grace did prosper with the deaw of
thy mercy: but no sooner fell from the blessing of thy holy spirit* but he was
like a blasted stock, yt loosing his sap was ready to be cut down, and cast
into ye ster: but sweet Lord, thou did tell him his folly, and correct him
for his fault: thou shewedst him his weak nesse, and thou gave him strength,
he loved thee, and thou knewst it; yet he forgot thee and thou saw it; but
how sweetly did thou deal with him? Thou did love him ever, and did leave
him but for a while. Thou keptst sap in ye root, that made the tree to
flourish, and to bring forth much fruit: yea to him, who had thrust himself
out of Paradise, thou gave the keys of heaven gates. How great then is thy
goodness? that forgiving offenses, wilt joy the heart with such gladness.
Sweet Christ, thou saw his sorrow with his sin, and setting the one
against the other, did cure him of both; his words were heinous in denying
of thee: but his tears were bitter that he shed for thee: when thy hand of
mercy wiping away yt one, would not let thee look on the other: Such was thy
regard of his love, as put his sins out of thy remembrance. O sweet Jesus,
is thy mercy closed up into so narrow a compass, that only Peter has the
benefit of thy blessing? No, my dear love, I know thou art almighty, all good,
and all glo rious: thy mercy is over all thy works* and I am one of them whom
thou have made: thou came to call sinners to repentance, and with confession
of mine unrighteousness, I cry unto thee for mercy: thine ears are open unto
all, and therefore I know thou will hear me, thine eyes behold all things,
and therefore I know, with my sins my sorrows are not hid from thee: thou art
good to all that trust in thee, and therefore my hope is only in thee: but
where Peter denied thee once, I have denied thee too often, and where he
repented in tears, I have continued in sins, he therefore obtained mercy, and I
have deserved punishment: but yet at what time soever a sinner repe^teth him of
his from the bottom of his heart, thou have promised, sweet Lord, that thou will put all his wickedness out of thy remembrance: thy promise is truth, and
thy truth can not fail, and therefore in the faith of thy truth, with the
tears of sorrow I fly to the comfort of thy mercy: I dare not boast of my
love, my soul has been so blotted with iniquity; but cry in the sorrow of
my sin, O lord think upon me in thy mercy, and though I be not Peter, yet
be thou Christ. I come not to him to be let in at thy gates, but cry unto thee
for the comfort of thy mercy, most humbly beseeching thee, to forgive me my
wickedness, and to inspire me with thy goodness; that if I slide, yet I may
not greatly fall, but in the feeling of thy mercy, I may lay down my life in
thy love, and in the comfort of such grace, give thee wholly ye glory: let no
cock crow at my denial of thee, but the Angels rejoice at my confession of
thee: yea let my soul be so ravished with the love of thee, that I may joy in
nothing but thee, and in the joyful joy of my soul, sing to thee, the only
true, due, and eternal Halleluiah.

Amen.
BLessed Lord, and Lord of al blessedness, father of all mercy, and God of all
goodness, who out of the abundance of thy heavenly store, do enrich the
souls of thy belooued servants, and suffer none to perish, that put their
trust in thy mercy, look I humbly beseech thee, upon the miserable need of
my distressed soul, which pining thoroughe the want of thy grace, cries unto
the glory of thy pity; Merciful Lord, be merciful unto me, the sorrows of
my heart are enlarged, oh bring thou me out of my troubles: many are the
sorrows, that I endure, but most in the cold feeling of thy comfort; for, when
I feign would seek after thee, the cares of this world, the corruption of the
flesh, and the illusions of the devil are ready to draw me from thee: in
thy word I have been unfaithful, for thy blessings unthankful, and if thy
service undutiful: if thou correct me, I am impatient, if thou forbear me, I
am ungracious, and in thou entreat me, I am unkind. Thus every way, woe is
me, I am so full of iniqnitie, that goodness has almost no place in me: sin
has taken such hold upon me, that despair has almost possessed me; but yet
sweet Lord, if thou but touch ye heart, all the body will have health, and if
it please thee to comfort the soul, how can the heart be agrieued* O dear
God, at thy rebuke the winds were down, the waves were calm, the ship was
safe, and thy disciples were joyful: at the touch of thy finger, the blind
received their sight, and at the sound of thy voice, a legion of devils ran
away. O Lord, all power is in thy will, and all glory is in thy mercy: in thy
glorious mercy therefore I humbly beseech thee look upon me, deliver me from
ye troubles that in the depth of sorrow seek the drowning of my soul, touch
the eyes of my heart with the finger of thy mercy, that beholding the glory
of thy goodness, it may humble it self to thy service, and drive from me all
those wicked Spirits, that do hourly torment me with temptations: O Lord
thou know my heart, and have seen my soul in adversities: thou have ever
been my comfort in my troubles; oh leave me not to the will of mine
adversaries. O dear God, thou have created me for thy self, and will thou
not know me in thy self* Thou have redeemed me by thy self, and will thou
put me from thy self? yea thou have comforted me with thy self, and will thou not take me to thy self? yes, my sweet Lord, though sin has wounded
me, thy mercy can heal me, and thy word does assure me, that thou will
have mercy upon me* thy blood is not so dry, but thou have one drop for my
comfort. Thou art the good sheepeheard* that wilt loose none of thy flock, and
thou art always with me, for thy right hand does uphold me: great are my
troubles, but thou can deliver me out of al: yea in the midst of my
calamities, thy rod and thy staff do comfort me: Sweet Lord, therefore
behold my confession, and accept my submission, forgive me my sins, and
comfort me with thy graces, strengthen my faith, and bless my belief in
thee: humble my soul in thy mercy, and let me not be undutiful in thy
service: make me thankful in the labor of my love, unto the mercy of thy
holy Majesty; give me patience in thy correction, repentance in thy
forbeara^ce, and true joy but in thy love: so being wholly wrought unto thee,
longing ever for thee, and ioying only in thee, I may most joyfully sing with
thy servant David; The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance. Go the world
to whom^e it will, my soul, joy thou only in the Lord, knowing that he has
given himself to the cross for thy comfort: him only love, him only serve,
and to him only give all glory, world without end.

Amen.
BE merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me, for man goes about to
devour me, he is daily fighting, and troubling me: so many are the occasions
of evil that draw me from thee, that I know not almost how to come to thee:
yet sweet Lord, though I am fearful of thy displeasure, I despair not of
thy mercy; for though thou awest thy children, yet do thou not terrify thy
servants, and whom once thou have chosen, they can never be forsaken: for thou
art the comfort of the afflicted, and the joy of thy sorrowful: and therefore
in the sorrow of my soul do I fly only to thee to thy mercy, for my
comfort: thou cleansest their eyes, yt would, and cannot see thee, thou openest
their ears, yt would and can not hear thee: yea, thou stre^gthenest their
faith yt co^fes their unbelief unto thee* O lord therefore of thy goodness,
clear my blindness, yt have wandered awry from ye way of thy* holy will, heal
me of my deafness, yt have too long harkened unto the follies of ye world,
and strengthen my belief, that has bin too weak in thy holy word: so shall
mine eyes be ever looking toward thee, mine ears shall be delighted with ye
hearing of thy voice, and my soul shall rejoice in the faith of thy mercy: yea
my heart shall love thee, and my lips shall praise thee: hear me therefore sweet
Lord and help me, have mercy upon me, and bring me out of my troubles, that
in the rest of thy mercy, I may sing to thy glory.

Amen.
MY God, my God, look upon me take not vengeance of my sins, but spare me
whom thou have redremed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with me
for ever: so many are ye sorrows that compass me in on every side, as
without the greater feeling of thy mercy, will confound ye hope of my comfort. O
sweet Lord, I go mourning all the day long, and all with fear of thy
displeasure, which I confess I have deserved, and therefore am justly punished;
but sweet father have mercy upon me, behold the tears of true repentance,
that in the bitterness of unfeigned sorrow, in the humility of my soul, cry
unto thy blessed patience for one drop of thy pity: loving father, look
upon me, and stroke me with the hand of thy comfort, whom thou have
stricken, with the rodd of thy correction: chide but be not angry, let not thy
wrath burn like fire, that art so glorious in thy mercy: turn thy face from
my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities out of thy remembrance, out of the
hell of my miseries, take me to the heaven of thy mercies: let me feel thy
loving kindness in the morning, that I may sing all day of thy goodness: woe
is me that ever I swarued from thee, and well only were it with me, if I
could ever be with thee: O God of all perfection have patience with my
corruption, O Lord of all goodness forgive me my wickedness, and O king of
all glory, comfort me with one cru^me of thy mercy: thou have created me in
thy power, redeemed me in thy love, and in thy holy spirit sanctified me;
and will thou now forsake me, that have done all this good for me* No, sweety
Lord, thou art wise, and know what is meet for me; though I know not what
is good for my self; but, sweet Lord, I humbly beseech thee, help mine
ignorance, and make me to know what is convenient for me, in thy holy will,
yt thou chastenest, whom thou love, and therefore I may take comfort in thy
correction: that scourges are but trials of thy love, where patience is a
blessing of thy mercy; while faith is never destitute of comfort, that is laid
up for ever in thy love: thus dear Lord I humbly beseech thee to deal with
thy unworthy servant, that if I be plagued with Job, I may have patience with
Job, if I have Paul's troubles, I may have Paul's faith, and Paul's love: so in
the feeling of my joys will my sorrows be forgotten, and in the joy of thy love
shall I rejoice for evermore: but, my dear Lord, Job was a just man, and
feared to offend thee, and I am a wicked wretch that have not feared to
displease thee: Paul was faithful thorough thy grace, and I am fearful
through my sin, and therefore their troubles turned to their joys, while my
punishments are continual torments: yet sweet Lord Jesus, I can not so forget
thee, but I must needs come to thee; and though ashamed to come before thee,
yet behind thee, to touch ye hemme of thy garment: I have been unfaithful,
oh help my unbelief, and in the sweetness of thy mercy, show the
greatness of thy glory: thou sauedst Peter from drowning in the sea, oh save
me from sinking into sin, thou sauedst Daniel in the Lions den, oh save me
from the mouths of my Lyonishe enemies, thou tookest Jonas out of the Whales
belly, oh take me out of the whale of this hellish world: thou sauest all that
trust in thee, oh save me that trust only but in thee: in thee sweet Lord,
the only life of my love, and whole joy of my heart* hear me therefore, I
beseech thee, and in thy mercy help me* among the number of thy elected, let
me be one of thy belooued, that in the train of thine Angels, though ye
least in thy kingdom, yet in the joy of my soul I may sing to thy glory.

Amen.
Eternal power of eternal peace, holy, and almighty glory of
incomprehensible Majesty, most merciful and only good God, who have made all
things by thy power, by thy mercy preseruest them, and by thy wisdom do
govern them, sweet Lord, dear life* living love, who have created all things
for man, and man only for thy service; who let nothing be idle that may
work to thy glory, and art thyselfe ever in working to the only glory of thy
goodness, who causest the winds to blow, the clouds to rain, and ye earth
to give her increase, and all for the service of man, and him only, above all
creatures thou have blessed with reason to judge betwixt good and evil, and
having government over all things on earth, to be governed only by thy most
gracious goodness; sweet Lord, that see the very senseless creatures all
in their natures, hold the due of their obedience, in their service to thy
glory, only man, to whom the mercy of thy holy Maiystie, has given a
spirit of higher blessing, wherewith to glorify thy holy goodness, and for that
thou have done for him, ask nothing, but to acknowledge thy bounty, and to
give thanks to thy glory yet see how this creature of thy love, framed
nearest to thine own image, in forgetfulness of thy grace, is become
unthankful to thy glory, gives ear to illusio^s breaks thy commandment, and
runs headlong to destruction, without the greater hold of thy mercy, yet in
that thou hate nothing yt thou have made, delightest not in the death of a
sinner, but art glorious in thy mercy, sweet Jesus, suffer not Satan, nor any
wicked spirit, so to govern in the world, as to draw thy people from thee:
but bless them with thy holy spirit, that they may know thee for (...) and
all the creatures therein power to give their increase, yea and themselves to
the service of man, give him power in the humility of his soul, and
thankfulness of heart, to give thy gracious Majesty, some fruits of thy
blessing, yea and with all that he has to give himself wholly to thy ser(...)
who was made only by thee and for thee. Let him not live in corruption, that
was framed in perfection; thou art his GOD, and he is thy creature, thou art
his father, make him thy child, thou art his Lord, keep him thy servant, thou
art his ever life, oh let him not die for ever: no creature on earth, that
lives only to it self, but all to thy glory, and shall only man live only
to himself, and so be unthankful to thy goodness? sweet Lord forbid,
hateful be that nature of iniquity, that draws man out of Paradise, and
throws him headlo^g into hell, fie on that accursed fiend, that so be
witcheth the soul with the delight of sin, and woe be to unhappy man that so
forgets ye godnes of his God: but yet sweet Jesus, my Lord, my master my
father, my king, and my God, look I humbly beseech thee, upon thy wretched
creature, thy unworthy servant, thy ungodly child, and thy rebellious
subject: in thy mercy look upon me, look upon myrepentance, not my
rebellions; my sorrows, not my sins; my tears, not mine iniquities: heal
my wounds, for they are corrupted, and wash me clean, for I am fowly infected:
keeps me from the in chaunting charms of all wicked spirits, and in the
wisdom of thy holy spirit, deliver me from the illusions of the wicked
fiende: make sin hateful unto my soul, and in the wisdom of thy grace,
make the whole joy of my life: oh let me love thee above my self, and hate my
self, but in thy love: let me not see the labor of all things, and thy
labor in all things, and my self idly do nothing, that may glorify thy
goodness: the earth gives me of her fruit, and shall I give thee no fruit?
thou have in heaven a place for me, and shall I not seek the way to thee? O
my dear GOD have mercy vvpon me, better had I never been borne, then to
live to be borne away from thee. What is the whole world to me, if I loose
mine own soul? and in what case is my soul, if I want the blessing of thy
grace? have mercy therefore upon me, I beseech thee, and preserve my soul,
for I am thy servant: make me to labor in the virtuous vineyard of thy holy
will^, and by the inspiration of thy holy spirit, bring forth of my heart the
humble fruits of thy holy love; that in profiting my neighbor, in the
blessing of thy grace, I may glorify thy holy Majesty, and in the joy of my
soul in the peace of thy mercy, I may sing to thy glory.

Amen.
O Glorious God of all power and pity, to whose only mercy belongs the
title of eternal Majesty, who by the wisdom of thine own will have framed all
things to thy service, and workest in them all to the glory of thine only
worthiness, O dear GOD, that art the true substance of comfort, to the humble
souls of thy beloved, and see the sorrows of thy humble seruautes, when
thou withdrawest thy hand of thy mercy; in the glorious goodness of thy
grace, I beseech thee, think on the number of thy afflicted creatures, among
whom, most needful, though most unworthy thy mercy, let this poor
wretched, wounded, and afflicted soul of mine beg one beam of thy blessed
pity, to revive this doleful, and half dead heart of my almost despairing
spirit; oh strengthen my faith in thy holy word, wash me clean from my
sins, and make me to feel the joy of thy mercy: let thy word be a
Lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths, and teach me the way that
I shall walk in, for I betake my self wholly unto thee: let me say with thy
servant David, O thar my ways were made so direct, that I might not offend my
God. O dear Lord, great was his happiness in thy grace, that had such a
feeling of thy blessing, to have such a loathing to the world, for thy love:
blessed, and ten times blessed were my soul, had it such a feeling of thy
grace: but I may rather cry, woe is me that ever I was borne, to live so long
in the sink of so much sin, that looking on the filth of my soul, I am
ashamed to look up toward thy mercy: yet when again I remember the Leapers
that thou have cleansed, the sins that thou have pardoned, and the souls that
thou have comforted, I can say to my self, oh my soul, why art thou so
disquieted within me? knowing the goodness of thy God: and then in the tears
of true repentance on the knees of my heart, in the humility of my soul cry
unto thee: O dear God, remember not the sins of my youth, forgive me all my
offenses, cleanse me from my iniquities, and take me again unto thy grace: O
Lord, let me feel a little of yt loving kindness, wherewith thou do glad the
heart of thy beloved, let me think with thy servant Paul, yt all the treasure of
this world is but trash, compared to the rich jewel of thy love: O sweet
Christ, so comfort me with thy self, yt in the gladness of thy goodness, I may
sing with thy servant Simeon, when he had the in his arms: Lord, now let
thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word, for mine eyes have
seen thy salvation. Blessed were his eyes yt so lived to behold thee, and
blessed were my soul, if it could so live to embrace thee: but my dear GOD,
since the corruption of sin will not suffer me in this world to behold
thee, I humbly beseech thee, mortify the delight of sin in me, that it may
have no power to draw me from thee, that when I have finished the days of
the imprisonment of my soul in this darkesome cave of this my wretched carkas
being freed from the hell of sin, by the merit of thy mercy, in the liberty
of my love, I may see the joy of my soul, and in the joy of thy gracious
goodness, I may sing, to thy glorious majesty, the only endless Halleluiah.

Amen.
O Glorious God, who from ye heavenly throne of thy holy mercy, beholdest all
the dwellers upon ye earth, and see the essence of every substance, which no
shadow can hide from thy sight, O God of al true wisdom and goodness, who
see the very hearts of all creatures, and know the thoughts of all ye
world, yea before the world was, in the abou^da^ce of thy mercy, cast one
look of thy gracious eye, upon the sorrowful soul of thy unworthy servant:
unworthy I confess my self to appear before thy presence, so hideous is the
horror of my sin in thy sight: yet when I know, that from corruption thou
can look for no perfection, and that mercy in justice shows the glory of
thy goodness, I had rather say with thy servant David, If my sins were as
red as scarlet, thou can make me as white as snow, then to cry out with Cain,
my sins are greater the^ I can bear: O my dear Lord thou have called al unto
thee that are laden, and thou will ease them: and to thee I come so laden with
sin in my soul, that I can scarce look up to thy mercy: hear me therefore
I humbly beseech thee, and in the greatness of thy mercy, ease me of this
heavy burden of my sin: O Lord, I confess to thee, I was conceived, and
borne in sin, and in transgressions of thy commandments, have I wasted the
weary days of my life: yet, sweet Lord, when I know, thy wisdom beholds
the weakness of my corruption, and thy mercy considers the sorrow of my
repentance, I am emboldened in thy word to come unto thee, and on the knees of
my heart to cry unto thee; O Lord have mercy upon me, behold the work of
thine own hands, lose not whom thou have redeemed, regenerate whom thou see
corrupted, heal him whom sin has wounded, and perform the grace that thou
have promised; that being cured of sin, and with thy grace comforted in the
love of my heart, and joy of my soul, I may sing to thy glory, the eternal
Halleluiah.

Amen.
THe lord he is my shepherd, that does feed
My soul full sweetly by the river side,
And will not let me nibble on a weed,
Where he does know there may my hurt abide.
He will not let the Wolf come near the fold,
Where he has laid His loving flock to rest,
Nor will he let them bide the bitter cold,
But sweetly warmes them from his sunny breast.
Along the pastures fair, and fresh, and green,
He leads them forth, for their best lives behoue,
Nor ever yet was there confusion seen*
Of any flock, that he does fairly love.
He does not rob them of a lock of wool,
But kindly calls them to their fairest fold,
Nor does he use the cunning how to cull
The fat from lean, nor young ones from the old*
But all alike he loves whom he does keep,
And if that any stray out of the plain,
Upon his shoulders he brings home that sheep,
And sings for joy to have his lamb again.
The winters worm, nor yet the summers fly
Can once anoy the smallest lamb of his:
But they shall still increase, and never die,
But ever live in everlasting bliss.
He gives them water from the living rock,
Where never yet did harmefull thought arrive:
Yea he so dearly loved his little flock,
That he did die, to save his sheep alive.
But shall (oh Lord) this sinful soul of mine,
So many ways with miseries oppressed,
Become a lamb of that fair flock of thine,
And feed with them when they are fairly blessed?
Then, when I hear my loving sheepeheard call,
My faithful soul unto her fairest fold,
I will forsake these worldly pleasures all,
And only joy my Jesus to behold.
FINIS.
THe fool has said within his heart,
He thinks there is no God.
But he shall find for his desert,
The Lord his heavy rod.
For when the Lord begins to frown,
But with an angry eye,
Then Satan's power shall all go down,
And all his dogs shall die.
And then the reprobate shall find
There is a God indeed,
Who at his pleasure with a wind,
Can shake the^ like a reed.
And by the roots can tear them up,
And fling the^ down again,
And make them taste the fiery cup
Of everlasting pain.
For though a while God lets them live,
And in their bravery bide,
Yet in the end his hand will give
A plague to all their pride:
Till when he lets them walk the path
Their wickedness has trod,
Until, by feeling of his wrath,
They know there is a God.
And then too late they howl and cry,
And gnash their teeth for grief
And ever live, and ever die,
And never have relief,
When they shall see before their face
The ougly shapes of sin,
That on the earth in every place,
They took their pleasurs in:
Where every devil shall have power
The damned to disease,
And not a minute of an hour
Shall give the^ hope of ease.
While in the heavens the chosen folk,
Without althought of strife,
Shall sit above the mountain rock
Of everlasting life.
And virgins, with the Angels sweet,
Shall sit, and play, and sing:
And mercy, grace, and truth shall meet
To glorify their king.
And my poor soul, that has no joy,
But in my living Lord,
Shall joy to see my God destroy
The scorners of his word.
O that my heart could hit upon a strain,
Would strike the music of my souls desire:
Or that my soul could find that sacred vain
That sets the consort of the Angels quire.
Or that that spirit or especial grace,
That cannot stoop beneath the state of heaven
Within my soul would take his settled place,
With Angels ens, to make his glory even.
Then should the name of my most gracious king,
And glorious god, in higher tunes be sounded
Of heavenly praise, then earth has power to sing:
Where earth and heaven and Angels are confounded,
And souls may sing while al hearts strings are broken.
His praise is more the^ can in praise be spoken.
IF I could set down twenty thousand ways,
And twenty thousand thousand, thousand more,
To pen his highest heavenly comforts praise,
That will not see my spirits ouerthowe:
If I could think of nothing else but glory,
And in the highest, highest, highest height,
To show the state of that celestial story,
Where Angels wonders in their honors wait:
If all the powers of heaven and earth would meet,
And all acknowledge all their powers too little,
To show the smallest of his smallest sweet,
Yet, to his title, All were but a title*
Then since no thoughts can to his praise be raised,
Above all praises Let my God be praised:
While the Angels all are singing,
All of glory ever springing,
In the ground of high heavens graces,
Where all virtues have their places,
Oh that my poor heart were near them,
With an humble soul to hear them.
Then should faith in loves submission,
Ioying but in mercy: blessing,
Where that sins are in remission,
Sing the joyful souls confessing
Of her comforts high commending,
All in glory never ending,
But ah wretched, sinful creature,
How should the corrupted nature
Of this wicked heart of mine
Think upon that love divine,
That does tune the Angels voice,
While the hoastes of heaven rejoice!
No, the song of deadly sorrow,
In the night, that has no morrow,
And their pains (not eased, not ended)
That have heavenly powers offended,
Are more fitting to the merit
Of my foul infected spirit.
Yet, while mercy is remoouing
All the sorrows of the loving,
How can faith be full of blindness,
To despair of mercies kindness,
While the hand of heaven is giving
Comfort, from the everliving?
No, my soul be no more sorry,
Look unto that life of glory
Which the grace of faith regards,
And the tears of love rewards:
Where the soul the comfort gets
That the Angels music sets.
There, when thou art well conducted,
And by heavenly grace instructed,
How the faithful thoughts to fashion
Of a ravished lovers passion,
Sing with Saints, to Angels nighest,
Halleluiah, in the highest.
OH that my heart could never cease to sing
The holy praises of my heavenly king:
And that my mind could think upon no bliss,
But of the grace wherein his glory is.
And that my tongue could talk of nothing else,
But of the wonders of his worthiness:
And that mine eye could see but where he dwells,
Who is the height of virtues holiness,
And that my tongue could like no other taste,
But of his flesh that is the spirits food:
And that my soul might swear a solemn fast
For one pure drop of his dear precious blood.
That at my song the Angels might rejoice,
To hear the music of a sinners voice.
Help, cries my heart, not from the hellish place
This wretched world nor all the wealth therein,
But from the God of that high heavenly grace
Whose only mercy does all glory win.
He, he alone, that sees the sinners tears
Distilling from a true repentant heart,
And will not let him perish in those fears,
That make the way to an infernal smart:
That only Lord, of only life and love,
Who does forbear, forgive and quite forget
All those misdeeds that his displeasure move,
While sorrows faith is fast by mercy set.
He, he alone, in spite of death and hell,
Bless my poor wounded soul, and all is well.
Emmanuell.
COme live with me, and be my love,
My love, my life, my King my God,
And let me now thy mercy prove,
That long have felt thy heavy rod.
Thy heavy rod, ah woe is me,
A rod of rushes, it is no more,
Who highly for offending thee,
Might have been shut from mercies door.
But thou art he, whose glorious eye
Beholdes the sorrow, not the sin
Of him who does for mercy cry
While tears of faith do favor win.
Thou do not wish a sinners death.
To live, and love is thy delight:
While in the blessing of thy breath,
Is ever day, and never night.
Oh thou more fair then fairness is,
More sweet, then sweetness can be thought,
More kind then lovers, when they kiss,
That with thy death, thy love have bought.
Oh truth of truth, and yet more true,
Then time can try, or tongue can tell,
Whose grace and glory still renew
In heavenly praise, in spite of hell.
Oh power of powers, above all power,
Oh constant faith for ever fast:
Oh only sweet without all sower,
Oh endless joys that eue^last.
In thee my love, and but in thee,
Do ever spring, that ever were,
And at thine only pleasure, be
To be disposed every where.
Oh, thou that werte, before what was,
In essence of all excellence,
And in thy wisdom do surpass
The reach of knowledge quintessence*
Who all of nothing did create,
But by thy word, and to thy will:
And so did order every state,
As shows thy high supernall skill:
Who, having all things set in frame,
Did show what love to man thou had,
To give him power each thing to name,
And make him Lord of all thou made.
And more then that, to show thy love,
Thou made him like unto thy self:
Till Jack an Apes of hell did prove
To make a Monkie breed an elf.
Oh God, had that sweet grace of thine,
In Adam, never been abused,
Our nature then, in him divine,
The devils apple had refused.
But ease begat such idleness,
And idle ease such wantonness,
And wantonness such wickedness,
As wrought in him our wretchedness.
He did forget thy goodness first,
We follow him, and fly from thee:
He for his folly was accursed,
And so (in justice) Lord are we.
But he with shame beheld his sin,
And flewe to mercy for relief:
Whose woeful state all we are in,
That to thy mercy show our grief.
He stuck unto rock of strength,
That after labor gave him ease:
And we in love do hope at length
That sorrows tears will wrath appease.
Oh God, thou know that only know
What knowledge is, and what to know,
And by thy mercy only showest,
What only pleases the to show,
That as of dust, we came at furst,
Unto the dust we shall again:
The belly of the world shall burst,
When sin, and sorrow shall be slain.
A time will be when that all time
Shall see his longest thread will break:
When gracious love, in praises prime,
Shall only of thy glory speak:
When graves shall open and bodies rise,
And hell shall shake, and fiendes shall roar,
And souls ascend unto the skies,
To sing thy glory evermore.
And oh, that that sweet time were come,
That Saints and Angels might accord,
While earth and hell are stricken dumb,
To sing thine only glory, Lord.
For here, alas, While here we live,
Or rather die by hurt of sin,
The pleasures that The world does give,
Do but the way to hell begin:
Where, by abundance grows excess,
And so forgetfulness of grace,
Or else by want, so great distress,
As brings the soul in desperate case.
Which, while the heart tormented stands,
In helpelesse cares calamity,
Held all too hard in sorrows hands,
Does long to be at liberty:
That by the blessing of thy grace,
Delivered from this earthly hell,
It may behold thy blessed face:
Where all contentments ever dwell.
For truly love in only thee,
Does live all comfort, joy and bliss,
And where thou art not, what can be,
But shows what shame and sorrow is?
And since in thee, does only live
The ground of the eternal good,
And thou alone can only give
The faithful soul her heavenly food:
Vouchsafe me leave to thee to cry,
Oh let my tears thy mercy move,
Who for thy love, would gladly die:
Come live with me, and be my love.
But I am vile, and foul, and black,
Unworthy object for thine eyes,
Yea worthy to be beaten back,
Even from the blessing of the skies.
But thou can make me white as snow,
By one pure drop of thy dear son:
And being purified so,
Thou will forget what I have done.
Had I a heaven to entertain
Thy holy presence, it were thine:
But thou a king, and I a swain,
Take pity on this love of mine.
Thy greatness was in goodness such,
As did the poorest love embrace:
And is not thy word true in tutch,
That humble love gets heavenly grace*
Wherefore on knees of humble heart,
Let me thy gracious mercy move,
Put all my sinful shame apart,
And live with me and be my love.
For thou art wise, though I am fond,
And thou can make me wise in thee,
And thou art free, though I am bond,
And thou alone can make me free.
Thou art all good, and I so ill,
I know not how to come to thee:
But work me wholly to thy will,
Then be my love, and live with me*
IN sorrows deep, my spirit all appalde,
Seeing the world, an only sink of sin,
Unto the Lord of heaven for mercy called,
And in her tears, did thus her suit begin:
If ever, Lord, a poor repentant wretch,
Whose bleeding heart can hardly speak for grief,
But from his soul those sobbing sighs does fetch,
That may in silence, sue for thy relief.
My gracious Lord and everlasting God,
In pity look a little on my pain,
Behold my faith, forbe are thy heavy rod,
And let thy mercy heal my soul again.
I must confess I have offended sore
That gracious will, and glorious love of thine,
I see my sins are evermore before
This wretched soul, and wicked eyes of mine.
Nor day nor night my spirit takes rest,
For fear of thy too much deserved displeasure:
Such bitter sorrows boil within my breast,
As prove my torments have no little measure.
But Lord that see, how I am woe begone me,
The deadly hurt, wherein my heart does dwell,
In thy sweet mercy once but look upon me:
Say but thou art my help and I am well.
WHen that I felt my soul with sorrow soke^,
My woeful mind with miseries oppressed,
My pining heart with bitter passions broken,
And every way my spirit all distressed,
Upon my knees unto my God I went,
And in my tears I told him of my grief,
And with a heart almost in pieces rent,
Repentance sued to pity for relief:
When to his ears, my prayers did ascend
And from his holy hill his mercy heard me,
And to my soul such comfort did descend
That I did see, that mercy did regard me,
For I did find how hope bad fear depart:
My hearty sorrow had obtained grace,
And I did feel such comfort in my heart,
That sudden joy, was set in sorrows place.
When, God he knows, that with no little joy
My soul was ravished with his sacred love,
That bad my heart abandon all annoy,
I should in heaven a sweter comfort prove.
Oh God, sweet God, more sweet then can be thought,
When hope is least, that gives thy comfort most,
Whose mercy has so with thy justice wrought,
As will not see thy faithful servants lost:
Among thy Saints, and Angels that does it,
About thy throne to glorify thy name,
Vouchsafe me grace to say Amen to it,
Although unworthy once to hear the same.
FINIS.

