GRIMELLOS Fortunes, With his Entertainment in his travail.

A discourse full of pleasure.



LONDON, Printed for E. White, and are to be sold at his Shop near the
little North door of S. Paul's* Church at the Sign of the Gun. 1604

To the Reader.
GRimellos Fortunes were more then were spoken of, and such as are, you may
easily consider of: Who runs many courses, is some-time out of the way, and
so was he, and every man cannot thrive, no more did he: yet his will was good,
so may be yours: But his Fortune was so so, so may be yours. But what became of
him in the end, is not spoken: and what you mean to do, I cannot Judge. Him I
had little acquaintance with, and you less: only his name I have read, but
yours I know not, that I have heard of: Of him I hear no evil, nor wish to
hear any of you: Him I find witty, and you I hope to find wise; if not, I
shall be sorry for your wit, as mine own Fortune, to let my labors fall
into your hands. But I will think the best, and so in the best thought I rest
in hope of your patience.

Your friend, B. N.

Faxit Deus
THE ENTERTAINMENT OF Grimello, by Signior Ganuzido, as he ouer-tooke him on
the way.
Grimello. Ganuzido. Gri. YOu are well over taken Sir.


Began. What? are you so sure of it?


Gri. Sure, of what sir?


Began. Why, my Purse.


Gri. Your Purse? no sir, it was the least part of my thought.


Began. Why, what have you taken then? or have you authority to take fools as
you find them in your way? If you have, you may happen yet to be deceived.


Gri. Why sir, I set no springs for Woodcocks, and though I be no great wise
man, yet I can do something else, then shoe the Boose for my living: and
therefore, I pray you neither fear your Purse, nor play too much with my
folly. But if you can find in your heart to do good for him that cannot deserve
it, and will trust a stranger, with as much as you dare loose, it may be I
should tell you a longer tale then you would believe, or else find you kinder
then I can look for.


Began. Why? say I were as I may be (for ought you know) an honest man, and of
ability to do for you more then I mean to prate of, if I like of your talk,
and your behavior, what would you say to me?


Gri. I could say somewhat unto you, but that my heart is full.


Began. Of what?


Gri. Sorrows.


Began. For what?


Gri. Oh sir, it were a world to tell you the discourse of the causes of them.


Ga. Well then, by the way, let me ask you a question or two.


Gri. As many as please you.


Ga. Then first, tell me whence came you?


Gri. From Terra Florida, and am going to Isola Brata.


Ga. Oh, I understand a little Latin, and if I be not much mistaken, you came
from the flourishing Land, and are travailing toward the blessed Island.


Gri. Uery true sir.


Began. Then figuratively, you came from the Alehouse, and are going to the
Tavern.


Gri. Oh sir, you make too hard a construction of my disposition: for, though a
cup of good Ale be comfortable in the morning, and a draught of old Sack,
warm the heart to bed-ward: yet for my self, I hold a moderate diet the
holsomest Physic, and for those kind of houses, they are but for necessity:
and therefore I pray you sir, be better conceived of my condition.


Began. Well then, let me ask you, how you made your walk hither?


Gri. In briefe-sir, not knowing your business, in admitting your leisure, or
requiring more haste, and so fearing by teadiousnes, to be some trouble to your
patience, with your good favor sir, thus it is. After that I had past the
great Mountain of mishaps, I fell into a long veil of misery, in which I
have wandered to the foot of this hill of hope, on which I have not been a
little comforted, since I came into your presence.


Began. Come, you are so fine, but will you not be angry, if I tell you my
mind, touching your figures?


Gri. Not for my life sir.


Began. Then it may be, you were going up Holbourne-Hill, and so afterward to
Tiburne: From whence, having escaped more by good fortune, then desert, you
have gone a begging ever since: and having learned your terms of art, either
at School, (which you have not forgotten, to put to an ill use) or among such
as your self, that with Eloquence, think to cosen simplicity of a little
coin, you would draw a hand of me: but you are deceived in me, or it may be,
that I am deceived in you, and therefore I pray you tell me what you are, your
profession and purpose? it may be for your good: for your hurt believe me it
shall not be.


Gri. Sir, to tell you what I am, you know what al men are, and so am I: Dust
and Ashes and worms meat, my profession honesty: which, if the heavens will
favor, I care for no fortune.


Ga. Well said, but how do you profess honesty?


Gri. I protest.


Began. What, do you only protest honesty? Why then, your profession is but a
protestation, as thus: You protest it a thing necessary in a common wealth,
but more commendable then commodious for many men to deal withal.


Gri. Oh no sir, no such matter: I know there is no true commodity without it,
and for my self, in all the courses that I have yet run, I have had so great
a care of it, and so great a love to it, that I have had rather have lost all
that I had in the world, and my self last of all, then have lived without it:
and without boast be it spoken, I now have it about me, and carry it easily
without any weight or trouble.


Ga. And where, I pray you?


Gri. Truly sir, in my heart, Where I hope it is too fast, for ever getting
out, while I live.


Began. Well then, if I must needs (as I have yet no reason to the contrary)
believe what you say. Let me hear a little of your courses, and of your
honesty in them.


Gri. I will tell you Sir first: After I had past out Crosse-rowe, speld, and
put together, read without a Festraw, had my Grammar Rules without book, and
was gone from School to the Uniuersities, there beginning in Philosophy, by
Gods grace to judge betwixt good and evil: and what honor was in honesty,
and what shame in the contrary: I rather noted then loved the fallacies in
arguments: and governing nature with reason, I was called the honest Scholar:
For I never used Rhetoric to persuade wickedness, nor Poetrye in wantonness,
nor Divinity in pride, nor law in Covetousness, nor Physic in malice, nor
Musicque in beggary: but held learning so honorable in all studies, that I
avoided all that I might any way disgrace her.


Ga. And there-with-all you wakte.


Gri. Why Sir?


Began. Why, I cannot see how being awake, you could do so: Temptations,
Illusions, and suggestions (and I know not what such other tricks) would have
put you so out of your By-ace, that you would some time have lost the cast, had
you bowled never so well. But let me hear you a little speak of your honesty
in all your points of learning.


Gri. Why, I tell you, I made no love to wenches, I did cosen no simple trust
with untruth: I fed my flock, undid no Clyent poisoned no patient, nor
followed a Fayrie with a blind Fiddle: but won the wilful with good words,
to a good way: made verses in the only honor of virtue: was true to my
friends, followed my Clyents case to his content, Preached every week in my
Parish Church: Cured soundly my Patients, and made content my best Music.


Ga. And yet could not thrive with all this?


Gri. Oh no.


Began. The reason?


Gri. I will tell you, words had no weight without money, and I was poor, and
the rich were covetous: therefore my good words only did good, to good
minds, that benefited not a little by my labors; but my gain was only a good
name: so that most my enemy which would say, I was a fool, would say, that I
was an honest man. My Poetry belyed no man's villainy, nor laid open his shame,
but reprehended vice privately, and touched no man's name in infamy. My Clyents
would pray for my life, for my true pleading: and my Parish all loved me,
because I was contented with what they gave me: my patients commended my
medicines, and my Musicque was pleasing, because it was not common.


Began. Well, then sir, your Rhetoric was gracious, your Potrye divine, your
divinity, pure, your Law Justice, your Physic learned, and your Music
Harmonious: and yet with all these you could not thrive.


Gr. No, For I could not flatter nor feign, nor be idle, nor sell breath, nor
bear malice, nor abide beggary.


Began. Well said, I like you well for this: but let me go a little farther on
with you out of booke-matters. What other courses have you past with this same
honesty?


Gri. Truly Sir, after that I had left my hard study, I became a Courtier.


Began. Yea marry Sir, now you come to me: let me hear a little of that point
with you.


Gri. I will tell you Sir, my place being not great there, I can tell you of no
great matters, but thus far without offense. I loved no Painting on my face, no
superfluity in my diet nor excess in my apparel, nor to creep to a Thorn
nor to flatter a fool, nor converse with a Muchauilion, nor to make idle love,
nor to scoff at virtue, nor to quarrel for trifles, nor to tell lies, nor to
importune friends, nor to delay suitors: but in all points of courtesy, so
linked honesty with modesty, that, being faithful to my God, loyal to my
Soueraign, careful of my self and kind unto my friend: my heart was all day
in a good harbor, and at night, my Conscience made me sleep quietly.


Began. All this I like well, and the rather, for that your estate answers (at
this time) to the condition of simplicity: but on a little further for I greatly
care not to talk too much of Court-courses: and yet I pray you tell me the
cause why you had such a care of your honesty in all your Court-time? But
first, let me ask you, why you would not paint your face as many do?


Gri. Because I would not offend God with setting an other color on my face,
then Nature by his grace had given me.


Began. Well said, but why did you forbear superfluity in your diet?


Gri. For that, with gluttony and drunkenness, I would not please the devil.


Began. Uery good now why do you mislike excess in apparel?


Gri. Because the wise that saw my fashions should not laugh at me for my folly.


Began. A good care: but why would you not creep to a Thistle?


Gri. For fear of pricking my knees, and making an idol of idleness.


Began. And why do you hate to flatter a fool?


Gri. Because I fret at my misery, to tie my patience to ignorance, and I
would shun the infection of a thirsting spirit.


Ga. Well said, but why would you not converse with a Machauilion?


Gri. For fear of a villain.


Began. Why would you not make love?


Gri. Because of the fashion.


Began. How so?


Gri. Why, it is unfit to the body, or the mind, or state, or common, or
foolish, or an idle thing or an other about it, so that I was loath to loose
time, about the trial of it.


Ga. Good, but why durst you not scoff at virtue?


Gri. For fear to be hateful both to God and man.


Ga. A gracious conceit: Now why did you mislike of quarrels?


Gri. Because they are enemies to peace, dangers of death, and disquietnes of
the senses.


Ga. Uery good: now why did you hate lying?


Grin. Because of the devil is the author of it, no honest man but abhorres it:
no Christian but may be ashamed of it: Few or none but the wicked love it:
Furthermore, when I tell true, I shall not be believed.


Began. You say well: Now, why would you not importune friends?


Gri. For fear to weary them, and so to loose them.


Began. Why would you not delaie Suitors?


Gri. Because I would not abuse their trust, nor be pitiless of their misery.


Began. All this I like well: but for that I like not too much to talk of
Court-courses, I pray you tell me of your next course, and honesty in it.


Gri. Uery willingly. The next was Arms: I left the Court and followed the
field, sought by danger to win Honor: and when by deserts of service, I had
gotten to the charge of Government: I did not abuse my credit, with either
foolish hardines, or base Cowardice.


Began. What was your reason?


Gri. For fear, by the First, to loose either mine honor, or my people: By the
other, to loose my credit unrecoverable.


Began. Well said. Now to your next point.


Gri. I would not deceive my soldier of his pay, nor make a melch-Cow of a man.


Began. And why? profit goes beyond Conscience in many considerations.


Gri. Yea, with such as think of no other world but this: but I have no part
in their play, for honor admitts no Avarice, and it is an unchristian humor, to
make money of men.


Began. Well said, and what was your next care?


Gri. Not to forget mercy in Justice, not to favor the vicious, nor to pardon
the obstinate.


Began. And why?


Gri. Because as Justice is the grace of Judgment, so is mercy the glory of
Justice.


Began. Why would you not favor the vicious?


Gri. Because they are the enemies of God, and the spoil of men.


Began. You say true, but last of all, wherefore would you not pardon the
obstinate?


Gri. For fear of infecting of other, and growing into a greater mischief, if
he escape unpunished.


Ga. A good consideration, for in time of war, one mutinous villain may
mar a whole Camp: these indeed were honest cares in you: but it seems,
fortune was not always your friend, or else she would have furnished you
better for your preferment: But I see, you have learned patience, which is a
great virtue in all men, and in all courses. It seems you had no pleasure in
fyring of Cities, in bloody massacres, nor in robbing of Churches.


Gri. Oh no, for God never prospers the blood-thirstie, the merciless, nor
the ungracious: and indeed, I must say what I know, that a true Soldier, is
neither Thief, Murderer, nor unmerciful.


Began. I am of your mind in this: But not to trouble you too much with
enquiring after your courses in the wars: let me a little ask you of the
next course, and as you said, of your honesty in it.


Gri. Uery willingly. The next course I took was this: finding my body, not
answerable to my mind, and the gains of my adventures no greater then would
defraie the charges of my necessary expenses: I left the field, and took me
to my chamber, where resolved to betake my self wholly to my book: I fell
soundly to the study of the law: in which, when I had so profited, that I was
able to plead a case, and judge betwixt right and wrong. I had that care of my
conscience, that, of poor men I would take no money, and of the rich, I would
not be bribed: And finding by some small ordinary fees, I could hardly pay for
my books, my chamber, and my apparel, and my outside being far unfit for
the comelines of that profession: I was enforced to leave that course, to a
conscience of an other kind: and seeing the misery of Clients, the quiddities
in Cases, and the long delayings in Courts: I left the Law, sold my books, and
my chamber, and keeping only a Night-gowne to keep me warm in a cold winter.
I got me into the Country, there intending to play the good husband: where,
having taken the lease of a pretty farm, I hoped to make much of a little.


Gri. Well said, but let me ask you, why you would not take money of poor men
for counsel?


Gri. Because their misery should not curse my Covetousness: for though
therich would wrong them, I would not wring them.


Ga. And well said, a sign of a good mind: But why would you receive no
bribes of the rich?


Gri. Because I would not sell breath for money; and I had more care of my
Conscience, then their Coin.


Ga. Well spoken, a sign of a gracious spirit. And since a good Conscience, is
better then a golden Castle, you did better to seek a quiet life with a mean
gain, then to charge your Conscience with a heap of treasure. But since the
study of the Law is both tedious and costly, I hold a good Pleader worthy his
Foe, and a reverent Judge worthy his Honor, without whose great care and
travail, the Common wealth would hardly be kept in good order: And therefore I
will leave further to talk of your Law-courses, and entreat you to tell me how
you fared with the farm?


Gri. Oh very well: as long as my Purse was my friend, I had Horses, Bullocks,
Cowes, Sheep and Corn, and company enough to help me to spend more then I
got: yet would I not mingle the fusty, ouer-growne corn, with the sweet and
good. I would not sell an old sheep for a Lamb, nor an old Cow for a young
Heiffor I would not forestall any markets, take any house over a Tennants head:
sell rotten Trees for good timber, raise the price of grain nor of Cattle,
nor defraud the labourer of his hyre: But when my Cattle dyed, my fruit was
blasted, and my Purse grew so bare, that great rents would not be paid with
fair words: two or three years brought me so down the wind, that I could
never look up more to the welkin: and so in brief, selling all that I had,
having no charge of wife, nor children, I took that little that remained after
the discharge of my debts, and going into some strange place where I was not
known, I meant to seek my fortune, in the service of some such Noble or
honest Gentleman, as would in his discretion, regard the care of my duty.


Ga. Why, have you ever served?


Gri. Yes a while, but I have observed the carriage of diverse, and not the
worst wits in their places that have served: which, if it were my hap to come
into, I would utterly avoid.


Ga. I pray you tell me some of your notes, for by your judgment in that you
have rehearsed, I can believe nothing in you to be idle.


Gri. I thank you Sir, for your good opinion of me, but howsoever I prove, I
will satisfy your request. When I came into a house where I saw diversity of
servants, and every one make a gain in his place: I began to cast mine eyes
about me, when I might see one carry a ring in his mouth, and it made not his
teeth bleed. I heard an other claw a back, as though he would leave no flesh on
the bones: an other play so on both hands, as if he had put down a cunning
Iugler: an other playing at Bo-peepe, with the eyes of his mistress: an other
following Judas, in betraying his master, and yet not one of these but made a
gain of his villainy.


Ga. As how I pray you? if at least you can tell me, and first for the
King-carrier?


Gri. Why, when no man would challenge the Stone, he should have the gold for
his labor.


Ga. Well couched; Now, for the next: to the Claw-backe, what got he by his
trade?


Gri. Somewhat more then a Lowse, when he met with a suit of Satin.


Began. Well said, now to the third: the Ambodxeter, he that plays an both
hands?


Gri. Sir, Jack of both sides, got a cloak of his master, and a shirt of his
mistres, when he did fit her humor, and serve his turn.


Began. Well hit, but, to the fourth now: Wagge-wanton with his mistress.


Gri. Oh, he gate his masters love through her commendation, and her comfort
through his own diligence.


Ga. A necessary servant, it is a sign he was not idle, when he was so well
occupied.


Gri. Exercised, you would have said, Sir I think at least.


Ga. Oh you say well: but nothing is ill-spoken that is not ill-taken. But,
now to the last, the Judas, what gained he?


Gri. That, which of all I pray God keep me from.


Ga. Why man, what was it?


Gri. Why Sir, the Gallows, if not hell. But it is a shrewde presumption: for
Treason is surely the very high-waie to hell.


Ga. Well said: then if thou were well entertained, with a good master, thou
would neither carry a ring, clawe a back, play on both hands, be no
wagge-wanton, with thy mistress, nor Judas with thy master?


Gri. No indeed Sir, I would be none of these.


Ga. What would you then do, or can you do, if upon my good liking, of your
behavior, I should procure your preferment?


Gri. Sir, I can do many things, more the^ I mean to boast of, and when I know
of what title, either for honor or honesty, my master or mistres may be, I
will then tell you, how I can fit my service to their contentment.


Ga. Well then, say he were a young Lord, and I would prefer you to attend
him in his chamber.


Gri. I would never be without a brush for his apparel: I would see his
chamber neatly kept, his bed soft and finely made, his linen clean washed,
and his chestes fast locked: I would be humble in my behavior, and civil in
my demeanor, go discreetly on a message, bring him word of his mistress
health, and his Cosins good rest: and what time of the day it is, etc.


Ga. Well put off, but say it were a fine Gentlewoman, that I would put you to?


Gri, Oh, I would be full of curtesse, hold her Glass stedie, bring her
painting unseen, and her Perriwig vncrushed: Have her taylour at a beck,
run quickly for her errand, now and then tell her a merry tale: and once in
favor, never loose it again I warrant you.


Ga. But will you not commend her favorite.


Gri. No, I hate that vile baseness, or rather, base villainy, to make my tongue
an enemy to my heart: I would rather leave her to seek a servant, then I would
be found in such a service.


Ga. Well said: but say that it were to a meaner person, I should put thee, I
cannot say, prefer thee to: as for example: Let me say it be some honest man
of trade or traffic, or so forth; how could you behave your self, that I
might hope of your credit?


Gri. Why Sir, I would keep his book of account, cast up by his reckoning^
once in four and twenty hours, look well unto his shop, learn the price of
his wares, ask what lack you of passers bye, use his Chap-men kindly, and
every one with courtesy: so that I would get more with good words, then some
other should do with good ware. In brief, I would be an honest man, and that
is worth all.


Began. Good all that I yet hear: and if there be no worse matter in you, then I
have yet heard from you, nor hope to find in you, I do not greatly care, if
your case be desperate, that for lack of entertainment, to save the charge of
an empty purse, you would venture upon a bad master rather then none, i will try
a little what you can do about my house: Base actions, as filling the
Dung-cart, going to plough, keeping of hogs, or washing of buckes, sweeping the
houses, or making clean shoes: these offices, I have in my house; Boys and
Girls enough, fit for the purpose. But to ouer-see my family, to instruct my
children, to be Steward of my courts, keeper of my Park, ranger of my Forest,
and now and then to wait on my wife: one of these offices, if any be void, I
care not if I place thee in, so that in thy good carriage, thou do not
deceive my expectation?


Gri.. Sir, not to trouble you with idle ceremonies, try me, and trust me:
either you or your Lady.


Ga. You say well: but by the way, because it is above three miles to my
house, and good talk passes the time well away, Let me entreat you to tell
me somewhat of your Fortunes in your cross courses; if, at least, they be
not such, as you will in modesty conceal, or are not willing to call in
memory.


Gri. No Sir, I fear not to satisfy your desire, either in respect of my
folly or my fortune. For the first is excusable in youth, and the other is her
self in all ages: and therefore let me tell you, thus it was: In my young and
little better then childish years, my father having put me to school, to a
more furious then wise Schoolmasters, who by the help of his Usher (a better
scholar then himself,) brought up a few good wits, to better understanding
then his own: I having learned to spell and put together, to Construe, and
Parce, to write my letters and to join, and to make my mistress Pistles, when
my master was from home: It fell out I know not how, that he, being a man very
vigilant in all his courses; and seeing my mistress beauty able to make a
good Scholar forget his lesson, imagining by his study in Astronomy, that
the sign of his Fortune, stood too straight upon Capricorn, meaning to cross
the fates in their powers, found a means to remove all his Boorders from his
house, in regard of a Meigrum in his head, which was much troubled by the
noise of our Pu-rulines. Now I, as little guilty, as any of the cause of his
folly, was yet among my fellows banished his house, and shortly after, sent
home to our friends. Where having idled it so long, that books were enemies
to our delights, I like a good wagge among other, seeing one day a gallant
knight come home to my fathers house, finding my spirit not so dull as to
dwell always in one place: made all the means I could to prefer my self
into his service. Which, with my mothers entreatie, my father brought to pass:
Preferred I was to this Gallant, and from a Scholar must turn Page; when, if
I should tell you the tenth part of the waggeries, that I passed thorough, I
should break mine oathe on the Pantable, call old tricks in question, and
perhaps, wrong some that were my fellows then, who would be loath to hear of
it now: Yet will I not be so sparing of my speech, but that I dare tell you
one merry part, that I and my good fellows plaide, that perhaps is worth the
laughing at.


Began. I pray you do.


Gri. I will tell you: thus it was. I being in my youth reasonably
well-fauoured, of a pure complexion, and of a reasonable good stature, and
having wit enough, upon a little warning to play the wagge in the right vain:
It was my hap among other my fellow-Pages, to take knowledge, of a certain
Gallant in our Court, a man of no great worth any way, and yet, a sufficient
Block for Frogs to leap upon: His years about some twenty two, or there
abouts, his complexion, Sea, cole-sanguine, a most wicked face, and a wit
correspondent: to be short, for that ill faces make no pleasant descriptions,
let it suffice, that he was every way a very filthy fellow: and yet, having
better clothes then he was worthy to wear, and more money then he could wisely
use: This Lob-lollie, with slauering lips, would be making love, and that not
only to one, but every day one: and though he were scarce welcome to any,
yet would be blush at no disgrace. This yonker had we found out, and hearing
of his disposition, we fitted his humor, one of us would borrow a Ladies
co^mendations, to get an Angel withal, for a message: An other get a
Nose-gaie or a Baie leaf, and bring from his mistress, which came up with
five, with a French Crown: An other or two of us, haunt him at dinner, and
with a song or a Galliard, nibble on his Purse for a piece of gold: An other of
us, somewhat toward the man, and in a manner past a Page, would fall in hand
with him for a rest or two, till which, some secret tricks of our own
setting, we could diue into a few Crowns worth the taking up. Now when we had
fed upon him so long, that we feared it would come out: we devised to lay a
plot to be-foole him to the full. We had among us one fine boie, (I will not
say, my self, whose feature and beauty made him an amiable creature.) This
youth, we had agreed among our selves, to make a means, by which, to catch
this Wood-cocke in a fine spring: Which, in few days after, we enacted, as I
will tell you: we got apparel of a Gentlewoman, (a waiting woman of a Lady)
of whom, having acquainted her with our intended sport, we borrowed many
things fit for our purpose. This Boy (being now a supposed Wenche) we caused
to take a lodging right over against this Wizards hospital: Where, out of his
window, beholding this beautiful object, his eyes were no sooner Lymed with
blindness, but, his heart was so set on fire with folly, that there was no
wais to quench it, but the favor of this imagined fair Lady, Gentlewoman,
or mistress, what you will. Now, we that daily used, (more for our comfort,
then his commodity) to visit him, no sooner in his chamber having gotten a
view of her, but we fell with admiration to commend her beyond the Moon for
an excellent creature: Oh, what an Eye? What a Lip? what a forehead? what a
cheek? what a harie? what a hand? what a body? For further, at the window we
could not see: Thus by little and little, we brought him half mad before, with
conceit, ready to hang himself for love. And now must those little wits he
had, go to work, to show his folly. Now we must get him a Poet, to make him
verses in her commendation, a Scholar to write his Loue-letters, Music to
play under her window, and Gloves, Scarfes, and Fannes to be sent for
presents, which might be as it were fore-speakers for his entertainment: And
thus, when we had fitted him for all turns, we got him such favorable
access, upon promise of no dishonorable attempt, that where before he was but
ouershooes, he was now ouer-head-and-eares for an Ass. For now began he to
think well of him self, and that he should carry the Bellawaie for Beauty;
when he should indeed carry away the Babble for folly. Well thus, having a
few days played with his Nose, and having agreed with the^ of the house to
seem ignorant of her name and cuntrie: but that she was a suitor at the Court:
They knew not wherefore, when, in pity, to pull the poor fool too low on
his knees: with holding him off too long from his off or on: We devised one
night that he should be at great cost with a supper in her lodging, and there
should be certain Gentle-women, to accompany her and that should offer her
what kindness might lie in their powers in the Court. These we brought, as we
made him believe, to let them see his favor, and good regard with this rare
creature, but came indeed only with a forced modesty, to conceal a laughing
at this Cockes-combe: not to dwell too long upon circumstances, the Supper was
provided, the guestes bidden, the Music in tune, the Gentleman welcome, and
the Boy plaide his part in the Q. He had the kiss of the hand, vows and
protestations, gifts and presents, and what not, that might be witness of his
folly? Now a little before supper understanding (by the imagined wench,) that
she was the next morning to go out of town, after solemn promise to bring her
on her way (kindly accepted on her part) to supper they went: where there were
so many healths drunk to his mistrisse, that with as much a do as might be
drunken to save his credit, he took his leave till morning, and so got him
home to his lodging: where, having scarce, power to stand on his feet, he fell
down on his bed, where with the help of a little trick that was put in a
Cup of wine, he slept till next day noone, when like a great Bear, grunting
and blowing, he goes to the window, where missing his former object (who was
now turned Page again) ashamed of his breach of promise, got him to bed
again: Where, keeping his chamber for a day or two, and then coming into the
Court, seeing some of his favors worn by one of the Pages, The Boy that
plaide the Wagge with him, ashamed to demand them, and fearing his folly to be
known in the Court: suddenly turned Clown, and with a sighing song, To the
tune of, Wela-day, wel-adaie, got him in ye cuntrie, where we never heard more
of him. Now Sir, was not this a pretty jest, and well handled?


Ga. Yea for wagges: I know since my self was a Page, a number of such
waggeries. But yet, I thank you for this merry tale, it has lasted a good
while. But now tell me when you had past the Page, in your next course, what
merry conceit can you remember, that may last an other mile? that I may
thank you for it.


Gri. I will Sir, since you take this so well: The next course I fell into was
Arms: and there I remember in a Town of Garrison, where I was in pay, the
Governor a man whom some ill fortune without desert, had thrown upon an
unworthy honor, bring of himself so tymerous of nature, as that a base note
of a Sagbutte would have made him start, as if he had heard the report of a
piece of Ordinance. This wicked Creature, by the means of his Sister (a Minion
of our Generals) gotten into this place: where, though it were far enough
from the enemy, yet, for that (if the sky fall, we mase have larkes; and so,
if the Soldiers were weary of their lives, they might come thither for a
hanging: for, except we would fall out among our selves, there was no fear of
any thing but Sparrow-blasting; and yet here I know not what cause more then to
skarre flies,) we held a strong Garrison: For the Governor being better
moved, then otherwise minded, fearing some two-legged Rats, should break into
the mouths of his bags, did not only enuyron his fear (for he was compounded
all of little better matter) within some seven walls without his Castle,
beside Ditches of no little breadth and deepnesse: and within, some seauenteene
double and treble walls within the house: where, (as close as a Flea in a
flockebed) he kept himself warm from the cold wind. Now, in this close
Cabin, (as he used much to contain himself, in casting up of his accounts) one
night, after the receipt of money for the pay of the Soldiers, locking up his
bags in cheffes of Iron and then laying up the keys under his beds head,
trusting none to lie in his chamber, but a son of his own, who was too young
to be a thief, and yet by outward appearance seemed to be weary of the father:
with this son, a Page as it was said, (a bastard of his by a Beggar) to whom
he gave but sire pence for a days work: With these two (in a Touch by his
beds side) to bed gueth his base worship, and there, having made a reasonable
supper took indifferent rest. But, after his first sleep (which was but a
kind of starting slumber) he fell into a dream: all of wars, discharging of
Ordinance, fyring of houses, and cry of people: in which, not a little amazed
or frighted, he started out of his bed, with crying out Arm, Arm. The watch
(or rather the Guarde) hearing this sudden noise, fearing some great Rat had
bitten their Captain by the Nose, (where there was a rich breakfast for a
dozen of lean Mise:) upon the sudden brake in with, Now now my Lord? Well
quoth he, with a Hah, as though his foot being in the Chamber pot, he had been
afraid of drowning: But as a man in such a maze might somewhat come to
himself, brake into this speech. My masters and friends, there is no
inexpected great matter of importance, but, unto careful spirits are revealed
in their sleeps, that by the providence of Gods discretion, they may be
prevented. This Town is a place of great regard with our General, the
careful government thereof is committed unto my honesty: I would be loath to
see the perishing of so many souls, and the secke of so many houses, as by
lack of care may fall out, if it be not the better looked unto: Now, what
stratagems are in band we know not: The enemy is subtle and strong, we
cannot be too wary of a mischief, you know: Had-I-wist is a fool in all
courses, and I would be loath to loose my credit, in slacking my care in the
charge committed unto me: to be short, I was this night much troubled in my
sleep with sharp wars, fyring of houses, the report of the Canon, and great
cry of the people: and the vision, as it was very dreadful, so it continued
long, and therefore being persuaded, that it gives me warning of some
mischief intended against this town, so would I be glad in what I may to
prevent it; And therefore call hither the Captain of the watch unto me. This,
when he had stammeringly in a pitiful fear brought out, with a
Palsey-shaking-hand, having buttoned up his Doublet, called for his Armor
(which all of Musket proof he put on, with all the have yt might be) and being
furnished to meet with a whole swarm of flies, (with his double guard) out he
goes and meets the Captain in his Hall: where, the wind blowing high, and
making a noise in the house, he stayed and asked him, hark quoth he, do you
not hear the noise of some shot? Oh no, Sir quoth he, it is the wind in the
Chimney. Oh, is it so said he, then good enough. But let me tell you, I have had
a shrewde dream to night: and therefore am willing to walk the Round, to see
how the Soldiers keep watch. My Lord, quoth the Captain, you shall need to
doubt nothing upon my life I warrant you. It is now toward day, and the watch
is upon discharge; I pray you keep your Chamber, and take your rest. Well,
quoth he, if it be so, I know you careful and honest, and I will leave all to
your charge, till I come abroad: And so leaving the Captain, retires himself
into his chamber: where, keeping on his Armor, here sets him down in a
chair, and there not trusting his bed any longer for that time, having taken a
nappe or two; the watch upon their discharge, gave the Captain a volley of
shot; the noise whereof awaking this gallant man of two Arms: Do, quoth he,
to the Guard, one of ye know, what shot is this? who bringing him word of the
discharge of the watch, he was a little at quiet. But the day being a Saints
day, when usually the Country people used to make such pastime, as fitted the
condition of their humors: somewhat early from a Wood under a hill, which
fronted the Town, and there with Drums and Fifes (and a few loose shot) came
toward the town, to make the Governor merry, with a Maie-game and a Morris.
Now such a Wagge as my self minding to make my self and some of my friends
merry with a Jest, having intelligence of the same the night before, yet
seeming ignorant thereof, came into the Town, with Arm, Arm, for the enemy
is at hand. This cry being brought to the governor, (he in a cold sweat,
what with fear, and the weight of his Armor) called presently for his
Captains, gave every one their charge what to do: which done, providing as
well as he might for one: Barricadod all his gates without, and all his doors
within: And in the midst of a Loue-roome, within a wall of twenty yeardes
thick of stone, Barricadod himself within a great wall of earth, which was
made for a Furnace to cast mettell in for Ordinance: There, ouer-head and
ears in fear sits he with his two Pages. The door fast locked to him, till
anon, the people being come in with their merry show: went a messenger from
the Captain of the watch, to entreat his Lordship to be partaker of the
Pastime, and to entreat the people with some kindness. The messenger being
come to the door and let in, before he could deliver his message: Well quoth
he, (imagining the enemies before the walls) What is the Parlee that he
offers thee? Parley my Lord, quoth the Messenger, it is a Pastime: There is
no enemy, all friends: Your poor neighbors are come to make you merry with
a Morris-daunce, and a Maie-game. Yea, quoth he, is it none other? and with
looking in his Purse, and giving him just nothing: It is well; stay awhile,
Boie, give me my sword and my Target, that my neighbors shall see how ready I
was to meet the enemy upon the least Alarm. And with these words, causing
the Trumpet to sound a merry Dote for joy of the deliverance of his fear:
Out he comes among them, and like an Ass (as ever man was) shows himself.
After, a little gratulation (leaving them in their sports) got him again into
his lodging, and there calling for his breakfast, put off his Armor, and went
to bed again: where, let him lie till I raise him.


Ga. Is it possible that there is such a (...) in the world?


Gri. Yes, and they wonder all that know him how he should come to have charge
of men, that would be afraid of a shadow, and be Governor of a Town that
would run into a bench hole. But the Jest was in the Maie-game: (if you had
seen it) For they had made a Lord and a Lady: and the Fool was like him as
one could be like an other. But it was but a Tale, and therefore I will not
trouble you any further with it.


Ga. Gramercy heartily, thou art as good as thy word, it is a merry tale and
well told. But if I may not trouble thee too much let me hear one more, that
you light on in your next course.


Ga. With a good will Sir. The next was, (as I said before) after I left the
wars, I fell again to my book, and studied the Law, where I heard a pretty
Jest betwixt a Lawyer and two Clyents, but it was but short.


Ga. No matter: Short or long, I will thank thee for it, and therefore I pray
thee out with it.


Gri. Why Sir, then thus it was: There were two Country men rich Farmers, fat
in Purses: (how lean soever in the face) These two, having in some twenty
years or more (with keeping of bare houses, and wearing of bad clothes,
selling of wheat, and spending of Rye,) scraped together more money then many
better men: It fell out, that (about or a little after mowing-time) these two
dwelling near together, and (as it seemed) each one of them nigh enough unto
himself: Fell at controversy about a Hey-cock, the value whereof (by the
judgment of the Parson, and the Constable, and other of the Ancients of the
Parish) could not amount to above two and twentie-pence: yet such being the
stubbornness of both their stomachs, that no means would be made to bring
them to agreement: To Law they would for the trial of their right. And now
the Angels that had been long lain in their Chestes, must use their wings for
the accomplishing of their wills. Counselors were retained, Attorneyes were
feed, and Soliciters were not forgotten: Days of hearing delayed, demurres,
and injunctions, (and I know not what diuises were used) from one Court to
another to keep them in their courses so long, till in the end the Judge (of
more conscience then the pleader) noting the long-time of their suit, the
nature of their controversy, and the substance of the matter, when he had
heard all that could be said on either side, made this open speech in the whole
Court. Ye two (masters) that have made a long harvest of a little Torn, and
have spent a great deal of money about a little matter: the cause being such,
as is more to be laughed at, then lamented, Let me tell you a little short tale,
and so I will have done with you.

There were on a time, two men went a fishing for Oysters upon the Sands at a
low Ebb: the one was blind, and the other lame: The blinde-man carried the
lame-man: so when they had gone a little way, they found an Oyster, which the
lame-man espied, and showed the blind-man, with guiding of his hand to take it
up. When he had taken it up, the lame-man challenged it to be his, because he
first saw it: The blinde-man would have it, because he had taken it out of the
Sands: Thus arguing the case, in conscience who should have it, There meets
them a Lawyer, who, hearing the controversy betwixt them, made this short end
betwixt them. Give me, quoth he the Oyster, which, when he had gotten into his
hands, he picked out the fish and gave each of them a shell, and went his way.
So you two, having made the Lawyers rich with your wilfulues, may repent ye of
your follies, and go home and agree together like neighbors, and keep your
money in your purses: for I am weary to hear more of it. The men ashamed of
their follies, fulfilled his commandment: went home, casheerd their counsel,
let fall their actions, went home and lived like honest good fellows. Now how
like you of this for a Lawyers jest?


Ga. I will serve to warn a wise man how he plays the fool with his purse.
But one more of your next course and then I will trouble you no more.


Gri. Well Sir, I will satisfy your request: The next course was the Farmer,
in which time, I remember a pretty Jest, which, if you have not heard before,
will surely make you laugh: But howsoever it be, I will tell it you, and thus
it was. A neighbor of mine, in good case to live, though not very wealthy,
and yet such a one as with his formality on a Hollidaie at Church, would have
been taken for the Hedborough of the Parish.

This honest substantial man, drawing one day a Mill-poole, among other fish,
lighted on a very great Eele: which, having got on land, he brought into his
house, and put it with small Eeles into a Cesterne, where, feeding of it every
Morning and Evening, he made (as it were) an Idol of it. For, there passed
not a day wherein he had not that care of his Eele, that it seemed, that he
had not of greater and better matters. This Eele, being taken about Candelmas
(he meant to keep and feed till Lent following) when he meant to present
him to his Landlord, for a great gratulation: In the meane-time, he never
went out of doors without giving warning to his wife and his servants, to
look well to his Eele. When he came in, how does mine Eele? when were you with
mine Eele? who looked to mine Eele? I charge you look well to mine Eele. Now
his wife, a iollie stout Dame, who made more reckoning of honesty, then either
beauty or wisdom (for she was troubled with neither) had in her house a young
Pie: (which we call a Magot-a-Pie) This Bird, having bin hatched in a Neste
hard under her chamber window, she chanced to take into her education: and
being one that loved to hear a tongue wagge; either her own, her Gossips, her
Maids, or her Pyes: For if one were still, the other must be walking: And when
they were all upon the going, there was no still-piece of Music: It fell out
that this Good-wife, (not a little displeased at her Goose-mans folly) in such
so much rare over the fish, that the flesh was but a little set by: one day;
(when her Asseband was gone forth) sitting with her maid at the wheel: (so
full at her heart, that yet her tongue would have swelled, if it had not broke
out at her mouth, began thus to fall in hand with her Maid-seruant.) I dare
not depose for her Uirginitie, but, as I said, her maid: she fell thus to
break her mind unto. Wench quoth the, do thou not see what a stir thy
master keeps with a scuruy Eele? In good earnest a little thing would make me
take her out of the Cesterne, and put her in a Pie, or eat her some way or
other: For better have one chiding for all, then have such a do as we have
about her. In truth mistress, quoth she, (as one whose mouth hung very
fitting for such a piece of meat) If it please you, I will quickly rid you
of this trouble. My master is rid to your Landlords, and there I know he
will tarry to night: if it please you, I will fetch her out of the Cesterne,
and kill her, and flea her, and put her in a Pie, and you may dispatch her ere
he come home; or save a piece for him when he is quiet after his chiding.
Content wench quoth she, I pray thee dispatch her quickly: I warrant you, quoth
she, for sooth with a (...). Thus was the Eeles death approaching, and the
matter thoroughly enacted. Now the Pie being made and baked, and set on the
Table, and betwixt the maid and her Dame (or mistress) brought to such a
pass, that there was very little left for her master. The Magot-a-Pye like a
vile Bird (that would keep no counsel, but duly would use her tongue, to
talk of all that she saw or heard) no sooner saw the good man come into the
house, (but as she was taught to speak) began with welcome home master: (and
then more then she was taught, she fell to pratle) Noh master, my Dame has
eaten the Eele: my Dame has eaten the Eele: my Dame has eaten the great Eele.
The goodman remembering his fish, began now to ask his wife, Now does mine
Eele? What means the Bird, to talk thus of eating the great Eele Tush
Husband, quoth she, warm you I pray you, and go to bed. It is cold and late,
talk of your Eele to morrow: No quoth he, I will not go to bed, till I have
seen mine Eele: and there within a bodily fear of that which was fallen out,
goes to the Cesterne, and there finding his Eele gonne, comes in again, as
dead at heart as a Stocke-fish, (and yet resolved to brawle out of reason) Comes
out: Why hoh (the good-wife ready to burst with laughing, and yet keeping it in
with a feigned sigh) sits down in a chair, and hangs the head, as though she
had had the mother: The maid having wit enough, (to make a fool of a
tame-goose,) meets her master, and catching him in her arms: cries out, but
softly master, be a man, and move not all. My dame you know loves you well,
and it may be she breeds, and bring you a boy worth twenty bushels of Eeles:
say she had a mind to it, and has eaten it: if you should seem to chide for
it, it may be a mean to cast her away, and that she goes with: And therefore
say nothing of it, let it go. For indeed it is gone: say thou so my Girl,
quoth he, I thank thee: hold thee, there is a Letter for thee, for thy good
counsel, I warrant thee all shall be well. Then in a goes to his wife, and
finds her in her chair sitting as if were heavily: comes to her and takes her
by the hand, with how now wife? be of good cheer, and take no thought, much
good do thy heart with her, take the rest that are left, if thou have a mind
to them I pray thee. With this, she (as it were awaked out of a trance) said, I
thank you good husband, and so after a few home-complaints, to bed they went,
where they agreed so well, that the next morning he had his part (though it
were the least) of that was left, and glad of it to, and so without more ado,
goes about his business. But no sooner was he out of doors, but the mistress
and the maid, went to the bird the Pie, and taking her out of the Cage, plucked
all the feathers off from her head, and left her as bare as a balde Coote,
which in the cold winter was very uncomfortable: Which done, she was put into
the Cage again, with these words, Tell tales again of the Eele, do:

Now about dinnertime, comes in again the goodman, and brings in with him a
neighbor of his, with a good face, but a balde head, that he had almost no
hair on it. Now the Pie being let out of the Cage, no sooner sees this man put
off his hat, but she skips on his shoulder and says: Oh, your head has been
pulled as well as mine, for telling of tales. You have told my master, how my
dame eat the great Eele: (and so she would do to any that she saw bald, that
came into the house.) And was not this a merry jest of the Pie and an Eele?


Ga. I think I have heard it long ago, but not as thou have told it: and
therefore as it is, I thank thee for it. And now since it is not far to the
Town, I pray thee let me try a little of thy wit, in the aunswers of a few
questions that I will put unto thee?


Gri. With all my heart Sir, I am for you at this time.


Ga. I pray thee, who was the happiest man that ever thou knew?


Gri. My Lord Governors Fool.


Ga. And why?


Gri. Because his master favors him, and none dare hurt him: he fares well,
and sleeps well, wears good clothes, and takes no pains.


Ga. Countest thou this a happiness?


Gri. For a lazy spirit, but not for my self.


Ga. Why, how would thou be happy?


Gri. In a feeling of Gods grace, in sufficiency of ability, to live without
borrowing: in wit, to discern justly: in Conscience, to deal truly: in an
honest kind wife, gracious children, honest servants, faithful friends, and
quiet neighbors: Neither disire of life, nor fear of death, but a scorn of
the one, and contented mind in the other.


Ga. Well said: But all this while, I hear thee speak of no master.


Gri. Oh no Sir, for to a free spirit, there is no greater misery then
bondage: And yet, a kind master, is a kind of father: where love breeding
obedience, makes a servant like a Son.


Ga. And what say thou of a kind mistress?


Gri. With a kind master, they are the hearts comforter, and they are like
unto a pair of Gloves, that fit both hands.


Ga. But could thou please both?


Gri. If I know both.


Began Then let me put thee in comfort, of me thou shall have rather a father
then a friend to nourish thy good spirit and of my wife, rather a sister then
a mistress to make much of thee for my sake.


Gr. I thank you Sir, and for the good I see in you, and the good I hope of
you, I will try my Fortune with you.


Ga. And do not think it shall be the worst. Come on, you shall go to the
town, and there dine with me, and so home.


Gri. I will attend you.


FINIS.

