THE DOCTRINE OF THE GOSPEL.

BY A PLAIN AND FAMILIAR INTERPRETATION OF THE PARticular points or Articles
thereof: with the Promises, Comforts, and Duties, severally belonging to the
same.

Whereunto is added, a declaration of the danger of not knowing, not believing,
or not obeying any one of them.

LIKEWISE, A REHEARSAL OF THE MAnifold heresies, wherein many have erred
contrary to them all.

Divided into three Books.

THE FIRST WHEREOF, IS OF BELIEF IN GOD THE Father, the first Person of the
most holy, glorious, and undivided Trinity: one only true God, to be blessed
and praised for ever.

1. Cor: 8, 6. (...) but one God even the Father, of whom are all things, and
we in him: and one lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

Matthew: 11, 27. (...) man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy
Ghost.

1. John, 5, 7. (...) three, the Father, the Word (that is the Son) and the
holy Ghost, are one.

Seen, and allowed.

T C
VERITAS (...) VVLNERA

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creed. 1606.

THE INSCRIPTION Dedicatorie. FOR THE GLORY OF GOD, AND edification of his
Church.
TO the right worshipful Sir Nicolas Bacon Knight, my singular good Patron,
with the virtuous Lady Anne Bacon his wife. And to the right worshipful Sir
Nathanael Bacon, and Sir Francis Bacon, and to Sir Edmund Bacon, Knights: and
to the Right worshipful Master Edward Bacon, one of his Majesty's worthy
Justices of the peace, in Suffolk (all lovers of Piety and Justice, and
friends to the Church of God, through his rich grace, blessed be his name for
so great a mercy) as a debt acknowledged most due unto them, and to the whole
posterity of their right honorable Father, a most worthy and wise Patron of
true Religion, upright Justice, and all good learning, in his high place, all
his time a most worthy Pattern to be imitated and followed of all that descend
of him: yea, of all that succeed him in like Office of high dignity. For a
token of gratulatorie-thankfulnes to God, for so inestimable a blessing: and
with a holy desire to help forward their holy knowledge, and the precious faith
of their eternal salvation. This second part of the Treasury of Christian
instruction (containing a chief portion of the Doctrine of the Gospel) is
both from heart and hand willingly dedicated.

By their Worships, among other of the Ministers of the Gospel, one most
bounden in the Lord, Robert Allen.

TO THE REVEREND AND LEARNED MINISTERS OF THE holy word of God: and to all true
hearted Christians: Grace and Peace in the Lord Jesus.
RIght well beloved, worthy great love, and reverence, (yea double honor in
the Lord, even for the Lords sake, and for your diligent and painful labor
in his work) seeing I hold it my duty, to give a reason to you, of that which
I have done, in the publishing of these writings, which are now brought to
your view, and remain subject to your godly censures, as you shall find just
cause: this I desire, that you do first of all, favorably consider on my
behalf, that were it not (besides my own persuasion of Gods gracious
assistance, in his guiding and leading of me through this business (that I had
been encouraged by some of yourselues: that is to say, by Ministers of the
word, of very good learning and judgment, singularly zealous of Gods glory,
and abundant in love toward his Church: I would never have presumed to have
offered these my labors, to be examined of such as have authority to license
the printing of Books; much less would I have presumed to have published
them, as now they are.

And yet for all that, (that is, though I was in such wife as is specified,
encouraged thus far (in hope of your good liking, and of some good fruit to
grow unto the Church thereby) how moderately and modestly I think of that
which is done, God he knows. And therewithal how desirous I am that none
upon the sudden should be offended at these superfluous labors, as they may
peradventure seem to some to be (specially they being undertaken by such an
one as I am; after the writings of so many excellent servants of God in the
ministry of his Gospel) I would gladly it might appear to all, by this my
care to render you the reasons, which prevailed with me hereunto.

First therefore, this (in all humblenes of mind) I do you to understand;
that insomuch, as (by the mercies of God) I have been a hearer of many of your
own selves, who are yet living, and also of some of those who have died most
blessedly in the Lord (most worthy and excellent Preachers of the word) and so
have been a partaker of your manifold good gifts and graces, to my singular
instruction and comfort, if I have not been failing to my self, in so long a
tract of time. I thought with my self therefore, that if (through the rich
mercy and goodness of God) I might be as the good Be, to draw honey out of so
many sweet flowers as were before me, and bring the same together, as it were
into one hieue; it might come to pass, that (through the blessing of God) I
might in process of time, perform some acceptable service to his Church. So
that this then, is the first reason, which I have to allege, to show whence I
have been imboldened to perform this service.

Secondly, seeing it is so, that in respect of my own practice in the holy
Ministry, I have had more then ordinary occasion (in course of Catechizing
by the space of these 20. years past, to go oftentimes through the principles
of Religion; and that not only in so brief a manner as they might well be
contracted, for the better capacity of the more simple in understanding: but
also more largely for the benefit of such as were of better discretion and
judgment, even till this kind of exercise, was thus far forth augmented as
you see) therefore I thought I might not with any equity, conceal it either
from such as having been less exercised this way, desire it for a helpful
supply unto them: or from those, who having no need of this help for any
defect; may nevertheless find an occasion offered them of their own more
excellent thoughts: like as the knife is made sharp by the rude and blunt
wherstone, when it is but a little whetted upon it.

Thirdly, I thought this duty, might the better beseem me in the Church of
God, yea that God himself would the rather require it at my hands, because it
seemed good to his divine Majesty, to employ me from time to time, in the
course of my Ministry, toward the people of small villages: by reason
whereof, I had the fewer auocations from my studies, and so more leisure to
write, then many other Ministers of the word, whom God had placed over greater
towns, and in popular cities.

Fourthly, I have been the rather confirmed, to think that it was the good
will and pleasure of God, that I should perform this service; because, by the
exercise of sundry bodily afflictions, I was in the midst of my thoughts this
way, constrained to keep house and chamber, for a long time together, more
then ordinarily: and chiefly, because thereby I found my heart (through the
blessing of GOD upon my afflictions) more humbled and sanctified thereunto,
being as one living in Diem, death every day threatening dissolution, and
hasting the decay of the outward man. And that in such sort, that before I am
old, the infirmities of age, are with a swift foot (as it were before the
time) come upon me. In which respect (as I thought with my self) necessity
lay upon me also, to make as much have as I could, to do the best service to
God and to his Church, that I might possibly attain unto, before I go hence
and be not.

Fifthly, in my very inward parts, me thought I saw and do see very clearly,
that nothing is more necessatie in these days (wherein all things are growing
to most lamentable uncertainties, for want of reverend and studious attending
to the word, as if all things might be carried after probabilities of
disputation:) Seeing therefore nothing (I say) more necessary, then such a
writing, as might, by the reading of it, retentiuely stay the minds of Gods
people, in a grounded meditation of the most sure and certain principles of
religion, by explications and proofs from the word of God, which is the only
sure and certain ground and stay of man's uncertain and weak wandering minds:
and having good trust that it has pleased God, that this writing should be in
some measure fitted hereunto; I have been hereby, encouraged to proceed so
far as I have done. And the rather also, that from the view of this labor,
it may appear to the Churc^es of God, yea even in the sight of all in the
world that will look upon it: what those things are which the faithful
Ministers of Jesus Christ do beat their wits about, and wherein they spend
themselves among their several flocks and charges. And that it might from
hence also appear in how many truths: that is, in particulars above number,
we do agree, teaching the same things from one and the same word, by one and
the same Spirit, with a sweet consent, in comparison of those few things,
wherein the judgments of some do differ: till God shall in them all so clear
our judgments, and frame our hearts to a more full agreement in all things,
against the distractions of these heavy days.

Finally, seeing the former part of my collectio^ of the doctrine of the Law
being well accepted of many, I conceived so much the better hope that this of
the Gospel should find good entertainment among the good servants of God.

But now, how well all this business has been performed: it belongs to you,
the well learned and godly Ministers of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
discern and judge: and accordingly, so far as you shall find cause, either
to reprove, or to give the glory to God.

And if you find that which your soul likes, then say you and spare not,
that whatsoever is well, God has herein glorified himself, by as weak and
unworthy an instrument of his, as could have been found out, among numbers of
those, whom it might have pleased him, to use to such a service as this is. And
concerning my own self, this I willingly profess, and say, as it is in the
peaceable and prouerbiall speech of Gideon, What is my vintage in comparison of
the gleaning of the least of you, my reverend Fathers and brethren, if your
labors in the holy Ministry of the word, had been gathered together, as
these are? And who am I, but as the diligent Apothecarie (to admit the greatest
commendation that may seem to agree) in comparison of the most learned and
skillful Physician? or only as the painful Be to fill the hiue, with the
honey drawn out of your sweet flowers, as was acknowledged in the beginning?

Now therefore, upon these considerations, gathering some hope of your
favorable interpretation of all things, seeing all is well meant and intended
toward you: yet me think, that I hear some say, that this kind of writing
is ouer-long and tedious, and able to discourage the mind of the Reader,
before he set his mind unto it. To this, under your correction, I answer;
First, that if such as so may think, will orderly read the Questions and
Answers only: then shall it be freed from that conceit of theirs, by many
degrees, of brevity.

Secondly, I doubt not, but even the same being once acquainted with the
Questions and Answers, and giving their minds to meditate upon them: will
grow desirous to read and stay their thoughts upon the Proofs also: and that
so doing, they shall (through the blessing of God) find no small profit, joy,
and comfort to their souls; in that they shall find them to be the marrowe
and life of those Answers, which be not the very words of the holy
Scriptures, and some lightsome clearing also, to the same holy Scriptures
themselves.

Thirdly, I would desire such as so think to answer themselves, from a
familiar similitude, which they may take from their own counting-housen (I
mean such as be rich in the world, who for the most part, can afford the
least time, to the diligent reading and studying of holy things) that as they
do not account it a vain or unnecessary thing, to have many more bags of
money standing together, then they can presently use, because they can one time
or other find use to improve them all to gain, so they would in this case,
be of like judgment, to think that it is to the best purpose in all the
world, to have the largest spiritual Treasury that may be, containing the
greatest variety of the instructions, comforts and duties of the Gospel of
Gods heavenly kingdom: though they do but at convenient times, busy
themselves to read that which is brought to their hands, concerning such or
such a profitable discourse, either for instruction, or for comfort, or to
stir up to duty, even as the necessities of their souls shall from time to
time require.

Whom also I would in the name of God earnestly pray, that they would consider
further with themselves, how necessary a thing it is, specially for them that
be rich in this world, that they should have by them (besides that most notable
means of public Preaching which God has sent them) the help of such holy
writings, as might most strongly stay their minds, in the long and serious
thoughts of the necessary points of their salvation: because otherwise, the
vehement and incessant cares of this life, will assuredly like a cancre fret
out, or as a viper gnawe out the very heart stringes of Religion, even in them
that be not the worst sort of worldly minded men. Last of all as touching
length of writing, that is not to be accounted too long which is no longer then
the largnes of the matter it it self does necessarily require.

Thus much, in way of rendering some account of the present enterprise, with
this admonition necessarily (as I suppose) inserted: in respect of some, who
without such caution, were most like to mislike, to their own greatest harm.

But to return my speech to you (the reverend and learned Preachers of Gods
word) this do I now humbly beseech of you in the Lord Jesus, that insomuch, as
ye are the salt of the earth, the light of the world, and Stewards in the
Lords house, appointed by God himself, to give to every one his portion in due
season: that you would as ye do, and yet still more and more, consider, the
peerlesse dignity and efficacy of your office of Preaching, far excelling
all writing or printing with incke and paper; both for the daily calling and
edifying of the Church of God, as well in knowledge and comfort of faith, as
unto obedience of life, even to the coming of our Lord Jesus, at the end of
the world. You are by your holy Preaching, the most active penmen of the holy
Ghost: to write, yea to ingraue all holy doctrine and godliness in the hearts
of all the Elect of God, with a far more deep and firm impression, then can
be made in any thin and shallowe papers. You are those holy instruments of
God, which are most effectual, both to give the clearest light of knowledge, and
to work the best impressions in memory, and to bring the conscience to
greatest remorse, and to affect the heart with the sweetest and most durable
comfort, and also most powerfully to stir up to the practice of the duties of
a godly life, then any other can be. Whence it is, and no doubt has always
bin found, that among the godly, such speeches as follow, have more often
proceeded from their hearing of the word preached, then from private reading,
or any other means. I never understood this point (says one) so well as I did
by such a Sermon. I remember such a point well (says another) ever since I
heard such a text handeled. I was never pricked in conscience, as I was at such
a Sermon, says a third. Me thought the Preacher spoke particularly to me, etc.
I was greatly comforted (says a fourth) by the doctrine of such a Preacher at
such and such a time. We see well now (say all that have any grace in them
with one consent) that we ought to be more careful, to hear the word
pre^^hed, and to pray more earnestly to God for his blessing upon it, then ever
we thought before. These kind of speeches I say, being often in the mouths of
such Christians, as be reverend hearers of Sermons; do evidently declare, that
Preaching has a special power given it of God: to work most mighty effects
in the hearts of the people of God, above all that any readings, or other
private or public exercises of religion can work. So that, though reading of
good books is very profitable, to such as do in godly manner acquaint
themselves therewithal: yet in commending of the reading of godly writings, we
must always admonish ^he people, that they prefer the hearing of holy
Sermons, and the reading of the holy Scriptures, before their reading of any
other writings besides.

Yea so just cause is there, to admonish all other hereof: that the most godly
and learned Preachers themselves, will from their own experience, easily
acknowledge, that they could not have understood the mysteries of Gods truth
so clearly, nor have found them so comfortable, by their own reading, prayer,
and meditation, as by the grace of God, they now do in a more liberal taste of
Gods power and glory: had they not their own selves, not only preached the
same to others, but also heard the same mysteries preached by other Ministers
unto them. And so do I willingly confess concerning my self, and the present
Treasury, so called in these books.

O therefore, be ye entreated for the Lords cause, to labor to the fulfilling
of the most worthy and noble duty of your office: that is, the duty of
preaching, which of all other, is the most worthy in the sight of God, and most
profitable to his Church. Without the which, no doubt, all writing, yea even
the holy Scriptures themselves, would lie contemned and despised, and without
any fruit, unless the people were put in mind of their duty: yea if they were
not earnestly stirred up by you, to have the due regard of them. Spartam igitur
vos nacti estis (reuere^di in Christo Patres ac Fratres) vos inquam, prae
coeteris: Prouinciam sane selectissimam. Hanc igitur macti virtute vestra
(coelitus sc: inspirata) maxim.i. qua poteritis fide and diligentia, exornate.
Ita Deum remuneratorem experiemini benignissimum, locupletissimumque. Ego
similiter (eadem gratia diuina fretus) vestrae virtutis imitator, maxim in
votis habeo, vt in idem vobiscum opus, totis viribus (huic scribendi negotio
temperans) multo deinceps accuratius, Domino pro sua immensa bonitate
concedente, incumbam. Optime valete.

And now henceforth, extending my speech yet more generally: this I desire,
that all might understand, that albeit this book is in some most dutiful
regard, dedicated to the right worshipful above named: insomuch, as it pleased
God, by their good means, to vouchsafe me the principal time, of such quiet
peace, and rest; with liberty, leisure, comfort, and maintenance in the Church
of God, wherein I might write any thing at all, worthy the reading of any.
Nevertheless, that which I do in special manner dedicate to them, as most
properly, and of best right belonging to them: the same do I from a more
common affection of christian love, and duty, (and with their very Christian
good liking I am sure) communicate also to you. Wishing and praying with all my
heart, that it may be abundantly blessed of God, to the singular both profit
and comfort, not only of them and theirs, but also of you, and of all that do
belong unto you.

To the which end and purpose, two things do I henceforth, most instantly
request of you.

First, that you would esteem of these writings, only as of a fruit of that
holy prophecy, or interpretation, which is an ordinary gift of God in his
church; to help toward the more clear understanding, of that manifold wisdom
of God, which is fully and perfectly contained in his own most holy Scriptures
alone: and therewithal, to lay open more plainly that manifold comfort, which
is enclosed in them: and likewise to make it more manifest, how plentiful
fruits of thankfulness, and obedience, is due from us to God, according to the
same. For as touching the things themselves, they are (as was said even now)
to be found most perfectly treasured up in the holy Scriptures of GOD himself:
and in no other writings beside. Neither in very deed, do these holy
Scriptures of God, stand in need of any other method and disposing; nor of any
other interpretation, then their own most pure and bright clearenes: were it
not, that our own darkness and ignorance, with the confusion that is in our
disordered minds, did stand in need of the same. For so writes the holy
Apostle S. Paul, 2. Tim. 3.16.17. The whole Scripture (says he) is given by
divine inspiration, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to
instruct in righteousness, That the man of God may be absolute, and made perfect
to all good works. And again, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things are written before
time (to wit in the holy Scriptures, as we may perceive by that which
follows) they are written (says the Apostle) for our learning, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.

All men's writings, whatsoever they be, specially such as do concern
religion: they ought to be nothing else, but mere servants to the holy
writings of God, to the ends here mentioned.

This therefore, is the first thing, which I do earnestly desire, of all such
as shall think good to acquaint themselves, with the reading of these or any
of the best worth: that they will in no wise have any other estimation of them,
but as of dutiful servants to the holy Scriptures of God.

Now, the second thing, which I do, to the same ends, and with like
earnestnes, desire as a meet consequent of the former request, is this: that
none would by the reading of these, or any other books; be any whit
withdrawn, or hindered, from the reading, or hearing of the word of God it
self. The which, being first written by most holy inspiration (as was even now
alleged) is thereby manifestly commended unto us, as that which (even by the
ordinance of God himself) is to be every way, and at all times, in season and
out of season, night and day (both in reading, preaching, hearing, and
meditating) most reuerendly to be regarded. Psalm. 1. ver. 2. and 2. Tim. 4.1.
2. And the same also, not without just cause: seeing they are questionless,
the only true ground, and perfect Canon, of all holy instruction. And because
the right understanding of them, is as the aiming point, whereunto all
instruction and teaching ought to tend: insomuch as they only are able, to
make us perfectly wise unto salvation.

This therefore, is my second suit; that none would by any other writings,
suffer themselves to be drawn away, to slack the reading or the hearing of the
preaching of the holy Scriptures of God: but rather, that they would double,
yea multiply their diligence that way.

Thus, if any shall at convenient leisures, read these writings prepared for
them; I doubt not, but through the blessing of God, they shall find them,
among other of the same argument, no vain help and furtherance: both for
light of knowledge, and also to further the comfort, and obedience of their
faith.

And now, these cautions being observed, I beseech ye give me leave, to utter
that which I have (among these prefatorie thoughts) conceived further in my
mind: that is, that I have good trust, that there is no just and important
cause, why it should offend any; though after many former excellent books,
there be still now and then, more set forth: provided always, that they be
sound and orthodoxe, and in some respects of special good use, moreover and
beside the former. For herein, the common proverb (current in all other things
of good use) may have a chief place, that Store is no sore.

The rather also, may this stone of offense be removed, if we consider that
none are enforced to buy this or that book: but it is left to their own free
choice to take or to leave; as they please themselves: or shall be advised by
the counsel of their godly friends. Whereupon, may we not discern, that if we
should not thankfully accept the manifold good and industrious labors of our
loving brethren, the faithful servants of God: we may easily (or we be aware
of it) not only complain of that, which might be for our own ease, from
other men's labors; but also grudge at that, which GOD has prepared for a
necessary help, and benefit, to many other; though we should for our parts,
think our selves to stand in no need of them?

Wherefore, that I may plead this cause of the new publishing of good and
profitable writings, such as we speak of. Be it, that the Church of God is
already enriched, with a goodly variety of all sorts of good books
(blessed be the name of our good God for it) both of lesser and greater volume,
larger and more brief, as well by Question and Answer, as in continued
speech, some more fit for learned Srudents, in a more exquisite method and
style, and some for Scholars of less understanding, etc. Yet this we cannot
but easily conceive, that not all good books of all sorts (no not of the
smallest and most easy price) do come to any one man's hands; no nor any one
kind of book to all: but rather to a very few, in comparison of those that
do very seldom, or not at all, hear of them.

God (no doubt,) who sets his servants to work, will dispose also of their
labors, as it seems best, to the eye of his most gracious, and all-seeing
Providence. To some, one help, to some, another: to some, at this time, to
other afterward. Yea doubtless, so wisely and prouidently will God dispose of
the labors of his faithful servants, that the least of them shall not be
altogether in vain.

And yet, moreover and beside that which has been said in this case, this
may be added further: that seeing God has manifested his wisdom, in the
variety of his goodness and mercy, every other way; in his works of creation,
to be seen, felt, tasted, etc. for the manifold comfort of the outward man:
why should we think it unsuitable to the same his goodness, and to the bounty of
his mercies, that he should fit and furnish his servants, with such variety
of spiritual graces, as might be every way delightful, and beneficial to
the inward Man? Verily, there is no reason why we should think so. Let no
man therefore, go about to straighten that bounty of God, which he has so
graciously enlarged toward us: nor grudge against that, for the which we
cannot be cheerful enough, in our praising of him.

But that we may hasten to an end of this plea, Shall false-teachers, by an
infinite and often renewed variety of heretical books, utter their counterfeit
wares and merchandise, their Pseudo-chatholike and counterfeit Treasuries? and
shall not the faithful ministers of the truth of GOD, use all holy diligence,
to promote the same by all kind of good and sound writings; and by laying
forth therein, the true precious catholic Treasures of the only true Church
of God? Far be, so unfaithful and secure negligence, chased away from
amongst us. And the rather also, because thousands of poor souls, have so
much the more need of such renewed helps by good writings, lest they should
be perverted by the bad: specially in such places, where the faithful and
diligent preaching of Gods word, (the chief preservative against this leaven
of false doctrine) is most wanting. So that for some supply of so great a
defect, what may we think to be accounted of the books of one impression,
though of more then a thousand: yea though the same book, should be imprinted,
thousand after thousand, many a time.

But to this it may be said, that not many thousands among many millions of
people, are so well minded, as to be studious in reading of good and godly
books. And in very deed, it cannot be denied, but that it is too true.
Nevertheless, this we may as truly answer, that God has his thousands, and
seven thousands in his Israel, better minded, then any one, or many of us are
privy unto.

Now therefore, good Christian brethren, what remains, but only this: that
we be wise and careful to use all such good helps, as God vouchsafes to best
(...) upon us, in their due time and place; so far as we shall find them to
be profitable unto us: but the chief helps, always with greatest care and
diligence?

^his great grace of Christian wisdom and discretion, with all other
nece^^^rie for us, our good God and most gracious and merciful Father grant
unto us all; both Preachers, Hearers, Writers, and Readers: working them in us
by his most holy Spirit, through his rich mercy in the Lord Jesus. To whom,
with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three most glorious, divine, and distinct
Persons, one true and everliving God, almighty, and in all things
all-sufficient, be all praise, honor, and glory, now and for ever. Amen.
London. October. 1606.

Yours in the Lord, with the best duty and service that he is able, most
willing. Robert Allen.

Page. 5. line 3. of this Preface, For being, I pray, read to be. The rest of
the Errata through the whole, are noted at the end of the last Book: yet so,
as not all there mentioned, are to be found in every Book.

THe Christian Reader ^ath, in the Heads or chapters following, the contents
of this first book, of The Doctrine of the Gospel, or second part of the
Treasury of Catechism, set before him in a short view. Yet so, as he may
understand, that under the heads mentioned, there are many particulars, and
much variety of matter both for instruction, confirmation, and comfort of
faith: and also for duties of obedience, deducted from the same.

The which would be ouerlong, and the less necessary to be set down here:
because the gene^all being found according to the present direction, the
particulars will readily offer themselves.

THE GENERAL CONTENTS of the first ^ooke.
WHat the Gospel i^. page 1, 2, 3. How the Gospel diff^reth from the Law.
pages. 4. 5. ^. How the Law accor^eth with the Gospel. page 7, 8, 9. Who are
fi^ hearers of the Gospel. page 10. The Gospel exalts those or^^^ whom the
law humbles. page 11. Faith m^st necess^rie to salvation page 12. 13. Faith
most pleasing to God. And why. page 14. What Faith is. page 15. 16. 17. 18. 19.
20. God justifies sinners. page 21. What Justification is. page 22. 23. etc to
the 33. page What Salvation is. page 33, 34, where the title of the page (...)
wrong Justification and salvation only by Christ. page 3^. 36, 3^. 8. What
Repentance is, page (...). 4^. etc. to the. page 45. The ^^ac^^ of Re^entance.
page 46, etc. to 71. The ^^^^rence betwixt Re^eneration and Repentance. 72. The
Doct^^ne of the Gospel as persed through the holy Scriptures. 73. A brief
sum of the Doctrine of the Gospel. page 74, 75. A general division of the
Articles of the Faith, or Belief. 76. The Ground of the Article. page 77, 78.
Belief in o^e only God.
The Meaning of it. page 79. 80. etc. to the 87. In the which page is a large
discourse, showing what manner of one God is. The Promi^e belong^ng to this
Article. page 87. Where the tit^e of the page fails. It belongs to every
Christian. page 88 89. 90. The Comforts and benefits of it. page ^1, and to 96.
The Duties arising from the comforts. page 97, etc to the 109 page The Danger of
not believing in one only God. 1^^, 100. Belief in one only God, three
distinct Persons. Belief in God the Father.
The Ground and meaning of it. page 107. etc. to the 116. The Promise. page 117.
The Duties In the same page and the next. The Danger of not believing this
Article. page 119. The Ground of it. page 120. 121. 122. 123. The Meaning of
it. page 124. The Promise. page 125. The Comforts. page 126, 127. 128. The
Duties in the same page and 129. 130. The Danger of not believing. page 131.
B^^^^fe in God the Father Almighty.
The Ground and meaning of it. page 132. 133. The Promise. page 134. The
Comforts in the same page, and, 135. The Duties. page, 136. 137. The Danger of
not believing. page 138. B^^^fe in God the Father maker of heaven and earth.
The Ground and meaning of it. page 139. 140 etc. to the 169. In a large
discourse, where the wh^^ History of the creation is declared. The Promise be
^n^ing^^ it. page 169. The Com^^^ beg^^^ing in the same page, are continued to
the. page. 173. The D^^^a^^ (...) page 174 175 etc. to the 183. The dan^er of
^ot ^e^e (...) th^^ Article. page 183. 184. The (...) etc to the 207. page By a
large inquiry an^w^^^le to the ^ar^e (...) all creatures, Persons, causes, and
actions. The Promi^e ^et (...) provident Father for his children is set down.
page. (...). ^1. 1^. ^^. ^3. Be^^^e in the Fatherly Providence of God.
The C^m^or^ contained in th^^e promises are prosecuted from the 214. page to
the 248. (...) yet not larger, then the argument it self requires. The (...)
which those comforts call for, do follow in the same page and page ^ 9. 250
25^. 252. 25. to 256. The Danger (...) not believing in Gods Fatherly
Providence. 256. 257.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE GOSPEL.
Having through the goodness of God, finished the first part of our Treasury of
Christian Catechism or instruction, concerning the moral Law of God: let us
(trusting in the same his divine goodness and mercy) use as good diligence as
we can, in like manner of familiar instruction, to enquire into the Doctrine of
the Gospel. Yea let us search after it, as after the most rich and precious
part of our spiritual treasure: according to the holy testimony and profession
of the Apostle Paul. Philip. 3, 8, 9, Doubtless, I think all things but loss
for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have
counted all things loss, and do judge them to be d^ngue, that I might win
Christ. And that I might be found in him, that is, not having my own
righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through faith, etc.

First therefore, I would have you show me, (as you have been taught) what the
Gospel is?

The holy Gospel is a most joyful doctrine, or divine message of most glad
tidings, sent and published to the world from God himself; and by the
Ministry of his faithful servants; the which teaches and assures every one
that hears and receives it, both what that righteousness and salvation is,
(together with the causes and particular fruits, or benefits, and comforts of
the same) which is to be apprehended and laid hold upon only by faith in
Christ: and also, what manner of obedience that is, which God requires and
accepts, (only as a fruit of thankfulness, but for no part of
justification, or for any piece of the merit of salvation before him) of every
one, to who^ the same righteousness and salvation, with all the fruits,
benefits and comforts thereof, do through his most free grace and mercy in
Christ Jesus, appertain and belong.

The moral Law of God (as has been declared in the former part of our
Catechism) is a divine rule or doctrine, Explication and proof
teaching and commanding the perfect righteousness of works: the which if a man
could perfectly fulfill, he should surely live therein: Leuit. 18.5. And to
that effect does our Savior Christ answer him who asked what he might do
that he might inherit eternal life: Thou know the commandments (says our
Savior) etc. as though he should have said: Thou can not possibly have a
more perfect rule, of the righteousness of the outward works and actions of thy
life, and of the right holy disposition and inward affection of thy heart,
according to the first creation of mankind, then the Law of God is. Matthew.
19, 16, etc. Mark. 10, 17, etc. Luke 18, 18. etc.

But because (as we have been further instructed) we are now of a very sinful
disposition, What the Go^pel^ is.
and even through the corruption of nature, trangressors of the law: the law is
so ^ar from all grace of justifying and saving of us, that it does most justly
convince us of sin: and consequently, of just deserved wrath from the judgment
seat of God. Wherefore necessarily are we all to seek to be justified an other
way, that i^, by the free grace and fatherly mercy of God, through the
righteousness and holiness of the works and merit of the perfect obedience of the
son of God our Lord Jesus Christ: and not by our own works, either already
wrought, or w^^ch we may at any time hereafter, possibly work.

For this cause, behold (I beseech you,) the wonderful grace and most rich and
precio^s mercy of our God, in that (as was now answered) he has not only
p^b^^^^ed this doctrine of free grace through the righteousness of our L: Jesus
Christ, ^o justification and salvation, (the which the law strictly taken does
not directly, so much as once tell us of) but also, for that he is most
graciously minded, to gi^e us the knowledge and faith, yea even the very
possession, and whole fruit of it.

This part of holy doctrine, is of us called the Gospel, the which in the
greek lang^age, wherein it was first written by the holy Evangelists in the new
Testament, evidently signifies good tidings, or a joyful, and gladsome
message.

The Greek word is, (Euaggelion) compounded of (Eu) which notes the goodness
and commodity, or the praise and commendation of a thing, and of (Aggello)
which is, To bring tidings, or to report and declare a message. Of these Greek
words, joined in one, not only those four, who wrote the history of our Sa:
Christ: but also such as were special attendants upon the Apostles, to preach
where they had once planted the Gospel, Luk 4.18. Ephesians. 2.1^. 1. Cor. 1.^7.
1. Pet. 1.25. Romans 10.15. G^^. 1.8.9. Reu. ^1.20. and ch 2. 1. etc.
are called Evangelists. Yea, from these Greek words compounded in one, all
Preaching is called, Euangelizing. And from (Aggello) Preachers are called
sometimes Angels: that is, such as are sent in the name of God, upon this his
most honorable and joyful message.

The Gospel (as we call it in our Engli^h) does not only in the latin tongue,
but also in diverse other languages, take the name from the same Greek words,
and is made the vulgar and common speech in many Christian churches: like as
diverse other both greek and hebrew words (are) pertaining to the Gospel, such
as are Jesus, Messiah, Christ, etc. Yea among those of the heathen also, who
have used the latin speech; good and welcome news or messages (such as among
them have been thought worthy any reward to the bringers, Cicero ad At. c:
lib. 2. App^^nece Cice^^: Homer: ^^ys^ v: p. 152. ^^^rat: ^ Ar^^: Nen^p. Ell^t.
or sacrifice and thanks to God) they have been, by ancient use, called from
the same Greek words, Euangelia, according to the example of the Grecians
themselves going before them therein.

The same use is of the hebrew word: (Besorah) answering to this: as we read,
2. Sam 4.10. One that brought David tidings of Saules death, thought that David
would have given him a reward for his tidings. The word there, is Besorah. And
in the same place it is said, that he which reported this to David, thought
himself to be Chimbassar, as one bringing such tidings as should be welcome.
For such is the usual signification of the verb (Bissar,) and of this
substantive Besorah: as we may perceive by that which we read. 1. Sam. 31, 9.
The Philistines are said to publish the death of Saul and his sons, for joyful
news or tidings, and to the praise of their idols. But 2. Sam. 1, 20. Publish
it not (says David) Al Tebassru: lest the daughters of the Philistines
rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph, read also, chapter 18. v.
19. and v. 27, and v. 31. And 2. king. 7, 9, Ps. 68, 11.

This therefore being a word used to signify all good and welcome tidings, it
is in the holy Scriptures, (for excellencies sake) transferred to note out the
best news above all other; even the publishing of the joyful tidings of the
Gospel. For the which, read Isay: 40, 9. O thou that bring good tidings to
Zion: Meb^stereth that is, (as it is well translated) Euangelizas, preachest
the Gospel, etc. And likewise chapter 41, 27. I will give to Jerusalem (says the
Lord) one that shall bring good tidings: Mebassar. This messenger is Christ.
chapter 61, 1. The Lord has sent me to Preach good tidings to the poor. And of
all Preachers of the Gospel it is said more generally, chapter 52, verse. 7.
according also as the Apostle Paul alleges it Romans 10.15. O how beautiful
upon the mountains are the feet of him that declares and publishes peace?

that declares good tidings and publishes salvation, saying unto Zion, Thy
God reigns. And Nahum Chap. 1.15. Read also Psalm. 40.9. and Psalm. 96 2.
Finally, from this Hebrew word, the holy Evangelists, who wrote the History of
the Gospel, are called Mebasrim.

As for our own English word Gospel, we will not now stand to enquire after
the deriuation of it. It may suffice us, that it is commonly received and
appropriated to signify the very same most ioifull glad tidings of our
justification and salvation by our Savior Christ which the Hebrew and Greek
words do signify, according to the saying of the holy Angel: Behold I bring
you tidings of great joy, that shall be to all people: That is, that unto you
is borne this day in the City of David, a Savior which is Christ the Lord.
Luke. Chap. 2.10.11.

This Gospel or tidings of the greatest joy that can be, it is called the
Gospel of God, as coming from him. Romans chap. 1. verse. 1. and chap. 15. verse.
16. 2. cor. 11.7. 1. These. 2.2.8.9. and 1. Pet. 4.17. And the glorious Gospel
of the blessed God 1. Tim. 1.11.

It is called the Gospel of Christ, insomuch as he is the argument and subject
matter of it, Mark. chap. 1.1. and 2. cor. 4.4. the glorious Gospel of Christ.

And again, the Gospel of Christ, because he is the chief messenger and
publisher of it, as it were from the bosom of the father. John. 1, 17, 18.
Ephesians. 2, 17. heb. 1, 1, Mat. chap. 3.1. It is called also the gospel of God
concerning his son. Romans 1, v, 1, 2, 9.

It is called the gospel of the kingdom, because Christ sets up, and
establishes his spiritual kingdom, in the hearts of his people, by the
preaching of it. Matthew, 9, 35, and chap. 24, 14. and Mark. 1, 14.

It is called the gospel of peace, because by it the conscience is set at
peace with God: God himself publishing and offering, yea entreating
reconciliation with us, by the Ministry of it. Ephesians. 6, 15, and 2, Cor. 5,
18, 19, 20.

It is called, to like purposes, the gospel of the grace of God, Act. 20, ver.
24, The gospel of salvation: Ephesians. 1, 13, The word of salvation. Act. 13, 26,
The power of God to salvation, To. 1, 16, The words of life, act. 5, 20, And
the words of eternal life, Ioh. 6, 68.

And because the righteousness of faith is necessary to salvation, therefore God
does by this his gospel, both teach, and reveal, and also give this
righteousness in the ministry and preaching of it, to all that will receive it,
ro^. 1, 17, and chapter 10, 4* 5, etc.

Further also, that the gospel lays forth the causes, benefits, Doctrina
Euangelij complectitur and regulam pij synceri que cultus quem a nobis exigit
Christus, and rationem qua nos restituit in vitam Calu. in Ioh. 5.24. The
Doctrine of the gospel contains both the rule of that godly and sinceare
worship which Christ requires of us, and also the way which be takes to
restore us to life.
and comforts of justification and salvation: read the 1, chap. of the Ep: to
the Ephesians. of the which more hereafter.

Last of al, that the gospel teaches what manner of obedience, God requires
and accepts, of all true believers, only as a declaration of their
thankfulness, without al worthiness of merit etc. Read, Tit: chap. 1, 1, where
in this respect, the gospel is called the truth which is according to godliness:
the which godliness, Paul describes in the same Epistle, and in all other his
Epistles, as also do all the other Apostles. And that all merit is excluded,
it is plain from that lesson which our Savior Christ has taught us: Luke 17,
10, For when we have done all that we can, we are but unprofitable servants,
Read also, Gal. chap. 2, 15, 16, and Ephesians. 2, 9.10. To. chap. 7. James, chap.
3, 2. Nevertheless, that God will accept of the sinceare, though imperfect
obedience of his faithful servants, for Christ's sake, we shall have the
occasion renewed, to show some proof of it, in the answer of a certain
scruple arysing from the last branch of the present answer.

For seeing the law (as we have seen before) shows the righteousness of
works, and therein, which are the true fruits of obedience and thankfulness to
God: Why should these duties be said to be taught again in the gospel?

And what may be the reason hereof?

The Lord in his most gracious wisdom, saw it to be so meet, in diverse
respects.

First, for that the law (as it is opposed to the gospel) only commands, and
exactly urges the performance of all duties, under pain of the most fearful
curse of God: but it gives no grace, or power, to perform that which it
requires, as the gospel does.

How the Gospel differs from the Law
Secondly, because the law urges every duty, according to that perfect light
and holiness of nature, wherein God created mankind at the beginning: but the
Gospel calls for duties, only according to the present measure of grace, as
fruits of spiritual regeration, with labor after the increases thereof.

Thirdly, because the law allows no duty, which is not done in full and
perfect righteousness: but the Gospel accepts every duty, which is
performed in any measure of sincerity, and truth, though from a weak and
imperfect faith.

Finally* because the Law, in all things deals like a most severe and
rigorous Judge, who will show no favor to any the least transgressor, and so
it discourageth altogether: but the Gospel, like a most tender and kind
nurse, cherishes every weak and feeble soul, whosoever longs after the
mercy and salvation of God, and desires unfeignedly to walk in his ways.

Explication and proof.
Hence therefore it appears indeed, that it is of the singular grace and
wisdom of God, that notwithstanding he gave the law, and doctrine thereof,
he should nevertheless send his Gospel also, to teach the doctrine of
godliness over again. For otherwise, the Law could have brought no benefit
unto us, but should have left us altogether without excuse, condemned in our
sins. Yet so, as the Gospel does not for all that, destroy or disanull the
Law, because if we should not by the doctrine thereof, be brought to the sight
of our sinful and miserable estate, the Gospel it self would easily be
ouerhautily despised of all, and loose the own gracious power and effect, even
as it does with the most in the world, whom God leaves, to that proud opinion,
which they have vainly conceived of themselves. A lively example whereof, we
have in the proud Pharisees, whom our Savior justly taunteth with that common
Proverb. The whole have no need of the Physician, but they that are sick, Mat.
9.12. whom also Luke chapter 16.14.15. he does for the same cause sharply reprove,
saying: ye are they which justify your selves before men but God knows your
hearts: for that which is highly esteemed among men, it is abomination in the
sight of God.

But that we may come to the particular branches of your answer.

Touching the first point, we have seen sufficiently, in the first part of our
treasury of the doctrine of the law, how imperious and full of exaction the law
is, and therwithall, void of all assistant grace, yea altogether armed with
the curse: but that the Gospel gives grace, and that even from the most free
clemency and grace of God; it is plainly testified John. chapter 1.17. in that it
is written: The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ. Read also. Romans chap. 7, 1.2, 3.4.5.6. and chap. 8.3.4.

Secondly, that the duties which the Law urges, are such as ought to be
performed, according to the innocence and holiness of the first creation, it is
evident from that which the Apostle Paul disputes: Romans 2.12. As many as have
sinned without the Law, shall be judged by the Law. For the hearers of the
Law are not righteous before God: but the dooers of the Law shall be justified.
For when the gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law, they having not the law, are a law unto themselves, who
show the effect of the law written in their hearts, etc. But that the Gospel
is satisfied, with such duties, as proceed from the spirit of regeneration, it
is manifest. Romans 8.13. If ye mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, ye
shall live. Yea though we cannot do it so fully as we ought: nay (which is
less) though we cannot do it as we gladly would. Romans 7.15. etc. and Gal.
5.17. For the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other, so that (We) cannot do the
same things that (We) would And as our Savior Christ told his Disciples in the
Garden; The spirit is ready, but the flesh is weak. Read also Mat. 25.23.
Where the servant is commended that has been faithful in a little, yea he
is betrusted with more, and admitted into his masters joy. And for increase in
obedience, which we ought to labor after, we have the commendation of the
Church of Thyatira set before us for an example. Revel. chapter 2.19 Thy works are
more at the last then at the first. And Mat. 13.12. Our Savior Christ for our
encouragement herein, promises that it shall be given to him that has, and
that he shall have abundance: to wit, of spiritual grace.

Thirdly, that the law rejects all which is not done in full perfection: read
romans 9 31.32 Israel which followed the law of righteousness, could not attain
to the law of righteousness.

Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works
of the law, etc. But that the Gospel accepts of sincerity, though there be
weakness and imperfection, not only in works, but also in knowledge and faith,
which are as one may say, the right eye, and the right hand thereof: we may
perceive by the testimony of the holy Prophet, who writing of our Savior
Christ: says that be will not break a bruised reed, nor quench smoking flax:
Isay. Chap. 42.3. Yea we may most clearly see it in the practice of our
Savior Christ himself, in the whole course of his dealing with his poor and
frail Disciples: and namely, by that which we read, Ioh. 1.47. in that he so
greatly approves of Nathanael, as of a true Israelite, even because he was
without guile: though as yet he had but small knowledge, and was scarce entered
into the lowest form of the Doctrine and faith of the Gospel. See it also,
Mat. Chap, 11.28.29.30. Come unto me all ye that are weary, etc. They are the
words of our Savior himself. And Act. 13. Verses 38.39. Be it known unto you
men and brethren (says the Apostle Paul) that through this man (that is Jesus
Christ) is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins. And from all things from
the which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses, by him every one that
believes is justified.

So then, we may truly say according to the last part of the answer, that the
law may justly be compared to a severe and righteous Judge, and the Gospel to
a most tender and gentle Nurse, etc.

This, M. Patrick Hammelton. Act. Mon. Page 890. ed. last.
as I find it well expressed by a holy Martyr and Minister of the Gospel of
our Savior Christ, in a lively opposition betwixt the law and the Gospel: I
thought it to good purpose, in this place to set down, according as Master
Fox has worthily recorded the same.

The Law (says the Martyr) shows us our sin. The Law shows us our
condemnation. The Law is the word of ire. The Law is the word of despair.
The Law is the word of unrest. The Gospel shows us the remedy for it. The
Gospel shows us our redemption. The Gospel is the word of grace. The
Gospel is the word of comfort. The Gospel is the word of peace.
Thus the holy Martyr sets out the contrary nature and office of the law
and of the Gospel, by this more mild opposition of the one to the other.

And he does the same again, by a more hot and sharp disputation, in way of a
contradictorie reply of each to other: the which also, we will likewise here
set down, to make this point of doctrine so much the more evident and plain,
from the testimony of so notable a Martyr. Thus therefore it follows.

The Law says, Pay thy debt. The Law says. Thou art a sinner, despair, for
thou shall be damned. The Law says, Make amends for thy sins. The Law
says, The Father of heaven is angry with thee. The Law says, where is thy
goodness, righteousness and satisfaction. The Law says, Thou art bound and
obliged to me, to the Devil and to Hell. The Gospel says, Christ has paid
it. The Gospel says, Thy sins are forgiven thee, be of good comfort, thou
shall be saved. The Gospel says, Christ has made it for thee. The Gospel
says, Christ has pacified him with his blood. The Gospel says, Christ is
thy goodness, righteousness, and satisfaction. The Gospel says, Christ has
delivered thee from them all.
Unto these differences of the Law and the Gospel, thus set down by the holy
Martyr: Master Fox, a little after the page above mentioned, adds diverse
notes and observations for the more full declaration of the same differences of
the Law and the Gospel, and of the several uses of them both: page 893. 894.
895. to the which for breuities sake I do refer the Reader.

But (as was mentioned in the beginning of the answer) all that is hitherto
said, must be understood, as being spoken of the law in such sense as it is
opposed to the Gospel: to wit, in the point of justification. For this is that
which does principally make the jar, yea that causes an irreconcilable war
betwixt them: insomuch as herein the law meddeleth not with the Gospel, neither
will the Gospel have any thing to do with the Law. Nay herein, the Gospel
utterly excludes, not only the works of the Law, but also the faith of the
Law, legally and strictly taken. And the Law again, will in no wise allow of
any faith of righteousness and salvation by it, without the parties own
personal, inherent and perfect obedience to the same.

So that then, to be under the law (or as the Apostle Paul speaks) of the
law: or in the same sense, of the works of the Law; that is, for a man to be of
this mind to seek and challenge righteousness and everlasting life thereby: and
to be under grace, that is, to be such a one as waits for justification and
salvation from the free grace and favor of God through the faith of the
Gospel: it is to be in a clean contrary state and condition For the which
read Romans 3, 28, and 4 14, and 6, 14, and 7, 6, and chap. 11, verse. 11. Col. 2,
15, etc. and chap. 3, ^0, 11, 12, 18, 23, 25, and chap. 4, 21, etc. and chap.
5, verels. 4, 5, according also to that which the same Apostle writes. 2. Cor.
chapter 3. where he calls the old Testament, the letter, that is, of no validity
to salvation: and the new Testament the Spirit, that is, the mighty
instrument, or as it were the wagon of the Spirit, for the plentiful conuoy of
al grace and salvation. Where likewise, he teaches that the Law is the
ministration of death and damnation, and ascribes righteousness, life and
glory, only to the Ministry of the Gospel.

Nevertheless, we may not be ignorant of this, that the law in a general
acceptance of the word, comprehends the whole gracious doctrine of the
covenant of life and salvation; that is to say, it comprehends both the
doctrine of works as the fruits of faith, and also the doctrine of the true
iustif^ing faith it self: Ps. 1, ver. 2, and Ps. 105, 8, 9, 10, and Ps. 119
Likewise Isay, 51.4.5, 7, and M^l. chapter 2, 6 7, 8, 9, and chapter 4. verse. 4.
Remember the law of Moses my servant which I says the Lord) commanded unto him
in Horeb, etc. as though the Lord would give to understand, that it was a
sufficient and full direction unto them, until the Sunshine of righteousness
should afterward more brightly shine forth, by the Ministry of John Baptist,
and by the manifestation of Christ himself. Like as the Apostle Peter also
writes to the Jews of his time, 2. Ep. 1, 19. We have also a most sure word
of the prophets, to the which ye do well that ye take heed as unto a light that
shines in a dark place until the day dawn and the day star arise in your hearts.

And besides, the moral Law and the Gospel, are so accorded in Christ, (who
is the perfect righteousness of the Law to every true believer,) who also
concerning such, has taken away all the sting and strength which the Law had to
death and destruction) that, as by the appointment of God, the Law is to all
his elect children, as a School-maister to lead unto Christ; so christ
himself again, even from the holy Law of God, schooleth all those whom God by
his holy Spirit has once guided unto him. For he calls all his scholars to
all diligent and industrious care of unfeigned obedience unto it, as unto the
only true rule of all good works. So do his holy Apostles also. And so do
all godly learned Ministers of the holy word of God, even to this day, as is
plentifully to be seen in their Catechismes, and all other their godly
wri^ings. Yet so, as neither the one, nor any of the other do thus teach, as
though justification and salvation could possibly be obtained by the works of
the Law: but because (as was touched even now) the doctrine thereof humbling
sinners before Go^, and d^iuing unto Christ: does also teach them, as by a most
brief and excellent rule, all duties of true thankfulness to God in a godly
course of life, in such manner as was described in the second and third
branches of the answer. For verily, ^he duties of the Law, and the duties of
the Gospel, they are one and the same in matter and substance, both toward God
and toward man.

All the difference, lies in the manner or measure, of the performance of
them. And therefore we say, that the Gospel boroweth all moral instructions
which it gives, even from the moral law of God; How the law accords with
the Gospel.
only fitting them to the grace and tenure of the covenant of the Gospel:
Eua^gelium vtitur ministerio legis, addens es sua^ epieiceian. vt site
Chemnitius. Harmon: page 310.
Adding (as one says very well) a kind of holy Indulgence or mild
moderation unto it.

Neither may it, without impiety be thought, that the law is absolutely
contrary to the promise of the Gospel: according to that Galath: 3.21. Is the
Law then against the promise of God? God forbid, etc. Nay as the same Apostle
teaches, Rom: 3.21. Christ has witness of the Law and the Prophets. And
he says of him self, that he being as one without the law, was
notwithstanding in the law through Christ. 1. Cor. 9.21. Likewise our Savior
Christ, and the Apostle John as he learned of him, they make no scruple to call
the Gospel not only a new commandment, but also the same which was of old.
John chapter 13.34. and 1. ep. 2. 7. 8. And so David likewise, profe^^ed of old,
that he believed Gods commandments, as containing matter of faith, and an
undoubted pathway to life, after that it has humbled the children of God to
the faith of Christ. Ps. 119.66. And how friendly, both the law and the
Gospel were accorded in his believing heart, we may understand by that which
he professes further in the same Psalm, verse. 166. Lord (says he) I have
trusted in thy salvation, and have done thy commandment. And verse, 174 I have
longed for thy salvation o Lord, and thy law is my delight. Read also Isay, chapter
42.4. and Matt. 12.21. The Islands shall wait for the law of Christ. And Gal:
6, 2. Bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ. and 2.
Pet. 1.21.

Whereupon also, we may yet furthermore, truly hold and affirm, that both the
old Testament and the new, or the law (as it is generally taken,) and the
Gospel: the doctrine of Moses, and the doctrine of Christ: they do contain
but one and the same couea^nt of Gods free favor and mercy (ever since the
fall of mankind,) toward all his elect, whither Jew or Gentile. One (I mean)
in substance, as might be proved by many testimonies and reasons out of the
holy Scriptures, according as M. Calvin that excellent minister of the Gospel
of God, has notably gathered and set them down to our hand, in the 9. and 10.
chapters of the second book of his Institutions: the which M. Piscator also,
And M. Calvin again upon the 20 verse of the 24. Psalm. It is the Devils craft
to dazell our eyes, etc. as though the certainty of the grace of God were to be
learned any other where then in the law and the Gospel. Diaboliartis ficium
est mentes nostras concutere, acsi aliunde quam ex Lege and Euangelio petenda
sit gratiae Dei certitudo.
whom God has made a skillful fisher of men in his Church, has in the 9.
chapt. of his little book of Aphorisms, or common places, abridged them in
19. several Aphorisms. E^ther of which books are in our English tongue, and
therefore I do the rather forbear to set down either the reasons or
aphorisms here. Nevertheless one notable saying or two of M Call. out of some
other part of his writings I will not omit. First, upon ^he 38. verse of the 5.
chapter of John in his Commentary upon the same: God (says he) has not spoken in
vain by Moses and the Prophets. Neither did Moses intend any other thing then
to call all directly unto Christ. Whence (says he further) it is evident,
that whosoever refuse Christ, they are none of Moses disciples. Beside, how
shall he have the word of life abiding in him, who thrusts away him that is
the life it self? How shall he understand the doctrine of the law, who as
much as lies in him, destroieth the life of the law. For the law without
Christ is of no force (to wit, as touching life and salvation) neither is there
without him any sound comfort to be found in it. Wherefore by how much any has
learned to know Christ more familiarly, by so much has he profited more in
the word of God. And again upon the 39. verse of the same chapter: Whosoever
aims not at this mark, let him tire himself as much as he will, all the
days of his lif^: yet shall he never attain to the knowledge of the truth.
Hitherto M. Calvin. Worthy also to the same purpose is that saying of Justinius
Martyr. Lexesteua^gelium praenuntiatum: Euangelium autem lex impleta.
The law is the Gospel spoken of before: and the Gospel is the law fulfilled
after.

In respect of this friendly harmony and concent, the law of God is in the holy
scriptures, many times honored with the name of the gracious covenant of God:
as Exo. 19.5. Deu. 4.13. and v. 23. and chapter 5.2. and chapter 9. v. 9. and again. v.
15. Hos 8.1.

Likewise, the arc wherein the law, (eue^ the tables of the moral law) were
kept, it is usually called the arc of the testimony, or witness of the
covenant of God, which he made with his people Israel: yea in respect of
Christ, no doubt. Neuerth^les we deny not but the same covenant, one in
substance, both in the time of the law and also of the Gospel; is to be
distinguished, in respect of some grave and weighty circumstances, not only
of time, (in that it is called either old or new) but otherwise also.

For first, the old Testament was more dark, through the veil of many
figures and ceremonies as it was restrained to the Israelites, yea and even the
moral law it self also, by reason of the dullness of men's understanding:
Yea, though both it and all things else, were visiblie sprinkled with the
blood of the covenant: as Exodus Chap. 24.7.8. Where thus we read: Moses
took the book of the covenant, and read it in the audience of the people: who
said; All that the Lord has said we will do, and be obedient. Then he took
the blood and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the
covenant which the Lord has made with you concerning all these things. And
Heb. 9. we read expressly, that the book of the law was sprinkled with blood.
The which blood of the sacrificed beasts, was (as we all know) an evident type
of the bloodshed of our Savior Christ, for the redemption and justification
of all the elect people of God: verses 18.19. etc. of the same 9 chap.

But the new Testament, as it is enlarged to the Gentiles, according as it was
formerly entered with Abraham, yea or rather with Noah, and the same also
according to the promise of God made to Adam at the beginning of the World,
immediately after his fall: it is ever since the manifestation of Christ in the
flesh, and by the death of his Cross, made most clear. For the veil of all
figurative ceremonies being thereby removed and abolished, the covenant is
now most authentically sprinkled, yea sealed and confirmed for ever, by the
very true blood of the Messiah himself, who is the lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world, and the Lord our righteousness, who has
fulfilled the law for us, etc: as it is further declared in the same 9. chap.
to the Hebr. verses 12.13.14.15.16. and chap. 13.20. and 1. Pet. 1.1.2. and
verses 18.19. and To. 3.25. Ephesians. 1.17. Colos. 1.14. and 1. Ioh. 1.7. and
chap. 5.6. all according to the prophecy of Zech. cha. 9.11. Thou shall be
saved by the blood of thy covenant: and Ier. 23.6. This is the name whereby
they shall call him, The Lord our righteousness. In regard of which clearenes
of the new Testament, (by reason of the more bright light of the Sun of
Righteousness, shining now in the Revelation of the Gospel, above the old
Testament, in the time of the law) the Apostle Paul says thus, 2. Cor. 3.13.
We are not as Moses, who put a veil upon his face, that the children of
Israel could not look to the end of that which should be abolished. etc. Read
also Ier. 31. verses. 3a. 32.33.34. They shall know me, etc. And Isay. chap.
11.9. The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that
cover the Sea. And cha. 54 13. All thy children shall be taught of the Lord.
And the same again, alleged to the same purpose by our Savior Christ: John.
cha. 6.45. Read also, 1. Cor. 2.9.10. and 1. John. 2.27. These therefore are
the former differences in the circumstance of one and the same covenant of the
old and new Testament. First that the old was more restrictiue toward the
Jews, the new enlarged to all Nations both of Jew and Gentile. Secondly,
that the old was more obscure and dark, the new more bright and clear.

Thirdly, the old Testament and the ministration thereof, was mixed with a
certain terror, and servitude, through the burden of ceremonies, and by the
often killing and slaying of beasts: but the new Testament is full of
liberty and freedom, and is graced every way, with more spiritual glory and
comfort: the proof whereof we may read, Romans 8.15.16.17. and Gal.
4.1.2.3.6.7.9. and verse 24. etc. and cha. 5.1. Read also Matthew. 11.29.2.30.
and Act. 15.10. and 1. John. 5.3.

So then, for the issue of this point, let us well observe, that the
contrariety of the law or old Testament, yea even of the moral law of God,
as it bears the figurative sprinkling of the blood of Christ, and so points
us to him, after that it has humbled us in our selves: the contrariety (I
say) of it, and of the Gospel or new Testament, it is not in themselves, and
in the purpose of God, as touching his elect: (for God is one, Gal: 3.20) but
partly in the ignorance, and partly in the pride, and hardness of the hearts
of those that misunderstand and pervert the right end and use of the law, as
if God had given it with a mind to justify men therwithall, (which he never
did) but rather on the contrary, to show all men how far they are from that
righteousness which he may justly require at all of our hands. Of the which,
both ignorance, and pride, joined with hardness of heart, we may take the Jews
first, for our admonitorie example. And therein first of all concerning their
ignorance, read Romans 10.2.3. I bear them record (says the Apostle) that
they have the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. For they being
ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going about to stablish their own
righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. For
Christ is the end of the law for righteousness unto every one that believes.
And concerning their pride and hardness of heart, we read further in the same
epist. chapter 11.25. partly obstinacy is come to Israel. and 2. cor.
3.14.15.16. Because they look not to the end of that which should be
abolished: Therefore (says the Apo.) their minds are hardened: for unto this
day remains the same covering untaken away in the reading of the old
Testament, which veil in Christ is put away. But even unto this day when Moses
is read, the veil is laid over their hearts. Nevertheless when they shall be
turned to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away. Thus the Jews may be a
warning unto us, and so does the same Apo. admonish all Christians, saying: Be
not ye high minded, but fear. The which admonition, because the ignorant and
proud Papists of these latter times, have not regarded, they are fallen into
the like, yea rather into so much the more damnable blindness and obstinacy, by
how much they do more craftily seek to cover their pride, with the counterfeit
show of greater humility. Would to God their hearts, together with the hearts
of the Jews, might yet at the last, be turned to the Lord, that the veil
might be taken away from either of their eyes.

Hitherto for the explication and proof of the former answer: and that in the
more large discourse, to the better clearing of some difficulty arising from
the same: we will labor after brevity, so much as we can.

NOw therefore, that we may go forward. Seeing the law, and the Gospel, do so
friendly agree; the one pointing and guiding to Christ, in that it shows us
our necessity of his righteousness and salvation; the other putting us so
directed, and prepared, into the possession thereof: is it not manifest from
hence, that the law according to the most wise and holy purpose of God, in
giving the same, and in the right construction thereof, is still to be
preached to all Christian people, together with the Gospel, and that it is not
utterly abolished thereby? How have you been taught and instructed concerning
this point?

The Law of God (no doubt) specially that part of it which is called Moral,
is necessary to be continually taught in the Church of God: because such as
are truly humbled by the Doctrine thereof, in the sight of their own
sinful, miserable, and damnable estate, are the only fit and profitable
hearers of the doctrine of the Gospel.

Explication and proof
It is true that you answer. For the Gospel (as touching this use and
ministry) does not abolish, but establish the Law. Romans 3.31. And howsoever
(as was said in the former part of our Treasury,) the Lord does not at the
first, humble and cast down every one of his children, in the same manner and
measure, that he does some of them, for the example and benefit of the rest:
nevertheless, it is the usual and orderly course, both of Gods doctrine, and
also of his working by his holy Spirit, more or less as it pleases him;
first, to make sin, and that misery which is due thereunto, known by the
law, to those whom he prepares and instructs unto his kingdom:
secondly, to make Christ known to them, and the comfort of his salvation:
thirdly, to stir up in their hearts, a holy care to lead a new life, both
according to his law, and also agreeable to the instructions of his Gospel.

And that the Lord should proceed in this course, he saw in his Divine
wisdom, that it was and is continually very necessary; because, like as men
in respect of their outward estate, if they feel no want at home, will not
beg abroad: so if we feel not the spiritual want and beggerie of our
souls, and if we be not bitten with the sense and feeling of our own
misery, we will never seek for relief in the mercy of God.

Who are f^^te hearers of the Gospel.
We may see it to be so, in the parable of the prodigal child: Luke. chapter
15.11. etc. Likewise, as the holy Proverb truly says: He that is full,
despises the ^onie comb; but to the hangrie soul, every bitter thing is
sweet. Pro. chapter 27.7.

For this very cause it was, that John the Baptist cried out so mightily, to
the people to whom he preached, that they should speedily repent because the
kingdom of God was at hand. And likewise, that our Savior Christ did so after
him: and the Apostles after them. Not that repentance goes before faith, but
because the doctrine of repentance, which discovers the corruption of man's
nature, and is a preparation to the faith of the Gospel: which faith above all
other graces, gives the entrance into the kingdom of God; and brings with
it both the assurance of the forgiveness of sins, and also the gift of
repentance and amendment of life, as the fruit and effect of faith to every
true believer and that by the inward operation of the holy Ghost, and according
to the course of the same his effectual working, as we shall have further
occasion to declare more fully hereafter.

It is true indeed, that God has imprinted in every man's mind, a certain
sight of sin, from that light which he has reserved in nature; in that every
man's conscience, either accuses or excuses him, as the Apostle Paul teaches:
To. 2.15. And that also, so much the rather, by how much the more heavy and
suddeine punishments of God do at any time fall upon men, as may appear. Ex.
9.27. and cha. 10.16.17. Jonah. chapter 1.7. Yet because this sight, (though thus
helped) is but a dim sight; and accordingly, the accusations of conscience
proceeding from the same, are too flitting, and insufficient to bring the heart
to a right discerning, and to a true remorse for sin: therefore has the
Lord added his law, for a more full inlightening, and for a more through
awakening of the conscience, and so consequently, to show more clearly the
greatness of sin, and the right use of all present punishments or
chastisements of God: the which in themselves, are but (after a sort) mute and
dumb messengers; and as a sealed book, till God by his holy doctrine do
open his meaning by them: as Elih^ teaches us, chapter 33. verse 14. etc. in the
book of Job.

Thus then, the doctrine of the law of God, is necessary to prepare the way
for the Gospel: after the comfort and grace whereof, powered (as it were a
sweet and precious oil) into the soul and spirit, orderly follows
repentance and amendment of life. All which, may be exemplified, from that one
Sermon of the Apostle Peter in the 2. chap. of the acts of the Apostles. And
that, in so much the more clear a view, by how much the works of Gods
extraordinary grace, was more glorious and speedy at that time. The Apostle
Peter says before the people the bainousnes of their crime, in their most
unjust and malious crucifying of a most righteous and innocent man; yea even of
Jesus Christ, the only Son of the living God, (a sin not only against the
sixth commandment in the highest degree, but also against the whole law and the
very person of God himself): Hereupon the people were pricked in their hearts,
and wounded with sorrow and grief for their sins, as if some dagger had been
thrust into their sides. And forthwith they earnestly desire to be informed,
what they should do. Then Peter exhorts them to amend their lives, and to be
baptized into the faith of the Gospel, in comfortable assurance that God would
receive them to his mercy. And thus by so speedy and quick an expedition, in
so great a work of Gods kingdom: the Lord would not only declare, the
mighty power and abundant grace of his Gospel, but also manifest to his
Church, the orderly course of the usual working of the same his spiritual
grace, though other-while more leisurelie, and in sundry measures and degrees
among his Elect and chosen people, as seems best to his Divine wisdom.

unwelcome, yea purposelie banked and shunned of all men? The Gospel exalts
those only whom the law humbles.


Doubtless there is no such danger or fear, concerning any of those which do
belong unto God, seeing God himself will cause them to understand, even in
themselves, that it is necessary that every one should be cast down and
humbled, before he can be exalted and saved.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. For the holy Scriptures of God says not in vain. God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble: 1. Pet. 5.5. And Prou.
15.33. Before honor goes humility. And again, chapt. 18.12. Before glory
goes lowelinesse. And yet again, chapt. 29.23. The humble in Spirit shall
enjoy glory. Likewise our Savior Christ, Matthew: 5.3. Blessed are the poor
in Spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of God. And verse. 4. Blessed are they
that mourn for they shall be comforted. And Luke, chapt. 18.14. Every man
that exalts himself shall be brought low, and he that humbles himself
shall be exalted. Thus then we see that we have strong encouragement, against
all such fear and danger. And the rather, seeeing (as was answered,) God
himself undertakes to encourage and draw all that be hi^, unto himself. For
this we may be sure of, that insomuch as he minds the salvation of his
children, he will make the wound no deeper by the one, then he will supple
and heal by the other. There need be no question, but he will deal most
tenderly, as a Father, having a merciful regard of the great infirmity and
weakness of the least of his children. Psalm. 103.18.9.10. etc. We may see it
also in the practice of our Savior Christ, whereby he has declared himself,
(according to the will of the Father) a most gracious and discreet teacher and
guide, to all that come unto him. He so sugareth and sweeteneth all things,
(yea even that which is of it self most sharp and bitter) that none can justly
allege any thing, why they should not most willingly come unto him. A proof
whereof we may, to our own comfort, call to mind from our last Sermon upon
Luke. Can ye (says our Savior) make the children of the wedding chamber fast,
so long as the bridegroom is with them? etc. And again. No man puts a
piece of a new garment, unto an old vesture. By the which similitudes, he
gives familiarly to understand, that he knows well what he does, and that
he has a most singular care, to order and train up his Disciples, with the
best discretion that may be. And again from the 10. verse of the same
chapter, we may to the same purpose, call to mind, that when Peter was
utterly astonished, and fell down at JESUS knees; saying, Lord go from me,
for I am a sinful man: Our Savior Christ does efte-soone comfort him, and
tell him that he should thence-forth catch men; to wit, even as he was
taken himself. Whereupon well says a learned Interpreter: Humilation in the
sight of sin, is as it were the Net of Christ, whereby he catches those
that be his. And he adds further, that by the same Net, he makes all
other his Ministers, to be fishers of men.

Thus then we see, that some measure of humiliation by the Law, is a
necessary preparation to the hearing of the Gospel of our Savior Jesus
Christ to our salvation.



It must needs be so. For without the faith of the Gospel, we can neither be
saved, nor please God in any thing that we do, no not in humiliation it
self.



He that will not believe shall be damned: says our Savior Christ, Mark.
chapt. 10. and 16 verse. And likewise John. 3.18. He that believes not, is
condemned already. Moreover, the Apostle Paul affirms. Roman. 14.23.
Whatsouer is not of Faith is sin. And Hebrew. 11.16. Without faith it is
impossible to please God.

Faith most necessary to salvation.
These proofs of holy Scripture (as every diligent reader may see) are very
evident and plain. Explication.
And the latter may very well be a confirmation of the former. For if without
faith, we cannot pleased God; nay, if all that we do be sin, the which is
abominable in the sight of God: how can we think that any such should be saved
by him? Nay how can we think, but that he will condemn them? Let us
therefore stand to consider a little of these latter places of holy Scripture.
The first of them speaks of doing such things as be doubtful to a man, and
of the which he has no well grounded and settled persuasion, that he may
lawfully, and with a good conscience do them. The other place is of such
things as be in themselves without all question good, and plainly warranted by
the word of God. But neither the one, nor the other (as the Spirit testifies
in either of those places) are of any reckoning and allowance with God, if they
be not done in faith. No not the very best actions and duties, either of mercy
to men destitute, or of religious worship to GOD all-sufficient: Whether it be
preaching, or hearing of the word of God, or prayer, or use of the Sacraments,
or any other religious duty beside. Hereupon, because the matter is of great
importance, let us stay yet a while longer, to make it plain by some
particular proofs. And first, that the preaching of the word, by such as are
without true faith, is of no account with God, as touching them that do so
preach it: read Math. 7.21.22.23. For our Savior Christ professes plainly,
that he cannot approve of them. Likewise, that hearing is to no profit, and
therefore also nothing pleasing to God; if it be not mixed with faith, we read
it plainly affirmed: Hebr. 4.2. It is faith, that makes the Gospel to be
unto all believers, as the cup of salvation: but unto all unbelievers, it is,
through their own infidelity and contempt, as it were a vial of the wrath of
God. For such is the similitude, whereunto the holy Apostle alludeth in that
place, as the Greek word Sugcecramenos, (in English mixed,) plainly shows.
And further, that Prayer is nothing auailable without faith; the Apostle James
is our warrant: cha. 1.6.7. Let him (says the Apostle) that asks, ask in
faith, and not waver, for he that wauereth is like a wave of the Sea, tossed of
the wind and carried away. Neither let that man think that he shall receive
any thing of the Lord. And again, chap. 5.15.16. It is the prayer of faith
only which is auailable. The prayer of faith (says the Apostle) shall save
the sick, etc. Hence it is, that our Savior Christ does so earnestly admonish
his Disciples, that they should believe to obtain whatsoever they prayed for:
provided that first of all they had good assurance, that they asked such things
only, as were agreeable to the will of God. Mark. 11.24.

And touching the holy Sacraments. First, Baptism to all such as despise
knowledge, and finally continue in unbelief: it is but as a seal set as it
were to a blanke, though not on Gods behalf, but for their own unbelief and
wickedness sake. Unless we shall add further (as the truth is) that through
this wickedness and unbelief, the charter of Gods covenant, turns at the last
to be as a writ sealed up to their greater condemnation, through the just
displeasure of God. For it is in no wise, the outward washing of the water
which saves, as the Apostle Peter teaches. 1. Ep. cha. 3. but the reverend
expostulation, or holy challenge (as it were) which faith makes: in that it
reasons from the effect of a good conscience, to argue the truth and
validity of the sign and seal thereof, from the efficacy of Christ's death:
the which also, is yet further warranted by his Resurrection, etc. as it
follows in the same place. To the further understanding whereof, let us well
observe, that the true justifying Faith, (where it is thoroughly rooted and
grounded) it has a holy boldness or confidence: and that it invinciblie
strives for the maintenance of that right and interest, which it has in the
mercy of God through Christ, against all temptations which rise up to the
contrary. As though the Christian soul should plead before God against them
all, thus: Is it not thy good will O gratiou GOD, to confirm the covenant of
thy grace and mercy for ever with mees touching the forgiveness of my sins,
through the death of thy son, whereof, thou have made holy baptism as a
faithful and irreuocable seal and assurance unto me? Yes Lord I verily
believe, that thou will for ever ratify and confirm it. I will not, neither
can I doubt of it, seeing I know, that my Savior Christ is to this very end,
risen a conqueror of sin, and of death, and of the Devil; and that he has
through his most precious blood perfected our reconciliation and redemption
with thee, and by his resurrection declares that he has justified us before
thee for ever. How should I then (trusting in this thy perfect grace) give
place to any fears or doubtings, which at any time, either my own frail
nature, or the Devil, or any of his instruments shall suggest.

To this effect does the words of the blessed Apostle Peter tend: 1. Piscator
in Analys. scholijs and obseruationibus in haec verba Apostoli.
Epistle 3, 21, 22. Baptism (says he) saves us, (that is, it is a sure
testimony that God will surely save us for ever) but not in that the filth of
the flesh (that is, the outward soil of the body) is put away, (to wit, by the
outward washing of the water) but in that a good conscience makes request to
God, (that is) pleads with him concerning the inward and spiritual fruit
and effect of Baptism, through the death and resurrection of our Savior
Christ: as was said before. To the same purpose, says Ananias to Paul, as we
read: Act. 22, 16. Be thou Baptized, and wash away thy sins by calling on
the name of the Lord. He ascribes (we see) the inward apprehension of that,
to the virtue (that is) to the faith of prayer, which is only sacramentally
signified and offered by the outward washing of the water.

And concerning the Supper of the Lord. Though the comfortable nourishment of
this holy Sacrament, is most pleasant and battlesome to the soul of every
believing Christian; as a feast or banquet, most worthy to be preferred, above
all other, the most delicate and full feasts, that may be: yet to unbelievers
(though verily, altogether through their own default, and not by any the least
failing on Gods part) it is in effect, no more then a fair sign to the
traveler, when he passes by it, but regards not to taste of that provision
which is plentifully provided in the Inn.

And no marvel, though the best actions of unbelievers be of no account with
God; seeing for want of faith, their very persons are accounted, and be in
very deed, wholly corrupt and defiled in his sight. Behold therefore the
excellency of faith, which makes both our selves, and all that we do,
pleasing to God: insomuch as by faith, we are made the children of God: John,
Chap. 1, 11, 12, and Gallat. 3, 26. Hebrews 11, 4. And also, because all the
holy ordinances of God, are by it made profitable to the furtherance of our
salvation: both word, prayer, Sacraments, and all things else as we have now
seen.



It is by reason of that infinite love of God, wherewith he has made us
accepted to himself, in his own beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ; whose
righteousness, and whole obedience and worthiness, faith apprehends; yea
and makes us one with Christ himself by spiritual conjunction; and that,
according to the most gracious and fatherly good will and pleasure of GOD
toward us, in the same his Son.

2. It is also, because God esteems it the greatest honor which we can
possibly do unto him, yea and the very ground and original of yielding him
any true henour at all; when we do believe in him, as being most true and
faithful of his word, above all that the natural sense and reason of man, can
possibly conceive and understand.

3. Furthermore, because faith only teaches us the true denial of our
selves, and of all trust in any thing but in God alone.

4. Finally, because faith is instrumentally, as it were the seed, yea the
very life of all true obedience unto him.

Faith most pleasing to God: and why.
There might more reasons be alleged, from whence the excellency of faith
may be discerned, as will further appear by that which follows: but we will
content our selves with these for the present.

Explication and proof.
Now for the proof of them: first let it be well considered, that even as God
is in special manner pleased to show mercy ( for mercy pleases him: Micah:
7.18.) so likewise does faith singularly please him, in so much as it makes
most precious account of his mercy, and does most dutifully attend upon the
same: as we read, Ps. 147.11. The Lord delights in them that fear him and
attend upon his mercy. Now, if we shall inquire yet further, why it is, that
the Lord delights so greatly, to show mercy to miserable and sinful men;
it is doubtless for no other cause, but for that infinite loves sake, which he
bears first to his own natural and only begotten son our Lord Jesus
Christ; and then to them for his sake, in whom he has adopted them, according
to that which we read Ephesians. chap. 1.5, 6. etc.

Secondly, we may see by that which is said of Abraham, how greatly God does
account himself glorified, of those that do truly and constantly believe in
him. For so we read of Abraham, that he gave great glory to God, in that he did
not doubt of the promise of God through unbelief; but was strengthened in
faith, and above hope believed under hope, etc. He being fully assured, that he
who had promised was able also to do it To. 4, 18, 19, 20, 21. And for this
grace of faith, all the servants of God themselves are specially honored, and
graced (as we may say) according to that we read, touching many particulars,
mentioned in the 11. chapter of the ep. to the Heb. from the beginning of the chapter
etc. and as it is generally affirmed of them, v. 39. All through faith obtained
good report. Whereas on the contrary, they that believe not in God, are charged
to make God a liar. Then the which, what greater dishonor can any do to him,
who alone is the God of all truth. 1. John, 5, 10? And how also can they that
be such, more dishonor and reproach themselves?

For the third branch, read Philip. 3, 3, 4, etc. And here it may be well worth
the noting, that as man's calling of the truth of Gods word into question, was
the beginning of man's fall from God; so it pleases God, that faith in the
truth of his word and promise, should be the recovery and reuniting of man unto
God again.

Finally, call here again to mind, the words of the former answer. Read
also, 2. Cor. 13, 14. Gal. chap. 5, verse 6.

What Faith is.
But of the nature of faith, we are now in the next place to enquire further,
as after a jewel of special price; and as after that which is the very staff
and stay of our souls, as we have partly been given to understand already.
Now therefore, seeing faith is so excellent a grace, show you yet more fully,
what the nature of it is.



The faith whereby every true believer is justified and saved, is that most
holy and excellent gift or grace of our spiritual regeneration and new birth,
wherein rests the principal comfort of our souls here in this life. The
which arising from the knowledge of the glorious grace of God in the face of
Jesus Christ, and sweetly and comfortably reposing and resting it self, only
and wholly upon the undoubted certainty of the divine truth and faithfulness of
Gods most gracious and free promise, concerning the same our justification and
salvation by Christ: yea, laying sure hold upon Christ himself, in whom only
and al-sufficiently, life, righteousness, and salvation is to be found: It has
furthermore many right worthy and admirable effects in the heart of every true
believer. Which are those so notable effects?

It rejoices the heart of the true believer, with joy unspeakable and glorious.

2. It imboldeneth him, to make open profession and confession of his faith, in
the name of Jesus Christ, even in the midst of the most cruel and
despitefull adversaries thereof.

3. It causes his soul, What Faith is.
to have good trust and affiance under the holy wings of the fatherly
providence and protection of God, in the most bitter temptations and trials of
this life.

4. It inciteth also and incourageth the believer, to earnest and constant
prayer.

5. It continually soliciteth to repentance, and care of a godly life here in
this world.

6. Finally, it is accompanied with hope, and that also in a patient waiting
for eternal happiness and glory after this life in the kingdom of heaven.

That the true justifying faith, is of such an excellent nature, as you have
described; Explication and proof
and that it works these so notable effects, as you have rehearsed: it is
every where evident in the holy Scriptures, as has been declared in the last
Sermon upon this point. Let us now briefly here call them again to mind. But
first of all, in so much as the word faith, is used in the holy Scriptures, in
diverse and sundry significations; it shall not be amiss for us, to set down a
note thereof. And let us begin with this, that faith is used sometimes to
signify, the doctrine of faith, as Act. chap 6, 7. A great company, and of the
Priests some were obedient to the faith. And again, chap. 13, 8. Romans 1, 5,
and chap. 3.31, and chap. 16, 26. Gal. 1 22, and chap. 3 verses 2, 5, 23, and
1. Tim. verse 2, chap. 1. Paul writes to Timotheus, calling him his natural
son in the faith, meaning to give him this testimony, that he was a true
believer, according to the true doctrine of faith. Read also, verses 3, 4, and
chap. 3, 9, and chap. 4, 1, 6, 10, 21, and 2, ep. 3, 8. Tit. 1, 13. Jude,
verse, 3.

Secondly, faith is used to note that measure of true Christian knowledge,
wherewith any Minister of the Gospel, or any other Christian is endued with:
To. 13. Let every man understand according to sobriety, as God has dealt to
every one the measure of faith. And ver. 6. Let us prophecy according to the
proportion of faith.

Thirdly, the word faith is used to note the very beginning of faith, or even
that teachablenes, whereby a man is in the way to receive and embrace the
doctrine of faith. John. chap, 2. verses 23, 24, and chap. 4.39, 40, 41, and
verses 51. 52, and chap, 8.31, 32, and chap. 12, 42.

Fourthly, in the Greek text, it is used for a sure testimony or demonstration
of a thing to come, Act. 17, 31.

Fifthly, it signifies an ordinary knowledge, or slight persuasion of the
historical truth of the holy Scriptures: to wit, that there is but one only
God, etc. like as the Devils are said to believe, but so as for all that, they
tremble and have no peace in believing: James. 2.19.

Sixthly, it signifies an extraordinary persuasion of the almighty power of
God, and therewithal in some, a ministerial power of working miracles, by an
extraordinary gift of God: as 1, Cor. 13, 2. Matt. chapter 21, v. 21, and chap. 7,
22, 23.

It signifies also sometimes, faithful dealing betwixt man and man: Matthew.
chap. 23. verse, 23, 1. Tim. 5, 12. and Tit. 2, 10, and. 1. Pet. 5, 12.

To conclude, it notes sometimes a temporany faith, either in a plausible
appearance, or with vain boasting of that which is nothing so in truth: as
Luke chapter 8, 13, 1. Tim. 1, 19, and 2, Tim. 2, 18, James, 2, 14, 17, 18, 20, 24,
29. Act. 8, 13. Thus manifold is the signification and use of this word faith.

But our special inquiry, is only after the nature of the true justifying
faith, the which is of the Apostle Paul for excellency sake, called faith
unfeigned: 1. Tim. 1.5, and, 2, ep. 1, 5 and in his Ep. to Titus. chapter 1, v. 1,
the faith of Gods elect. Likewise of the Apostle Peter it is called the
precious faith. Of the which, all true Christians have the denomination of
faithful or believing men and women: as Act: chapter 6, 5, and chapter 11, 24, and chapter
16, 15, and 1. Tim. 5, 16. and 2, ep. 4, 7.

Now therefore, to come to show the proofs of our description of the nature
of it. That this faith, is first and foremost a gift of God, we read Ephesians. chapter
2, 8, Where the Apostle, speaking both of it, and also of that salvation which
it lays hold of, he says that they are either of them the gift of God. By
grace (says he) ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves: it is
the gift of God. Likewise Philip. ^, 19. Unto you it is given for Christ, that
not only ye should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake. And 1. Pet.
1, 5. S. Peter teaches that it is an effect of the power of God, whereby he
maintains and vpholdeth his children to their eternal salvation. And 2, ep.
1, 1, 2, 3 he teaches us again, that it is a precious gift obtained by the
righteousness of God. According as his godly power has given us al things, etc.
And likewise the Apostle Paul calling it the faith of Gods elect. Tit: 1, 1,
(as we saw even now) he gives therewith plainly to understand, that it is a
gift of God as a fruit of his election. Yea God is not only the giver of it at
the first, but also the continuer and the perfitter of it: as 2. These. 1, 11.
where the same Apostle prays for the believing Thessalonians, that God would
make them worthy of his calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his
goodness, and the work of faith with power. Read also Heb. 12, verse 2. Our
Saui: Christ is both the author, and also the finisher of our faith. Hence it
is, that the most part of men are without faith, even because God for their
contempt of his Gospel does not vouchsafe to bestow it upon them: as 2. These.
3, 2. All men have not faith. And Luke 18, 8. When the son of man comes,
shall he find faith on the earth?

This gift of faith, as it is rare and precious, and a very excellent gift; so
it is in the same respect, called a most holy grace: as in the Ep. of the
Apostle Jude, verse 20. Beloved (says he) edify your selves in your most holy
faith, praying in the holy Ghost. And it is called most holy, not only because
it has a special prerogative above all other graces, in the apprehension of
justification and salvation; but also, because it does in special manner
purify our hearts, and sanctify our whole persons unto God. So we read.
Act. 15, 5. God purifieth our hearts by faith. And chap. 26, 18. Our Savior
Christ himself testifies, that his people are sanctified unto him by their
faith. Read also, 1. Pet, 2, 4, 5, Non solum homine Deo reconciliat siaes, sed
quicquid in eo est adhue imperfectum san^tifie^^ vt gratuita Dei in iudulgentia
iustus sit, qui nulo merito tantum benu^ acquirere libi posset. Caluinus.
6, 7, 8, etc. To this effect, well says a godly learned Interpreter, that
faith does not only reconcile man to God, but also it sanctifies whatsoever
is hitherto imperfect in him; to the end he may be righteous through the most
gracious and free good will of God, who by no merit or just desert of his own
could possibly obtain so great a benefit.

That the same faith, so given of God (as has been declared) is a principal
grace of our spiritual regeneration and new birth: it may be evident from the
doctrine of our Savior Christ, John. chap. 3, verses, 3, 5. compared with that
we read, Romans 5, 1, 2, and Ephesians. 2, 18, and 1, Pet. 1, 3, 4, 5. For by faith
we have that access to God, and entrance into grace, which leads into the
kingdom of God, etc.

Furthermore, we limite the excellency and comfort of this gift of faith, to
every particular Christian here in this life, as touching himself more
immediately; because otherwise, the gift of love is preferred, as most
profitable for the mutual comfort and benefit of one Christian, with and by
an other: and also, because, (as it seems) love is more durable, and has a
more special use for ever in the kingdom of heaven: 1. Corinthians. 13.

Not that faith shall utterly vanish away, after this life ended: but only
that expectation and waiting of faith which is here in this life, by reason
that the thing it self believed and looked for, shall then be actually
performed and enjoyed.

Nevertheless, faith shall still retain this assurance for ever in heaven,
that our happiness once purchased and performed, shall for ever be
established according to the former promises of God. And this assurance of
faith, for the perpetual and endless continuance of our happiness, shall be a
principal ground of our everlasting rejoicing in and with the Lord: yea and a
chief argument of our eternal praising of him, in so much as we shall be out
of all doubt of loosing the same again. And beside, until the resurrection,
the souls of the faithful do (no doubt) retain the faith and expectation of
the resurrection of their bodies to everlasting life, and of the final
confusion of all the enemies of the militant church of God: according to that
Revel. 6.9.10, 11.

But leaving this: That faith arises from the knowledge of God the father, and
of his glorious grace shining in the face of Christ: read, 2. Cor. 4, verses 3,
4, 5. And it may evidently be proved from that which the same Apostle writes.
Romans 10, 14. How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? For
indeed it is impossible that any should believe that, whereof he has no
knowledge or understanding. Out of all question, faith is a most wise gift and
grace of Gods holy spirit, making those that are endued with it, wise even unto
salvation: 2, Tim. 3, 15. And verily there can be no greater wisdom, then that
which is unto salvation; even as on the contrary, there is no greater folly,
then that which carries a man on forward to his eternal destruction. Now that
there is singular wisdom in faith, we shall the rather discern, if we
consider how great that subtlety of the Serpent the Devil is, as also, how
great the deceitfulnes of sin is, which are both of them defeated thereby. In
this respect it is, that faith is sometimes called by the name of knowledge and
understanding it self: as John. 17, 3. This is life eternal (says our
Savior Christ) to know thee to be the only true God, and whom thou have sent
Jesus Christ. And Ioh. 1, Ep, 2, verses 3, 4. Hereby we are sure that we know
him if we keep his commandments. He that says, I know him, and keeps not
his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him. What truth? verily,
the truth of faith, or of saving knowledge, which is in effect all one with
faith. Hence also it is, that it is so nearely linked with knowledge, as we
find it to be oftentimes: as Tit: 1, 1, according to the faith of Gods elect
and the knowledge of the truth which is according to godliness. And 2, Pet. 1,
1, 3. You have obtained like precious faith with us, through the knowledge of
him that has called us unto glory and virtue.

And again, verse, 5. Moreover, join virtue with your faith, and with virtue
knowledge, etc. And chap, 3, verse, 17. Read also, Ephesians. 1, 16, 17, 18. And
Colos. 1, 9. And chap. 2, ver. 2. The Apostle protests his great desire, that
the Colossians and Laodiceans hearts, and that the hearts of all other
Christians, might be comforted and knit together in one, and in all riches of
the full assurance, of understanding, to know the mystery of God even the
Father, and of Christ: In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Thus then, faith arysing from knowledge, grows to be even the
settled assurance of all holy understanding, and the very life of all true
wisdom. But on the contrary, where this faith is wanting, there is no true
wisdom at all. For as we read, 1. Cor. 1, 19, 20. It is written (says the
Apostle) I will (that is, the Lord God will) destroy the wisdom of the wise,
and cast away the understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise? where is the
Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? has not God made the wisdom of
this world foolishnes?

Let us now proceed. That faith is of this nature, that it does sweetly repose
it self only and wholly upon the faithfulness of Gods most gracious and free
promise, concerning justification and salvation, in and by our Lord Jesus
Christ: it may well be observed; first more generally from that which is said of
faith. Heb. chap. 11, 1, in that the Apostle writes, that it is a ground of
things hoped for, and an evidence of things which are not seen. The which
words do plainly signify, yea rather they do very significantly declare,
that faith has a clear and undoubted confidence or persuasion concerning that
which it apprehends. And then the same may be more particularly observed,
from that testimony which is given of Sarahs faith: ver, 11, in these words.
Through faith (says the Apostle) Sarah received strength to conceive seed,
and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him
faithful that had promised. Now, that which Sarah did in respect of this
promise concerning him, ( Isaake I mean) from whom he should spring (though
long after) that should be the justification of all the faithful; the same
must every faithful Christian do, concerning justification it self: that is,
we must constantly believe, that the promise of GOD in this behalf, is most
faithful and true; to wit, that he will assuredly justify and save every
one, that shall truly believe in the name of Christ his Son. Or else there
can be no true faith in us. To this purpose therefore, let us well weigh in our
hearts and minds, the Doctrine of the holy Scriptures, touching this so
material a point. What though some did not believe (says the Apostle Paul.
Romans 3, verses, 3, 4.) shall their unbelief make the faith of God without
effect? God forbid. Let God be true, and every man a liar, as it is written,
That thou may be justified in thy words, and overcome when thou art judged.

Moreover, the same Apostle (as we read chap. 4, 13, etc. and chap. 9, 7, 8,
etc. And Gallat. 3, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, etc. and chap. 4, 23, 28) by the
example of Abraham's faith, and as a most excellent and faithful interpreter of
the holy Scriptures, he teaches very plainly and plentifully, that the
principal foundation and stay of faith, is the undoubted word of Gods promise:
The children of promise (says he) are counted for the seed. For this is a
word of promise. In this same time will I come, and Sarah shall have a son.
And again, We receive the promise of the spirit through faith. To Abraham and
his seed were the promises made. The inheritance it by promise. The Scripture
has concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ,
should be given to them that believe. Such are the frequent and often speeches
of the Apostle Paul, in those his Epistles. Read also Heb. 6, 13. When God made
the promise to Abraham, because he had no greater to swear by, he swear by
himself. And a little after verses 17, 18, 19. So God willing more abundantly
to show unto the heirs of promise, the stablenes of his Counsel, he bound
himself by an oath, That by two immutable things, wherein it is impossible
that God should lie, we might have strong consolation, who have our refuge to
hold fast the hope that it set before us, etc. And chap. 11, verses 6, 13, 17,
etc.

This most steadfast faithfulness of God, is every where worthily testified unto
us, in the holy Scriptures. And namely, 1. Cor. 1, 9. God is faithful by whom
ye are called unto the fellowship of his son Jesus Christ our Lord. And
chap. 10, 13. God is faithful etc. And 2. Epistle 1, 18. the Apostle appealeth
to God, as to the most faithful and true witness. So again chap. 11, 31, and
chap. 12, 2, 3. God (says he) knows that I lie not. And 1. These. 5.24.
Faithful is he which calls you, who will also do it. And Chap. 3, Epistle
3, 3. The Lord is faithful, who will establish you etc. And Tit. 1, 2. God
that cannot lie, has promised. And Hebrews 10, 23. Let us keep the
profession of our hope without wavering: for he is faithful that has
promised. Read also James 1, 17. There is no variableness in God, neither
shadowing by turning. And Paul again, Romans 11, 29. The gifts and calling of
God are without repentance. Likewise the Prophet Hos, chap. 13, verse 14.
Repentance is hid from my eyes: says the Lord. Read also, Psalm 36, 5. Thy
mercy o Lord reaches to the heavens, and thy faithfulness to the clouds. And
Psalm 105, 8. He has always remembered his covenant and promise which he
made to a thousand generations. And Psalm 111.5. He will ever be mindful of
his covenant. And ver. 9 He has commanded his covenant for ever. And 146, 6.
He keeps his fidelity for ever. And in the Lament. of Ierimiah, 3, 23 Great
is his faithfulness.

To this end also, it is well worthy the observing, that the word of God has
often testimony given to the faithfulness of it: Tit. 1, 9. The Minister is to
hold fast the faithful word. And chap. 3, 8. This is a faithful saying.
Likewise, 1. Tim. 1.15. and chap. 3, 1, and chap. 4, 9. and Revel. chap. 22, 6.
These words are faithful and true. So also, Psa. 19.7 The testimony of the
Lord is sure. And Psalm, 93.5. Thy testimonies are very sure. And Isay. 55, 3. I
will make an everlasting covenant with you (says the Lord) even the sure
mercies af David. And again, Act. 13, 14. I will give you the holy things of
David which are faithful.

And yet further, that faith does in special manner lay hold of the promise of
God toaching justification, it is evident by the often confirmation of this,
that we are justified by faith: and namely, Gal. 3, 8. The Scripture foreseeing
that God would justify the Gentiles through faith, preached before, the
Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all the gentiles be blessed. So
then, they that be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham.

This testimony is often repeated in the epistles of the blessed Apostle. And
Act: 13.39. By Christ every one that believes is justified.

That the same faith does herewithall lay hold of salvation by our Savior
Christ, we read Act. 15.11. We believe (says the Apostle Peter) through the
grace of our Lord Jesus, to be saved, even as they (that is the believing
Gentiles) do. For as it is else where affirmed, Christ only is salvation both
to Jew and also to Gentile. Neither is there any other name whereby any may be
saved. Act. 4.12. Read also Ephesians: 2.8: By grace are ye saved through Faith And
Pet. 1.5. Ye are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. And
verse 9. Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.
Of the which salvation, the Prophets have enquired, etc. Believe (says the
Apostle Paul to the Iaylor) in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved
and thine household. And hereunto tends that comfortable speech of our San:
Christ: himself, so often repeated in the Gospel. Thy faith has saved thee.
Matt. 9.22. In which words, he would encourage the poor woman, to believe
spiritual salvation, by the comfort of that bodily health, which she had
received from him. For this verily was the end of all the bodily cures which
our Savior Christ wrought: as may be perceived by the testimony of Saint
Matthew: chapt: 8.16.17. Read also the same comfortable speech: Luke, 8, 50.
Fear not; believe only, etc. And chap. 17.19. And again, chapt: 18.42. Thy
faith has saved thee. And Mark: 9.23. All things are possible to him that
believes.

Finally, that Faith lays hold upon Christ himself: it is manifest, in
that by faith Christ lives in the faithful; and they again do live in him.
Gal: 2.20. And chap: 3.27. By faith we put on Christ. And Ephesians. 3.17. Christ
dwells in the heart by faith. For the which cause it is, that the true
iustifiyng and saving faith, bears the name of faith in Christ, faith in the
name of Christ, the faith of of Christ, faith toward Christ, the faith which is
by Christ, and through his blood, etc. Yea, faith does so lay hold upon
Christ, that it does most nearely unite us unto him for ever, in one mystical
body, as the members of the natural body are knitte to the head, according
to that of the Apostle Paul. 1. Cor. 12. verses. 12.13. and Ephesians.
2.18.19.20.21.22. And as we read chapt: 5.30. We are members of his body, of
his flesh, and of his bones. Hitherto of the former part of our description of
the nature of faith.

It remains that we show some proofs out of holy Scripture, concerning
those notable effects, which are ascribed to the same faith.

And first of all; that it rejoices the heart of the true believer with joy
unspeakable and glorious: Read. 1. Pet. 1.8. Read also Romans 5.1.2.3. and
James 1.2. And Luke. chap: 1.46.47. and ch: 2.10.

That faith gives boldness touching the profession of the name of Christ: we
read Romans chapter: 10. verse 10. With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth he confesses to salvation. Read also. 1.
Pet. 3.14.15. Matthew. 10.28. etc.

That it causes the soul of the believer, to have comfortable trust and
affiance under the Fatherly providence of God; we may easily perceive, by the
comfortable Doctrine and exhortation of our Savior Christ, Matthew: 6.25. etc.
And chapter 10. verse 19, and verse 30. We may perceive it also from the
example of the Apostle Paul: Act: 27. etc. 25. Syrs, be of good courage: for I
believe God, that it shall be so, as has been told me. And again. 2. Tim.
1.12. I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able to
keep that which I have committed to him, against that day. Read also 2. Corinthians: 4.8.9. etc. Likewise, Psalm. 23. and 46. and 62. And Ps: 119.50. It is
my comfort in my trouble, for thy promise has quickened me. And Sam: 30.6.
When the people would even forthwith have stoned David, he comforted himself
in the Lord his GOD. Read also Hebr: 10.32. etc. and chap: 11.24. etc.

That Faith incourageth to Prayer, we may reason from that which the Apostle
Paul writes, Romans: 10.14. For it is a fruit of faith: yea so a fruit; as
without Faith there can be no true prayer, or calling upon the name of God.
Read also, chapt. 8.15. The Spirit of adoption incourageth to prayer. But where
this Spirit is not (even that Spirit which is only received by Faith) there is
no readiness to true and faithful prayer. What profit should we have (say
Infidells) if we should pray unto God? Job: 21.15. And Psalm. 14.4. They call
not upon the Lord. See also a fearful example. Mal: 3.14. Ye have said, It
is in vain to serve God. etc.

That faith does solicit to repentance and care of a godly life: we may
perceive, Gal: chap: 5. verse 6. Faith works by love. Read also and rightly
understand the 2. chap: of the epistle of the Apostle James, who (as by the
grace of God we shall declare more at large afterward) consents with the
Apostle Paul, in showing what manner of faith, the true iustifiyng faith is;
namely such a faith as feeds the hungry, clotheth the naked, and is not a
verbal faith only, etc. Likewise teaches S. John. 1. ep. chapter 3. verses 2.3.
Every man (says he) that has this hope in him (that is in God) he purges
himself. And verse 17. This we shall yet further perceive, 2 Pet 2.22. Ps.
14.1. Ephesians. 4.30. 1. Cor. 6.15.
if we consider, that says has very many and mighty reasons at hand, to
withdraw from sin; and to move unto godliness of life. From sin, because
sin is in it self a most vile and filthy thing; because it is highly
displeasing and abominable in the sight of God; because it grieueth his holy
Spirit, whereby we are sealed unto the day of redemption; because also in
respect of our Savior Christ, it is a most unseemly thing, that any being a
member of his most holy Body, should not be suitable to the Head in some
measure of holiness, etc. But no reason is more mighty, then when faith deeply
weighs with it self, that the least sin could no way else be satisfied for,
unto the Justice of God offended therewith, but by the most grievous sufferings
and death of our Savior Christ. And unto godliness of life, it moves the
believer, by laying before him all the mercies of God; specially this of our
redemption, through the same his most bitter sufferings, even to the sheadding
of his most precious heartblood for us most wretched and unworthy sinners.
Read Romans 12.1.2. and 2. Cor. 6.18. I will be a Father unto you, and ye
shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord almighty. And chapt. 7.1.
Seeing then we have these promises, dearly beloved (says the holy Apostle)
let us cleanse our selves from all the filthiness of the flesh and the spirit,
and grow up to full holiness in the fear of God.

To conclude. That faith is accompanied with hope, in a patient waiting upon
God, for everlasting happiness and salvation: We read Tit. 1.1.2. The faith
of Gods elect is said to be under the hope of eternal life. Let us to the same
end consider the confession of the Apostle Paul. Act: 24.14.15. This I
confess unto thee, etc. that I believe, etc. And have hope toward God, that
the resurrection of the dead shall he both of the just and unjust. Let us
consider it also by calling to mind the example of Abraham's faith, who above
hope, believed under hope, etc. Romans 4.18. And there follows an other
express and notable proof. chapt: 5.1.2. etc. For being justified by faith,
etc. We rejoice under the hope of the glory of God. Moreover in the same
epistle, chap. 8. verses 23.24. We are saved by hope, etc. And we do with
patience abide for that which we see not. Read also. 2. Cor. 4.16. etc. and
Hebr: 6.18. etc. And chap: 10.35. etc. And chap: 12.1.2. etc: there is a
notable exhortation, moving us to patience. Likewise James chap: verses 2.3.4.
and verse 12. Blessed is the man that endures tentation, etc. And 1. Pet.
4.12. etc. Read also Isai: 28.16. He that believes shall not make haste. And
chapt. 64.3.4. God works things above expectation, to those that wait for
him. In the 5. Psalm: verse 3. we have the notable example of a patient waiter.
And again, Psalm. 85.8. And Psa. 147.11. God delights in those that practice
this excellent virtue.

God justifies sinners. God justifies sinners.

THus far of the nature of the true justifying Faith. Let us now hasten
forward as fast as we can. For albeit many things more might be added: yet
hoping that this which has bin already laid forth, may well suffice for our
present purpose; I desire that you should without all further delay, show to
whom that promise of justification and salvation, whereupon the justifying
faith depends, is made?



God of his infinite goodness and mercy, has promised, that he will for his
only Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, justify and save every poor soul,
never so sinful and damnable in themselves, and by reason of the former
wickedness of their lives; Whosoever, after they have truly known the grace
of God, shall thenceforth constantly believe in the name of his Son, and as a
lively fruit thereof, earnestly repent them of their sins, and lead a new
life.

Explication and proof,
This is plainly confirmed in the 3. chapt: of the Evangelist John, verse. 16.
God so loved the world, etc. Read also Isai: 56.3. etc. Let not the son of
the stranger that is joined to the Lord, speak and say, The Lord has surely
separated me from his people: neither let the Eunuch say, Behold I am a dry
tree. For thus says the Lord unto the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and
choose the thing that pleases me, and take hold of my covenant, Even unto them
will I give in my house, and within my walls a place and a name, better then of
the Sons and of the daughters, etc. Yea, as it is in the first chapter of
this prophecy: Though (says the Lord) your sins were as crimsin, they
shall be made white as snow: though they were red like skarlet, they shall be as
wool. And that it is the gracious good pleasure of God, to justify, and save
sinners, yea most grievous sinners; it is not only testified in word, as we
read, Romans 4. verse. 5. To him that works not, but believes in him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. Even as David
declares the blessedness of that man, unto whom God imputes righteousness
without works, saying: Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, etc. But
the same thing is also confirmed ( ipso facto as a man may say) and by
canonical experience; I mean by experience, according to the canon and rule
of the holy Scriptures. For whom did our Savior Christ call, but sinners to
repentance? Yea and among the^, whom rather did he call, then such sinners as
were of most infamous condition and offense of life, in comparison of many
others? Matt. 9. verse. 10.11.12.13. And does not our Savior Christ himself
profess, that he came not to call the righteous: that is, not only such as in
their own proud opinion were such, but even such as were indeed free from the
common crimes, that some other were stained withal, whosoever of the^ would
not humble themselves, in respect of their more inward and hidden corruptions?
Does he not plainly affirm, that Publicans and harlots truly repenting,
should go before hipocrites and iusticiaries into the kingdom of heaven?
Matt. 21.31. And hereof the woman of Samaria, John. 4. and that other sinful
woman, Luke. 7.37. etc. And the Apostle Paul also, 1. Tim. 1.13.14.15.16.
Likewise that sinful thief upon the cross, may be lively examples. And all
according to those comfortable promises of God, Ier. 31.33.34. Heb. 8.12. Isai:
cha: 53. Ezekiel: 18. At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins,
I will blot all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord.

But here, I beseech you, let none take that with the left hand, and by a
sinister and wrong interpretation, which is delivered with the right hand. That
it, let none abuse that to encourage himself to any license to sin, which
is only spoken to magnify the great mercy of GOD, and to provoke and
encourage sinners in the comfortable hope thereof, speedily to leave and
forsake their sins. It is, (as we know, or ought to know, every one of us)
the duty even of children, from their youngest years (according to that which
our Christian baptism challenges at all our hands) to settle their hearts,
What justification is.
to serve God their Creator and Father. Much more then ought every one of us,
as we are of more years (and have hitherto neglected our duty) to be without
delay, most heartily sorry for it; and therefore henceforward, to be the more
careful, etc. For albeit it is an undoubted truth, that God will receive every
sinner, that shall come unto him, and truly believe in the name of Jesus
Christ, unfeignedly repenting them of their sins: yet how know thou, that
he will hereafter give thee the gift of faith and repentance, if thou do
despise the present offer which is tendered for to day: according as we
read, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, etc. True
repentance is in deed never too late; (as one truly says) but late
repentance is seldom true. Herein, delays are most dangerous, as we shall
further perceive, when we come to inquire out, the doctrine of repentance. In
the mean while, we will conclude this point with the words of the holy
Apostle Paul: Rom: 6.1. Shall we continue still in sin, that grace may
abound? God forbid.

What Justification is.
THese things thus hitherto observed: now to the end we may understand the
matter in hand, to our more full use and comfort; three things are yet a little
further to be inquired into of us.

First, what the meaning of this word to Justify, is.

Secondly, what is meant by Salvation, or to save.

Thirdly, what Repentance is. For to the end we may understand the mind of
God, it is meet that we should be careful to understand the words which God
uses to express the same unto us by; specially such, as be in the science of
Religion, (the most high and excellent science of all other) as it were words
of Art, the which have a peculiar sense proper unto them.

Justify, signify in this our Christian doctrine of Justification by faith?

This word Justification, or to justify, it signifies a full and perfect
clearing and discharging of the offender, from the everlasting wrath and
condemnation of God, by the free pardon of his sins, for Jesus Christ's sake.
It signifies also therewithal, the imputing of the perfect righteousness of
Christ, to every sinner truly believing in him, and that of the ^ame most free
grace and mercy of God.

Explication and proof
That this is so we may evidently perceive, by that which is written, Romans 4.
verses. 5.6.7.8: the place alleged a little before. Likewise, by that which
we read further verse, 22. even to the end of the same 4. chapter. Moreover
by that which we read 2. Cor. 5.21. God has made him to be sin for us, who
knew no sin that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, Whence
also it is, that the Pophet Jeremiah pophesied long before, that he should be
called and acknowledged, the Lord our righteousness. chap. 23.6. and again, ch:
33.16. Read also Galat: 4. verses, 4.5. The Son of God (says the Apostle)
was made under the law, that he might redeem them which were under the law,
that we might receive the adoption of sons. And this also, according to the
prophecy of Isaiah, The knowledge of Christ, put for the says of Christ.
cha. 53.11. By his knowledge (says the Lord by his holy Prophet) shall my
righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear their iniquities. But among
all other testimonies, we may not pass over in silence, that of the Apostle
Paul, Romans 3.24. etc. We are justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Whom God has set forth to be a
reconciliation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, by the
forgiveness of the sins that are passed through the patience of God. To show
at this time his righteousness, that he may be just, and a iustifier of him
that is of the faith of Jesus. And cha. 5.19. As by one man's disodience of one
shall many also be made righteous. And chapt: 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies, etc. No marvel therefore,
though the faithful servants of God (according to the doctrine of the holy
Scriptures) do so highly advance this doctrine of our free justification, only
by faith in Christ the Son of God; that they acccount it, the touc-stone of
all truth of doctrine, and the ground of all true comfort, to the soul and
conscience of man. It is a saying worthy to be noted from M. Fox, that herein
lies the touh-stone of all truth and doctrine: and that this doctrine beats
down all errors. Act: and Monu^: pa: 770. immediately before the history of the
life and doctrine of D. Martin Luther, a most memorable and zealous preacher
and iustifier of this most holy and heavenly doctrine. Whereunto accords M.
Calvin, who likewise truly affirms, that the right understanding of the
doctrine of justification, is praecipuus sustinendae religionis cardo: M Charke
in his disputation against Campion.
the principal support of the true Christian religion. And another learned
man: that it is as the soul or life of the Church. Thus then we may
perceive, what the word to justify, or justification it self in the sight of
God means, when we speak of our justification by faith. For it is nothing in
effect, but the apprehension and application of Christ's righteousness and
redemption to a man's self, according to the free promise and gift of God:
whose good will and pleasure it is, to impute it to every true believer, as
verily and fully, as if he had performed it himself.



The meaning is, that no man either has, or can possibly perform, the moral
works commanded in the most holy and righteous law of God, so perfectly, that
he should thereby deserve to be accounted righteous before the judgment seat
of God; and for the same, to be worthy of that high reward of the Crown of
righteousness and glory, the which God of his free grace and mercy, has for
his Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, laid up for those only, which
believe in his name, and love and long after his most glorious and blessed
appearing.

Explication and proof.
It is true. So says the Apostle Paul. 2. Timoth: 4.7.8. And again Rom: 3.20.
We know that whatsoever the law says, it says it to them which are under
the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world be culpable before
God. Therefore by the works of the law, shall no flesh be justified in his
sight: for by the law comes the knowledge of sin. And in the same chapter,
verse 28. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith, without the
works of the law. Likewise, chapt: 11. 6. and in many other places of his
most holy Epistles.

But it may be objected, that the Apostle James seems to teach otherwise: For
he affirms expressly, that not only Abraham (that renowned father of the
faithful; but also, that Rahab a heathen woman, one that was before of an
infamous condition of life; was after that she believed, justified by her
works.

James to be understood?

We are first of all, undoubtedly to persuade our selves, that it never came
into the Apostle James his mind, to teach any thing in his holy Epistle
contrary, no nor in any the least thing, dissenting from the doctrine of the
Apostle Paul.

Explication and proof.
This ought to be out of all question indeed. For both the one and the other,
did both write and preach always, by one, and the same most faithful and
constant Spirit of truth: by whom no doubt, they were perfectly guided, and led
into all truth, according to the promise of our Savior Christ, John 16 13. And
the rather are we thus to persuade our selves, in the present point of
doctrine; because it is a doctrine, both of the most singular honor and glory
to the most free grace and mercy of God, and also of the greatest comfort to
our own poor souls, that may be, as was mentioned before. Yea, and further
also; of all other doctrines, most effectual to provoke us, and all true
believers, to all holy thankfulness and good duty toward the Lord God, our most
gracious and merciful Father, for the same. And the rather also will we thus
persuade our selves, if we duly consider, (as the truth is,) that the doctrine
of Justification by works, and the imagined opinion of the merit and worthiness
thereof before the judgment seat of God: is, as a learned and godly Father
has well observed, many ways exceedingly prejudicial, both to Gods glory,
and to our own comfort, and to the truth it self.

M Fox in his observations concerning the doctrine of the law of God. Act.
And M^n. page 894.
For first, as he truly says, they that teach Justification by the works of
the law, (the which is contrary to the end and scope of the law) they do
pervert all method and order of doctrine.

2 They seek that in the law, which the law cannot give.

3 They are not able either to comfort themselves, or other.

4 They keep men's souls in an uncertain doubting of their salvation.

5 They obscure the light of Gods grace.

6 They are unkind to Gods benefits.

7 They are injurious to Christ's passion. Yea enemies to his cross.

8 They stop Christian liberty.

9 They bereave the Church the spouse of Christ, of her due comfort, as taking
away the Sun out of the world.

10 In all their doings they shoot at a wrong mark. For where Christ only is
set up, to be apprehended by our faith; and so, freely to justify us: they,
leaving this Justification by faith, set up other marks, partly of the law,
and partly of their own devising, for men to shoot at. This therefore (as
that learned Father has observed) is the B. of Romes doctrine, and not the
doctrine of the Apostle James.

James to be understood, in that he says, Abraham and Rahab were justified by
works?

The Apostle James having just cause to reprove certain vain and carnal
professors of the Gospel; even such as verbally and in word; only boasted of
their faith, but were altogether unfruitful in good works: he is accordingly,
veri^ earnest in declaring, not what are the causes of our Justification, (as
the Apostle Paul does) but only what manner of faith, the justifying faith is,
whereby true believers are justified in the sight of God.

It is very true, and so can it not but be acknowledged of every upright and
diligent Reader. Proceed you therefore to declare what manner of faith the true
justifying faith is, according to the doctrine of S. James.

James?

He gives plainly to understand, that the true justifying faith is not an idle
and unfruitful faith, such as theirs was whom he justly reproves, and
therefore terms it a dead faith: but that it is such a faith, as through the
quickening grace of the holy Ghost, works by love, G^l 5.^ Heb. 11.33.
and is fruitful in the actions and duties thereof. And that for the same
cause, it man justly be said, that such as do so believe, are by their works:
that is to say, by the fruits of their faith, justified to have a true
justifying faith in deed, to the comfort of their own hearts, and before the
Church of God, so far as it may judge and discern.

Explication and proof.
That this is the true scope of the doctrine of the Apostle James; it will in
deed appear to every one, that will diligently, and in the fear of God bend
his mind, to consider of it wisely, comparing one thing with an other. Let us
therefore yet again upon the occasion renewed, use some further diligence, for
the clearing of this point of Justification, against the litigious importunity
of the gainsayers and corrupters thereof.

To this purpose, we are to understand, that there are diverse significations
and uses of this word, to Justify, as we have seen before, concerning the
word Faith: and that, either as it is referred to God, or as it is applied to
men.

First therefore, as it is referred to God, either it notes a manifest or full
declaration and proof of his most perfect righteousness, by a special
prerogative and power or pre-eminence, which he has above all creatures: as
when we say that God will surely justify, that is, perfectly approve himself
most holy and righteous in all his ways, and namely, in this matter of
justifying his people through faith in his son, against all whosoever do
contradict or cavil against the same: Romans 3, verse 4, and verse 26. That thou
might be justified in thy words, etc. And as our Savior Christ is said, to
have been justified in the spirit. 1. Tim. 3, 16. Or else, this word of
justifying, being referred to God, it signifies man's dutiful acknowledging of
the perfect justice and truth of God: as Luke chap. 7. 29. The Publicans are
said to justify God, in that they submitted themselves to be Baptized of
John. And verse, 35, Our Savior Christ affirms that wisdom is justified of
all her children. These are the significations of the word to Justify: as it
is referred to God, in respect of himself, and his own most holy and just
proceedings.

Now as it is applied to men, it signifies either morally (as we may say) to
avouch a man's own innocence, in any matter unjustly laid to his charge: for
then is a man said to justify himself, when he clears himself as
vnguiltie of the crime objected against him. And likewise to justify an other
man, when he by a true testimony clears him against a false accusation: or
at the least to excuse one in comparison of an other, as Judah said of Tamar
that she was more righteous then himself: Genesis 38, 26. And as Saul said to
David: Thou art more righteous then I. 1. Sam. 24, 18. And as the rebellious
Israel is said to have justified her self more then the rebellious Judah:
That is, to have sinned less then Judah: to wit, all circumstances duly
considered: Ier. 3, 11. And on the contrary; Jerusalem is said to have
justified Samaria and Sodom: that is, to have sinned more grievously then those
wicked Cities: Ezekiel: Chap. 16.

Thus, as was said, the word to justify, is taken either some thing more
morally. Or else the same again is used iudicially, for to accept and
pronounce a man, according to witnesses, and secundum allegata and probata as
they say, to be guiltles, touching the crime or crimes particularly objected
against him. According as it is the duty of the Judge to justify the innocent
party as we read: Deuteronomy. 25, 1. When there shall be strife between men, and
they shall come unto judgment, and sentence shall be given upon them, and the
righteous shall be justified, and the wicked condemned; Then if so be etc? And
Prou. 17, 15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just,
even they both are abomination to the Lord. Likewise, Isay, 5.22, 23. Woe unto
them that are mighty to drink wine, and to them that are strong to pour in
strong drink: Which justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from him.

Moreover, to justify, signifies sometimes, even of clemency and mere
mercy, to forgive a trespass done against one, as freely as if it had not
been committed: like as if a creditor should forgive his debtor, as perfectly
as if the debt had been paid to the uttermost farthing. Of the which use, we
will consider by and by: for it is specially serving to clear the great point
of holy doctrine which we have in hand. Finally, the word to justify,
according to the latin diriuation of it, signifies to make righteous: but
this must be ouerruled by the use of the holy languages of the original text
in Hebrewe and Greek, seeing it is but a translation of them, and not the
original it self. And besides, even in the use of the latin speech, the
latter part of the word does not always exactly follow the natural
diriuation, to signify the making of a thing so, or so. As for example, this
word (to signify) even now mentioned, does not note the making of a sign, but
to give some knowledge of a thing. So, to amplify, is not always to make a
thing more large, but to treat of the same thing more at large, the^ some other
or the same party had done before. Likewise, to magnify, is not used to note
the making of a thing great, but to acknowledge and celebrate it, according to
the greatness and excellency of it. As when we are said to magnify the Lord
our God. And when God says he will magnify himself, his meaning is that he
will make his greatness known. So to glorify God, is not to make God glorious,
as one without glory in himself, but to acknowledge and set forth his glory,
etc.

Likewise, when in our own language, by an imitation of the same latin
composition, we say we will exemplify a thing, our meaning is not, that we will
make an example: but set forth and illustrate a thing by an example. And when
we say that a thing is verified, we do not mean that it is made true, but
that it is declared and confirmed to be true. And when the earth is said to
fructify, the meaning is not, that the earth makes fruit (which is the more
immediate work of God) but that it brings forth fruit. There might more of
like sort be alleged, but these may suffice to show that it is not
necessary, by force of the latin diriuatio^, that to justify, should signify
to make just, as though a man that is justified, must needs be made perfitly
just by a real and inhere^t justice of his own: but that without injury to
that kind of composition of the word, we may according to the use of the holy
Scriptures, justly understand it to signify the accounting and esteeming, or
the declaring and pronouncing of a man either generally just, or else innocent
concerning a particular crime objected against him.

Hitherto of the diverse significations of the word, to justify.

Now it follows, that we do enquire in what sense we are to understand the
same word, when we refer it to faith; and also when we refer it to works:
and that according to the use of the holy Scriptures, the which, in either
case, must altogether ouerrule, as was said.

First therefore, when we are said to be justified by faith, we will not
altogether refuse to understand it thus, that we are made perfectly righteous
by faith, but on this cond t on, that we rightly conceive of the manner how:
that is to say not by faith as by a moral duty, and m^^^e action of him that
believes, legally taken for a persuasion of the truth of Gods promise, in
respect of perfect obedience yielded unto him: but by the faith of the Gospel,
that is by faith apprehe^ding and applying to a man's self the perfect
righteousness of Jesus Christ, for his perfect justification in the sight of
God. For the faith of the Gospel has always a necessary relation to Christ,
and so is it necessarily to be understood in this high principle of Christian
religion, concerning our justification by faith, according to that we read, 2.
Cor 5, 21. God has made him to be sin for us: that is, he has imputed and
laid our sins to his charge, and proceeded against him as if he had been a
most grievous sinner, though he knew no sin: that is, was nothing at all
guilty of it: that we should be made the righteousness of God in him: that is,
that we being most grievous sinners, might have his righteousness imputed, and
freely given unto us through the rich grace and mercy of God; as verily as if
we our selves had wrought and performed the same. Whereby also it is evident,
that the true Christian faith, in that it justifies, does it not as it is an
action simply considered, but as in the action of it, it receives and
imbraceth Christ with his righteousness, even passiuely as a man may truly say.
And in this sense (as was said) we will not refuse to understand, by this word
justified, that we are made righteou^; seeing through faith in Christ, a man is
of a sinner in himself, made no sinner but righteous in Christ, by the
imputation of his righteousness unto him: according to that of the same Apostle.
To. 3, 26. God is just, and a iustifier of him which is of the faith of Jesus.
And chapter 4, 5 He justifies the ungodly, accounting his faith for righteousness.
Nevertheless, we must therewitha l needs acknowledge, as the truth is, that the
usual acceptance of this word to justify, is in the holy Scriptures, to
esteem and account, or to declare and pronounce just, by acquiting of sin, and
imputing of righteousness, and that even of the mere grace and favor of God
for Jesus Christ his sake: as we will now henceforth further declare.

And first, to begin with that which is written. Act. 13, 38, 39. Be it known
unto you men and brethren (says the Apostle Paul) that through this man, (that
is, by Jesus Christ) is preached unto you forgiveness of sins. And from all
things, from the which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses, by
him every one that believes is justified: That is to say, he is perfectly
acquitted set free and delivered from the guiltines and punishment of it. Like
as the same Ap. To. chapter 6. v, 7. speaking of deliverance from the power of sin,
by the virtue of the death of Christ he expresses it by this word of
justifying from it, as we read in the Greek text. where he borrows the word
of justification, to express the nature of sanctification, which is a singular
effect, or fruit of the true justifying faith, and an open testimony and
prooofe of the same. But let us proceed to see what the nature of
justification it self (properly taken) is according to some other testimonies
of the holy Scriptures. To this purpose read again, Romans 3, 24. and v 26 and
chap. 4, 5. and Tit. 3, 7. We being justified by his grace, are made heirs
according to the hope of the eternal life. But that which is written Romans 8,
33, 34. shall be principally considered of us at this time: Who (says the
Apostle) shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
justifies. Who shall condemn?

In the which place, the Apostle has a respect to the like words of the
Prophet Isaiah. chapter 50, 8. etc. Where the holy Prophet speaking thus of the
perfect faith and assurance of Christ the head, that he should perfectly be
justified by his own inherent righteousness and actual obedience to his
father, against all that could be objected against him: He is near that
justifies me, who will contend with me? (says the Prophet, as it were in the
person of our Savior Christ:) Yea further: Let us stand together (says he)
who is my adversary? Let him come near to me. Behold, the Lord God will help
me: Who is he that can condemn me? etc. The same does the Apostle apply to the
encouragement of all true believers in Christ, the members of his body, that
they also by him, and for his sake, shall have their free discharge from the
judgment seat of God: that they may say likewise, with great comfort and
confidence: Seeing God has not spared his own Son, but gave him for us all,
how shall he not with him give us all things also? Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods chosen? And so forth, as was alleged even now. But yet in
this differing manner (as is most necessary to be observed) that the
justification of our Savior Christ: is (in respect of himself) by a real and
perfect justice, examined and tried in a most exact course of judgment, before
the judgment seat of God, and not by faith, such as ours is. For he never
offended in his own person, but perfectly obeyed the law of God: and
therefore might not in justice have been condemned, had he not set himself a
mediator before God, in the behalf, yea even in the person and condition of us
miserable sinners. But our justification (insomuch as we are in our selves all
of us damnable sinners) it is from God, of mere grace and favor, in that by
faith only, the righteousness of Christ is imputed to us, and made ours, as
if (as was said) we had perfectly performed it our own selves. Yet so, as we
must nevertheless, acknowledge our selves in our selves, to be always
miserable sinners, and therefore, according to the instruction of our Savior
himself, to pray continually, for the forgiveness of them, etc. Like as just
Job, though he had the comfortable assurance of his salvation, through faith in
his Redeemer, as he professes in the 19, ^hap. of his book. And chap. 13,
15, 19. Lo (says he) though God slay me, yet will I trust in him. He will be
my salvation also. And verses. 18, 19. I know that I shall be justified who is
he that will plead with me, etc. Nevertheless, he does therewithal profess
likewise, that he will reprove his own ways, as being faulty in the sight
of God, as we read in the latter part of the 15, v. And in the holy Gospel of
our Savior Christ: we read likewise that the Publican confessing and
bewailing his sins, was justified, and not the Pharisie, who justified
himself. Luke 18, 10. And chapter 16, 15. Our Savior Christ does more generally
condemn the Pharisees for the same their pride, saying. Ye are they which
justify your selves before men: but God knows your hearts: for that which is
highly esteeemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God.

But when we affirm, that we are justified only by faith (in such sense as
has been expressed) our meaning is not, to exclude the care and practice of
any good work, in those that are so justified: but rather, by the magnifying of
the grace of God to provoke our selves and others, so much the more earnestly,
to the study and performance of al obedience, for declaration of our true
thankfulness to God. And for many other weighty causes; to wit, for the
assuring unto our selves the truth of our own faith, and the certainty of our
election, for the quiet and peace of our co^scie^ces; and also for the good
example of others, that they seeing our good works may be moved to glorify the
name of God our heavenly father; and lest otherwise, we should imbolden any to
speak evil of the Gospel, or at the least, grieve the rest of the brethren, if
we should be unfruitful in good works etc.

We teach also (as we have learned out of the word of God) that the faithful
servants of God truly justified, are likewise truly sanctified: yea so, as
through the renewment and regeneration of the H. Ghost, they have a certain
measure of true inherent and practike righteousness, in dying to sin and the
actions thereof, and in living to righteousness and all the good outward works
and fruits of the same. And therefore are they usually in the holy Scriptures,
described by this, as by a special property, that they love righteousness, and
that they are such as follow righteousness, etc. So that in comparison of the
unfaithful and wicked, whether more open and loose transgressors, or more
close and counterfeit hipocrites; they may truly be justified, that is,
preferred and approved for righteous above them: according as Saul was convict,
even in his own conscience, that David was more righteous then himself. Yea so
are they renewed and sanctified by the holy ghost, that they are truly and
indeed accounted righteous, inchoately and in part, even before God, who has
given them truth in their inward parts: according as the holy Scriptures do
not in vain call Noah, Lot, Job, and many other, Just men fearing God,
eschuing evil, etc. Genesis 7, 1.2. Pet. 2, 7, 8. Job. chapter 1, ver. 1, 8. Ezekiel. 14
20. Luke. 1, 6, and chapter 2, 25. In which respect, we may truly use the words of
the Apo. James, and say that they were all justified by their works; that is,
declared to be righteous indeed and in some measure of truth, and not in show
and appearance only. According also, as it is said by our Sa: Chr: in the
Gospel: By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned: that is, it shall hereby be justly discerned of men, what manner of
one thou art, and how thou art among them to be accounted and esteemed. Mat. 12
37. And as we read, 1. John. 3, 7. He that does righteousness is righteous, to
wit, he is righteous indeed, and in truth, though not perfectly righteous: as
he had taught before, in that he wrote thus: If we say we have no sin, We
deceive our selves and the truth is not in us. Thus we do not deny, but
plainly affirm, that all true believers justified by faith, have, as an
effect thereof, a general care and practice of righteousness begun in them,
though never perfected here in this life.

Neither yet do we deny, but that through the same grace of God, and the
sanctification of his holy spirit, which he gives unto them; the faithful
servants of God, may so uprightly behave themselves toward men, specially in
some particular action, yea and in the general intention and purpose of their
heart: that they may truly profess, that they are (for any thing that men may
charge them with) as clear, as the child borne but yesterday. Like as David
protests, concerning his loiall heart toward king Saul, altogether free from
intending any traitorous conspiracy against him: as Ps. 7, 3, 4, 5, and Ps.
131, 2. Where he compares himself to a young child, in respect of his innocence
in that matter. According also to that of our Sa. Christ. Mat. 18, 1, that we
must all of us, as young children be void of pride and ambition, or else we
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Like also as the Prophet Samuel
clears himself, as touching his vprightnes in government, and is justified
of the people. 1, Sam. chapter 12. And Paul. Act. 20, 33, etc. And as Moses
appealeth to God. Number. chap. 16, 15. Yea, so may the servants of God, through
his grace, behave themselves in duties more directly respecting his own divine
majesty, that they may truly protest in his sight, that they have served him
in truth of heart: as K. Hezekiah for his part, protests in a good
conscience: Isay, 38, 3. And that they do unfeignedly love the Lord: as Peter
protested, Ioh. 21.17. Thou know Lord that I love thee. And David, Ps. 18,
1, and 116, 1.

And specially in some one action, may they, by the special grace of GOD, so
behave themselves, that they may in special manner be justified; that is, not
only be allowed and approved, but more then ordinarily commended therein: as
we have the zealous act of Phineas set forth unto us, for a notable example, in
that he, executing the Lords judgment upon the adulterous Israelite, and the
Midianitish harlot, it was accounted to him for righteousness, from generation
to generation: so pleasing was it unto the Lord: Numb. 25, 10, 11, 12, 13, 13,
14, 15, and Psalm. 106, 30, 31. According also to that which our Savior Christ
says of the woman in the Gospel, who of singular love toward him, powered a
box of very costly ointment upon him: Verily (says he) wheresoever this
Gospel shall be preached throughout all the world, there shall also this that
she has done, be spoken of for a memorial of her. Mat. 26, 13.

Thus we deny not, but willingly grant, that the faithful servants of God, have
their righteousness in truth and verity, through the sanctification of the
spirit of God, both infused or rather inspired, and even inherent in them, and
also actually flowing from them in the actions and duties of true righteousness:
so that God himself being judge, and approving the work of his own spirit,
they are found of him truly worthy to be preferred before the wicked, yea to be
received into his heavenly kingdom, when they shall justly be shut out and
condemned to Hell for ever: as we read Matt. 25, 31, etc.

But with all, we do no less truly and constantly affirm, Isay. 64.6. We are
all as an unclean thing, or person: to wit, as a leaper. And all our
righteousness is as a clout to be cast out of sight or naught worth, etc. Read
also Exodus 28, 38, and Phillip. 3, 8, 9.
that all this their righteousness, is only by favor and mercy accepted of
God, with allowance from the throne of his grace, as a fruit of their perfect
justification by faith in Christ, through the forgiveness of their sins: the
which justification alone, and no other, can endure strict examination before
the judgment seat of God: agreeable to the confession of the holy Prophet,
Psalm. 130, 3, 4. If thou o Lord straightly markest iniquities, o Lord who shall
stand? But mercy is with thee that thou may be feared. So that, even of
necessity, we must all (as well as he) come into the house of the Lord, in the
multitude of his mercy, and worship him in fear. Psalm. 5, 7. Praying to him
as we read, Ps. 143, 2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy
sight shall none that lives be justified. Hereunto also does the example of
the holy Ap. Paul lead us, in that he makes his protestation. 1. Cor 4, v. 3,
4, in these words. As touching me (says Paul) I pass very little to be judged
of you, or of ma^s judgment: no I judge not mine own self. For I know
nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified: but he that judges me is
the Lord etc. And the example of righteous Job, in his confession: chap. 9, v.
1, 2, 3. I know verily (says he) that it is so: for how should man compared
unto God be justified? If he should dispute with him, he could not answer him
one thing of a thousand. And v. 19, 20, 21. If we speak of strength (says
Job) behold he (that is God) is strong: if we speak of judgment, who shall
bring me in to plead? If I would justify my self, mine own mouth should
condemn me: If I would be perfect, he shall judge me wicked. Though I were
perfect, yet I know not my soul therefore do I ahhorre my life.

And chapter 25, 4. in the same book: Bildad (likewise speaking by the holy Ghost)
says confidently: How can a man be justified with God? or how can he be clean
that is borne of woman? Wherefore, as Judah says to Joseph, Genesis 44.16. How
shall we justify our selves? He professing thereby, that they could not clear
themselves. Much rather may we, yea ought we to say, and confess before the
Lord, that we cannot possibly justify our selves before his judgment seat
but must needs appeal to his throne of free mercy and grace. For assuredly,
none shall be justified by their own righteousness, but such as shall perfectly
fulfill the whole law of God according to that, To. 2, 13. The hearers of the
law are not righteous before God, but the dooers of the law shall be justified.

But this can no man possibly perform. For as touching the righteousness of the
best, it is imperfect, and we must every one of us, labor to better and
increase it from day to day: as Revel. 22, 11. He that is just, let him be
justified still; and he that is holy, let him be sanctified still. That is, let
every such one, not only continue, but also in continuance, let him more and
more increase in righteousness and holiness, and so declare the truth of that
righteousness and holiness which is in him. For as our Sa: Christ says, To him
that has shall be given, and he shall have in a boundance, etc. But the
righteousness of God, by the gift whereof he justifies his adopted children;
namely, in that he imputes the righteousness of his own natural son our
Lord Jesus Christ unto them; it is fully perfect at the very first instant, and
so continues always, even as the righteousness of Christ himself is perfect
once and for ever: howsoever in the faithful, the duty, yea and the comfort
of their justification may appear, and be more fully manifested in process
and tract of time, as Abraham believing, and by his faith being justified in
the sight of God long before, showed the truth and power of his faith, in
offering up of his only son Isaak, at the commandment which God gave him
for the trial of his faith, many a year after.

And thus, by the grace of God may we perceive, what justification by faith is:
according to the doctrine of the Apostle Paul: to wit, that we are accounted
righteous before the judgment seat of God, only for the merit and worthiness
of the righteousness and obedience of our Savior Christ imputed to us of God
and apprehended of us by faith, and not otherwise.

Now when the same word (to justify) is referred to works, as the Apostle
James uses it; the Apostle is in no wise to be understood, as though a man
might by his works be made perfectly righteous in the just and strict
judgment of God. For that cannot be, insomuch (as it was said even now) al our
own works, yea even the best of them, they are imperfect. And besides that, as
the Apostle James himself teaches us, In many things we sin all: And
therefore it must needs be in his judgment, a grievous sin for any to go
about to justify themselves by any worthiness of their own works in the sight
of God: according as it is expressly noted to be a sin in the Pharisees by our
Sa: Christ. Luke chapter 16. v. 15. Ye are they which justify your selves before
men etc. And again, chapter 18, 19, etc. For if it be a sin to stand in a vain
ostentation of our righteousness before men, much more sinful is it, in opinion
thereof, to lift up a ma^s mind in the sight of god: as Hab. chapter 2, 4. Behold he
that lifts up himself, his mind is not upright in him: but the just shall
live by his faith. They only have the fruit and reward of their works, who
doing them in conscience of most bounden duty, and in obedience to God, do
most unfeignedly renounce al opinion of merit, and according to the instruction
of our Sa: Christ, acknowledge themselves, when they have done all that they
can, to be unprofitable servants. Luke 17.10. And chapter 18. 9. etc. it may in a
good part be evident by the comparison, which our Sa: Christ makes, betwixt
the Pharisie justifying himself, and the poor Publican, humbly confessing and
bewailing his sins: of whom our Sa: says that he went to his house justified
rather then the other. And it may be more fully confirmed by these reasons
following.

Abraham being justified without works, has nothing concerning himself to
rejoice in before God Likewise Ephesians. 2, 9. Not of works, lest any man should
boast himself. This, because it was not duly regarded of the unbelieving
Jews, who sought after their own righteousness, it turned to their destruction,
To. 9, 30, 31, 32, 33. and ch 10 1, 2, 3. Wherefore as it is written. 1. Cor.
1, 31. He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord. Who has made Christ to
be perfect wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption unto us.





Paul, Romans 7, 24, 25, 1. Cor, 15, 57, and 2. Ep. 1, 9. Philip. 1, 20, 21. But
all these excellent and comfortable effects follow justification by faith in
Christ, and cannot stand with any imagined justification by the worthiness of
our own works in any parcel or part thereof, which would even falsify the
truth of faith it self. It follows therefore, that we are perfectly justified
in the sight of God by faith in Christ, and not by our own works. How the^ is
this word of justification, to be taken when it is applied to works, as the
Apostle James does, being drawn thereunto upon a special occasion? Verily
no otherwise as was answered, but as works may outwardly argue and declare to
others, and inwardly confirm to our selves, the truth of our faith in Christ,
which only is the instrument of our perfect justification by him. And so does
the Apostle James express his own meaning, chap: 2.18. in that he gives
plainly to understand, that it is the duty of every Christian, to show forth
his faith by his works. And this is that which he disputes in this latter part
of the chap: as it is further evident, in that he had to deal against such as
boasted that they had faith, when in the mean while, they were void of all
good works.

In mayor: annot. in verse. 14. ca. 2
The which place of the Apostle James, to the end it may be the better
understood, I will here set down the learned and diligent interpretation of M.
Beza, for the acording of either Apostle with other. In so much (says he) as
Sophisters (we will in our language call them Cauillers, do urge no other
place (to wit of holy Scripture) more stoutly, to the end they might
overthrow the doctrine of the grace of God: and that truly, in such sort,
that this Epistle has been for the same cause refused of some, as if it were
contrary to sound doctrine: therefore, I for my part, will the rather endeavor,
briefly to give some light, to the understanding of the same place, to the end
it may plainly appear, that it neither makes any thing on the behalf of the
Cauillers, neither yet contains any thing differing from the sound and true
doctrine of justification by free favor and grace. To the which end (as says
this excellent Interpreter) the Apostles drift is principally to be considered.
He had before dealt against those, that would seem to live holily, though in
the mean while they were accepters of persons, and he has pulled away from
them their false visard of holiness. But now he sets upon another sort of
men; that is, upon such, as putting upon the bare knowledge of the doctrine
of the Gospel, the title of faith, do so rest in that their devise, as if
they were of all other most righteous men: though in the mean season, their
whole life abounds in much wickedness: so far off are they from the practice
of charity. And this to be the Apostles drift, it is so clear that I suppose
(says Beza) the Cauillers themselves will not deny it to be so. Now let us
consider, after wat manner, such men are to be reasoned against. Paul, specially
in his epistles to the Romans, and to the Galatians, is altogether in this, to
teach that we are freely justified by faith without works, (or which is all
one) by faith in Christ. Wherefore is he so? Surely, because he bickered with
them, who either did set their own merits in stead of grace, or else did
couple and join them with grace. It was behoouefull for him therefore, first of
all, to discuss the right way of justification, in so much as they instituted
false ways and means in stead of the true. But as touching these, (to wit,
with who^ the Apostle James has to deal) like as the controversy with the^
is altogether contrary; so the matter it self shows, that he was to take a
clean contrary course, in his disputation against them. For they, (that is to
say, some among the Romans and Galatians to whom Paul wrote) they sought to
establish justification by works: these, (that is, some among them, to whom the
Apo: James did wright) they did not only remove justification from works, but
also they took away even works themselves. Wherefore, like as against these,
free justification by faith, is so defended, that not good works themselves are
taken away; but only the power of justifying, is withdrawn from them: so here,
who sees not, that even in a contrary course, works are in such wise to be
established; that although the power of justification be not yielded to the^,
yet that true justification may be discerned by them, as by the effects thereof?
I will utter the matter, yet more plainly (says the Interpreter.) There, (to
wit, in Paul's epistles) the question is concerning the cause: but here, (that
is, in the epistle of James) it is about the effects. There Paul comes down
from the cause to the effect: here (James) from the effects goes up to the
cause. There the question is how we may be justified: here, how it may be
perceived, that we are justified. There, works are excluded from being the
cause of justification: here, it is firmly determined, that they are the
effects of justification. There, it is denied that the works of those who are
to be justified, do go before: here, it is affirmed that they do follow, after
that men are already justified. For to what purpose were it, for a man to
prove against these, that we are not justified by works, seeing they are so
far from ascribing more unto works then is meet, that they do not require
them as true testimonies of righteousness? The which things being so: who sees
not how miserably, the Sophistical cauillers are deceived, for want of true
light of judgment, in that they go about to accord James with Paul, as if
either of them handeled one, and the same question, concerning the causes of
justification? Hence comes that their crooked distinction of works moral
and ceremonial, as though these only, (to wit, the ceremonial) were excluded
by Paul. etc. Hitherto out of Beza his annotations. Thus therefore, having
sufficiently (as we trust) for the course of this our exercise, declared the
truth of this great and high point of our justification by faith: we might
come now to the second point, pertaining to the explication of the former
answer, touching the promise of justification and salvation: that is, what the
word salvation or to save means: save that to make the matter yet more
plain, if it may be, I am to ask you here a question or two more.

Paul, in that he opposes faith to works, makes the opposition only betwixt
the ceremonial works of the law, and the faith of the Gospel, as was said
even now: and not betwixt it, and the works of the moral law?

No, it may not be thought so. For it is manifest, that the Apostle excludes
the one as well as the other, yea most expressly, the works of the moral
law: to the which end he does allege that text of the law, which does most
properly belong thereunto.

Explication and proof.
It is true. So we read, Gal: 3.10. For (as the Apostle says) so many as are of
the works of the law, they are under the curse: for it is written: Cursed is
every man that continues not in all things which are written in the book of
the law to do them. The which Scripture in Moses, Deuteronomy: 27. follows after
an enumeration of the moral, and not ceremonial duties of the law. And
touching the ceremonial, there was less need that they should be so
expressly mentioned, because they of themselves, do more evidently disclaim
justification by the exercise of them: in so much as they do more apparently
point unto Christ, and are otherwise a flat handwriting against the users of
them, whosoever should seek justification by them: as the Apostle teaches.
Colos: 2.14. For what did circumcision signify, but the corruption of man's
nature to be put off, and cast aside, etc? What the legal and ceremonial
washings, but that man is stained with the soil and filth of sin? what did
the slain sacrifices testify, but that every man has justly deserved
everlasting death and damnation, if God should enter into judgment against
them, etc? And therefore, seeing they all contained a manifest confession of
sins in the practice of them, there was no such need, that they should be so
expressly mentioned, in this question, concerning justification, as the other
should: though they as well as these, be altogether excluded in this case. Now
therefore, seeing all the works of the holy law of God, as well moral as
ceremonial, are dis-abled from justification, by reason of the weakness of
them, or rather of man himself, for his not performance of them: Rom: 8.3.
Infinitely much rather then, all popish ceremonies, and all their works of
blind and superstitious devotion, yea all their best works of alms, must
needs be blotted out of this reckoning: in so much as they are for the most
part, contrary to the express commandment of God, and they that are
commanded, are done of them in a corrupt manner through the proud opinion they
have of merit, and to wrong ends, even for the credit and maintenance of a
false and Antichristian worship: etc.

Paul and James together: may we not think that true Christians after they be
endued with fath, are justified, partly by faith in Christ, and partly by
their own works, which they do in faith? No, in no wise. For seeing our best
works are imperfect: that faith, which should rest in any part, upon such
works, it should stay it self upon a false and deceiuable ground, and so
should even betray and overthrow it self.

Explication and proof.
It must needs be so. And in very deed no man can do any good work, in the true
faith of Christ, but he must, ipso facto, renounce all opinion of justification
thereby, or else it is not done in faith. For so much shall a man deny unto
Christ, as he does attribute unto his own work. Neither will Christ himself
be partaker with us, in this work of justification. He will be a whole Savior,
or no Savior at all unto us. But yet let me ask you another thing. Christ's
sake, God does accept them, yea he does crown and reward the^: therefore it
seems, that this cannot hinder, why they should not justify us in some part.
For if God do so graciously accept them, who shall except against them? God
does very graciously accept the^ in deed, as tokens of true tha^kefulnes, and
as holy fruits of obedience, sanctified through faith in Christ, but not to any
part of our justification.

Christ, comprehend the whole religion and worship, as some contend: and so
take in all Christian works, as into one enclosure with faith?

In this question of justification, it cannot be so taken; It should be an
unjust enclosure, not of the commons from the poor, but of a royal dignity
from Christ: as the opposition and thick hedge or wall which God himself has
made betwixt faith and works, in the Epistles of his faithful Apostle Paul,
does manifestly declare.



Faith, in that it is a work or action, it does not simply and of it self
justify, but only in that it apprehends Christ, and imbraceth him alone for
perfect justification.

Explication and proof.
So it is indeed. And in no other sense, does our Sa: Chr: himself say: Ioh:
6.29. This is the work of God (that is a work singularly well pleasing unto him)
that ye do believe in him who^ he has sent. For seeing God has sent Christ,
eue^ to this end he should be believed in, it must needs be very acceptable unto
him, that we should believe in him. Nevertheless, this we may easily perceive,
that it was not the purpose of our Sa: Christ, in those words to determine
faith to be properly a work: but answering the Jews in their own word,
enquiring of works, he draws them from their own sense, and tells them,
that this is the work of God.

What salvation is.
NOw let us proceed. And having showed what justification is: what have you
learned that this other word Salvation, Save, does mean?

To save is not only by the merit of Christ's death and obedience, to deliver
and discharge from all guiltines and punishment due to sin, in the just
displeasure and wrath of God: but also, by the power and efficacy of the same
satisfactory death and obedience, to deliver from the power and strength,
subtlety and craft, both of sin and Satan; and also of all whatsoever else,
would hinder the same our most happy salvation. Yea more then this; to Save, is
to reconcile and bring most miserable sinners, into the perfect favor of the
most just God; to give them unspeakable peace of conscience; as also wisdom
and power to live a Godly and Christian life, in some measure of holiness here;
and finally to possess them, with the most blessed inheritance and fruition,
of the most glorious and everlasting kingdom of heaven. It is true, Explication
and proof.
as we may se it warranted unto us: First concerning deliverance from the
guiltines of sin, and also from the punishment thereof: Isai: 53.4.5. Matt:
1.21. Ioh: 1.29. And from the wrath of God. 1. These. 1.10. Romans 8.1. Col.
1.13.14.

What Faith is.
Secondly, from the power and strength of sin: Rom: 6.3.4.5.6. etc. and chap.
8.2. etc. Read also Galat: 1.4. and 1. Ioh. 5.5.19 and chapt: 3.5.6. And from
the craft and subtlety of sin: Ephesians: 4.20.21.22. and James. chap: 1.14.
with verse. 18. Likewise from the power of the Devil. 1. John. 3.8.9. etc. And
ch: 5. 18. Ephesians. 6.13. etc. Rom: 16.20. James. 4.7. and 1. Pet: 5.8.9.10. And
from his subtlety. 2. Corinthians. 2.11. and chapt: 3. etc.

Thirdly, for reconciliation: read Luke, ch: 2. 14. Coloss. 1.19.20. and 1.
John. 2.2. And for holiness of life in the same chap, verses. 3.4. etc. and
Colos. 1.21.22. and Luke 1.74.75. And therwithall, for peace of conscience:
Romans 5.1. and chap: 14.17. Philip: 4.6.7. Heb: 2.14.15.

Finally, for the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven: read Ephesians: 2 1.2.3.
etc. And Philip: 3.20.21. Behold therefore, the many and exceeding great
benefits contained under this one of salvation: the which is therefore
worthily called the great salvation, and the salvation of God, infinitely
exceeding all humane delivering or saving. Heb. 2.3. Psalm. 50.23. and 119.41.
Isai. 45.15.16.17.21.22. and cha: 46.13. and 49.6. and 51.5.8. and 59.16.17.
and Genesis 49.18. And note here, that these diverse words of deliverance,
redemption, reconciliation, and the rest: they do all serve to express, but
one and the same salvation, manifoldly distinguished in diverse respects. For
as it is truly observed: Christ does not only save us by the merit of his
death, but also by the efficacy and power of his Spirit communicated unto us:
yea, and even by the communicating of his person, in that it pleases him to
dwell in us, and most nearly to unite us to himself. And in these 3. things
(says learned Vrsinus) Totum saluationis beneficium consistit: the whole
benefit of salvation does consist. The which, while we duly consider in the
several branches of it: o how ought it to affecte us in a longing desire
after it! in precious estimation of it! in thankfulness to God our Savior for
it! But on the contrary, the want of the knowledge of it, makes many to
esteem no more of this salvation, then profane Esau did of his byrthright. We
are therefore to be so much the more careful, lest any of us should fall into
the same contempt of it. It is lamentable, to see the rifenes of this profane
contempt, and the notorious ignorance that is among those, that go under the
name of Christians. For ask them how they look to be justified and saved:
they know no other way, but by their good works, and by good prayers, etc This
shows plainly, that such have not as yet, any thing at all truly learned
Jesus Christ. They understand nothing in truth, of the spiritua^l covenant of
grace; but altogether they dote after a covenant of works, which indeed is
more natural, though now altogether above all power of natural reach, etc.
But whatsoever others do, let us in the name of God, according as we are
taught out of the word of God, make most precious account of the covenant of
grace and salvation, by our Savior Christ alone, in whom only are opened unto
us, and in whom alone are to be found, all the rich treasures of the kingdom
of heaven.

Justification and salvation only by Christ.
Here therefore, before we proceed any further, I would gladly hear of you,
what our Savior Christ has done for us, thus to justify and save us.

What have you learned out of the holy Scriptures to answer to this?

Our Savior Christ, has for the procuring and purchasing of our perfect
justification and salvation, perfectly fulfilled the righteousness of the whole
law of God for us, in the whole course of his life; and by his death, he has
paid the full redemption, and as it were the Fine and Ransom, or penalty of
all our sins: to the end, that both the guiltiness and punishment being
laid upon him, they might be removed and taken away from us; Justification and
salvation only by Christ.
and also that his perfect righteousness, and the whole merit and worthiness
of his death, might, through the grace of God, be freely imputed and bestowed
upon us.

Explication and proof.
The proofs which may serve for the confirmation of this Answer, have been
already set down by us not long since; so that now we need the less to stand
to repeat them again. Only let us yet once more, by this occasion, so
consider of the true nature of justification, and of the righteousness which is
by faith; that, it being well understood of us, yea thoroughly settled and
rooted in our hearts, we may by no subtlety of adversaries, be removed from
this most heavenly and comfortable truth; even a chief principle of the
Gospel of our Sau: Chr: For what else I pray you (to think uprightly of the
matter) may the righteousness and justification of faith in Christ, possibly
be; then the apprehension of that whereby Christ has justified us? And what
can this be, beside the holiness of his nature; the righteousness of his
life, and the Sacrifice and Redemption of his death? Wherefore as was said
before, so we say again, that as we do justly remove justification from our
own works, so also do we even from faith it self, so far as it may be
esteemed an action or work from us, or rather from the spirit of God, which is
given unto us of God: and we wholly ascribe it to our Savior himself, in
respect of that only, which he has wrought and suffered for us; it being
passiuelie as we may say, received and apprehended of us. For faith is but as
the hand, or tunnell of our empty souls, to receive the water of life and
salvation, which God of his mere grace and mercy pours into us. For as M.
Calvin says notably well: Fides nihil ad Deum affert: quin potius hominem
vacuum and inopem sistit coram Deo, vt Christo eiusque gratia impleatur. Quare
passiuu^ est opus vt ita loquar) cui nulla potest rependi merces. Nec aliam
confert homini iustitiam, nisi quam a Christo accepit. That is: Faith brings
nothing to God: but rather presents a man altogether empty, and forlorn in
his sight, that he may be replenished with Christ and his grace. Wherefore it is
a passive work, (if I may so speak) whereunto no reward is due. Neither does it
yield any righteousness to a man, which it has not received of Christ before.
Calu. upon John. 6.29.

And now further, that our Savior Christ was necessarily, both to fulfill the
righteousness of the law, and also to die for us, to the end we might be
perfectly justified by him: it may easily appear, if we do rightly consider,
that all of us, who stand in need of justification by him, do not only want
righteousness, in that we can neither for the present, nor shall ever be able in
this life, to fulfill the righteousness of Gods law, our own selves, who fail
always even in the best duties that we do: but also that we are infinitely
guilty of transgressions and rebellions, concerning the time past, through the
patience of God, as the Apostle Paul has taught us. Yea, and besides all this,
we do originallie stand wholly corrupt, and guilty of eternal
condemnation, before the judgment seat of God; as the same Apostle has
convicted all the world, both young and old: Roma: 3.19.20. and chapt: 5.12.
etc. For the least of which our transgressions, we our selves could never in
our own persons, have made any just and sufficient recompense or satisfaction,
to the most holy justice of God. I^ is necessary therefore, that we do in
every respect, rely wholly upon our Savior Christ alone, and upon the most
free grace and mercy of the Lord God our heavenly Father, for our
Justification and Salvation: seeing it is express^ly affirmed as we have often
heard and read, and cannot too often hear, read, and consider out of the
holy Scriptures, that they are not to be found in any other, but in him alone,
as Act. 4.11.12. This is the stone, cast aside of the builders, which is become
the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other: for among men
there is given no other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved. Our Sa:
Christ only, of all men, is perfectly holy and righteous in life. Our Sa:
Christ alone, is of all men pure and undefiled by nature. He therefore alone,
and no other, could be that meet and worthy sacrifice, even the lamb of God
without spot, which God himself has appointed, to take away the sins of
the world, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, as the Prophet Daniel
long before the performance of it, did prophecy of him in the 9. chapter of
his prophecy.

And in deed, in so much as we, in and of our selves, are altogether corrupt
and sinful by nature, yea and do still so remain in a great part, even after
the grace of regeneration is begun in us: how may it be thought, in any
probability of good reason, that any man's own works should justify
himself, and deserve any thing at Gods hand, for the merit and worthiness
thereof, as our popish false teachers do blasphemouslie contend? For whether
we ^^te up our eyes to God, or cast them down upon our selves; we shall be
easily, yea and that with great force also cast off, from all confidence this
way, if so be we will uprightly weigh and consider all things. For first
concerning God, he is (as we know) such a one, and so infinitlie rich and
all-sufficient in himself, that whatsoever is given him, he has nothing the
more. And as the holy prophet says: Who has given him, and it shall be
recompensed him? As though he should say, that God is beholding to no creature:
but he gives abundantly to all, and yet he has never the less.

And secondly as touching our selves, we want all those conditions, which are
necessary to be found in those persons, that should merit or deserve any
thing at the hands of God. For first, we are not out of his debt: nay we are
most deeply indebted unto him, by thousands of talents, as we read in the
Gospel. Secondly, we can gratify God with no good thing, which we have not
first received of him. And besides, that which we are able to bring, is
nothing equal to that reward of everlasting life and salvation, which proud
men shame not for their worthiness to challenge at the hands of God. Nay rather,
even that little which we bring unto God, and the same also his own gift
bestowed on us before; it turns to our own further benefit, through the
exceeding bountifulness of God. And therefore, how much the more God
vouchsafes to accept at the hands of any, their service and duty: by so much
the more, they are yet more deeply bound and indebted to him. For it is of
mere grace and favor, that he accepts any duty at all, at any man's hands.
To the which end, worthily says Elihu in the book of Job. chap: 35.7.
speaking on the Lords behalf in this wise: If thou be righteous (says he)
what give thou unto him? or what receives he at thy hand? Thy wickedness may
hurt a man as thou art: and thy righteousness may profit the son of man. etc.
How then may it be thought, that it is in any man's power to benefit the Lord,
and to deserve any thing at his hands, whereby he should be beholding or
indebted unto him?

Blessed be the Lord our God therefore, who has of his most gracious goodness,
enlightened his servants to see and understand, the truth of this most holy
and comfortable doctrine of our free justification by faith: and to discern
the vanity and wickedness of the false doctrine of man's merit by his own
works. To the which end it shall be to our comfort (as I trust) to call to
mind some holy testimonies, which the servants of God have given unto it,
from time to time. Among whom, that faithful Martyr and minister of the
Gospel of Christ M. Patrick Hamelton, M. Patrick Hamelt^^, ^n his b^^ke (...)
stated out of latin m^^ English, (...) I* F^y^h, set down by M. Fo^e. A^t. and
Mo^um. page ^^^ etc.
has with great sharpnes and dexterity of holy understanding expressed it,
where he affirms and confirms from the holy Scriptures, that (to speak
exactely) no manner of works do make us either righteous or unrighteous, good
or evil: and that they neither save nor condemn the children of God. He
expresses his meaning thus, and it is very true: that until a man be
justified by faith, and so be by faith allowed of God, to be a good man; he can
not possibly do any good thing acceptable to God: neither can any good deeds
make him a good man. For in deed, without faith he can do no good work well.
Likewise also (as he says further) evil works are not the cause that any man
is evil, but he himself being evil first, afterward works that which is
evil. Finally (as he truly says) works do not save, but faith, whence
spring all good works. Neither do evil works simply and in themselves
considered) condemn: but rather infidelity which is the root of all evil.
For to him that believes, Christ has by his passion, obtained forgiveness of
all sins etc. Read also the answer of John Lambert another faithful Martyr
to the 31. Article objected against him: Good works (says he) make not a man
just, but a man once justified, does then good works. And so has Augustine
said of more ancient time, that good works do not go before, in him that is
to be justified, but follow after his justification. He disputes also that
only infidelity is Peccatum damnans: the sin that does utterly cast men
away. Whereas faith is a general medicine that heals all sin which the
child of God may fall into.

These Christian paradoxes, or strange sentences (as they may seem to be) they
are no other, then our Savior Christ himself has taught: and namely by the
similitude of a tree. Mat. chapter 12, 33, 34, 35. Either make the tree good and
the fruit good: or else make the tree evil and the fruit thereof evil: for
the tree is known by his fruit. O generation of vipers (says our Sa: Christ to
the proud Pharisees that justified themselves, and made a great outward show
of holiness) how can ye speak good things when ye are evil? For of the
abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. A good man out of the good
treasure of his heart brings forth good things: and an evil man out of an
evil treasure brings forth evil things. Now it is faith only which makes
a man like the good tree, and infidelity which makes a man like the evil
tree, etc. Wherefore well says an other learned man, Beza in his Annotations
upon the 2. Chap. of James.
Who would ever have thought that men could have been so untoward, as to say,
that good fruit does make the tree good: to the end they might bring in the
justification of man's own works: and not rather to confess that the tree must
first be good before it can bring forth good fruit? For this verily (as he
truly says) is no less absurd and foolish, then if a man should be of this
mind to think that the cause should come of the effect. And thus, insomuch as
we must be justified by faith in Christ, before we can do any good work: it
follows that neither any works before, nor any good works after, can
justify us in the sight of God. For we are herein, altogether prevented by our
Savior Christ: who alone is our perfect righteousness before God, as has bin
sufficiently declared. Wherein it may justly be delightful to every true
believer, to see man's works defeated and abased, that the works of our Savior
Christ only, may be perfectly advanced and established.

WHerefore, that we may now at the last, conclude this point of justification
by faith in Christ, and also of salvation the blessed consequent thereof: let us
firmly assure our selves against al adversaries of the grace of God, that they
contending for a meritorious righteousness really infused and inherent in
themselves, and concurring with their faith; (the which also with them, is no
better then a morral virtue assenting generally to the truth of the Gospel,
without any particular assurance that the righteousness and salvation of Christ
is certainly theirs) let us I say, assure our selves, from the former
testimonies and reasons out of the holy Scriptures; that they are herein
altogether most grossly deceived, in that they have not learned (or rather, if
we speak of those that profess learning among them) that they have hardened
their hearts against the evident instructions of the word of God, which (as we
have seen) both plainly and plentifully distinguishes betwixt the
righteousness of works, and that which is by faith, yea in this doctrine of
justification, do oppose works to faith as perfect contraries: the one being
of the just God, the other of sinful man: that according to nature, this of
grace infinitely above all natural reason or power and reach: that of man's
proud challenge, this of Gods most free gift, only proper to those whom God
makes new creatures to himself, by regeneration in Christ; even such, to
whom only, he gives this special grace, that in the denial of themselves,
they humble themselves in themselves, and rejoice only in that righteousness
which God has brought to light and exhibited in our S: C. Let us therefore be
specially well advised, and take heed that we never abolish true humility out
of our hearts, by misunderstanding the reioicing of the Gospel, as they do,
whosoever stand conceited in the merit and worthiness of their own works. For
doubtless, the magnifying of man's own works, arises from that proud and
arrogant opinion, which men have first conceived, concerning the worthiness of
themselves and their own persons, how unworthy soever in truth they be. And
whereas they would seem, to borrow the merit of their own works, from the
merit of Christ: this being altogether without warrant from Christ, it is to be
accounted no better then a cunning shift, even a mere devise and vizard, to
cover and shadow their pride withal. For if they meant in good sooth, to
magnify Christ's merit and worthiness, they would (according to the doctrine of
Christ) rest wholly and solely in the same, as being most perfect and entier in
it self. Out of all question, whatsoever is more then this, it is of wicked
and devilish pride, how goodly a gloss soever any shall put upon it. It is
but poison in a glittering cup. Let it for ever suffice, that our Savior
Christ has by his own hand, pulled off the counterfeit vizard thereof: as was
alleged before. Luke 18. verse. 9. etc. where the proud Pharisie (as we have
seen) is rejected of God, for trusting in his own righteousness, though he
pretended to be thankful to God, for those his imagined virtues, whereof he
boasted himself: but the poor sorrowful and sinful Publican is justified
before God. Let popish Iusticiaries therefore, following their elder brethren
the Pharisees, boast and glory in their own works as they lust: we for our
parts, will by the grace of God, humble our selves with all the faithful
servants of God, in the sight of our sins and unworthiness; and rejoice only
in the Lord, and in the multitude of his free grace and mercy, only in and by
our Lord Jesus Christ, according to the tenure of his own most holy word and
promise, Isai: 45.25. The whole seed of Israel shall be justified, and glory
in the Lord. According also to that, 1. Cor. 1.30.31. and Ephe. 2.9. as was
alleged heretofore.

What Repentance is.
NOw let us go forward.

You have already answered to two of the things last propounded; to wit, what
is meant by the word to Justify, and also what this other word, to Save, does
signify.

The third thing yet remains; that is, what Repentance is. The which, though
it was touched in our entrance into the doctrine of the Law; yet because the
Law (to take it in the more strict signification) does not teach Repentance, in
so much as it offers no grace or mercy to the transgressor: therefore we will
resume it, and handle it more purposedly, here in the doctrine of the Gospel.
For the Gospel only, and not the Law, as it is a member diuident from it;
gives hope and comfort of forgiveness to the poor sinner, through the
righteousness and obedience of Christ: how unworthy soever he be in himself, of
any mercy, yea though he be most worthy of all plague and punishment, from the
just deserved wrath of God. The doctrine therefore of Repentance, and of
remission of sins, is properly belonging to the Gospel: yea and all allowance
of repentance to the sinner (as it were a board to relieve his poor Sea-beaten
soul, against the most dangerous ship-wreck that may be) it is a special
gratuitie belonging to the Gospel.

It is true in deed, that Moses, and the rest of the Prophets, do every where
move to repentance, and also give comfortable hope of mercy to the repentant,
and to that end allege the promises of God. But all this they do, having a
respect to the covenant of God in Christ, according to his Gospel: and not by
virtue of any naked promise of the Law, as we now speak of it.

Wherefore seeing (as was said) we have only touched the doctrine of
Repentance, in our entrance to the former doctrine of the law, so far only,
as it might give some light of interpretation thereunto: let us now in the
doctrine of the Gospel, as in the more proper and due place, What Repentance is.
enquire more fully into it: acknowledging nevertheless, that although the law
strictly taken, does not teach repe^ta^ce, or encourage the sinner to repent,
but only leaves him co^uicted in his former sin, and present corruption: yet
according to the direction of the Gospel, it is a perfect rule to teach us what
our sins be, whereof we are to repent, and also, which be the duties of
holiness and righteousness, wherein we are to walk and please God. For both
the Gospel, and also the law forbid the same false worship, the same
profanenes, the same blasphemy etc. Likewise, the same disobedience to parents,
the same cruelty, the same filthiness of fornication etc. And on the contrary,
they teach one, and the same true spiritual worship of God, and the same
duties of love, belonging from man to man: as it is evident Mat. chapter 5. and ch,
15, 4. etc. and chapter 22, 37, 38, 39, 40. Romans 13, 8, 9, 10. Ephesians. 6, 1, etc. 1.
Tim. 1, 5. Yea, and the law, in the most strict acceptance of it, howsoever,
it does not teach or encourage the sinner to repentance, (as the immediate and
proper cause thereof) yet it is no weak or small occasion or means, as well
for the furthering of it, as for preparing the heart of the sinner unto it.



Repentance, a fruit all ways attending upon true iustfying faith (to speak
of it in the most general signification) it comprehends all particular
graces of our spiritual regeneration and new birth (faith only excepted)
whereby the erroneous mind and understanding, as also the vain and wicked
memory, together with the corrupt and sinful will and affections of the
children of God, are inwardly more and more altered and changed, from that
which they are by natural birth; and made more and more conformable to the
spiritual image and likeness of GOD: Whereby also, the words, and outward
actions of their life and conversation, are likewise more and more altered and
changed, from the facion and course of this wicked world, unto the fruits of
true righteousness, and holiness, in obedience to the most holy will and word of
God.

Explication and proof.
That this is the nature of repentance, and that in the general signification
of it, it carries so large a compass, as has been described: we may
understand, first by the diverse and sundry words, whereby it is noted in the
holy Scriptures, both of the old and also of the new Testament: and then, by
the doctrine it self, which does more jointly open and declare, the full sense
and meaning of all the same words.

The Hebrew words, whereby repentance is signified in the old Testament, are
these: first Chacam, which signifies to be wise; as Deuteronomy. 32, 28, 29 They are
a nation (says Moses) void of counsel, neither is there any understanding in
them. Oh that they were wise etc. Likewise Pro. 23, 19. O thou my son (says
wise king Solomon) hear and be wise, and guide thine heart in the way. And in
the same sense, though the holy Prophet do use an other word Sacal, not that
Sacal whose first letter is Samech, which signifies to be foolish: but that
which begins with the letter Shin, and signifies provident and prudent
warines or circumspectio^ in a man's affairs and dealing. Be wise now ye kings
(Haschiln says the Prophet David) be ye learned (that is, receive ye
instruction, to wit from the holy word of God and the faithful ministry and
preaching thereof) o ye judges of the earth etc? In this respect also,
repentance is noted by this other phrase of speech, to return to a man's heart;
that is, to grow more wise and better advised, then he was before: as Deuteronomy.
Chap. 30.1. and 1. Kings 8.47. If they turn again to their heart etc.
Likewise, when the LORD would note the turning of the hearts of the Gentiles
unto him by true repentance, he expresses it by that abundance of knowledge,
which he intended to power down upon them: Isay. 11.9. Jeremy 31, 34.
According to that also. Prou. 9.12. If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for
thy self: and if thou be a scorner, thou alone shall suffer. And Psalm. 90, 12,
Teach us (says Moses) so to number our days that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom.

Thus, repentance (to begin withal) is signified synecdochically, (the part
put for the whole, by attaining to true wisdom and understanding, from the advice and direction, of the holy word of GOD. And that, in very good
consideration, seeing, if there be true wisdom in the mind, the will and
affection will be the better ordered and guided, and consequently also, both
the tongue, the hand, and the foot: and likewise, the memory will store it
self with good and holy things for meditation, etc.

And that it is the meaning of God in the holy Scriptures of the old
Testament, to note repentance by wisdom and understanding: it may be
discerned, from that which is contrariwise set down concerning folly. For
usually in the same Scriptures, men yet lying in their sins, without all care
or regard to repent, they are called fools, even such as want all holy
judgment and good discretion, who call light darkness, and darkness light,
good evil, and evil good: as we read Isay Chapter 1, 3. and Chapter 5.20, 21, and chapter
42.16, 17. and so forth to the end of the Chapter. And Ier. 4.22. My people
(says the Lord) is foolish, they have not known me: they are foolish
children, and have no understanding: they are wise to do evil, but to do
well they have no knowledge. And Prou. 27.22. King Solomon speaking of the
obstinate and impenitent sinner: Though (says he) thou should bray a fool
in a mortar etc. yet will not his foolishnes depart from him.

The ground of this wicked folly, is selfe-conceitednes in a man's own carnal
and corrupt wisdom: and therefore is the wicked man, noted to be such a one
as walks after his own imaginations. As Genesis 6.5. and Prou. 6.14. The wicked
man imagines evil at all times. And therefore verse 18. God is said to
abhor such. And Chap. 12.2. He will condemn the man of wicked imaginations.
Read also. Ier. 18. verses 12.13. etc. And verily there is very great reason,
why the Lord should deal thus severely against the man of wicked imaginations;
because, according as the imagination is conceited, both will, and word, and
deed it self, are carried all headlong, as it were upon swift running
wheels, to work all mischief. Wherefore, we may truly say, that God in his
holy justice punishes no sin more grievously, nor more often and manifoldly,
then he does that proud conceit, which every man has of himself, and his
own ways. For by reason hereof, or rather for want of sound reason, they do
not only magnify their own imagined, and counterfeit virtues, obtruding them
to God as it were for good and current coin: but also in a presumption
thereof, they do easily dispense with themselves, touching those sins,
whereof their own conscience conuicteth them: as if they were few and small
in comparison of their virtues, and therefore that God should easily bear with
them, etc. The which wicked and devilish presumption, it cannot be, but GOD
must most justly abhor, and severely plague and punish them for. Wherefore,
as the Prophet Isaiah exhorts, so let all such as mind the way to true
wisdom, forsake their own ways and imaginations, and return unto the Lord,
and he will have mercy upon them; and to our God, for he is very ready to
forgive. Chap. 55.7.

Moreover, in a like contrary respect (as touching this word Wisdom) Sin is
called by the name of Error; to wit, such error as comes of ignorance, or
want of true understanding and wisdom: as Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his
errors, or faults? to wit, such as he commits ignorantly, or unadvisedly,
etc. Whereupon, well says a learned Interpreter: Humanum est errare and
ignorare errorem suum. It is a thing very usual with men to err, and yet to
be ignorant of their error. And therefore, great need have we all, to pray
to GOD with the holy Prophet, as we read, Psalm. 119.10. With my whole heart
have I sought thee, let me not err (or wander) from thy Commandments. And as
the Prophet Moses teaches us to pray. Psalm. 90.8. as was alleged before.
Hitherto of the first word Chacam, which (as was said) signifies to be wise,
from whence true Repentance is noted.

Secondly, the same repentance, is noted by the word (Nacham); which is a word
belonging to affection, and signifies properly, the alteration and change
thereof, by sorrow for some thing rashly committed, after that a man has
better bethought, and advised himself: as may appear by that reprehension of
the Prophet Iere. Chap. 8.6. No man (says he) repented him of his wickedness,
saying. What have I done? Where, the word which the Prophet uses, is (Nicham).
But as it follows: Every one (says he) turned to their race, as the horse
rusheth to the battle. The want of this change of affection, upon better
advise from the word of God, makes way to hardness of heart, and utter
impenitency, if it be not maturely prevented: as the same Prophet gives to
understand, both here, and elsewhere: as chap. 3, 17. and Zech. 7.11.12. and
Ezekiel. 36.26. The which if it once take place, it is vehemently accursed and
condemned by the Lord. Deuteronomy 29. verses 18.19.20.21.

The third Hebrew word, whereby Repentance is noted, is (Shobh) which is as much
to say, as to return. And it may well note these three things unto us. First,
a ceasing of the former evil course of life. Secondly, a turning or
alienating of a man's heart from sin. Thirdly a returning to God with ca^e of
leading a godly life. For it is a metaphore or borrowed speech, taken from a
man's bodily going, and namely, from that his going, whereby he carries
himself, more and more out of the right way, until he returns quite back
again. So it is with the wicked souls of men. For all of us, having naturally
perverse and crooked minds, we are of our selves bent to practice perverse and
crooked things, walking as it were, in crooked and wrong ways. So that until
we mend our lives, it may truly be said of us, that we walk altogether from
God, as if we turned our backs, and not our faces toward him: according to the
complaint of the Lord by the Prophet Ier. chapter 2.27. And herein, there is no
ceasing, but a continual proceeding, and increasing in manifold rebellion
against God, so long as we are left unto our selves: as we read in the same
prophecy of Ier. chapter 3.5. Thou do evil even more and more. And ch 8.4.5.
whereupon it is, that the exhortation to repentance is often renewed to the
people of God, under this word of r^turning: as in the same Prophet. Chap. 3.
verses. 1.7.12.14.22. and chapter 36.7. Likewise Ezekiel. chapter 18. and chapter 33. by an
often repetition. And Hos. 14. v. 2.5. In this respect also, and to the same
end, the people of God, are often exhorted, to seek the Lord: as Isay 55.6.7.
Likewise Amos. chapter 5. v, 4.5.6. Thus says the Lord to the house of Israel,
seek ye me, and ye shall live. But seek not Bethel. etc. And again, v. 14.
^eeke good and not evil, that ye may live: and the Lord God of Hosts shall be
with you etc. Yea, for more plainness and evidence of speech, we are exhorted
to seek his face. Ps. 27.8 Hence also, is that often metaphore in the holy
Scriptures, that the laws and commandments of God, are called the ways of
God: and that the licentious courses, which wicked men do rush into, and
wereby they wander, and go astray from the Lord, are called their own ways.
Isay. 35.6. and chapter 63.17. Thus therefore, by this word (Shobh) which
signifies to return, or to change a man's outward course or trade of life; the
change of the mind, and inward returning of the heart to God, is also
understood.

Neither is it to be forgotten here, that a wicked and unrepentant course of
life, is noted also, by a forgetfulness of God: as Deuteronomy: 32.18. Psalm: 9.17. and
Psalm: 50.22. and Ier: chapt: 2.32. and chap: 3.21. Read also Amos. ch: 6.10.
Sed consule Trem: and Iun: interpret: As on the contrary, a holy remembrance
of God, notes care of Repentance, according to that: Lament: Ier: 3.20. My
soul has them (that is, my afflictions) in remembrance, and it is humbled in
me. Read also, Isai: 46.8.9.10. Remember this (says the Lord, by his holy
Prophet) and be ye ashamed: bring it again to mind, o ye transgressors.
Remember the former things of old, etc.

Hitherto of the words of the old Testament, from the which, Repentance is
signified.

NOw to these Hebrew words of the old Testament: there be Greek words,
answering in the new: the which we shall not without some good use, (as we
hope) make like rehearsal of.

And first, that which answers to (Chacam) is Metanoeo, which signifies upon
good consideration to change a man's mind, as the latin word resipisco,
whereby it is well translated, gives to understand: the which, according to
the nature of verbes inchoatiue or inceptiue, (as Gramarians call them)
signifies (as the learned know) to begin to wax wise: to wit, after some
folly committed before. For according to the true verdite of the holy
Scriptures, the mind of man, is of it self vain, erroneous, and full of
folly, for want of the true knowledge and fear of GOD. There is no
foreknowledge in us to understand what is good and godly, until God himself
do reveal the same: and therefore we have need of a better after-wit, then
our fore-wit was, as the common proverb goes. The wisdom of the flesh
(says the Apostle Paul) is band. Ye were once darkness etc. Yea it is enmity
to God: Ephesians. 5, 8. Romans 8, 7. And set on evil works. Colos. 1, 21.

In which respect, wicked and unbelieving men, are in the new Testament as
well as in the old, called by the name of fools: as Romans 1.21, 22. Because
when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but
became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of
darkness. When they professed themselves to be wise, they became fools. And
1. Cor. 1.20. God has made (that is, he has euicted) the wisdom of the
world to be foolishness. And Chap. 3, 18. Let no man deceive himself. If
any man among you seem to be wise in this world, let him be a fool, that
he may be wise. For the wisdom of this world, is foolishness with God,
etc. And Chap. 15, 36. O fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened before
it dye. And Gala. 3, 1. O ye foolish Galatians (o Anoetoi) who has bewitched
you that ye should not obey the truth? And Chap. 6, 3, 4. If any man seem to
himself that he is somewhat, he being indeed nothing, he deceives himself
in his imagination. But let every man prove his own work, etc.

Hence it is, that the exhortation to Repentance, runs so often upon this
word, Metanoeite: as Matthew. Chap. 3, 2. and Chap. 4, 17. Act. 2, 38, and Chap.
8 12. Where the Apostle Peter, mightily reproving Simon the Magitian: Repent
(says he) of this thy wickedness, and pray thou God that the thought of thy
heart may be forgiven thee. The wicked thought of Simon, is called Epinoia:
the godly change of mind, which Peter exhorts him unto, is called Metanoia.

The same word is likewise used Revel. 3.19. Be zealous and amend. And all
very aptly, according to that which was observed, concerning the Hebrewe word,
whereunto this answers, For the change of the affection, and even of the
actions of the whole life, depends upon the change and reformation of the
mind of man, according to the mind and will of God, made in his holy word: as
2. Tim, 2, 25. Where the Apostle Paul gives us to understand, that repentance,
which is the gift of God, must be according to the knowledge of the truth. And
Ephesians, 4, 23. Be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind. And chap. 5, 15. Not
as fools, but as wise men etc. According also to that, Luk, 1, 17. Where
repentance is described to be a conversion of the heart unto God, according to
the wisdom of just men: that is to say, of such as God himself has made
wise by his holy spirit. Likewise, according to that in the same Evangelist.
Chap. 15, verse 17. Where our Savior Christ says of the Prodigal and
unthrifty son repenting, that he came to himself: that is to say, that he
now be thought himself of a more wise course, then he had taken before. Thus
to be wise unto salvation, is to be in the state of true faith and
repentance. 2, Tim. 3.15. Hitherto of the first Greek word Metanoeo, answering
to the first of the Hebrewe words, Chacam.

Secondly, we have the Greek word Metamelomai, which answers to the Hebrew
Nacham, and signifies the change of a man's care: to the bettering of his
affection; as the other word Metanoeo, signified the correcting or bettering of
the judgment, and discretion of the mind and understanding.

That this is so, it may be perceived by that which we read, Matthew: chap:
21.29. He (says our Savior Christ) that said at the first to his Father, I
will not work in the vineyard, yet afterward repented himself and went. But on
the contrary, as it follows in the same chapter, verse. 32: The Pharisees
(as says our Savior Christ) were not moved to repentance; that is, they
remained still careless of their duty, yea they hardened their hearts with an
obstinate rebellion. For hardness of heart grows fast upon securite, or a
continued neglect of good duty; and is altogether contrary to this
Metamelomai, which we now speak of. Yea, it peruerteth the understanding
also, and therefore they are both joined together. Rom: chapt: 2.5. Read also
chapt: 11.25. and 2. Cor: 3.14. and 1. Tim. 4.2. In the which places, hardness
of heart, is noted as an evil fruit, following upon secure and careless neglect
of duty. Moreover, 2. Cor: 7.10. Where the Apostle teaches, that repentance to
salvation, the which godly sorrow causes, is not to be repented off: he uses
the word Ametameleton, and so gives to understand, that no after-sorrowe
blongeth to this, that a man has repented to salvation. Only want of
repentance, is, as we may say, metameleton; that is, a matter justly to be
sorrowed for, and to be repented off, etc. And thus we may perceive, how the
word Metamelomai, respects the change of the affection, as the former word
Metanoeo, does more properly belong to the change of the mind.

Thirdly, to the Hebrewe word Shobh, the which (as has been declared) notes
a reformation of the disordered actions of life and conversation; the Greek
word Epistrepho answers, both in signification and use, as may be observed in
the new Testament, and namely, Mark: 4.12. Luk: 1.16. John. 12.14. and Act:
28.27. Read also, Act: 9.35. All that dwelt at Lidda and Saron (says the
Evangelist Luke) turned to the Lord. And chapt: 11.21. A great number believed
and turned to the Lord. Likewise, chap: 14. verse 15. The Apostles Barnabas and
Paul, preached unto the people of Lystra, that they should turn from vain
Idols to the living God, etc.

The same Apostles do make report of the conversion: that is, of the
repentance of the Gentiles. And verse. 19. My sentence is (says the Apostle
James) that we trouble not them of the Gentiles, that are turned to the Lord.
And the Epist: of James, chapt: 5.19.20. Unto this conversion or turning to the
Lord, erring or going astray, is opposed. And 1. Pet: 2.25. Ye were as sheep
going astray: but now ye are returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your
souls: that is, to our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the obedience of his Gospel,
etc. Read also, 1. Thessalon: 1.9. and 2. Corinthians: 3.16.

Finally, how repentance, or at the least, a singular means or introduction
to the renewing of it, is noted by the word of remembrance, or bethinking our
selves of our former evil ways. Read Reuelat: 2.5. Remember from whence thou
art fallen, and repent, and do the first works. etc. And chapt: 3.3. Remember
how thou have received, and heard, and see thou hold fast, and repent.
Neither is it without great cause, that this remembering of ourselves, should be
required to repentance: because we are naturally forgetful of our duties,
and of all good things. Yea, we are naturally so possessed with the thoughts,
and remembrance of vain and wicked things, that there is no room for any good
thought or meditation. And so it comes to pass, that the heart is set
altogether upon evil, which only is present and ready, both to eye, and to
ear, to hand and foot and all: until it shall please God to give us grace,
better to remember, and bethink our selves.

And thus we may perceive, how the nature of Repentance, is opened unto us,
even from a distinction of those sondrie names or words, whereby it has
pleased the holy Ghost, to express the same unto us in the holy Scriptures,
both of the old and also of the new Testament.

Concerning the which distinction of the words, this yet we must nevertheless
understand, as touching the matter it self, that it must be entirely and
wholly conceived of us, though one of the words only, be any where mentioned
instead of the rest. And so does our English translation, oftentimes by good
interpretation, exhort generally to amendment of life, even from the first of
the Greek words above rehearsed, though it do properly signify the change
of the mind only. Yea, and for the same cause also, the same words, are for
the more full declaration of the nature of repentance, not seldom combined and
lincked together, in the holy Scriptures themselves; chiefly the first, and
the third of them, and the same also, sometime with an addition of some other
words, for more evidence sake: as Deuteronomy: 30.1.2. If thou shall turn into thine
heart, etc. and return unto the Lord thy God, and obey his voice in all that I
command thee this day: thou and thy children, with all thine heart, and with
all thy soul. Then the Lord thy God will cause thy Captives to return, and
have compassion upon thee, etc. And 1. King: 8.47.48. If they turn again
unto their heart, etc: and turn again to the Lord, with all their heart, and
with all their soul, confessing their sins, etc. The like is in many other
places of the old Testament: And in the new Testament likewise: as for
example, Matthew: 3.8. and Luk: 3.8. and Act: 26.18. where the Apost: Paul says,
that our Savior Christ sent him to preach to the Gentiles, that their eyes
might be opened, and so might turn from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan to God. And verse 20. he professes accordingly, that he preached
both to Jews and Gentiles, that they should repent, and turn to GOD, and do
works worthy amendment of life; that is to say, such as might outwardly argue
and declare, the inward truth of the change of the heart and mind. Read also
Act: 3.19. Amend your lives, and turn, that your sins may be put away. etc.

But enough concerning the words, whereby the holy Scriptures of God, do note
out and signify repentance: even such, as our own English words do answer
unto, when we say of any, that he is repentant, penitent, converted, amended,
etc.

NOw let us furthermore, even as briefly as we can, lay forth the nature of
repentance, from that description, which has been set down of it, according
to the doctrine of the holy Scriptures. Wherein, we may well be so much the
more brief, because it has been in a great part cleared already, even by the
opening of the words, werby it is usually pointed out unto us.

First therefore, concerning that which was answered in the beginning: namely,
that repentance in the general signification of it, comprehends all graces
of spiritual regeneration and new birth, faith only excepted: it may hence
appear, that the whole work of Gods grace, which he works in his children,
is comprehended under these two heads, Repent and believe the Gospel. For this
is a brief sum of the whole doctrine of the Gospel. Mark: ch: 1.15. And so
does the Apostle Paul abridge his whole doctrine, saying, that he witnessed
both to Jews and Grecians, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ: Act: 20.21. and 2 Timothy 1.13. Keep the true pattern of wholesome
words, which thou have heard of me in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
Where, love is Synecdochicallie, put for whole Repentance, because it is a
principal grace, and as we may say, a radical or fundamental part thereof.
And Heb: 6.1. Not ^aying again, the foundation of repentance from dead
works, and of Faith toward God. Nevertheless, we grant herewithall, that
repentance and conversion to God, may be construed in so large a sense, that it
shall comprehend faith also, as a part of it. But we speak here, of the more
proper, and exact limits and bownds of them: like as faith also, and knowledge
are to be distinguished; though sometimes the one is put for the other,
according to that of our Savior Christ: John: 17. This is eternal life, to
know thee. etc. And Esaias. 53. By his knowledge, my righteous servant shall
justify many, etc.

Secondly, from the former proof, it is evident, that Repentance does always
accompany true iustifiyng faith. But that repentance, should be a fruit of
faith; and that faith, in a certain order, is to have his place assigned
before it (howsoever in time they go together, as touching the inward change
of the heart and mind) it is not from the former testimonies, to be so easily
discerned, in so much as Repentance, in course and order of Doctrine, is placed
before it: the reason whereof has been observed heretofore. We are therefore,
for this point, to look to some other places of holy Scripture, whence it
may be cleared. And namely, to the 9. verse of the 15. chap: of the Acts,
where we read it plainly expressed, that God does by faith purify the heart.
And chap: 26.18. We are sanctified by faith in Christ. And Galat: 5.6. Faith
works by love. And 1. John 3.3. He that has hope in God purges himself.
This hope is the next and immediate supporter of faith. And verily, if there
were not hope of mercy, through faith in God the Father, that it is his good
pleasure to forgive sins, and to receive sinners to favor, for his Son
Jesus Christ's sake: who would, yea rather, who could have power and comfort,
to repent the^ of their sins? and to turn to God with their whole hearts and
minds? etc. And yet again, so do we affirm faith to go in order before
repentance (speaking generally) that, though the knowledge of the Gospel, is
one particular grace of repentance, yet it is nevertheless the forerunner of
faith: like as faith taking his original from the knowledge of God in Christ,
passes into the heart, and taking up seat and residence there, does more and
more purify both mind and heart, yea tongue and hand, and foot, and life and
all. For (as the Apostle Paul teaches us) With the heart man believes unto
righteousness. Rom: chapter 10. verse 10. And all true wisdom is every where in
the holy Scriptures called, the wisdom of the heart, even of that heart, which
is sanctified by faith, the which faith (as was said even now) has his seat,
and as it were his fining and refining shop or furnace there. Read Pro: 2.10.
and 8.5. and ch: 14.33. and 16.21. and ch: 22.17.18.19. and ch: 23.12.15.19.26.
and Dan: 10.12. Finally, Prou: 17. v. 16. Wherefore (says the most wise king)
is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, and he has no heart?
As though he should say, All means are in vain to him that wants a hearty
affection, toward that which is to be sought after, etc. Surely, no grace is
any grace of sanctification, until it descend to the heart, and there be
allowed, and sealed, as it were for lawful and current, by the stamp of faith.

Now thirdly, that repentance notes the changing and altering of the mind,
memory, will, and affection, from that which they are by natural birth (even
erroneous, vain, corrupt, and every way altogether sinful) to the renewed
image and likeness of God, in inward purity, soundnes and integrity, with
daily increase of holy wisdom and understanding, etc: it may be proved from
that which we read, Ephesians: 4.17.18.19.20.21.22.23.24. and Col: 3.10. and 2.
cor. 3.18. And whereas two things are requisite to this spiritual change: first
a dying to sin, and secondly, a quickening or rising up to newness of life:
we have both of them from our Savior Christ, by the hand of faith: the first,
from the grace and power of his death, the other from the virtue of his
resurrection: as the Apo: Paul does most notably declare in the 6. chap: of the
epist: to the Romans From the beginning whereof, he enters to treat of our
sanctification by the Spirit of Christ, as a fruit of that our justification by
faith in Christ, which he handled before.

Finally, that repentance comprehends the altering and changing of the
outward speeches and actions of life, answerable to the inward changing of the
mind, and affections of the heart, from the common course of the children of
this wicked world: Read Rom: chapt: 12.1.2. And 1. Corin: 6.20. James 4 4. and
1. John. 2.15.16.17. and 1. Thessalon: 5.3. where the holy Apostle prays for
the sanctification of the body, together with the soul, and the Spirit of the
children of God. The Practice of Repentance.
Read also Act: 8.22. 2. Cor: 12.21. Revel: 2.21.22. Luk: 3.9.10. and Matthew:
21.32. In the which places, the doctrine of repentance is extended, to the
reformation of the outward works of the flesh, and to the contrary practice of
good outward duties. And so, Repentance, (which is principally inward)
breaks forth in the outward fruits thereof, that it becomes a visible
thing, to the view of all men, according to the speech of our Savior Christ,
touching Repentance in sackcloth and ashes. Matthew: 11.21.

The Practice of Repentance.
THis therefore, to speak generally, is the nature of true Christian
Repentance, according to the former description of it. The which, because it
may be made the more clear and familiar unto us, from the practice of the
people of God, in whom God has wrought this excellent work of his holy
Spirit: let us now proceed, to take a view thereof, that so we may the better
inform our selves, how we are to begin, and proceed in a right course,
after the examples of those, who by the grace of God, have gone before us
therein.

The practice, is answerable to the doctrine. Yet so, as it is not always
after one usual course, but sometimes more special upon more special
occasions: namely in respect of some more grievous and predominant sin, at
the first conversion, whether of one, or of many: and by reason of some
particular relapse of such as have formerly repented them. For in such cases,
the inferior and helping causes, or as one would say, (the common affections
of repentance,) whether going before as preparatiues, or following after, and
accompanying the several parts thereof, either touching mortification of
sin, or quickening to newenesse of life: they ought to be so much the more
vehement and intentive.

The profession also of repentance, is either more public, or more private.
Ordinary by means of Gods word and Gospel preached, and the execution of the
prescribed censur^s and discipline of the Church of God: or extraordinary, as
it pleases God to work, either by the same means, or any other way, in a
more then ordinary course.

Examples hereof we have in the holy Scriptures, both of the old, and of the
new Testament.

Of the more public and extraordinary practice and profession of repentance
by many, we read Exodus 32, verse, 19, etc. to the end of the Chap. And Chap.
33, 5, 6. Where we read that Moses and the Levites, did by the sword take
vengeance of the chief of them, that were most forward in the sin of making
and worshipping the Idoll-calfe. And that Moses prayed to God for the people.
And that all the people humbled and abased themselves in the sight of God. A
declaration whereof, was their sorrowing and laying aside of their costly
raiment: they thereby acknowledging themselves unworthy of the common mercies
of God, and much more unworthy to be accepted for a peculiar and holy people
unto him. And Judges. Chap. 2, 4, 5. At the fearful threatening of God, that
(because of the great sin of his people in sparing the heathen Idolaters) he
would not cast them out before the^; but that they should remain among them,
as thorns in their sides, etc. They mourned and wept so abundantly, that the
place where they did so, does bear the name of weeping. And 1. Sam: 7.6. The
people of Israel, in their fast, did as it were pour out rivers of tears in
great abundance before the Lord, confessing the hainousnes of their sin, in
joining Idole-seruice with the worship of God. Unto the which lamentation, it
seems that the Prophet Jeremiah alluded chap: 9.1. wishing that his head were
full of water, and his eyes a fountain of tears, etc. According also as Ps.
119. verse. 136. the Prophet says there: Mine eyes gush out with rivers of
water, because they keep not thy law: so exceeding was the lamentation of that
people, in that place of Samuel. And in the book of Ezra, chap. 9. Ezra, that
holy Scribe of God, by reason that the holy seed of Gods peculiar people, was
mixed with the people of the profane and Idolatrous nations: he rent his
clothes, and plucked off the hair of his head and beard, as one astonished to
think of the greeuousnes of the sin. And afterward recovering himself from
his exceeding great heaviness, he fell down upon his knees, and prayed God most
instantly, to pardon the sin of his people. Then, as it follows, chapter 10.1.
while Ezra thus prayed, and confessed himself, weeping and falling down
before the house of God; there assembled to him, of Israel, a very great
congregation of men and women, and children: for as the text says, the people
wept with a great lamentation, etc. We read likewise in the book of Ester,
chap. 4. 1. 2. 3. 13. 14. 15. 16. that Mordecai cried with a great cry and
b^^^. And further, that there was great sorrow among the Jews, with fasting,
and weeping, and mourning, and that they lay in sackcloth and ashes. Yea,
that they fasted three days and three nights: and that Queen Ester, and her
honorable maids about her, did so likewise. In the which long continued fast,
there is no doubt, but that they earnestly bewailed their sins, and craved
forgiveness of them, that so the exceeding great d^nger they were in, might be
removed. And Jonah, chapter 3. The Nineuites (though a heathenish people) yet at
the sudden and extraordinary warning of God, by the preaching of the Prophet;
they repented with very earnest repentance, they, and their King, even in
sackcloth and ashes. And as the text reports; they cried mightily to God, to
wit, for forgiveness, and turned from their evil ways, etc. Such are the
examples of the old Testament.

We have likewise, examples of extraordinary and public profession, and
pr^ctise of Repentance, in the n^w Testament. And namely, M^t^h. Chapt. 3.
Verse. 6. Many were baptized of John the Baptist, confessing their sins. And
Act. 2.37.38. at one Sermon, three thousand souls were converted,
acknowledging their sins, and desiring to be instructed in the truth of God.
And cha. 19. verses 18.19.20. Many that believed, came and confessed, and
showed their works. Many also of them that used curious arts, brought their
books, and burned them before all men, and they counted the price of them, and
found it fifty thousand pieces of silver. So the word of God grew^ mightily,
and prevailed.

Now of the more particular, and extraordinary practice and profession of
public repentance: we have in the old Test: Judah. Genesis 38.26. Aaron and
Miriam Numb. chapter 12.10 etc. to the end of the chapter. Achan, Josh. chapter 7.
ver. 20. King David Psalm. 51. Create in me a clean heart o God, and renew a
right spirit within me, says the deep repenting soul of the King. Not that
he had lost all grace, but because faith was for the time greatly eclipsed and
darkened; yea as touching the sweet comfort of it, overwhelmed with contrary
sense and feeling of bitter sorrow for his sin, etc. We have also King
Solomon, for an example of this kind of more particular and extraordinary
practice and profession of public repentance, testified by his book entitled
Ecclesiastes: the which (as by good reason appears from the book it self)
was published in his last years, after he was well beaten with experience of
the vanity of all things, beside the true fear of God, and obedience to his
holy commandments, which he most highly aduanceth. King Manasses comes
likewise within the compass of this sort of extraordinary conuerts, such as we
read of in the old Testament. For he was called to very earnest and notable
repentance, by special tribulation and affliction which God cast upon him.
For, as the holy Story reports, albeit he was a most wicked and ungodly man,
yet in his tribulation, (that is, while he was the King of Ashurs prisoner, and
lay bound in fetters and chains) he prayed to the Lord his God, and humbled
himself greatly. And God was entreated of him. 2. Chro:
33.11.12.13.15.16.18.19. And in the new Testam: we have (for examples in the
same kind) of the more extraordinary repentance of particular persons, the
Thief repenting on the cross. Luk: chap: 23. verses. 40.41.42. We have also
the Apostle Paul, Act: 26.9.10.11. and 1. Cor: 15.9. and 1. Tim. 1.13.14.15.
And that sinful woman, Luk: 7.37.38. etc. Likewise Zacheus chapt: 19.8. and
the cruel Iaylor, Act: 16.29. etc. with many other: all of them set down in a
like public record, though the profession of the repentance of some of them,
was in their own practice, somewhat more private then of the rest. And thus
far of the examples of the extraordinary practice and profession of public
repentance: both by many together, and also by particular persons apart by
them selves, as well out of the old Testament, as out of the new.

OF the more ordinary profession of public repentance by many, we have often
examples in the book of Judges, though few did repent in truth, as is evident
by the often relapse of the most. The like is also testified, Ps: 68.34.45.
etc. and Isai: ch: 58.1.2. etc. And Zech: 7.5.6.7. We know also that there was
in Israel an ordinary institution of God, touching the yeerelie fast of his
people, Leuit: 16.29.30.31.32.33.34. and ch: 23. verses 27.28.29.30.31.32. and
ch: 29.7.8.9.10.11. And unto this ordinary profession and practice of public
repentance, tends the admonition of the holy Ghost in the new Test: to the
Christian churches, Reu: ch: 2. v. 5.16.21.22. and ch: 33. ve. 19.

Of public Repentance by particular persons, in an ordinary course, by the
blessing of God upon the preaching of his word, and execution of the holy
censures of the discipline of the Church: we have in the new Test: the example
of the penitent Corinthian, who was excommunicated for his incest: 1. epist:
ch: 5. And upon his repentance received again into the communion of Saints, 2.
Epi: ch: 2.6.7.8. etc. For this we take to be an ordinary censure of the
Church discipline, though at that time, by the direction of the Apostle, an
extraordinary minister of the word: whose duty it was generally to watch over
the right execution of discipline, as well as over the preaching of true
doctrine: 1. Tim: 1 3. etc. through the whole Epistle. Hereunto tends the
rebuke of the same Apostle, concerning such as having given public offense, by
their uncleanness, fornication and wantonness, were not yet humbled to show
forth the fruits of their repentance. 2. Cor: 12 21. Hereunto also does the
exhortation and rebuke tend, which the Apostle Peter, makes to Simon the
sorcerer, that he should repent, and show forth meet tokens of repentance,
touching his special sin of going about to buy the gifts of the holy Ghost
with money: but with a better mind then he had seemed, generally to have
repented of all his sins before. Act. 8.13.23. And hereof we have a lively
representation given us by our Savior Christ, Luke: 18.13. in the parable of
the penitent Publican, who standing in the Temple far off, would not so much
as lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote his breast saying: O God be merciful
unto me a sinner.

And in the old Testa: we have like notable examples of private repentance. Of
David, in his chamber, in the night, and upon his bed; Yea many nights, night
after night, as Psalm. 6. I cause my bed (says he) every night to swim, and
water my couche with my tears. Read also Psalm: 38.1.2.3.4. etc.

Likewise, we have the notable example of king Hezekiah: who wept sore, and
prayed to the Lord, confessing his sins: and yet withal, comforted his
distressed soul, from the testimony of a good conscience, because he knew
that he had walked in truth, and with a perfect heart in some good measure,
before the Lord: Isa: 38.2.3.4. And the Lord cast all his sins behind his back.
ver. 17. Moreover, concerning Josiah, this we read, that his heart melted at
the hearing of the law red, and he humbled himself and wept, and rent his
clothes. Wherefore God was merciful to him, 2. Kings. chap: 22.10. etc. The
public profession and fruit of which his humiliation and repentance, is
recorded in the next Chapter of the same book.

By the which examples of these so good and holy servants of the Lord, who
excelled in all grace and virtue; We are justly to learn, that not only men
altogether wicked, and at their first conversion only, are earnestly to repent
them of their sins: but also that it is the duty even of godly men already
converted, and turned to god, to renew their repentance upon special
occasions of their often falls; which sometime fall out upon humane
infirmity, yea sometimes of gross negligence etc. In which respect, worthily
does Calvin, that blessed light in the interpretation of the word and Gospel
of Christ, distinguish concerning the repentance both of the one sort, and also
of the other: Harm: Euang: in cap. 15. verse. 10. Lucae. And Likewise, in his
Institutions Lib. 3. Cap. 3. Sect. 18. The name of repentance (says he) is
sometimes restrained, to the conversion of those, that being altogether
estranged from God, are raised as it were from death to life, that is from dead
works and their death in sin, to serve the living God in the duties of true
righteousness and holiness before him: and unto such, even of his own
people, as have after a sort fallen away from the Lord, and shaken off his
yoke by giving themselves to Idolatry for a time. Whereas otherwise, the
meditation and practice of repentance must (as he truly says) be continual,
through the whole course of our life. Neither does that special repentance of
some, take away that which must be ordinary for all, seeing the daily sins
of all, do give unto every one, just occasion to profit daily therein.
Nevertheless, as he further adds in that place of Luke: it is one thing,
after that a man has once entered a right course, to labor still to hold out
in the same, though err while he trip or fall and go astray: and an other
thing, for a man that is altogether out of the way, to recover himself, and to
begin a straight course, as it were from the barriers, or lists, and
beginning of the race. For such a repentance, is not necessary for them that
have already begun to frame their lives according to the rule of Gods law,
in leading a holy and godly life: howsoever it be necessary for them, to sigh
under the infirmities of their fleshly nature, and to use all good diligence
for the correcting of them.

And this difference, (as he well observes in his Institutions, the place
also above alleged) is diligently to be marked of us, lest security creep
upon us, as if repentance did only belong to a few, who are outrageous in
sin: and that the care of mortifying the flesh, did no longer appertain unto
us, in regard of those pleasing lusts, and other sins, which do ever and anon
spring out of us.

So then; we may conclude, that after we have repented of our grosser sins,
which in the beginning of our calling have been discovered unto us: we must
according to the further light of knowledge (making our more secret sins and
corruption manifest unto us) increase our repentance, that sin may more and
more decrease in us. Neither must we repent us, only for minding and doing
such things as be simply unlawful, but also for our abuse of lawful things;
yea, for that we cannot use them so wisely, purely, temperatly, and soberly; as
we ought. I mean apparel, meat and drink, sleep, the mariage-bedde, etc.
Yea, it is our duty to repent us continually, concerning our abusing of the
best gifts and graces which God has given us, and concerning the best things
which we do: for that we cannot in the doing of them, so holily and
religiously use the name of God, either in his word, Prayer, Sacraments, or
Sabbaths, as we ought to use them, to his honor and glory; and for that we
cannot so dearly love, nor so abundantly employ our selves, to profit our
brethren, as we ought in and for the Lords sake, both to love, and also in
love to labor to profit them. Repentance therefore, is not a sigh and away,
nor the work of a day or two only: but it is to be extended to the whole
number of all the days of our lives; that sin daily decaying, godliness may
continually prosper, etc.

These things thus hitherto observed, we cannot but perceive, that where is
repentance (as touching the substance of it as one may say) stands in the
mortifying of sin, and in rising up to newnes of life: the which also, is
otherwise called the breaking up of our fallow grounds, that we sow not among
the thorns, but that we be circumcised to the Lord, etc. Ier. 4.4. And the
renting of our hearts and not of our garments. etc. Joel. 2.13. and the putting
off of the old man, which is corrupt through deceivable lusts, and the
putting on of the new, etc. Ephesians. 4.22 23.24. We may hereby perceive (I say)
that repentance has diverse appurtenances, or helping graces, to the through
and happy effecting of it. I would have you therefore, after this long
breathing given you, to show both more immediately, and also more remouedly,
what graces are necessary both for the mortifying of sin, and also for
quickening to newnes of life. Yea and for the better declaration of this
excellent doctrine, I desire that you show, which they are, as each succeed
other in either of the same respects.



They are these which follow.

First, a true knowledge, and earnest meditation of sin: yea of that
original fountain of sin, which is in our wicked nature. How infinite also
in number, and how heinous in offense our sins are, and always have been in
the sight of God. How grievous to the children of God, who have already begun
to repent, so far as they have broken forth to Gods dishonor. Ad how
dangerous and deadly they are, even against our own souls.

Secondly, shame and confusion of face and conscience, both before God and the
holy Angels: and also (if need so require) before all good and godly men.

Thirdly, remorse and pricking of conscience, in the sense of the guiltines of
our sins and in the fear of Gods just wrath and vengeance due to them.

Fourthly, godly sorrow and mourning even with salt tears of repentance, from
the bitterness of a man's soul, in contrition as it were, and brokennes of heart
before the Lord.

Fifthly, a willing suffering and enduring of all rebukes and chastisements,
which God sends at any time, to the taming and subduing of our unruly and
rebellious nature.

But above all, and in all, a most near application of the death of our
Savior Christ to our wounded souls and consciences; the which only, is a
most sovereign plaster, to mortify and kill as it were the proud flesh of
sin, and also to heal and quiet every soul, that is troubled and
distressed, for the same.

Explication and proof.
These indeed do most immediately go before, in the work of Gods grace, to
the mortification of sin.

Concerning the first whereof, that is, the knowledge of sin, etc. it comes
(as we have already learned) from the doctrine of the law, which God has for
the benefit of his children, made as it were a servant to the Gospel: though
to the obstinate, it is armed as a Judge to their condemnation. And further,
for the meditation of the greatness of sin, and the infinite number of them,
even from our youth, yea from our original corruption of nature: consider the
example of David. Psalm. 25.7. and 38.4. and 40.12. and 51.4.5. and Psalm. 19.12.
And of Job. Cha. 9.2.3. and Chap. 13.26. And of Ezra. Chap. 9 6. And for the
grief, which we put the godly unto, by our sin: consider it from the
example of Lot. 2. Pet. 2.8. of David. Psalm. 119. verses. 136.158. of Ier:
Chap. 9.1. and Paul. 2. Cor. 12.21. and Phil 3.18.

Secondly, for shame and confusion, read in the same Ch: of Ezra, and in the
beginning of the same verse: where note, that when the servants of God, are
ashamed and confounded, for the sins wherein other have chiefly trespassed:
how much more then, ought every one to be ashamed of his own? For the which
read further Jeremy 3.25. We lie down in our confusion, and our shame
covers us, for we have sinned against the Lord our God, we and our Fathers,
from our youth even unto this day, and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord
our God. Read also, Ezekiel. Chap. 16.68. Thou shall remember thy ways, and be
ashamed etc. And I will establish my covenant with thee and thou shall know
that I am the Lord. That thou may remember, and be ashamed, and never open
thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for
all that thou have done, says the Lord God. And Romans 6.21. What fruit had ye
then, in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? For the end of those
things is death.

Mark here the just cause, why we should be ashamed of sin, namely, that we
should ever be so foolish, as to addict our minds to follow so greedily, and
to delight so excessiuely, as we have done, in that, which without repentance,
would be our utter destruction. For want of this shame for sin: read a
vehement rebuke. Ier. 3, 3. Thou had a whores forehead, and would not be
ashamed. And chap. 6.15. Were they ashamed, when they had committed
abomination? Nay they were not ashamed, no neither could they have any shame:
therefore shall they fall among the slain, etc. The Prophet speaks of a
godly shame: for otherwise, by the conviction of their consciences, that they
do ill in the committing of sin; the very wicked have a certain shame
though it profits them not: as chap. 2.26. As the thief is ashamed, when he
is found, so is the house of Israel ashamed, they, their Kings and their
Princes, and their Prophets, Saying to a tree, thou art my father, and to a
stone thou have begotten me, etc. There is none in the world, who if they have
not by custom of sin, and hardness of heart, as it were feared their
consciences with a hot iron, as the Apostle writes, but they have akinde of
shame and blushing in their face, when their sin is found out: according to
the prouerbiall saying, The good blood lies not. But the shame of those that
are in the way of repentance, is an other manner of shamefastness: for they
do willingly shame themselves, and that, even as in the sight of God, and from
their very hearts, in a dislike of their sin, etc.

Thirdly, for remorse and pricking of conscience; read Genesis 42.21.22. We have
verily sinned against our brother, (say the brethren of Joseph) etc. Read also,
2. Sam. chap. 24.10, David's heart smote him, after he had numbered the people
and David said to the Lord, I have sinned exceedingly, in that I have done:
Therefore now Lord I beseech thee, take away the trespass of thy servant: for
I have done very foolishly. And Acts. 2.37. Now when they heard it: to wit, how
grievous a sin they ^ad committed in crucifying the son of God: they were
pricked in their hearts etc.

Fourthly, concerning godly sorrow and mourning, the holy Apostle Paul
writes, that godly sorrow causes repentance to salvation, never to be
repented of, 2. Cor. 7.10. The Apostle means, that this is one helping cause,
among the rest, through the work of Gods grace, though not the only cause. It
causes repentance, because it does by the grace of God, provoke it not only
to begin, but also more and more to work forth the own work. For when a
man is truly sorry for sin, he indeuoureth to leave it and to take a better
course. In which respect, King Solomon, Eccles. 7.4. affirms that it is
better to go to the house of mourning, then to go to the house of feasting:
because this is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his heart.
Likewise, he says that anger is better then laughter, (he speaks of that
anger, which a man justly conceiueth against himself for sin) because by a
sad look the heart is made better. And again in the same respect, verse, 7.
It is better, (says he) to hear the rebuke of a wise man, then that a man
should hear the song of fools. This sorrow is very fitly to be put before
the death of sin, and as a means tending to the mortification of it. For
there is no sorrow at all to be taken for the death and dying of sin: but
joy and comfort, yea, a triumph of spirit. We are only to sorrow that sin
has lived, and borne the sway, so long in us: and that we have taken so great
pleasure in it already, etc. This kind of godly sorrow, breeds the death of
sin: for sin cannot prosper where it is not delighted in. Sin must be
made a wanton, or else it will have no joy to stay. It will take no liking of
cold and grimme entertainment. This godly sorrow, whereby the soul mourns
for nothing so much, as because God our most kind Father is thereby displeased
with us; Gualan super hoc. Trem: Inn: in gen: neut: and paulo post in cadem
sententia gualan, de co.
it is a gracious gift of the holy Ghost, according to that we read, Zech.
12.10, etc. In that day (that is, in the time of the Gospel, says the Lord) I
will power upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
(that is, upon all true Christians, both Jews and Gentiles) the spirit of
grace and supplication, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced,
and they shall lament * for this as one mourns for an only son, and be
sorry * for it, as one should mourn for his first borne.

Tears are oftentimes joined with this mourning: as Judges, 2.4.5. as we have
seen before. Ezra. chap, 10.1. Luke. 7, 38. Psalm. 56, 8. Joel. 2.17. Mat. 26,
75. and in many other places of holy Scripture, Not that godly sorrow, cannot
be in some measure, without tears: or not in great measure, but there must of
necessity be abundance of tears. For some are less apt to weep then
other, even by constitution of nature: but not the less apt to sorrow by
that, but subject rather to more deep and pensive sorrow, even because they
cannot so easily feel their hearts to melt. For the easiest melting of the
heart; and the breaking forth of tears, is a dissoluing and loosening of
sorrow: the which, without tears, is both to body and soul, of a constringent
and binding nature.

The heart being contrite and broken with this godly sorrow (insomuch as
hereby, as it were with a hammer, all vain confidence is battered down, and
the soul made fit to be suppliant to God for his tender mercy and grace) it
is more accounted of, before God, then all outward and legal sacrifices were
ever unto him. For as we read, Psalm. 51, 17. The sacrifices of God, are a
contrite spirit: a contrite and broken heart, o God, thou will not despise. And
as we read, Ps. 34, 18. The Lord is near unto them that are of a contrite
heart, and he will save such as be afflicted in spirit. Read also, Isay. Chap.
57.15. Thus says he that is high and excellent, he that inhabiteth the
eternity, whose name is the holy one. I dwell in the high and holy place: with
him also, that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the
humble, and to give light to them that are of a contrite heart. For I will not
contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail
before me, and the souls which I have made. And again, Chap. 66.2. To him
will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my words. Come unto me, all ye that are weary and laden, and I
will ease you says our Savior Christ. Mat. 11.28. The same in sense though in
other words. Where note with singular thankfulness to God our Savior, this his
sweet promise, whereby he releeueth the poor oppressed soul, assuring all
such, that he will ease them. And Isay, 61.1. and Luke, 4.18. he will bind up
and heal the broken hearted. And the rather consider of it with exceeding
thankfulness to God, because all that will not mourn and break their hearts
in a blessed practice of repentance now, shall one day howl when it will be
too late, and wish that the high mountains might fall upon them, to crush
them to pieces, that they might not appear before the judgment seat of the
Son of God, whom now they despise. Neither is the holy proverb unfit to be
considered of us, to the same purpose, chap. 29.1. in that it is said: He that
hardens his neck, having been often rebuked, shall suddenly be destroyed,
so that he cannot be cured.

And for the same cause also, let us willingly practice that which was
answered, in the fifth place, concerning the enduring of all Gods fatherly
chastiseme^ts: to the breaking of our stout and sturdy hearts, and to the
weakening of that sin which is so strongly settled in our nature. That is, let
us harken to the admonitorie precept of the Apostle James. chap. 4.9.10.
Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye wavering minded. Suffer
ye affliction, and sorrow, and weep. Let your laughter be turned into
mourning, and your joy into heaviness. Cast down your selves before the Lord
and he will lift ye up. For this is one blessed use and benefit of
afflictions, that they do humble and meeken the heart, as we may remember from
the example of Manasses. And as we read, Job, 33.17, 18, etc. That God may
cause man to turn away from his enterprise, and that he might hide the pride
of man, etc. For to this end, (as it follows) he is stricken with sorrow
upon his bed, and the grief of his bones is sore etc. And Leuit. 26, 41. Their
uncircumcised hearts shall be humbled, and then they shall willingly bear the
punishment of their iniquity. Let us therefore, in all times of our
afflictions, lay our hand upon our mouth, and bear them patiently, according
to that of the 39. Psalm. verse 9. I should have been dumb, and not have
opened my mouth, because thou did it. Let us say as we read. Psalm. 119 15.
I know Lord that thy judgments are right, and that thou have afflicted me
justly. Read also. 1. Sam. 3, 18, and 2, Sam. 15, 26, etc. chap. 16, 10, 11,
12. And Eccles. 7.16. Yea, we ought to entreat the Lord to correct us, that we
might not continue in our sins: as the holy Prophet prays: Correct us o
Lord, but yet in mercy. Yea, and to desire that the righteous may smite us with
their wholesome rebukes: the property whereof, is to supple and heal like
precious oil, and not violently to crush and break. Psalm. 141.5.

But above all (as it is answered in the last branch) the application of the
death of our Savior Christ to our soul, is the most sovereign plaster that
can be, to mortify and kill the proud flesh of sin. For as well says a
godly learned man. Like as a strong corasiue laid to a sore, eats out all the
rotten and dead flesh: even so the death of Christ being applied to the heart
of a penitent sinner by faith, weakens and consumes the sin that cleaves so
fast unto our nature, and dwells within us. Master Perkins exposition of the
Creed, in the Article of the death of Christ. And who, duly considering, that
his sins were the cause that Christ was crucified, and that his most precious
blood was shed: but he must needs it he have any sparckle of grace, wrought in
him by the spirit of Christ which gives this blessed effect to his death,
mourn for his sins, and grow out of love with them. etc? According to that
alleged before, out of the 12. chap. of the Prophet Zachariah. This also is
the proper, and as one would say, the very specificall virtue of the death of
Christ, as to stay the anger of God which is bent against sin, so to stay the
course and rage of sin, that it do no longer provoke and anger God. Read,
Rom, 6.2.3. etc. and Gal. 6.14 and 1. Pet. 4.1.

Hitherto therefore of the former sort of the helping causes of the first part
of repentance, belonging to the mortification of sin. Only, let us here add
this one caution by the way, that albeit these helps are placed in the
beginning of repentance: yet we are not to understand it so, as if there should
be no use of them afterward: but rather, that they are continual helpers, to
further repentance from the beginning to the end of the same.



First, the confession of sin, joined with the care of leaving and forsaking
the same.

Secondly, indignation and hatred against sin; yea even against our selves
because of our sins: and as a further fruit thereof, a holy fight and
revenge by fasting and prayer against them, and for the forgiveness of them,
withal meet signs and fruits of detestation: such as are crying out against
them, and against our selves miserable sinners and beasts that we are, with
striking of the hands upon the thigh, or breast, or some other like
convenient and seemly way; as the holy spirit of GGD will be ready to teach
every one, that truly lamenteth and bewaileth his sin.

Thirdly, admonition to others, that they take warning by our experience and
example.

Fourthly, watchfulnes, lest sin should at any time recover that strength,
which it has already lost.

Finally, a diligent avoiding of all wicked means, or vain persuasions and
fancies, whereby either this part of repentance touching mortification and
weakening of sin or the other of rising unto newnes of life, should be
hindered.

Explication and proof.
Touching the first branch of this answer, which is, of confessing and
forsaking of sin: we must understand concerning confession, that although it
is to be made not only to God, but also before men, and of one man mutually to
another: yet it is not to be done in like manner, nor of the same necessity to
men, as it is to be made unto God. For unto God it is simply necessary, and
always necessary, even of all men: insomuch as all men, do continually sin
against God, and in his sight and knowledge, though not always in like measure
and greatness of transgression. And it does properly belong unto God only, to
say, I have pardoned, I will not destroy: Job. 34.31. And Psalm. 103.3. It is
the Lord that forgiueth all iniquity, and who heals all infirmities: that
is, who both puts away the guiltines, and also takes away the strength, and
remoueth the punishment of sin. We are therefore to confess our sins unto God
continually, with as great sorrow and humiliation as may be, and yet with
assured hope of pardon: seeing mercy is with him, that he may be feared, Psalm.
130.4. And Micah, chapter 7. Who is a God like unto thee (says the holy Prophet)
that takes away iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of
his heritage. He retains not his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him.
He will turn again and have compassion upon us: he will subdue our
iniquities, and cast all our sins into the bottom of the sea. Thou will
perform thy truth to Jacob, and mercy to Abraham, as thou have sworn unto our
fathers in old time. Thus therefore, confession of sin to God, especially
when it is joined with forsaking and renouncing of sin (after the example of
the servants of God, and according to the instructions of the word of God) it
has great comfort in it.

Examples of this confession of sins unto God, withal godly sorrow and
humiliation, both public and private, have been rehearsed before: such as were
Ezra, Daniel, Nehemiah, David, Hezekiah, Paul, etc. Read also, Luk 15.18.19,
20, 21. The prodigal son is described, in his repentance, both to purpose
and also to perform the confession of his sin. I will go to my father
(says he) and say to him: Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before
thee. I am utterly unworthy to be called thy son, etc. And chap. 23. The
thief on the Cross, in his repentance, acknowledges himself to have done
things worthy of death: according to the general instruction of the Prophet
Hosh. chap. 14, 1, 2. in case of humiliation, saying: O Israel, return unto
the Lord thy God: for thou have fallen by thy iniquity. Take unto you words,
and turn unto the Lord, and say unto him: Take away all iniquity, and receive
us graciously: so will we render the calves of our lips. That is,
thanksgiving and praise, as the Apostle to the Heb: does interpret the same,
chap. 13, 15.

The blessing and fruit of this holy and humble confession of sin, joined
with care of forsaking it, is testified in many places; and namely in the chap.
of Hosh: even now alleged, as it follows in the 4. verse: I will heal their
rebellion (says the Lord) I will love them freely, for mine anger it turned
away from him, I will be as the dew to Israel: he shall grow as the lilly
etc. It is evident from the example and practice of David. Psalm. 32.5.6.

For whereas he could find no rest, so long as he bitte in his sin: Then (says
he) I acknowledged my sin, neither did I hide my iniquity: I thought, I will
confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the
punishment of my sin. Selah. Therefore shall every one that is godly, make his
prayer to thee, in a time when thou may be found. Surely in the floode of
great waters, they shall not come near him. Read also, Jonah: chapt: 3.10. The
holy Proverb also, is singular to this purpose, chap: 28.13. He that bideth
his sins shall not prosper: but he that confesses and forsakes them shall
have mercy. And let us well observe, that forsaking of sin, does always go
with true confession, that we may find mercy with God. For otherwise,
confession shall but make way to further condemnation, seeing it is in truth, no
better then a reioicing, or iustifiyng of men themselves in their sins, when
they acknowledge themselves sinners, and yet do nevertheless continue and
abide still in them. Read also the curse of hiding and cleaving to sin:
Isai: chapt: 30.1.

But as touching true confession and forsaking of sin, let us here observe
further, that as it is beneficial to our selves, so it is singularly to the
glory of God: according to that we read. Joshua: 7.10. Where Joshua exhorting
Achan to confess his sin, he bids him. Give glory to God. And the
prophet Ierem: chapt: 13.16. Exhorting all Estates to Repentance, he uses the
same words: Give glory to the Lord your God, before he bring darkness etc. And
so it has been usually acknowledged in the Church: yea even of the wicked
themselves, though ill practiced and applied of them: as we read Ioh: chapt:
9.24. Give glory unto God (say the Pharisees to the blind man, whom our Savior
had made to see) we know that this man is a sinner. As if they should have
said, confess thy self to be a counterfeit, or else to be healed by some other
way then by Christ.

Hitherto of confession to God.

There is also, (as was said) a confession or acknowledgement of sin from man
to man. But this confession or acknowledgement, is not properly, for the
removing of the guiltiness of the sin (which God only forgiueth) but either
for relief of conscience by mutual counsel and comfort against despair,
when the soul is oppressed and confounded with fear and sorrow, etc.
according to that saying of the Apostle James: Acknowledge your faults one to
another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed: for the prayer of a
righteous man avails much if it be fervent. Or labor some. We may read it
thus, The earnest prayer of a righteous man avails much. chap ^.16.

Or else, this confession of man to man, is for some charitable satisfaction and
reconciliation of the one to the other, concerning such offenses and
unkindness, as do many times grow, upon sondrie occasions, betwixt them.
And this is with greater or less sorrow and humbling of the party offending,
according to the commandment of our Savior Christ: Matthew: 5.23.24. If thou
bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought
against thee, leave there thine offering before the Altar, and go thy way:
first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift: etc.

And in such cases, every Christian ought to remit and lay away the offense
conceived, with great facility, as they that are easy to be entreated:
according to the further instruction of our Savior Christ, chapt: 18. verse.
21. etc. And Luk: 17.3.4. Take heed to your selves, if thy brother trespass
against thee, rebuke him. And though he sin against thee seven times in a
day, and seven times a day turn to thee, saying, It repents me: thou shall
forgive him.

But what if he will not forgive him so doing?

The party seeking reconciliation, may have nevertheless, peace in his
conscience before God: who accepts of the submission, though the froward and
uncharitable party will not regard it.

Let this suffice for the opening of the first branche of the answer.

Secondly, concerning indignation and hatred against sin, yea against our
selves for sin; read Psalm: 97.10. Ye that love the Lord, hate evil. Amos
ch: 5.15 Hate evil and love God. And Rom: 12.9. Abhor ye that which is
evil, and clean to that which is good. And in the Epistle of Jude. verse. 13.
Hate ye even the garment spotted by the flesh. This was the commendation of the
Church of Ephesus, that it could not forbear them that were evil. And that
they hated the works of the Nicolaitans, which the Lord himself hated. Revel.
2.2.6. And contrariwise, a wicked man is described by this property, that he
does not abhor evil. Psa: 36.4. We abhor and shun many noisome diseases
with much loathsomnes: as the pockes, the foul leprosy, the plague, etc. But
we ought to loathe and shun sin the cause of all loathsome and noisome
diseases, much more.

Now for examples sake, concerning such as have had indignation against
themselves for sin: consider of Job, chapt: 42.6. I abhor my self, and
repent in dust and ashes. Namely, because he had sometime unadvisedly
muttered against the correction of God upon him. And of David: Ps: 73.21.22.
Certainly my heart was vexed, and I was pricked in my reins. So foolish was I,
and ignorant: I was a beast before thee. And of Agar: Prou: 30.2. Surely, I am
more foolish (or as the word signifies) brutish, then any man ought to be. I
have not the understanding of man in me. The holy Prophet complains of his
natural ignorance, and of the evil fruits thereof. Consider also the example
of the Apostle Paul: Rom: 7, O wretched man that I am. And of Ezra. 9. verse
10. and of Daniel: ch: 9.7 8. And note also, that as we must principally hate
sin in our selves, and as it were, throw the first stone against our selves
for it: so must we, with like hatred, detest it in others, without respect of
persons: after the holy example of Iaakob, concerning the sin even of his
own sons. The which he did not only at the first, but to his dying day. Of
Reuben his eldest son he says: Thou have lost thy dignity. etc. And of
Simeon and Leui he says, they were brethren indeed, (as though he should
say, according to the common Proverb. Neither barrel better herring.) Into
their secret, let not my soul come: my glory be not thou joined with their
assembly, etc. Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it
was cruel, etc. Gen: 49.4.5.6.7. In which anger of Iaakob, is represented, the
very indignation of God himself against sin. Read also, Ps: 26.5. and 31.6.
and. 101.3. and 139 21.22. and 119. verse. 128. and 163. And for the signs of
detestation, read: Ier: 31.19. I heard Ephraim lamenting thus, Thou have
^orrected me, and I was chasticed as an untamed calfe, etc. Surely after that I
converted, I repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh:
I was ashamed, yea even confounded, etc. And Luk: 18.13. The penitent sinner is
by our Savior Christ described to have smote his breast, saying: God be
merciful to me a sinner. It is as much as if one should say, O that my leg
should ever have carried me, to such an enterprise. O that my hand should ever
have been employed about such an evil service. O that my wicked heart
especially, should ever have yielded consent thereunto: etc. Read also,
Nehemiah. chap: 5.13. He shook the lap of his garment, with a holy
imprecation against them that should oppress their brethren: showing thereby,
how greatly the sin should be detested. It is like to the speech of our
Savior Christ, that his Disciples should shake off the dust of their feet,
against the despisers of the Gospel. Note also the speech of the Lord by his
Prophet Isai: chap: 30.22. Ye shall pollute the covering of the images of
silver, and the rich ornament of thine images of gold, and cast them away as a
menstruous clothe, and thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence. And chap: 31.7.
In that day every man shall cast out his idols of silver, and his idols of
gold, which your hands have made you, even a sin.

And by Ezekiel: chapt: 18.31. Cast away from you, all your transgressions,
whereby ye have transgressed: (not only idolatry, as before in Isaiah) but
also every other sin. Consider likewise, that which the Prophet Daniell
speaks to Nabuchadnezzer, in the name of the Lord: Break of thy sins by
righteousness, Abrumpe. etc. There must of necessity, be rough dealing, and an
holy violence used against sin. It will not yield, unless it be vanquished.
If it be not killed, it will kill, etc.

They therefore that strive most manfully and courageously against sin, yea
even to the death of it, they are to be accounted of all others the most
valiant men: Prouer: 16.32. He that is slow to anger, is better then the
mighty man, and he that rules his own mind, is better then he that
wins a City. And Hebre: 12.4. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood,
striving against sin. The weapons whereby sin is to be incountred, must be
spiritual, according to the nature of the adversary. Namely by holy prayers,
and sometimes with fasting, as the importunity of the enemy shall require.
Our resistance or revenge must not be by whipping of our selves, or by any
other like Popish penance: but only as God requires in his word.

All other practices and blind devotions, are of no reckoning with God.
Coloss: chapt: 2.20. As touching those that make semblance of misliking sin
generally: but when their own particular sins come in question, they deal
as favorably with them as may be, they are too great triflers, and even
cowardes in this Spiritual warfare. They may well be compared to those that
make as if they would throw their children to the puttocks, (as they say) but
they embrace and hold them fast in their arms still. Sin must not be so
dallied withal, if we mean in good earnest to repent: we must deal with it,
as with a most impudent and shameless guest, that must be thrust out of doors by
the head and shoulders (as they say) before he will depart.

Thirdly, touching admonition to others, that they may learn from our
example, and experience, to take warning: read the excellent practice of David,
Psalm. 32. and again, Psalm. 51.13. Restore me to the joy of thy salvation,
and stablish me with thy free Spirit, Then shall I teach thy ways unto the
wicked, and sinners shall be converted unto thee. And Psalm: 124: consider both
the title, and the Psalm: And Ezekiel: 18.30. Return, and cause others to turn
away from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your destruction.
It is agreeable to the precept of our Savior Christ, Luk: 22.32. When thou art
converted (says our Savior to Peter) strengthen thy brethren.

Fourthlie, concerning watchfulnes, that sin renew not the strength: read 1.
Cor: 9.27, I beat down my body, and bring it into subjection, lest by any
means, after that I have preached to others, I my self should be reproved.
Sin recovering strength, is more hard to be subdued afterward: Matthew: 12.43.
etc.

Muta animalia cum fraud capiantur, si aliquo se modo, in fugam excitauerint,
fiunt postmodum cautiora: vitantque semper ea omnia, in quibus dolos
insidiasque senseru^t. Sic hominem (inquit Lactantius) poenitentia cautum ac
diligentem facit, ad euitanda peccata, in quae semel fraud deciderit. The
dumb creatures grow more wary, after they have escaped their danger, much
more ought man, a reasonable creature, grow daily more wary against the
danger of sin.

Fifthlie, how the fear of God helps forward this part of repentance, yea
how it preuenteth sin: Read: Genes: 39.9. How can I do this great
wickedness, (says Joseph to his incontinent Mistress) and sin against God?
And again, chap: 42.8. and chap: 50.19. He persuades his brethren, that he
minded no revenge against them, because he had the fear of God before his
eyes. Read also, Prouer: 16.6. By the fear of the Lord, men depart from
evil. And chap: 14.27. The fear of the Lord is a Wellspring of life, to
avoid the snares of death. and chapt: 23.17. and Job, chapt: 28. verse. 28. and
Prou: 3.7. Read also, 2. Cor: 7.11. Where the Apostle rehearses this holy
fear, among diverse other of the helping graces to repentance. Godly sorrow
(says he) causes repentance to salvation, not to be repented of. etc. For
behold, this thing, that ye have been godlilie sorry, what great care it has
wrought in you: Yea what clearing of your selves: Yea what indignation: Yea
what fear, etc.

Read also Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord in fear, rejoice in trembling: And Ps:
4.4. Tremble and sin not: examine your own heart upon your bed, and be
still: (that is) take heed, that ye do not add sin to sin in an obstinate
rebellion against God. Selah. And Psalm. 99.1.

Finally, as for the means that hinder this part of Repentance, as well as
that other part now following, we will consider of them together afterward.

In the mean season, let us proceed to those helping graces, which do
formerly serve to stir up to newnes of life, which is the second part of
Repe^ta^ce.



First and principally; an earnest meditation and application of the
Resurrection of our Savior CHRIST, to our dull and dead souls, that by the
virtue thereof, they may be quickened, suppled, and made lithe, as it were with
a most holy and precious oil, to rise up to newness of life.

Secondly, a like earnest meditation, of all other the mercies of God,
concerning the comfort of this life; whose bountifulness, and every part,
fruit, or benefit thereof, ought to lead us to Repentance: yea to carry us
on forward, to this our second part of Repentance.

Thirdly, a faithful and believing meditation, of all the sweet and faithful
promises of God, touching the blessedness of the life to come.

Finally, the fear of God, is not only as a bridle to with-holde from sin
(as was answered before) but it is also a sharp spur to quicken us to newnes
of life.

It is very true: and therefore, when the Prophet Samuel exhorts the people of
God to serve the Lord, Explication and proof.
he makes the fear of God, the ground or cause of it. Therefore (says he)
fear ye the Lord, and serve him in truth, with all your hearts: and consider
how great things he has done for you. 1. Sam. 12.24. Yea the fear of God is
not only a helping grace to this part of repentance, but it is a principal
grace of repentance it self, according as it is written: Pro: 1.7. and Ps:
111.10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning (yea, as the word may well
signify a chief point) of wisdom. And Ps: 2. We must serve the Lord in
fear, as we saw before. That godliness has the promise of the life, both
present, and to come: the Apo: Paul assures us 1. Tim. 4.8. And that the
meditation of these promises, help forward repentance, it may be perceived by
that we read. Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy promise in my heart, that I might
not sin against thee. And in the next verse. O blessed Lord teach me thy
Statutes. Read also, 2. Cor: 7.1. Seeing then we have these promises, dearly
beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh, and of the
Spirit, and grow up unto full holiness in the fear of God.

Yea generally, that all mercies of God, as well past and present, as to come,
ought to move us to repentance: call to mind that place: 1. Sam. 12.24.
alleged even now. For to this end the Prophet of God, exhorts the
Israelites to consider the great things which the Lord had done for them:
nothing doubting, but it must needs provoke all that feared God among them, to
settle their hearts to serve him. Read also in the same 1. book of Samuel, ch:
15.17. and 2. Sam. 12.7.8. and Isa: 5.1. etc. and Mica: 6.3.4.5. and To: 2.4.
and ch: 12.1. etc. where, and in many other places, the Lord calls, and
reasons earnestly for obedience, from the consideration of his mercies, and
benefits bestowed upon his people. Behold (says our Sa: Chr) to the impotent
man, whom he had healed: thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto thee. John: 5.14. Verily, every bit of bread which we eat, every
garment which we put on, every creature that we behold: every flower that we
smell to, etc: they ought all and every of them to be esteemed of us, as
continual admonitors to move us to hearty repentance. Finally, as touching
the first branche of the Answer, concerning the power of our Sau: Chr: his
resurrection, read Rmo: 6.4. etc. and Ephesians: 1.19. etc. and chapt: 2.1. Read
also, 1. Pet. 3.21.

These graces therefore, are those which we may reckon for the former sort of
helps, to stir up to newness of life.

Finally, as touching the first branch of the answer, concerning the power of
our Sa: Ch, his resurrection, read To: 6.4. etc. and Ephe: 1.19. etc. and
Chap. 2.1. Read also 1. Peter. 3.21.

These graces therefore, are those which we may reckon for the former helps,
to stir up to newnes of life.



First, an earnest meditation of our former unprofitableness, yea of our
offensive and harmefull life, among the people of God, even to the dishonor of
the most holy name of God himself.

Secondly, a like earnest desire to take a better course, for all time to come.

Thirdly, joy and delight in well doing.

Fourthly, earnest prayer to God, for daily increase of his grace and power in
us, to the same end.

Finally, careful meditating of all good reasons, and a diligent using of
every good and holy means, which God of his infinite mercy and goodness, has
ordained to further us, in the practice of either part of repentance: both to
the honor of God, and also to the common benefit of his people.

Explication and proof.
Touching our former unprofitableness, yea harmfulnes, by our evil example, and
by our encouraging of others to do evil; and that we ought, even from
thence, to provoke our selves to be the more careful henceforward, to walk in
good duty: and for the same cause also, to watch for, and to lay hold on all
good occasions to do every good works we may attain unto: to the end we may,
by the daily increase of the amendment of our lives, more glorify God, and
also make amends among his people, whom we have any way damnified, or seduced,
either in soul, or outward estate: read Ezekiel: 44 6. Thus says the Lord God, O
house of Israel, ye have enough of all your abominations. Likewise To: 13.11.
And that considering the season, that it is now time, that we should arise from
sleep: for now is our salvation nearer, then when we believed, to wit, when
we first believed. And 1. Pet: 4.3. It is sufficient for us, that we have
spent the time past of the life, after the lust of the Gentiles, walking in
wantonness, etc. For seeing we owe the obedience of our whole life unto God
principally, and then for the Lords sake, unto his people: the reason is
plain; that by how much, we have misspent a greater part of our lives
heretofore, we ought to spend the rest of it more dutifully for the time to
come. And therefore I cease to add any more at this time, concerning the first
branch, save only, that which the Prophet of God says: I considered my ways,
and turned my feet into thy testimonies. Psalm. 119.59.

Secondly, concerning earnest desire and zeal to do well: read 2. Cor. 7.11.
Where the Apostle commends the Corinthians for this grace, that there was a
great desire and zeal in them. And hereunto he exhorts all Christians. Tit.
2.14. that they would be zealous of good works. And Cha: 3.8. careful to show
forth good works. And Revel. 3.19. Be zealous (says the Lord) and amend.

Thirdly, for joy and delight in well doing: read Gal. 5.22. Joy is a fruit of
the Spirit. And 1. Cor: 13 6. Love reioiceth not in iniquity, but it reioiceth
in the truth. Read also Prou: 21.15. It is joy to the just to do judgment. And
Psalm. 119 14. I have had as great delight in the way of thy Testimonies, as in
all riches. And verse 16. I will delight in thy statutes, and will not forget
thy word. And verse. 97. And Rom: 7.22. I delight in the law of God, concerning
the inner man. And again. Psalm: 119.32. I will run the way of thy
commandments, when thou shall enlarge mine heart. Verily, we ought to take
more delight in godliness, then ever we took in sin.

Fourthlie, for Prayer to this end, Read Psalm: 19.14. Let the words of my
mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my
strength and my Redeemer. Read also, Psalm: 139.24. Consider O God, if there be
any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the way for ever.

As touching other means and reasons, to further repentance, we will inquire
of them by and by.

But before this, I would have you show, why we must be so pricked in our
consciences, and so sorrowful for sins, and so ashamed of them, etc. as has
been declared.



We must Matthew. 9.12.13.
feel the most deadly wound which sin has made in our souls: that from
thence we may be most earnestly provoked to seek after the curing and
healing of it.

We must Isai ch: 1.11. etc. etc. 43.22.24. and ^3 10. Ephesians: 4.30.
be sorrowful for our sins, because we have grieved the Lord, and his holy
Spirit, with them: remembering also Isai. 53. and Matthew. 26 36. etc.
how deeply our most loving Savior was wounded for them: and because
otherwise we cannot have any comfortable persuasion and hope of the forgiveness
of them.

We must be Ps. 10.15. Ezekiel. 6.61.63 Rom: 6.21.
ashamed and wounded for our sins, because they have brought deserved shame
and confusion upon us. Yea because even in their own nature, they are very
confused and shameful.

We must confess and bewraye them, specially to God: because otherwise in
the guiltines of our consciences, we should remain still They that conceal
the ^^^^n and reb^^^on of other, a^e accessory in huma^e ^^^^e: much m^re
before God if we conceal and hide our own w^cked^es from h m.
as accessarie to them.

We must accuse and 1. Cor: ^1.31.32.
condemn our selves for them, that the Lord may clear and acquit us.

We must 2. Cor. 12.7.8.^.
pray to God against them, because without his grace, they are to strong for us
to encounter withal.

We must hate, abhor, and by all means resist them, because 1. Pet. 2.11. H
b 12.1.4.
they are our Spiritual enemies, and do for their parts always most
maliciously fight against our souls, as it were under the banner and
designement of the Devil.

And for the same cause also, must we most vigilantly E^he: 4.22. Ia^es, 1.14.
watch against them, lest we should at any time be undermined and surprised of
them.

Finally, we must practice all righteousness, with earnest desire, holy
joy, ready diligence and constancy: because herein chiefl^e, Ephe: 4.24. 1.
Pet. 2.9.
does the image of God our heavenly Father shine forth in us, who has called
us out of darkness, into his marvelous light, that we should show forth his
virtues: as the Apostle Peter teaches us.

So we read in the 1. Epist: of Pet: chapt: 2.9. etc.

B^t of the several branches of this answer (they being plain in themselves,
and already proved in effect) I will not stand to speak any thing further of
them. Only let us observe, that the sorrow of true repentance must be godly
sorrow: and not the sorrow of Judas, which was worldly, and not in faith, but
in despair, etc. The tears of repentance, must not be Esaues tears. The
humiliation and fasting, not such as Ahabs was: nor such as is reproved, Isai:
58. and also Zech. chapt: 7.5.6. The prayer must not be the slight prayer of
Balaam, that we may die the death of the righteous only, but that we may live
their life also.

Now we are come to inquire of those lettes which hinder either part of
repentance jointly, whether practices or persuasions: and on the contrary, of
other general furtherances of the same.



First, incredulity, or unbelief, as if neither promise nor threatening of
God, were of any certainty, and therefore that it is in vain to serve God: or
on the contrary, pre^uming upon Gods mercy, without all fear of his justice.

Secondly, the enticing pleasure of sin, which, for the present, is always
most delightful to our wicked nature.

Thirdly, hope of long life: and therewithal, an opinion that it shall
suffice, if at the last we cry God mercy, as they use to speak, and so repent
for all at once: or else, that our good deeds at the last, and the devotion
and prayers of other, may be set against our ill deeds, and so be available
for us.

Fourthly, the fellowship and familiarity of some choice wicked companions, in
the which, one does mightily animate and imbolden the other, to hold on in
their wicked course, contrary to all godly motions, and persuasions.

Yea fifthly, the common example of the licentious multitude, is to every one an
usual let and hinderance of repentance.

Sixthly, the more general prosperity of the wicked here in this present evil
world, above the godly.

Seventhly, some particular examples, of such, as having lived notoriously ill,
for a long time: have nevertheless at the last, seemed to die as well as the
best of them all, as they say.

Eighthly, long custom in sinning, works hardness of heart, and obstinate
wilfulnes in committing of sin.

Ninthly, flattering Preachers, such as sing placentia (as they are termed)
that is, such things only, and in such manner only, as may be best pleasing
to the carnal ear of their hearers.

Tenthly, an opinion that there is too great austeritie, and vncomfortablenes,
yea even mere folly in a godly life: specially in times of cruel persecution
and loss of all worldly things, for godliness sake.

Eleuenthly, a great let, and hinderance of repentance, is that delight, which
every one of us, have naturally, to hear and talk of other men's sins, with
secure neglect of examining, and censuring, of our own; as if all were well,
if we be not in our own opinion, as bad as the worst of all.

Finally, the Devil uses his whole craft and power, to hinder, yea and if it
may be, utterly to overthrow and frustrate, all our endeavors after the
practice of true repentance.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. And therefore we have the greater need to watch against all
his hindrances, and to pray earnestly to God, for wisdom, and power, to
escape his snare, and to keep our selves, that we never fall into his hands
again. For not only, are we all, at the first, in the snare of the Devil,
taken of him as captives, at his own will and pleasure. 2. Tim. 2.26. but also
after we are escaped, he seeks by all means, how he may entrap us again,
and so bring us to a greater destruction. Math. 12.43. etc. as was alleged a
little before: and 1. Pet. 5.8. and 2. Cor. 2.11. and chap. 11.2.3.14.

But let us briefly consider of the several branches of this answer.

And first concerning unbelief; that it is a principal hinderance of
repentance, it is of it self evident. For verily, if we did believe the
certain truth, both of Gods gracious promises to the obedient, and of his most
fearful threatenings against the wicked; it must needs (by the grace of God)
work both a care of leaving sin, and also of walking in the ways and
commandments of the Lord: as we have the notable example of the heathen
Ninevites, who, believing the threatenings of God to be true, unless they
should repent: did thereupon proclaim a fast, and repented in a very singular
manner Jonah chap. 3.5. etc. as we saw before. But where this faith is wanting,
no marvel, though all such do put off the fear of the evil day far away
from them, and embrace the momentany pleasures of sin, as if the Lord made no
such great matter of sin, as faithful Preachers would make us believe: or,
though evil do come upon others, yet every man is ready to sooth himself,
that it shall not come near him, as if they were at agreement with hell. etc.
and therefore are bold to elude and mock at all the judgments of God, saying:
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die: And Mal. 3.14. It is in
vain to serve God, etc. Or else (as was answered) they do so presume of the
mercy of God, as if there were no justice to be feared from him: as Ier. chap.
18. verse. 18. and Micah. chap. 3.11. and again, Ier. 7.4. etc. 9.10.

But howsoever they flatter themselves, and suffer themselves to be bewitched
of the Devil: yet their judgment sleeps not, as it is expressly testified
and denounced against all such, by the holy Prophets of God. Isai. ch^p 5.19.
and cha. 22.12.13.14. and cha. 28.14.15. etc. and Amos. cha. 5.1^. and chap.
6.1. etc. and chap. 9.10. Read also Psalm: 10.4.5 6. and 50.21. and 7^.11. and
94.7. and Zech. 1.12. And 1. Cor. 15.32.33.34. Job. chapter 22.13.

Secondly, that the present pleasure of sin, which is very vehement and
enticing to our wicked nature, Si^^ may in this respect be ^o^pared to the
poison o^ that ki^de of S^^^e 1. which thou^h ^t ^^^ng deadly, yet al^^ (...)
the flesh of him that is s^^ g with a plea a t and tickling del^g^t.
as a most sweet sugared and drunken bait; (...) another special hinderance of
repentance: it may be evident from that which we read of the wicked man: Job:
22.11. etc. His bones are full of the sin of his youth, and it shall lie
down with him in the dust. When wickedness was sweet in his mouth, etc.
Degustatis male iucundis voluptatibus (says one) vix diuelli ab his pa^^umus.
We can hardly be haled from ill pleasures that be delightsome after we have
once tasted them. And James. 1.14. Lust is compared to an enticing bait: And
Heb. 11.25. the Apostle gives to understand, that the wicked are carried after
the momentanie pleasures of sin. Which, Moses guided by the spirit of God,
refused, and chose rather to suffer affliction, with the people of God, and
therein made the best choice. But the wicked, they say, as the adultresse
says, Pro. 7.18. Come let us take our fill of love, until the morning: let us
take our pleasure in daliance. And cha. 10, 23. It is as pastime to a fool, to
do wickedly, And Ier. 4.10. The wicked delight to wander. And 2. Tim. 3.
verse. 4 The wicked are described to be lovers of pleasure more then lovers of
God. The Apostle speaks not only of inordinate and unlawful pleasures, but
also of pleasures in things lawful: so far forth, as by the immoderate use
of them, the minds of any, are withdrawn from the love of God. Thus the
pleasure of sin, and all sinful pleasure, is a hinderance of repentance.

Thirdly, that hope of long life, with those false imaginations mentioned in
the answer, are a great hinderance of repentance: not only men's practices, in
putting off from day to day, but even the open speeches of many do declare.
For they say still, time enough yet. Every one thinks he has a dispensation
in youth, to follow the lusts of youth. It is enough, we think, to be sober
and stayde, when we come to age. Yea and the Devil has made this hellish
proverb current in the mouths of many: A young Saint an old Devil etc.

This wicked vanity and presumption of youth, K. Solomon does most wisely
discover, and sharply rebuke, and also correct by wholesome counsel. Eccles.
11.9.10. and so forth from the beginning of the next chapter. Rejoice o young
man in the days of thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth: and walk thou in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes. As though he should say, Seeing thou will needs have it so: well, go
on. But know says the wise King) that for all these things, God will bring thee
to judgment: etc Read also for the reproof of this folly: Luke. 12.^. Mark.
chap. 13.33. etc. 3^. and Luke. 21.34.35.36. and 1. Thessa. 5.2.3. R^uel. ^.^.
and chap. 16.15.

And besides, though a man should live long: who knows whether ^^st all have
grace, at the last to repent. It is well observed, that although God would let
us have one example of repentance at the last end, recorded in the holy
Scriptures, namely the thief on the Cross, that none, truly repenting at so
sudden an instant, should despair: yet he has recorded no more then one,
that none might be imboldened to presume. Finally, this may every man assure
himself of, that if he do not truly repent, nothing that he himself, or
that any other can possibly do for him, shall stand him in any steed before
God. Except ye repent, ye shall all perish: as our Savior Christ flatly
affirms, Luke chap. 13, 3.5.

Fourthly, that wicked company is a hindrance to repentance, yea a mighty
provocation, to go out even to a desperate course of sinning: the holy Ghost
gives to understand, by a most careful warning against this danger. Pro.
1.10, etc. and chap. 23, 19, 20, and chap. 24, 21, 22. Read also, chap. 22.
verse 24.25.

And fifthly, concerning the example of the multitude, and the broad and
licentious way that they walk in, how dangerous a provocation that is; it may
be likewise perceived by the admonition of the Lord: Exodus 23, 2. Thou shall
not follow a multitude to do evil etc. And Luke. 13, 24. Strive to enter in
at the straight gate etc. And Mat. 7.13.14.

Sixthly, what a stumbling block the prosperity of the wicked is, we may
consider from the example of David: Psalm. 73.2.3. etc. As also in the same
place, of what strength the seventh hinderance is, in that there are no bands
even to their death: but all goes on, in an even course, as the cloth that is
wouen with even and unbroken yarne. But that this is no sure token, that God is
pleased with such. Read Job. 21.6.7. etc. And though one of a thousand, living
wickedly, do truly repent at the last: what encouragement may any take from
thence, seeing such a one (a thousand to one) though he live an hundredth
years, yet he shall be accursed. Isay. 65, 20. Vain is it therefore, that the
common sort are so much led away to like and speak well of them that have
l^^ed wickedly, when they dye quietly like a bird as they say, and counterfeit a
little charity in forgiving all the world, etc.

Touching custom in sinning, how that confirms sin, and hinders a^^ ^ell
doing: read Ier. 13, 23. Can the Black-more change his skinnne, or the she
Leopard her spots? then may ye also do good, who are accustomed to do evil.
Read also. Titus. Chap. 1, 12, 13. Because the Cretians were accustomed to
lying etc. the Apostle informs Titus, that they must be the more sharply
rebuked that they might be sound in the faith.

The danger, and hinderance of flattering and corrupt Preachers, is testified:
Ier. 23, 13.14.21.22. and Lament. chap. 2.14. And Ezekiel, 3.6, etc. 10.22. read
also Mat. chap. 23, 13, and Luke 11.52.

That the false opinion, which the wicked have of the folly and
vncomfortablenes of a godly life, is no small hinderance of repentance: it may
well be expressed from that figurative description of the thoughts of the
wicked, in the Apocryphal book of wisdom. chap. 5, 4. We fools, thought
the righteous man's life madness, and his end without honor, etc. And so
Festus esteems Paul mad by much learning. Acts 26.24. Read also, chap. 18,
15. What a base opinion, Gallio had of the Gospel of Christ. And thus (no
doubt) but the common opinion, that true godliness, in the practice of godly
sorrow and repentance, is no better then a melancholy humor etc. it is a
notable let unto repentance. But the contrary is most true, that the right
godly life, is the only true comfortable and joyful life: yea so, that there
is much joy in godly sorrow, in so much as it leads to repentance, not to be
repented of. 2. Cor. 7.10. Read also, Psalm. 32, 10, 11, and Psalm. 33, 1.2.3.
and Philip. chap. 4. verrs. 4, 5, 6, 7. This therefore, ought to be an
encouragement to repentance. It is a most certain thing, that there is no
sorrow in godliness: but all the sorrow of the true servants of God, is for
that they can be no more godly. Touching that which was reckoned in the
eleventh place, experience shows plainly, that such as are most busy
censurers of others, are most negligent in correct^ng their own falts. And
therefore well exhorts and warns the Apostle James, chap. 3, 1. My
brethren, be not many masters, knowing that we shall receive the greater
condemnation. And our Savior Christ the great Master of us all, he says to
the rebuke of this dangerous hinderance of repentance, Why see thou the moate
in thy brothers eye, and perceiuest not the beam that is in thine own eye?
Or, how say thou to thy brother, Suffer me to cast out the moate out of
thine eye, and behold a beam is in thine own eye? Hypocrite, first cast the
beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the
moate out of thy brothers eye. Matthew. 7.3.4.5. But grant that other be never so
bad, we must not measure our selves by their example, but by the holy and
incorrupt word of the Lord.

Finally, how the Devil uses all his craft and power, altogether to hinder, or
if he cannot do that, yet at the least to frustrate our repentance, by causing
us to return as it were to the mire of our sin again, we have already seen.

IT remains, that you show on the contrary, by what holy reasons and means,
we may further our selves in the way of true repentance. Sundry of them have
been already mentioned.



A due consideration of the things following.

First, of the shortness and uncertainty of our frail lives.

Secondly, of the end of our creation yea of our preservation redemption,
justification, sanctification, and calling to the faith and hope of our
endless glorification: all of which, with one voice do cry aloud unto us that
it is our most bounden duty, in all things, and by all means, to seek to
advance the glory of our God.

Thirdly, by due consideration of the great dishonor, which we do to God, so
long as we continue in our sins, and therewithal, a due consideration of our
own dishonorable and vile estate, under the slavery of the Devil, so long
as we do so continue: as al^o of the great wrath which by the increase of our
sin, we treasure up against our selves, against the day of wrath, and
declaration of the just judgment of God, which shall one day, yea in a moment,
certainly come upon the whole impenitent world.

Fourthly a like due consideration of the fewness of those which shall be
saved, for want of repe tance: and of the fearful plagues, which do in the
mean while fall upon some notorious sinners, for the common admonition and
warning of the rest: yea and al^o by the consideration of our own punishments,
and of the sharp and long continued afflictions, which here and there, God
lays now and then, upon some of his dear children, who (our own consciences
being judges) have served God much more carefully, and better then our selves.

Fifthly hope of forgiveness, is a very comfortable motive, and encouragement
to repentance: and the rather if therewithal we shall consider, that the
repentance of a sinner, causes not only joy to the godly on earth, but also
to God himself and his holy Angels in heaven.

Sixthly, an other special means of furthering repentance, is a diligent
treasuring up of the word of God in our hearts partly for direction of life,
and partly for comfort of faith: as al^o a religious frequenting of the table
of the Lord, among other the faithful servants of God.

Finally, the holy society and familiarity of the godly, in the common
conversation of our whole lives, is a continual cherishing, and watering of
repentance, as it were by the sweet ^ewes of heaven.

Explicati^^ and proof.
These indeed are very effectual reasons, and means, if they be duly
consider^d and used.

And in this respect, first, concerning the shortness and uncertainty of our
life: Moses te^cheth us to make this notable prayer to God? Teach us so to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Ps. 93, 12. For
howsoever we may promise to our selves many day; yet as our Savior Christ
tells the rich man rejoicing at his provision, laid up for many years: this
night may our lives be taken from us, for any thing we know.

Secondly, touching the end of our creation, that this should move us to
repentance, that so we may glorify God in a godly and religious life: read Ps.
9^.6. Come let us worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our
maker. And Psalm. 100. Serve the Lord etc. For he has made us. The same is
much rather, the end of our redemption. Luke. 1, 74.75, and 1. Cor. 6.19.2^.
and Tit. 2.11.12. etc. And so of our calling likewise. 1, Pet. chap. 1.15.16.
and chap. 2.9.10. etc.

Thirdly, how can any, having the least grace, duly consider, that we dishonor
God by our wicked lives, according to that, Romans 2.24. And that it is our own
dishonor, as being therein slaves to the Devil. Ephesians. 1, 2. And also that
we thereby treasure up wrath against our selves. Romans 2, 5. How can it be I
say, but that these co^sideratio^s, must through the grace of God, effectually
move us to repentance? As the Apostle reasons against one sin, so will we
reason against all other: Shall I take the members of Christ, (that is, those
members which are in profession honorably ingrafted into him, to the honor of
his name) and make them the vile and base members of an harlot? (to his
dishonor) God forbid.

Fourthly, from the consideration of the fewnes of those that shall be saved,
for want of repentance: our Savior Christ shows us, that we ought to take
an earnest occasion from thence, to strive to enter in at the straight gate.
Luke 13, 23, 24. And that there is no salvation without repentance, it is
evident from the beginning of the same chap. And 1. Sam. 12, 25. If ye do
wickedly ye shall perish, both ye and your king. Read also. Luke 3.8.9. and
chap. 13, 6, 7. and Revel. 2.21, 22, 23, and chapter 3.15, 16. Likewise, the
examples of Gods judgments upon others, ought to admonish us to repent. 1.
Cor. 10. verse 11. Read also, Ier. 3, 8, and Dan. 5, 20, 21.22, 23, 24, etc.

Every man's own punishments, ought much rather to have the same effect in
himself. Job, 33, 29, 3^. The want of making this use of Gods corrections, is
reproved, Isay 9, 13. The people turns not unto him that smites them,
neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts And Amos chapter 4, 6, etc. 11. Finally,
this ought to be the use of those afflictions, which God lays upon his best
servants. For thus we ought to reason, as the holy Scriptures teach us. If the
righteous be scarcely saved: where shall the sinner and ungodly appear? And if
such and such things be done to a green tree, what shall be done to that which
is dry?

F^ftly, that hope of forgiveness, is a comfortable encouragement to repentance,
it may be considered from that we read, Hosh. 6, 1.2, 3, yea such an
encouragement to repentance it is, that (as one says truly) without hope of
forgiveness, none can kindly repent. Nemo recte egerit poenitentiam, nisi qui
sperauerit indulgentiam. The Angels rejoice, when a sinner repents. Yea, God
himself, is after a sort reioiced with it, Luke 15.

Sixthly, that the treasuring up of the word of God in our hearts, is a
principal furtherance of repentance, it is proved by that we read, Ps. 17, 4.
Concerning the works of men, by the words of thy lips, I kept me from the
paths of the cruel man. And Ps. 19.11. By thy commandments thy servant is
made circumspect, And Ps. 119.11. I have hid thy promise in my heart, that I
might not sin against thee. And ver. 9. By thy commandments thou have made me
wiser then mine enemies: for they are ever with me, etc. Read also Pro. 2,
1^.11, etc.

Finally, for the benefit of the society of the godly, to the nourishing and
bettering of repentance, read, Ps. 141, ^, Heb. 3, 13, and chapter 1^, 24, 25. Read
also Ps. 133. No doubt, the goodness and commodity of the communion of Saints,
consists in this, as in a special part of it, that we are thereby
encouraged, and confirmed, in a godly course of life. Holy instructions,
admonitions, and exhortations, are as the dewes of heaven, which make the
barre^ earth of our souls fruitful etc. Hitherto of repentance, what it is,
and which are the helps, or hindrances of it.



We must begin presently, even while it is called to day, as the holy Ghost
speaks; and thence forth we must labor to increase so long as we live.

So indeed we read. Psalm. 95, 7.8. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts, etc. And Heb. 3.7.8, 13.



Sundry of the former reasons, moving to repentance, are likewise of special
weight, to move us to speedy repentance.

Explicatio and proof.
It is true. For seeing our life is short, and uncertain, it is necessary, that
we should not neglect the present opportunity, lest that should come upon us,
which is written. Ps. 73, 19, O how suddenly are they destroyed, perished and
horribly consumed, As a dream when on awaketh! Answerable to the example of
the sudden destruction of the Sodomites: etc.

Seeing also the increase of sin (especially, if it be joined with contempt
of the Gospel, which most graciously calls us to repentance) it increases
wrath we have cause to fear: yea rather, we may be sure, that if we
obstinatly refuse to repent, it shall be easier for Tyrus and Sydon, and for
Sodom and Gomorrha then for us, at the day of judgment. Mat. 11, 20, 21,
22.23, 24. Moreover, seeing continuance in sin confirms sin, and makes
it more difficult and hard for us to repent afterward, as we have learned from
the Prophet Jeremiah: there is great cause, that we should speedily break off
the evil custom of sinning, that it get no prescription of time against us.

These reasons have been already mentioned.



By how much repentance is longer delaied, specially (as was said) if it be
with contempt against the often admonitions of the holy word and Gospel of
God: the truth of it, will be so much the more hardly discerned even in the
conscience of him, that at the last (it may be does truly repent.

It usually falls out so indeed, and therefore are such, more deeply plunged
in sorrow, etc. It may seem, that late repentance, is rather an extorted,
then a free and kindly repentance. It may seem, that sin has forsaken such,
rather then that they have forsaken sin, etc.



Because God vouchsafes us his holy Sacrament of Baptism (the heavenly seal
of his covenant and of our adoption to be his children,) even from our
infancy: yea because he has loved us in his beloved son our Lord Jesus
Christ, before we were conceived and borne.

Explication and proof.
This verily (if it be duly pondred) is a reason of special weight and
importance to bind us, both to most speedy repentance, and also to most
constant, and dutiful obedience: even from the first time, wherein we may have
the least inckling and understanding that may be, concerning the exceeding
great grace and co^stancy of Gods purpose, in this his covenant sealed to us,
as it were from ^e^^en, by Baptism: to the very end of our lives, and for ever
and ever. Mat. (...), and Luke 20.4, 5, 6. For shall the Lord accept of us
miserable sinners, vas^^ of Satan, and children of wrath by nature: and shall
we refuse him the God of mercy, the only fountain of spiritual freedom, and
of everlasting life and sal^ation? God forbid. Let us therefore, hearken to the
holy exhortation, of the m^st ^ise Preacher, that we remember our Creator in
the days of our youth, etc. Ye, seeing our Savior Christ forbids those
that would hinder young children, from coming to him: let us speedily break
through all lets, that by no me^nes ^e be kept from him. Thus much for the time
when to repent.



Because it will be always failing, and imperfect, here in this life.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. And therefore not without cause, does the Apostle extend his
exhortation, of casting away every thing that presses down, and the sin which
hangs so fast on, even to the end of our race: that is, through the whole
course of our lives, spending our blood as it were, in this most holy and just
quarrel. Heb. 12, 1. etc. 4. And the song of perfect triumph, is not till
another life: when death shall have fully lost sin, which is the sting
thereof. 1. Cor. 15.54, etc.



God will surely chastise such negligent and undutiful forgetfulness, in
every one of his children, that shall deal so unfaithfully with him. And as
touching those that continue and go forward in a good course: it is the will
of God that they should with all holy wisdom, and in all tenderness of
Christian love, and compassion over the souls of such as are fallen, to
procure their recovery, as much as lies in them.

So we read: Galat: chapt: 6.1. Brethren (says the Apostle Paul) if a man
be fallen by occasion, Explication and proof.
into any fault, ye which are Spiritual, restore such one with the Spirit of
meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted: Bear ye one
another burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ. And read likewise, 1.
Thessalon: 3.14.

And that God will chastise the negligence of his children, we read it
expressly confirmed from the Lord himself, by the Prophet Nathan, 2. Sam:
7.14. in his message to king David, concerning his son Solomon. I will be his
Father (says the Lord) and he shall be my Son: and if he sin, I will
chasten him with the rodds of men, and with the plagues of the children of men,
(that is, with such correctio^s, as God uses to correct men withal, as one
judging without respect of person: like to that, Ps: 82.6.7.) But my mercy
(says he) shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul: whom I
have put away before thee. And more generally, we read, Psalm: 89.30. etc.
from the ministry of Ethan, the Ezrahite. If his children forsake my Law
(says the Lord) and walk not in my judgments: If they break my statutes,
and keep not my commandments: Then I will visit their transgressions with
the rod, and their iniquities with strokes. Yet my loving kindness will I
not take from him, neither will I falsify my truth, etc. David himself, may
be an example hereof unto us. And before him Moses and Aaron, and others of
Gods children, whom God did sharply chastise, when they had transgressed
against him. Nevertheless, God continued their good God and a gracious Father
unto them still. For they sinned of infirmity, not in obstinacy, etc.



Unto such, there is no place left for the renewing of their Repentance. And
by the effect, they do show further, that they never began to repent in
truth.

Explication and proof.
For the proof of this: read Hebr: 6.4. etc. chapt: 10.26. etc. And 2. Pet:
2.20. etc. and 1. John. 2.19. They went out from us (says the Apostle, John:
speaking of such kind of Apostataes) but they were not of us. For if they had
been of us, they would have continued with us. But this comes to pass, that
it might appear, that they are not all of us.

THere is yet something remaining, concerning the doctrine of Repentance:
whereunto I desire to hear your answer.



No, no more then there is in any creature, a natural power to conceive and
bring forth it self into the world, at the first: or afterward, to make
himself a new arm, or a new leg, if it be once cut off from the body.

You say well: for herein the proportion holds betwixt our natural
generation and birth, and our spiritual regeneration and new birth, as will
yet further appear in that which follows.



By the holy Ghost, whose entire work our whole regeneration is, and in no
part or parcel^ of it, any of our own.

Explication and proof.
It is most certainly so. It is he alone, who works both Repentance, and
also Faith, with all spiritual and heavenly wisdom, and understanding in
us, with all the increases and renewings of every decay thereof: as we read,
John. ^, verse. 5. Verily, verily, (says our Savior Christ to Nicodemus)
except a man be borne again of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God. Read also, Galat: 5.22. The fruit of the Spirit is love,
joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meeknes, temperance.
And Ephesians: 5.9. The fruit of the Spirit, is in all goodness, and righteousness,
and truth. And: 2. Cor: 3.17.18. We are changed into the image of the Lord,
from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord. And in this respect, the
holy Ghost is called the Spirit of Sanctification; and we our selves, are
said to be sanctified, by the sanctification of the same Spirit, and not
otherwise. Rom: 1.4. Christ our Lord was declared, mightily to be the Son of
God, touching the Spirit of sanctification, by the resurrection from the dead.
And ch: 15. verse. 16. The Gentiles are acceptable to God, being sanctified by
the holy Ghost. And 2 Thessalonians: 2.13. Called to salvation, through the
sanctification of the Spirit. And 1. Pet. chap: 1.2. Elect unto sanctification
of the Spirit. Read also Isai: 4.4. and chapt: 59.21. Mal: 3.2.3. and Matthew.
3.11. Likewise Iere: 31.8. Convert thou me, and I shall be converted. And verse
31.32.33. The Lord (says he) will put his Law in the inward parts of his
people, and write it in their hearts. This he does, by the finger of his holy
Spirit. Ezekiel: 36.^^. and Joel: 2.28. Thus the whole work of our regeneration,
and sanctification is of the Spirit. Yet so as God gives his children this
grace and power, that they do carefully use the means serving hereunto:
every one for his own part, and mutuallie one for another, as servants to the
provident grace and mercy of God: As Ezekiel: ch: 18.30.31. Return ye (says the
Lord) and cause others to turn away from all your transgressions: so iniquity
shall not be your destruction. Cast away from you, all your transgressions,
whereby you have transgressed, and make ye a new heart, and a new spirit:
for why will ye die o ye house of I^rael? And our Savior Christ says to
Peter, Simon, Simon behold, Satan has desired to winnowe you as wheat: but I
have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not: therefore, when thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren. Luk: 22.31.32. And the Apostle James, chapter
5.19.20. Brethren if any of you have erred from the truth, and some man has
conuer^ed him. Let him know, that he which has converted the sinner from
going astray out of his way, shall save a soul from death, and hide a
multitude of sins.

But yet further, I would have you show, by what means the holy Ghost does work
our regeneration, and all the graces thereof: to wit, knowledge, faith, and
repentance, with every other grace belonging thereunto, and withal the
increases of the same.



Principal^^e, and in an ordinary course, the preaching of the glad tidings of
the Gospel, and all the holy instructions thereof in our hearing: by such
faithful ministers of the word, as he for the same purpose, sends unto us.

Hereunto also serves the opening of the doctrine of the Law, and the uses
thereof, by the same ministry of preaching.

Moreover, diligent and reverend reading, and meditating upon the holy
Scriptures, by every one by himself apart: as also conferring with other wise
and godly Christians, for mutual edification, and comfort, in the clearing of
necessary questions and doubts, which at any time arise in our minds: and
therewithal the teaching and encouraging of those that are ignorant and weak.

Likewise the serious meditation of our Baptism, with often and due resorting
to the Lords Table.

Finally, earnest and constant prayer unto God, for his gracious blessing
upon all these means.

These indeed are the ordinary means, whereby it pleases the holy Ghost, to
work his whole most gracious work in the hearts of all the children of God.
What his more immediate working is, where it pleases him, for supply of the
wants of any of these means, yea even of the principal of them, as in the
case of infants, etc: it is not for us curiously to inquire, or trouble
ourselves, let us leave it as a hidden secret to his own Divine pleasure and
wisdom: and with all thankfulness, let us for our parts make the best use
of all the blessed means which he has vouchsafed, above many others, to make
us partakers of.

And first, that the preaching of the Gospel, is the principal means of our
Regeneration: Read James, 1.18.19. Of his own will (the Father of lights)
has begotten us by the word of truth, that we should be as the first fruits
of his creatures. Wherefore my dear brethren (says the holy Apostle.) Let
every man be swift to hear, etc. And 1. Pet. 1.22. etc. Seeing your souls are
purified in obeying the truth, through the Spirit, to love brotherly without
faining, love ye one another with a pure heart fervently. Being borne a new,
not of mortal seed, but of immortal by the word of God, who lives and
indureth for ever. For all flesh is grass. The grass withers and the flower
falls away. But the word of the Lord indureth for ever: and this is the word
which is preached among you.

Thus, the whole work of our regeneration, is generally as^ribed to the
preaching of the word, as the principal means which the holy Ghost uses
thereunto. Now more particularly, touching knowledge given by means of the
word, and principally by it preached and applied to our consciences: Read
Prou: 1. verse. 1.2.3.4.5. The parables of Solomon, etc. To give wisdom and
instruction, etc. To give unto the simple, sharpnes of wit, and to the child,
knowledge and discretion. A wise man shall hear, and increase in learning, and
a man of understanding, shall attain to wise counsels, etc. And cha: 2^.19. O
thou my son, hear and be wise. And Psa: 2.10. Be wise, ye kings, be learned
ye judges of the earth: that is: Submit your selves to be taught from the word
of God, that ye may be wise. Read also, 2. Corinthians: 4.6. etc.

Touching Faith, by the preaching of the word: read Rom: chapt: 10. verses,
14.15.17. and chapt: 1.17. By the Gospel, the righteousness of God is revealed
from faith to faith. And Ephe: 4.13. Till we ad mee^ together in the unity of
faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, to the measure of
the age of the fulness of Christ. And for repentance, let that one famous
example, Acts: 2.37. abundantly suffice. Where also observe (according to
that which has heretofore been noted) that the law of God has his office to
the convincing of the conscience, and consequently to the furthering of
repentance.

Likewise also, more private instructions, together with the public ministry,
yield their help hereunto: Rom: 1. verses 11.12. and as was alleged a little
while since, out of the last chapt: of the Apostle James, verses 19.20. Neither
is it to be doubted, but as in all other learning, they that are skillful, do
by teaching the ignorant, grow more expert themselves: so is it in the Art
of all Arts, as touching those that instruct others unto the kingdom of
heaven.

Unto reading also, and meditation, there is a promise of blessing, Psalm. 1.2.
And Revel: 1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of
this Prophecy, And withal, mark also, that he requires the keeping of those
things that are written therein. According to that of James, 1.22. Be ye doers
of the word, and not hearers only. For this must in no wise be forgotten, that
practice is a singular means of confirming: yea of increasing that knowledge,
says, and repentance, which is allreadie begone in us. As for Baptism, it
cannot be, but the due knowledge, and meditation of it, is a means of helping
forward regeneration, seeing God has appointed it, to be unto us, a sign and
seal thereof: as both our Sa: Christ, Ioh: 3.5. And the Apo: Paul, Tit. 3.5. do
give to understand, by their speeches, wherein they do not obscurely point us to
the institution and use of this Sacrament. Likewise, if the fault be not in our
own selves, great profit is to be obtained by often resorting to the Lords
Table. 1. Corinthians: 11.17.

Finally, that prayer is a helpful means, to further Knowledge, Faith, and
Repentance, yea the whole work of our regeneration: it may be discerned of us,
from the testimony of the Apostle Jude, in the 20. verse of his Epistle,
writing thus, Beloved edify your selves in your most holy faith, praying in
the holy Ghost. The gracious promises which God has made unto prayer, do
evidently confirm the same. Ask, and ye shall receive (says our Savior
Christ) etc. Now, this we know, is a special petition, which we are to
ask of God, that it would please him to increase our Faith: as we have the
example of the Disciples of our Savior Christ. Thus much for the explanation
and proof of this answer.

NExt to this, it is not (as I suppose) amiss, that you show, after what
manner (I mean, in what course and order) the holy Ghost does work this work
of our regeneration and new birth: with the increases thereof in the several
parts or branches of it, so far as for the present, we can discern.



First, he shows every one of the Elect children of God, his own ignorant,
sinful, and damnable estate: yea he subdueth their souls, to an
acknowledgement of the just deserved damnation, which is due thereunto, and
accordingly to fear and tremble at the curse of the Law.

Secondly, he inlighteneth the mind to see the Salvation of God, with hope to
be a partaker thereof.

Thirdly, he stirs up the affection of the heart, to a longing desire
after it: and therewithal to mourn for sin, which might justly separate
betwixt us, and it. Yet so, as he causes the heart to long with patience, in
waiting for the comfort and assurance of attaining unto it.

Fourthlie, he powers into the soul and conscience, a feeling, and joyous
taste of Gods love, and of his gracious readiness to show mercy: yea, he
gives such a certificat, of their particular Adoption, to be the children of
God, that they rejoice more therein, then if they had won the whole world.

Finally, the holy Ghost does not cease to stir up every true believer, to
an earnest care and endeavor of daily profiting by all holy means, both in
Knowledge, and Faith, and also, in Repentance, and obedience of the Gospel:
comforting, and strengthening them also, against all such lettes and
discouragementes, as they do meet withal.

For the first of these, read John. ch: 16.9.10.11.12. The holy Ghost (as our
Savior Christ has taught us) reprooueth the world of Sin, and of
Righteousness, and of Judgment. Of sin, (says our Savior:) because they
believe not in me: etc. Whereby it is evident, that not to believe in Christ,
is a very great and a grievous sin.

For the second, read Ephesians: 1.17.18. where the holy Ghost is called the
Spirit of wisdom and Revelation, inlightening the eyes of our understanding,
to know the hope of the calling of God. etc. Read also, 1. Cor: 2.9.10. The
things which the eye has not seen, etc. God has revealed them unto us by his
Spirit: For the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God. And
for the comfort of Hope; see Rom: 8.24. We are saved by Hope.

Thirdly, for that desire, and longing after Salvation, which the holy Ghost
works: read in the same chapt: the 23. verse, and also verses, 26.27. We
which have the first fruits of the Spirit, do even sigh in our selves, waiting
for the Adoption, even the redemption of our bodies. Likewise the Spirit also
helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray as we ought, but the
Spirit it self makes request for us, with sighs which cannot be expressed,
etc.

And the children of God are noted by this property, that they love the
salvation of God: Psalm: 40.16. And (which is in effect all one) they are said
to be such as love the appearing of the Lord. 2. Tim. 4.8. And therefore they
pray, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Revel. 22: 20. And Psalm: 119.41. Let thy
loving kindness come unto me, o Lord, and thy salvation, according to thy
promise. Nevertheless, they wait with patience: according to that of the
Patriarch Iaacob: Gen: 49.18. O Lord, I have waited for thy salvation. And as
Simeon (upon whom was the holy Ghost, as the Evangelist testifies) waited for
the consolation of Israel. Luke. 2.25. And as we read Rom: 8.25. If we hope for
that we see not, we do with patience abide for it. According also, to that in
the 123. Psalm. Behold, as the eyes of servants look to the hand of their
Masters, and as the eyes of a maiden, to the hand of her Mistres: so our eyes
wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us. And that the holy
Ghost causes the children of God, to mourn for their sins, it has been
showed before: in which respect, they are said to be such as mourn in Sion.
Isai: 61.3. The which mourning also, ministers hope of Gods mercy. Lamen:
chap: 5.19.20.21. Ezekiel: chap. 9.

For the proof of the fourth branch, read Rom: 5.5. The love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts, by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us. And chap:
8.15.16. Ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father.
The same Spirit bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the children of
God. Herein as the Apostle Peter teaches, we have cause to rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and glorious. 1. Ep: 1.8. And in comparison hereof, all is but
dung, as the Apostle Paul truly estimateth. Phil: 3.8.

Finally, touching the care of further profitting, both in knowledge, faith,
and repentance, which the holy Ghost works: it may be proved from that we
read Philip: 1.7. God will perform the good work, which he has begun. And
the prayer of the same Apostle warranteth the same. 2. Thessa: 1.11. God will
fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith, with
power. He will lead from knowledge to knowledge, from faith to faith, and
from glory to glory, according to the image of God. Rom: 1.17. 2. Corinthians:
3.18. Read also Proverb: 4.18. The way of the righteous shines as the light,
which shines more and more, unto the perfect day. And for proceeding in
knowledge, consider of that, 2. Cor: 5.16. Henceforth know we no man after the
flesh, yea though we had known Christ after the flesh (that is, not so purely
as we ought) looking too much to his abasement, etc. Yet henceforth know we him
(so) no more. A figurative concession, like to that, 1. Corinthians. 4.^. Consider
also of the similitude, which the same Apostle uses in the 13. chap: of the
same Epistle, verse, 11. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I
understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put
away childish things. So it is in the spiritual age as it were of Christ, not
only in comparison of our estate here, with that it shall be in the Kingdom
of glory: but also in respect of that differing measure of grace, here in the
Kingdom of grace, which now we speak of. For as in the work of nature, all
the parts and powers, are not perfect at once, but they grow in the womb
first. Ecclesiast. 11.5, and after by the milk of the mothers breast, etc: so
is it in the work of grace. We are borne of the Spirit, we must grow up
still, by the milk of the word. 1. Peter: 2, verses. 2.3.

Read also Hebrews. 5.12.13.14. and 1, Corinthians. 3.1.2.3. By this
spiritual food, the inward man is renewed daily, though the outward man be
daily decaying. Read also Ephesians. 4.11.12.13.14.15.16.

Thus we must use the same means for our continual increase in knowledge,
faith, and repentance; both for wisdom and practice, and also for co^sort and
strength, all the days of our lives: the same means, I say, whereby God
vouchsafed to give us grace to make our beginnings in the same. The Practice of
Repentance.
Unto the which care as was answered in the last place) the holy Ghost will
comfort and strengthen all that be his, so that they may say with the holy
Prophet, Psalm. 42.5. etc. Why art thou cast down, o my soul, and unquiet
within me? Wait thou on God. For I shall yet give him thanks, for the help of
his presence. And for this cause, our Savior Christ calls the holy Ghost by
the name of a most gracious comforter, or incourager: John, Chapters 14.15. and
16.

Hitherto of the doctrine of Repentance, yea of the whole work of our
regeneration and sanctification. From the examination and declaration whereof,
it may be perceived, that albeit there is little or no difference betwixt our
sanctification and regeneration; in so much as we may truly say, that our
regeneration is no other grace, but that whereby we are wholly sanctified and
set apart unto God, from the sinful corruption of our natural birth, and the
evil fruits thereof, to serve God in our whole man, both body, soul, and
spirit: yet there is some difference or distinction, to be put betwixt our
regeneration or sanctification generally taken, and repentance. I would have
you therefore, show in this our issue of this doctrine, what that difference
is.



First I have learned, that regeneration is more general then repentance,
comprehending Faith, as well as repentance; yea and knowledge also, the
forerunner of them both.

Explication and proof.
You have learned that which the truth it self teaches. For so our Savior
Christ (instructing Nicodemus in the true knowledge, faith and repentance of
the Gospel: Ioh. chap. 3.) includes all under regeneration, or new birth. As
also the Apostle Paul does. 2. Cor. 5.17. saying; If any man be in Christ, let
him be a new creature. And Gal. 6.15. In Christ Jesus, neither does
circumcision avail any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature.
Regeneration therefore, and repentance, differ as the part from the whole, or
as the special from the more general, or as the effect differs from the
cause.



A second difference may be this, that the work of regeneration (to speak
properly) is but one entire action once only wrought, even as we are but once
naturally borne: whereunto also, Baptism the Seal of our regeneration
answers, in that being once baptized we are never to be baptized again. But
repentance is not only a continued, but also a multiplied and increased grace
and action, in the several parts, and in the whole practice of it.

Explication and proof.
It is true: so that we may say, Regeneration does properly note the first
change of the natural man, whereby is inspired, as it were, the whole and
entire seed of godliness, though it do but by little and little utter it
self, by reason of the contrary lusting that is in our flesh: like as by
natural birth, we have the seed of all sin in us, howsoever it do not all
at once break forth, by reason that it is restrained, and holden in, and as it
were chayned, by the secret hand of God. Yet so, as we deny not, but
regeneration also may be said to increase, in respect of the particular and
several parts or graces thereof, knowledge, faith, repentance, etc. according
to the increases which it pleases the Lord from time to time to give unto it.

And thus be it spoken of the doctrine of the Gospel in general, concerning
faith and repentance.

A brief sum of the doctrine of the Gospel. The doctrine of the Gospel
dispersed through the holy scriptures.



It is dispersed through the whole body of them, from the 15. verse of the
third chapter of Genesis, to the very end of the Revelation; as it were the
veins and sinews, or rather as the blood and life, yea as the everliving
soul and spirit of them: but it is expressed and opened most fully and
clearly, in the writings of the new Testament.

Explication and proof.
It is so indeed. For though (as our Savior Christ says) the books of Moses,
and of all other the holy Prophets, do testify of him. John. cha. 5.39.46.

(Read also Acts 3.21.24. and chap. 10.43. To him give all the Prophets
witness, that all that believe in him shall receive remission of sins. And
1. Pet. 1.10.11.12. And Reave. cha. 10.7. And chapter 14.6. where the Gospel thus
testified from the beginning, is by the holy Angel, called an everlasting
Gospel. So that the Gospel may not unfitly be compared to the river of the
garden of Eden, which divided it self into all quarters round about it,
compassing far and near, Genesis 2.10. etc.) Nevertheless, (as you have
further answered) it is most fully, and most clearly, opened by the holy
Evangelists and Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the books of the new
Testament: according to that we read, To. 16.25.26. And Ephe. chapter 3.1.2.3.4.
And 1. Pet. 1.12. and Matthew: 13.16.17. Blessed are your eyes (says our Savior
Christ to his Disciples) for they see, and your ears, for they hear. For
verily I say unto you, that many Prophets and righteous men, have desired to
see those things which ye see, and have not seen them: and to hear those
things which ye hear, and have not heard them. From these holy Scriptures,
are we therefore to learn and believe the whole doctrine of the Gospel, even
as it is in them recorded from the very first beginning, to the end and
conclusion of them. But herewithall let us consider further, that partly for
help of memory, and partly for consent in profession of the doctrine of the
Gospel: the same doctrine concerning faith, has bin by some excellent and holy
Ministers of the word, even from the time of the primitive Churches, gathered
into as short a sum as might be, out of the books both of the old and new
Testament. The which sum so briefly comprised, is commonly called the
Apostles Creed, because, for the most part, it is gathered out of their
writings: or else it is called the Articles of our belief, because the chief
points of faith are contained in it. Of this sum of the doctrine of faith,
intend we henceforth by the grace of God to enquire. And afterward (if so it
shall further please him) of the doctrine of the Sacraments of the Gospel,
which are the seals of all the Articles of our Christian faith. And also of
the Lords prayer, which is a principal rule of Christian prayer, a singular
exercise of faith, etc.



I believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth: And in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, etc.

Explication and proof.
This sum of the doctrine of the Gospel, concerning the chief Articles of our
faith, gathered out of the holy scriptures (as has been said) it contains
an bridgement of the most high and divine mystery of the nature of God: that
is to say, of the incomprehensible Trinity of persons, in the unity of one
most absolute and perfect spiritual essence or being of the Godhead, so far
as it is meet for us to enquire, or may be known and discerned of us. And
therwithall, it sets out unto us frail creatures, and most miserable
sinners, the free covenant of Gods divine mercy, favor and grace toward us.
Herewithall also, A brief sum of the doctrine of the holy Gospel contained
in the articles of our Belief.
it lays forth these two things: first, the causes of our justification: and
secondly, the fruits or benefits thereof. The causes are these, first (to
speak more generally) the whole Trinity of persons, Father, Son and holy
Ghost, eternally consenting in the unity of the Godhead, to elect and ordain
us thereunto. But more particularly the Father (for orders sake) as the
efficient cause: the Son (in that he took our nature, and therein lived,
preached, wrought miracles, fulfilled the righteousness of the law, and at the
last died for us, and rose again, etc.) the material cause: The holy Ghost,
(in that by the preaching of the Gospel, he gives faith) the formal cause:
The small cause, being the everlasting praise of the same most glorious and
free grace and mercy of God. Now the fruit and benefit of this grace of God
toward us, being generally comprehended under this word salvation; the
particulars are partly expressed, Communion of Saints in one holy catholic
Church, forgiveness of sins, resurrection of the body, and everlasting life:
and partly, they are to be collected from those that be mentioned, as
unspeakable peace of conscience here, yea even against death and hell it
self: and the immortality of the soul in heaven, even from the very time of
our departure out of this life, etc.

This sum of the chief Articles of our faith therefore, contains an
abridgement of the History of all the greatest, and most glorious counsels and
works of God, and of his most wonderful benefits toward us: (Election,
Providence, Creation, Adoption, Redemption, Justification, Sanctification,
Salvation, and Glorification) and to these ends and purposes, alike abridgement
of the incarnation of the son of God, and therewithal, of the union of the
humane nature with the divine, in one most holy person of a mediator, and also
of the sufferings of the son of God: etc. all of them (as was said before)
proceeding from the infinite bounty of Gods mercy, to us most unworthy men.
Of the which most great counsels and works of God it is worthily written by the
Apostle Paul: 1. Tim. 3.16. Omologoumenos Confessedly, o^ by a general
acknowledgement, to wit, of all t^^e Christians.
Without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness, which is, God
manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up in glory. Read
also Rom: 8.29.30. etc. Those which God knew before, he also predestined to
be made like to the image of his son, that he might be the first borne among
many brethren. Moreover, whom he has predestined them also he called, and
whom he called, them also he justified, and whom he justified, them also he
glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If God be on our side, who
can be against us? etc. And Ephesians: 3.8.9.10. etc. Even to me the least of all
Saints (says the holy Apostle) is this grace given, that I should preach among
the Gentiles, the unsearchable riches of Christ. And to make clear unto all
men, what the fellowship of the mystery is, which from the beginning of the
world has been hid in God, who has created all things by Jesus Christ. etc.

Of these most high and excellent things we will by the grace of God treat and
inquire, according to this sum of the Articles of our faith in the order
following.

First of all, we will consider of some special ground of holy Scripture,
whence every article or point of our faith, may be warranted: and from whence
also, the right sense and meaning thereof may be interpreted and opened. For
the word of God contained in the books of Canonical Scripture (the which God
himself has given and authorized for the instruction of his Church) it is the
only certain and undoubted ground and foundation of faith. And therefore
also, it is our bounden duty, to yield it the honor of teaching and
confirming every truth of God, from the sacred testimony and witness thereof.
And thus we read, how in matters of faith, the Scripture refers it self to
the Scripture; the latter to the former: Luke, 24. verses, 25.26.27. and
verses, 44.45.46.47. And before this, in the 22. chap: ver. 37. Read also
Acts: chap: 26. verse. 22. and 1. Corinthians: 15.1.2.3.4, and 2. Pet: 1.19. And
verily, it were too great and sluggish a folly, for any to content themselves
so with any brief abridgement, that the original copy (wherein is the more
full and perfect declaration of all things) should be neglected. A man will not
do so with his several Deeds, and more large writings, showing the
conueiances of his lands: for any brief extent or survey which he has taken
of them. And shall we be more unwise, concerning the grand evidence of our
salvation? Nay rather, as great landed men, by how much they see by a short
view, that their possessions are very ample, etc. they will make the more
reckoning, of all their ancient Court-rouls, or Charters, etc. So let us by
all means provoke ourselves, notwithstanding any other testimony, to make our
principal and most precious account, of the authentical and divine records of
God. And that not only for the points themselves, which concern our faith:
but also for the right understanding of them, and for all holy circumstances
belonging to them.

For in this respect, the holy Scriptures are so necessary, that without them,
we should not by the shortness of our Creed, hear of many points,
necessarily to be be believed of us, for our holy instruction and comfort.
And they that are mentioned, could not without the holy Scriptures be
thoroughly understood of us, as will appear in the handling of the points
themselves. For in the Articles of our faith, (as they are abridged) the
doctrine of creation is mentioned but in part; for nothing is expressly set
down of man's creation, or of any other creature upon earth, or of the Angels
in heaven. Nothing is mentioned of the providence and government of God over
his creatures. And in the doctrine of redemption likewise, nothing is mentioned
concerning the life, doctrine, or miracles of our Savior Christ. Neither is it
expressed, what we are to believe concerning the holy Ghost, nor wherein (as
touching a principal part) the communion of Saints consists, nor what is the
state of our souls immediately after this life, and so forth till the
resurrection of our bodies, unless we be advertised by interpretation, that
(though everlasting life is set after the resurrection of the body) yet is it
not then only to begin: but that beginning by regeneration in this life, it
continues for ever, notwithstanding this natural life ends in death. And
how should we know what is to be believed, concerning the descension of our
Savior Christ to hell, but by the interpretation of those Scriptures, Fidei
fundamentum gratuita promissio. Ab ipsa (inquit Caluinus) incipit, in ipsa
co^stat, in ipsam definit. Instit: lib: 3. Cap. 2. Sect. 29. The promise of
free grace is the foundation of faith. From it (says master Calvin) it
begins, in it it consists, and it ends also in the same.
whence that phrase of speech may be opened unto us?

Wherefore, in the second place, we will from the ground and warrant of the
holy Scriptures, open the meaning of every article.

Thirdly, insomuch as faith looks directly, to the most free and gracious
promise of GOD, wherein stands the comfort and stay of it: yea, seeing it is
the wisdom and prudence of Faith, to look always hereunto, as we see the
practice of it very often in the 119. Psalm, and Psalm 56, 3, 4, 10, 11. and
Psalm 57, 1, 2, 3. we will therefore inquire out the promises of GOD, made to
his people, concerning every article. For in this respect, the faithful are
called heirs by promise: Galatians 3, 29. and children of the promise. Chap.
4.28. Read also, Heb. Chap. 4.1. and chap. 10, 36, and chap. 11. ver. 13. Read
the whole Chapter, and Romans 4, from the 13. ver. to the end.

Fourthly, we will show what comfortable fruits and benefits belong to the
believing of every article.

Fifthly, seeing faith cannot be idle, we will likewise search out, what those
duties be, which GOD requires as fruits of obedience and thankfulness, for
so singular fruits and benefits of his love, as faith assures us off.

The general division of the Articles of our Belief.
Finally we will note the just punishment and danger of infidelity: but
especially of heretical and obstinate opinion and fancy, gainsaying the truth
and soundnes of any part of our true and orthodox Christian faith and belief.



Into these two general heads.

First, they show both me and every Christian, how we stand bound to believe
in our God.

Secondly, what every one of us ought to believe concerning the whole company
of the people of God, called his holy Catholic or universal Church.

Explication and proof.
They may be so divided indeed. And the like is the order of the law of God,
for the direction of our life: and of prayer, for the exercise of our faith:
and of the Sacraments also, for the strengthening of our faith. God has
worthily the first place, whose glory we ought principally to respect: and then
it follows, how God has a most gracious regard of our selves, and of all the
rest of his people. So that if we would define faith, according to the articles
thereof: we might well say, though (as may peradventure be thought somewhat out
of place now) yet not altogether without some good use: that it is a
comfortable apprehending and applying of the whole doctrine of the Gospel, in
the right understanding of the several articles of it, to a man's own particular
benefit, with some measure of assurance, that he is a true m^mber of the
Church of Christ: and that his part is in all the spiritual privileges or
prerogatives, which do belong unto it, in the holy fellowship and communion of
the Saints of God.

And further, the sum of this brief profession of our common faith, is in
effect no more but this; that the only true God, even the father o^ our Lord
Jesus Christ: is (through the mediation and intercession of the same Christ our
redeemer and Savior) become my father; and that for his sake, he has
received me to mercy, and sanctified me, and sealed me by his holy spirit, to
be one of his adopted children: and that he will for ever, make me a partaker
of all the benefits of the most holy meditation, of the same Jesus Christ his
only son our Lord, to my endless salvation, even to the fruition of
unspeakable felicity and glory in his heavenly kingdom. But these things
require a very ample and large unfolding.

Belief in one only God.
LEt us therefore come to the first part of your division of the Articles of
faith.



First that he is only one in his divine nature, or spiritual Essence and
being. Secondly, that he is nevertheless in the same only one nature and
essence, three distinct persons.

That this is so, it will further appear, in the particular opening of this
most high mystery.



In these words: I believe in God.

Explication and proof.
It is true, and therefore is the word (God) but once mentioned, (even to the
end that the unity of the Godhead might be the more plainly testified and
observed) although the same word, is in understanding to be referred to every
one of the three persons following, in this wise.

Belief in one only God.
I believe in that one only God: who is God the father, God the son, The
ground of it.
and God the holy Ghost: and yet not three Gods, but only one God. For like as
when mention is made indefinitely of the name of God, the whole Trinity may
be understood coessentially and coniointly: so when we apply the same name
(God) to any of the three persons alone, we must take it personally, according
to the distinction of the one from either of the other, by the proper and
incommunicable propriety belonging to the same, though not without respect to
the unity of one essence of them all. So that, as it is well opened in the
other C^eeds of Athanasius and the Nicene Counsel: we believe in one God, who
is the father almighty, etc. And we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity
in unity. Neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance, etc. as
we are further to consider afterward.



The 35. ver. of the 4. chapter of Deuteronomie, in these words: The Lord is God,
and there is none but he alone. And ver. 39. Understand therefore and consider
in thine heart, that the Lord, he is God in heaven above, and upon the earth
beneath: there is no other. And in the 4. ver. of the 6. chap. Hear o Israel,
the Lord our God is Lord only.

Explication and proof.
Thi^ being a chief and principal ground of all faith, and true godliness: it
is is every where most plentifully testified in the holy Scriptures. Of the
which testimonies, it shall be to good purpose, that we do set down some more.
And first, we will begin with the words of God himself. Deuteronomy. chapter 32.39. Behold
now (says the Lord) that I, even I am he, and that there is no God with me: I
kill and give life, I wound and I make whole; neither is there any that can
deliver out of my hand. Likewise Isaiah, 42, 8. and chapter 43, 11, 12, 13. I, even
I, am the Lord, and beside me there is no Savior, etc. You are my witnesses
(says the Lord) that I am God. And in many other places of the same Prophecy,
chapter 44, 6, and chapter 45, 5. I am the Lord, and there is no other: there is no God
beside me. The same is repeated six times in that chapter The often repetitio^
shows, that we have need to be often and earnestly put in mind of it, to the
end it may be firmly rooted in our hearts. To this truth and principle of our
faith, do the servants of God, every where give witness. As 1. Sam. chapter 2. v. 2.
There is none holy as the Lord (says Hannah in her holy thanksgiving) yea,
there is none besides thee, and there is no God like unto our God. And Psalm
18, 31. Who is God besides the Lord? And who is mighty save our God? And Ps.
83.18. Jehovah is alone, even the most high over all the earth And Ps. 86, 10.
Thou art God alone. And Nehemiah. 9.6. Thou art Lord alone. And 1. Cor. 8, 4.
There is no other God but one. Yea 2, Kings 5.15. This testimony is drawn
from Naaman the Syrian, in experience of Gods gracious power, in the cure of
his leprosy: Behold (says he) now I know that there is no God in all the
world but in Israel. His meaning is, that they only professed the Religion of
the true God, the only God of all the world.

There are many more testimonies: but we will end with that of our Savior
Christ: John. chap. 17.3. This is life eternal to know thee the only true
God, etc.

As touching the name of God attributed to the Gods of the Heathen, in the holy
Scriptures: that is but according to the abusiue speech of the heathen, and for
a refutation of their heathenish error. And when it is ascribed to Angels, or
men, it is not to be understood properly: but in respect of that special
dignity and power, which God has as it were lent them, above others, etc.

Let us now proceed.

Show likewise, from what ground of holy Scripture, you have been taught, that
it is every Christians duty to believe in this our one only true God.



Our Savior Christ admonishes his Disciples to have faith in God. Mark. chapter
11. v. 22

Explication and proof.
The words of the greek text are. Have ye: (that is, see that ye have) the
faith of God; but in the self same sense, according to the Syrian translation:
Let the faith of God be in you. Our Sa: Chr: calls it, the faith of God,
because he requires his people to believe in him: and for that all faith
placed any other where, is utterly profane, wandering and vain. Yea (like as we
saw eue^ now) that God by his holy spirit, gave Naaman the Syrian grace to
believe in God, from the experience of his gracious power manifested upon him,
in his miraculous cure: so does our Sa: Ch: from the example of the fig tree
dried by the power of his divine word, instruct his Disciples to gather an
argument, for the strengthening of their faith, to believe in every word of
God, and principally in his promise touching everlasting salvation. According
to that of wise Agur. Pro. 30.5. Every word of God is pure, he is a shield to
them that trust in him.



In the 62. Psalm. we have not only the doctrine, but also the practice set
forth unto us, by a very notable and lively example.



Yet my soul keeps silence unto God. Or as we may read it in the Hebrew
text, thus. My soul quietly rests or reposeth it self only in God (says
the holy Prophet) for of him comes my salvation. He only is my strength, and
my salvation, and my defense: I shall not much be moved. Yea he repeateth the
same words again, to show his singular affiance placed only in the Lord.

And then he does with like earnestnes (from the experience of his own
comfort) exhort and encourage all other the people of God, to do the like;
saying. Trust in him all ye people power forth your hearts before him. Selah.

Explication and proof.
This Ps. is very notable, no less for the wisdom, then for the earnestnes of
the holy Prophet to this purpose; as was made plain from the interpretation
thereof. In the which, it was more largely declared then now time will suffer
to be repeated, that the faithful servant of God, reioiceth in that victory,
which (through the grace of God) he had obtained, against his troublesome
temptations: in that he did bid silence (as it were) to his soul, against all
impatient murmurings, by a quiet attendance upon Gods mercy. In the same
confidence also he triumphs against his adversaries. Nevertheless, because he
felt his natural infirmity and corruption still present with him, he does
(together with this holy and triumphant rejoicing) admonish his soul, to
continue still in silence to God, and in a quiet resting upon him, whithout
wearines in waiting. And thus this first part of the Psalm. unto the 8. v. does
very liuelily represent unto us, the nature of faith, which continually
animateth it self, to a holy strife and resistance, against the temptations of
the flesh, the world and the devil. For the believing man, is not to be
imagined, to be as one altogether at rest, and as one rowing at pleasure in a
still and calm water; but he is rather to be likened to one, that is (for the
most part) tossed in the rough and raging waves of the maine s^a, where one
huge billow follows upon the neck of another: so that if he should not look
well to his tackle, and cast the anker-hold of his soul, into the sure hope of
Gods deliverance, he could not be saved. And this plainly shows, that
although the doctrine of believing in God, is a lesson wherewith we begin to
teach and catechize children; yet it is in the practice of it, so great a
lesson, that the oldest among us, have not so learned it, that we may perfitly
take it forth, as children use to speak.

Wherefore, let us I pray you (even al and every one of us) give diligent heed
to the Prophets holy exhortation; whom God has set forth, as a most
experienced School-maister of faith unto us, as it follows in the latter part
of the Psalm. When at any time we find our selves combred in our minds (even as
if we should be overwhelmed with temptations) let us practice the remedy which
he tells us of, from his own probatum-est: that is, let us empty our hearts,
by pouring forth our complaints and supplications to our good and merciful
God. So no doubt shall the force of all the temptations be broken, and
continually let out, as the swelling waters by a most commodious sluice.

Neither let us marvel, though toward the end of our Psalm, The meaning of
it.
the Prophet so greatly debaseth trust in Man or in Riches: for alas, what are
they, to deliver or save a man, etc?

Wherefore, seeing (as the Prophet concludes) both power and mercy belong
unto God: let us (according to the pattern which is set before us) quietly
repose our souls, only in and upon the Lord; nothing doubting, but with him
we shall find most tempestiue, seasonable, and happy deliverance and
salvation.

Read also Psalm: 33.16.17. and 146.3. etc. Thus then, we have David for one
notable example. But he is not alone: we have Abraham also, Genes: 15.6. and
Romans 4.3. Abraham believed the Lord, and he counted that to him for
righteousness. And Paul, Acts 27.25. I believe God (says he) that it shall be
so, as it has been told me. Yea we have a multitude of examples, which the
Apostle calls a clowd of witnesses: Heb: ch: 11. And v. 6. of the same ch: it
is affirmed generally, that every one that comes unto God, must not only
believe that God is: but also, that he is a rewarder of them that seek him.

Hitherto, concerning the proof and ground of the article.



I have been taught, that in professing that I do believe in God; my meaning
must be this, that I am verelie persuaded, that the only true God of Heaven
and of Earth, is, and (according to his most holy and faithful covenant) will
forever be my good and gracious God, in all things: and that therefore, I do
undoubtedly put my whole trust and confidence in him, looking for all good
things from him, for comfort in all and against all evil, and finally for my
deliverance out of all evil, and for eternal happiness and glory in his
heavenly kingdom, through his free grace and mercy alone.

This is so evident, from that which has already been declared, that we will
not stand upon any further explanation or proof of it. We will therefore go
on forward.

But before ye can believe in the only true GOD aright, it is necessary that
ye know, who, and what manner of one, God is; that ye may be able to put an
infinite difference betwixt him, and all things whatsoever besides.

This has been partly declared from the preface or general reason of the
ten Commandments, in the former part of our Treasury. Yet because the more
full declaration, or (as we may say) adornation and enriching of this excellent
point of Doctrine, belongs to the Gospel; therefore it is meet, that here we
do make a more full inquiry into it.

This we may do (as I suppose) in the order following.

First, if we search out and sort together, the excellent titles of the
Deity, which show and declare what manner of one he is, most entirely in his
own Divine nature.

Secondly, if we consider what those titles be, which show what manner of one
he is, in respect of his creatures. And therein: first, what he is more
generally toward all. And then more particularly, what he is: First, in
respect of their several degrees in humane society: and then, in regard of
their several estate and condition touching the life and world that is to
come, concerning both the wicked and also the Godly. But principally if we
call to mind, which those most gracious Titles of God are, which concern his
elect people, and holy Church, which is the most proper (and as we may say)
the essential argument of our Christian belief.

Not, that we think that any thing in God, is to be severed from his nature,
as if it were accidental in or to him: For we know, that he was Eternally,
and in all perfection, that which he is, without beginning, and so shall
continue the same for ever, and world without end: but partly because we are to
respect the order and time, both how and when, God has manifested himself, by
his external works, either of creation and government: and partly because we
seek some help to succor the weakness of our understanding, and the frailty
of our memory thereby.



First, as our Savior Christ teaches us: Ioh: 4.24. God is a Spirit (that is
to say) he is a most spiritual, and Divine nature, or Essence, and Being.

Explication and proof.
That is the meaning of our Savior Christ indeed. For he does not in those
words speak of the third person of the Trinity, but of God in his Divine
nature, simply and indefinitlie considered: so that it is the same in sense,
with that which God himself says of his own nature and essence, in that he
calls him self: I am, that I am, Exo: 3.14. As though the Lord should say: I
am such a one as cannot be comprehended of any creature, as touching the
perfection and Eternity of my nature: who do cause all other things to be,
but am caused of nothing, etc. And of the same word (as it is used in the holy
language) does the Lord usually call himself by the name Jehovah; to the end he
might be acknowledged, God in respect of his Eternity, calls himsel^e also
the First, and the Last. Isai: 44 6. and chap: 4^.^2. I my self even I am the
first, I am also the last. and ch: 41.4. I the Lord, do the first work, and
I am he that does the last.
not only a perfect being in himself, and the only eternal and efficient
cause of all creatures: but also to be the cause of the effecting of all his
promises and blessings, in the proper times, and seasons thereof: as the Lord
does interpret his own meaning. Ex: 6.2.3. Moreover (says the text) God spoke
unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the Lord, and I appeared to Abraham, Isaak,
and to Iaacob, by the name of Shaddai, (that is all-mightie, or all-sufficient
God) but by my name Jehovah was I not known unto them. That is, I promised to
Abraham, Isaak and Iaacob, the land of Canaan, for an inheritance; but I did
not perform it unto them, as touching the real, and actual possession of it,
as I will now to you their posterity, etc: as it follows in that chapter. It
is as much as if the Lord should have said to the Jews, at the coming of
Christ in comparison of the former ages, that he never showed himself so
manifestly, or by his name Jehovah, as he did then: in so much as all the
promises of God are Yea and Amen in Christ. In which respect, our Savior
Christ himself tells his disciples, that they were blessed above all other
that were before the^: in so much, as they now saw and heard, that which the
Prophets and Righteous men among them, desired to hear and see, but could not.
Wherefore, worthi^ie might they then, and we our selves now, in special manner
hearken to the exhortation of the 68. Genes: 21.33. Abraham called upon the
name of Jehovah, the everliving God.
Psalm: verse: 4. Sing unto God, sing praises to his name, exalt him that rides
upon the heavens, in his name Iah, and rejoice before him. and Isa: ch: 26.4.
Trust in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord God (Be Iah Jehovah) there is
strength for evermore. Read also this name I^h, Ps: 89.8. A mighty Lord,
Chasin Iah. and Ps: 94. twice, verses ^. and 12. and Ps: 118. five times, and
135. verse. 4. And in composition often times Halleluiah: praise ye the Lord.
Iah, is but as it were a contraction of the name Jehovah. It notes the
Eternity, yea the Sempiternitie or perpetual eternity of God, without
beginning and without ending, He that was, and is, and is to come: as this name
is interpreted in the new Testament, and applied to Christ our Jehovah, the
Lord our righteousness: as we are after to observe, when we come to consider
of the Deity of his person.



Next unto the name Jehovah, which (as I have learned) we do English by the
name Lord, and thereby are to understand his eternal nature and being, as was
even now declared: the most usual title of the Lord, is God: the which word as
I have been also taught, is used of us, in stead of that which signifies in
the Hebrew language, the almightines or omnipotency of God, as though he
should call him the God of all might or power.

Explication and proof.
So is it indeed: For the Hebrew word El, or Eloah, and in the plural number
Elohim, signifies the power, yea the manifold power and virtue of the Divine
nature: yea and with some learned interpreters also, El, and Elohim. P^alm:
50.1. Deuteronomy. 32.15. Eloah.
the distinction of the persons in God, unto whom equally, the almighty power
of the divine nature of God, does belong, as we shall further consider
afterward, by the grace of God. Thus then the most usual titles, belonging to
the nature of God, are in our language, Lord and God: as though we should call
him (as in other words we do) the Eternal and Almighty God. In regard of
which eternity of God, the name of God, is oftentimes in the holy scriptures,
said to be eternal: and likewise, that his mercy endures for ever: and that
all his promises are sure and steadfast; that his faithfulness shall never fail;
that his throne is for ever; and that his righteousness is everlasting; and that
there is no end of his kingdom. And in respect of his omnipotency. He that is
mighty has done for me great things (says the Virgin Marie) and holy is
his name. Luk: 1.49. And the almighty God by the name Shaddai, Psalm: 68.14.
and Ps: 91.1. and often in the book of Job, ch: 5.17. and ch: 6.4.14. and chap:
8.3.5. and chapt: 22. five times, verses. 3.17.23.25.26. But of the titles of
the justice, and mercy, and government of God, we shall have further occasion
to rehearse them among some other sorts of the titles of God.

LEt us therefore come to those, which show what manner of one God is named to
be, in respect of his creatures: wherein also are noted the actions or works, as
likewise the divine properties and attributes of God.



Creator, governor, and preserver of all things, most high possessor of heaven
and earth. The Lord God of all flesh, and of the Spirits of all flesh. The
searcher of the hearts and reins, Judge of the whole world, who judges
without respect of persons: The judge which makes low, and which makes
high, Lord of hosts, and if there be any other like to these?

These are every where to be found in the holy Scriptures Creator Eccles:
chap: Explication and proof.
12.1. and Isai: ch: 42.5. and chap: 45.12. and ver. 18. Acts 17.43. etc.
Psalm: 33.6.7.8.9. Psalm: 74.16.17. And Psalm: 94.9. Job. chapt: 32.22. etc.

Governor, Psalm: 22. The Lord rules among the Nations. And Ps: 33.10.11. The
Lord breaks the Counsel of the heathen, and brings to naught, etc. He that
chastises the Nations, Psalm: 94.10. and Psalm: 47.8. God reigns over the
heathen. And Psalm: 66.7. He rules the world by his power, Isai: 16.1. The
ruler of the world. Preserver, Job, chapt: 7.20. O thou preserver of men. And
1. Timot. 4.10. We trust in the living God, who is the preserver of all men,
specially of those that believe. And Psalm: 36.6. He that preserves man and
beast. No man could have any power or authority to govern, if God did not
give it him. John chap: 19.11. and Rom: 13.4.

Most high God, possessor of Heaven and Earth, Genes: 14.22. and Psalm. 104 24.
Tremell. The Lord God of all flesh. Ierem. 32.27. and of the Spirits of all
flesh, Numb: 16.22. and chapt: 27.16. And Hebr: 12.9. Father of Spirits. Zech:
12.1. The Lord who has formed the Spirit of man within him. etc. And Ezech:
18.4. All souls are mine, both the soul of the Father, and also the soul of
the son are mine. Searcher of hearts and trier of the reins. 1. Sam. 16.7.
The Lord beholds the heart. And 1. Kings. 8.39. The Lord only knows the
hearts of all the children of men. And Prou: 16.2. The Lord pondereth the
Spirits. Psalm: 7.9. The righteous God tries the hearts and reins. And Ierem:
11.20. and chap: 17.10. I the Lord search the heart, and try the reins,
Acts. 15.8. God which knows the hearts. and 1 Thessalonians: 2.4.

Judge of the whole world: Gen: 18.25. Shall not the judge of all the world do
right? says Abraham to the Lord. Read also Job. chap: 34.10. etc. 19. He
judges without respect of persons. Deuteronomy: 10.17.18. Acts 10.34. Rom: 2.11. And
in many other places, The judge who makes low, who also makes high. Psalm:
75.7. Lord of Hosts. Psalm: 46.7. The Lord of Hosts is with us. And Psalm:
82. thrice in that Psalm: And Ps: 84. four times. and Psa. 89.8. O Lord God of
Hosts, who is like unto thee; which art a mighty Lord, and the truth is
about thee? 32.18. and Amos 4.13. The Lord of Hosts is his name.

And note also, that the works of God, not only of Creation, and of the
ordina^ie course of Government, but also his extraordinary and wondrous works,
partly such as he works by his own immediate hand, and partly such as he
works by the ministry of his servants, both for his people, and against the
wicked; they are so many declarations of his divine wisdom, mercy, justice,
etc. According to that Psalm: 9.16. The Lord is known by executing judgment.
Selah. A point worthy singular observation. And in respect of his mercy,
according to that Psalm: 68.20. This is our God, even the God that saves us.
etc.



He is in this respect, called the most high, and excellent, he that inhabiteth
Eternity, whose name is the Holy one. Isai: 57.15. and Ps: 83.18. The
mosthigh over the whole Earth. and Ps: 97.9. And 1. Tim: 1.17. The King
everlasting, immortal, God, only wise. And ch: 6.15.16. He that is blessed,
and prince only, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who only has
immortality, and dwells in the light, that none ca^ attain unto, who^ never
man saw, neither ca^ see, unto who^ be honor and power everlasting. Ame^.

Explication and proof. This title of GOD (Gneljon, the most high) is often in
the Psalms, namely in these, 7.9 18.21.46.47.50.56.57.73.77.78.82.83.87
91.92.107.
Read also, 1. Chron: 29.11.12.13. and Psalm: 24.7.8.9.10. The king of glory:
that is, the most glorious King. And 82.1. God stands in the assembly of
Gods. (For Judges and magistrates assembled, are the honorable assemblies
which God himself has called to the seat of justice,) and he judges among
Gods: that is, among the same Judges and magistrates, gathered together in
his name: either ratifying every right sentence which they give, or reproving
the contrary, as it follows in the same Psalm. For all Judgment is
properly the Lords; it is his sovereign prerogative, belonging as it were to
his Crown and Dignity: Deu: 1.17. and 2. chro: 19.6.9.10.11. Read also
Eccles: ch: 5.7. If in a Country thou see the oppression of the poor, and
the defrauding of judgment and justice, be not astonished at the matter. For he
that is higher then the high regaraeth; yea, he that is most high above them.
Where the word (Gebhohim) used in the plural number, notes the most high
excellency of God. And that also (as some interpret it) in respect of the most
high mystery of the holy Trinity. In Ezra: and Nehe^: God is diverse times
called, the God of heaven. Thus we see what manner of one God is, in comparison
of those that be in higher place above the rest. Though they be high, yea
higher powers, as To: 13.1: yet God only is the most high. Whereas these are
mortal: Ps: 146.3.4. and Isa: 51.12. The Lord God is immortal. Though they
dwell in Princely Palaces, yet their dwelling places are nothing co^parable to
the habitation of his heavenly glory. They are many, and so their government
is a parted government: but God is one, and has the whole sovereignty,
entierly united in himself. Ps: 47.6.7.8.9. God is called also oftentimes in
the holy Scriptures, (Adonai) the chief Lord, authoriser, and supporter of all
Lordship and Government. And therefore the title is in a special form of
writing attributed to God, as some observe ( Adonai, not Adon, or Adoni,) as it
is applied to me^. And in this respect of his sovereignty, he is called Adonei
Adonim) Ps: 136.3. the Lord of Lords, that is, the Lord of all that have
government, whether domestical, eccl: or civil. And Mal: 1.6. The plural
number for the singular, in the same sense, twice in the same verse. Hence, or
according to this, the word (Heden) is used for ( basis or sustentaculum) the
foundation of a thing.



He is the Father of Mercies, the God of all consolation and comfort. 2. Corinthians: 1.1.3.4. and chapt: 7, 6. The God that comfort the abiecte. He is
the Father of the Fatherles, and judge of the Widows: Psalm: 68.5. and Psalm:
113.5. who is like unto the Lord our God, that has his dwelling on high? who
abaseth himself to behold things in the heavens and in the earth. He raises
the needy out of the dust, and lifts up the poor out of the dung, etc. And
Psalm: 146.7. He executes justice for the oppressed, he gives bread to the
hungry. He loses the prisoners. etc. It follows that you show which those
kind of titles are, which declare what manner of one our God is against the
wicked, whether Princes or any other. Which may they be?

as it follows in the same: 146, Psalm, He is terrible to the Kings of the
earth: Psalm. 76, 12. Yea generally, it is a fearful thing for any
conte^ptuous sinner to fall into the hands of the living God. For vengeance
belongs to the Lord, and he will recompense. Heb: 10, 30, 30, 31. and Rom:
12, 19, according as Psalm: 94, He is expressly called, God the auenger.

To this purpose we may call to mind again, That God judges without respect
of persons. Explication and proof.
For seeing he will not have his magistrates to respect the poor in any evil
cause: Exodus: 23, 3, and Leuit: 19, 15, Much less will God himself deal
partially.



and the God of Abraham, Isaak and Iaacob, or Israel: in many places of the
holy Prophets. The holy one, Job. cha: 6.10. The holy one of Israel: Isai. cha:
6.3. and 41.14. and cha: 43.15. and Luke. cha: 1.49. Holy is his name. The hope
of Israel: Ierem. 14.8. and Psalm. 46.1. and 62.8. yea the hope of all the ends
of the earth. Psalm: 65.5. The God both of Jew and Gentile. Rom: 3.29. Redeemer,
Deliverer and Savior of his people: as he is often called, and as he himself
calls himself, in the writings of the Prophets; and every where else in the
holy Scriptures.

Explication and proof.
We shall find it to be true for a good taste, if we do call to mind the
testimonies alleged before out of Isaiah, to prove that there is but one only
God, who there is called, the only Savior. And likewise, The God of our
salvation. Psalm: 68.19.20. and Psalm: 25.5. and 27.9. Moreover Isaiah chap:
41.14. The Lord calls himself the redeemer, and the holy one of Israel. And
chap. 44.6. and chap: 47.4. and chap: 48.17. and chap: 49.7. and chap: 59.20. I
know that my redeemer lives, says Job, chap: 19.25. This redeemer (as well
writes F: Iun:) is the father in the son by the spirit. And to this end and
purpose, is the Lord also called the God who only works wonders, for the
deliverance and safety of his people. Psalm: 77, 14, and Psalm: 72, 18, and 136,
4. And David for his part, calls God his deliverer out of all his trouble,
and from all his enemies. 2, Sam: 4, 9. and Psalm: 18, 48. And otherwhere, a
present help in time of need: etc. And again, Great are the troubles of the
righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all He is the King of Saints:
Revel: chap: 15, 3. In all which respects, he is called The blessed one: that
is, he that is for his incomparable goodness to be blessed and praised above
all, yea even the wicked being Judges. Mark, chap: 14, 61.

And thus we have helped our selves with some distinction of the manifold
titles of God, that from thence we might learn, what manner a one our God is,
in whom only we are to believe. There are some places of Scripture, wherein
the principal of these titles, are purposedly set down together. It were
therefore to good purpose, that you do rehearse some one or two of them.

In the 6, and 7, verses of the 34, of Exodus: God himself proclaims his
own divine name and nature in these words. The Lord, the Lord, strong,
merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth,
reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin,
but not making the wicked innocent, visiting the iniquity of the fathers, upon
the children, and upon childrens children, to the third and fourth generation.

The same, almost word for word, is repeated by Moses: Numb: 14.18. which he
makes the ground of that his prayer, whereby he entreated and obtained mercy
for the people, who had grievously provoked the Lord to anger against them by
their infidelity. Read also Deuteronomy. 10.17.18. and Psalm. 103.7.8. etc. The like
is in many other places. The which we must not think tedious to search out, and
to observe more diligently, from time to time. For when men of this world, are
exquisite in seeking out, and blazing and setting forth the titles and styles
of earthly Princes: shall not the servants of God, much rather, use all holy
diligence, to seek and enquire after the knowledge of the excellency of God,
what his divine style is; infinitely exceeding all the multiplied titles, that
can be attributed to all the Princes of the world? Yes, and the rather are we
to use al diligence herein, for the reproof of the sottish rudenes of a number
who (notwithstanding they are careful to observe the titles of men) they will
not wholly and right out (as some use to speak) or with any reverence utter
one title of God. He is not God Almighty in the mouths of many, but God a
might: as if they might be haile-fellow well met with him.

Here therefore, we will by the grace of God, stay yet a little longer in this
point. For seeing it has pleased God, to express his own nature, not only
simply and entierly in it self: but also in way of comparison, and that partly
negatiuely, and by an infinite inequality; partly by similitudes, in a
certain proportion of resemblance, for a further help of our weakness: we will
also consider of these things. And first of this, that by an infinite
disparagement (as it were) the Lord expresses himself after this sort; that
he is such a one as none may be compared or matched with him: As Psalm: 89.6.
Who is equal to the Lord in the heavens? and who is like the Lord among the
sons of the Gods? that is, of the most mighty upon the earth. Whereunto, we
may make that for a true answer, which we read, Psalm. 97.9. The Lord is most
high above all the earth, and much exalted above all gods: that is, above all
the Angels of heaven. And again, Psalm: 86.8. Among the Gods (that is to say,
among any of those, to whom the name of God is given, whether to Angels, or men
of magistracy and power above the rest; or to false Gods, such as are so, only
by Idolatrous conceit) there is none like thee o Lord, and there is none that
can do like thy works. And Psalm: 135.5.6. I know that the Lord is great, and
that our Lord is above all Gods. Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in
heaven and earth, in the sea, and in all depthes. Herein therefore, the Prophet
Isaiah is earnest: cha. 40.18. To whom then will ye liken God, or what
similitude will ye set up unto him? And v. 25. To whom now will ye liken me,
that I should be like him, says the holy one? And Exo: chap. 1^.11. Who is
like unto thee o Lord among the gods! who is like thee so glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises, doing wonders! etc And Deu: 32.31. Their God is not as
our God, even our enemies being judges. And also Psalm: 115.3. etc. Our God is
in heaven, he does whatsoever he will. Their Idols are silver and gold even the
work of men's hands. They have a mouth and speak not, etc. And Ier. 10.16. The
portion of Iaacob is not like them: for he is the maker of all things, and
Israel is the rod of his inheritance The Lord of hosts is his name. And Gal:
4, 8. The gods of the heathen are not gods by nature, as our God is: to wit, of
a most spiritual divine nature, infinite and eternal, as has been declared
before.

To this kind of expressing the Lord, in way of comparison negatiuely,
belongs that which is written, Numbers 23.19. God is not as man that he
should lie: neither as the son of man, that he should repent.

Likewise 1. Samuel. 15.29. The strength of Israel will not lie nor repent, for
he is not man that he should repent. Moreover Hosh: Chap. 11.9. I am God and
not man, the holy one in the midst of thee, etc. And Rom: 3.4. Let God be true,
and every man a liar. As though he should say, howsoever man is found light and
inconstant: yet this is a principle which ought to be above all exception, that
God is always, and in all things, perfectly true. And on the contrary, to the
same effect: Isai 31.3. The Egiptians are men and not God and their horses
flesh, and not Spirit. Therefore prays the Church: O God give thou us help
against trouble, for vain is the help of man. Psalm. 108.12. and Ps: 20.7.8.
and 33.16. Hereunto also may be referred these Titles of God, only wise, or
infinite in wisdom: Epistle of Jude, verse. 25. and Ps: 147.5. Invisible, Heb.
11.27. Incomprehensible. Ps: 145.3. His greatness is incomprehensible.
Immortal, as before: 1. Ti. 1.17. And who only has immortality. ch: 6.16.
He that Reigns of old. Ps: 55.19. and Dan. 7.9. and Isai: 51.9.10. For these
also have a reference of comparison, in respect of creatures. For man is
mortal, and all things else transitory, and mutable: God is not so: He is
the everliving God, Ps: 102.23.24. etc. There is no change in him, he is
always the same. James: 1.17. And Ierem: 10.10. The Lord is the God of
truth: he is the living God, and an everlasting King, etc. Every Creature
has his limited substance and place: yea place it self is limited. But God
fills all places, yea he comprehends them, but is not comprehended. He
fills heaven and earth. Ier. 23. verse. 23.24. He is greater then all
creatures. Isai: ch: 40.12. etc. Not that we are to ascribe any material
magnitude or greatness to God (for he is a Spirit) but such a greatness as is to
us incomprehe^sible, as was said in the Psalm. Such a greatness, as filling all
places, does therwithall after a sort fill all things, he being in them, and
they having their being in and by him, though he be in no wise intermixed with
any of them. So that when we look upon all things, and see the beauty of
them, and comprehend in some measure the greatness of the heaven and the earth:
we must conceive of God to be of an infinite Majesty and G^orie, even by the
greatness of his throne and footestoole, etc.

Yea and though man has much knowledge; yet beside that he has none which
God has not given and taught him, according to that in the Ps: 94.10. and Isa:
28.24.25.26. And 1. Cor: 7. ver. 7. Besides this I say, How little do we know
of his ways, and of his infinite knowledge and Judgments, which are
unsearchable? Job: ^6.14. etc. Read ch: 9. and ch: 33.13.14. Read also Isai:
40.13.14. Romans 11.33. O the deepnes of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and
knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out! For who has known the mind of the Lord? or who was his
Counselor? Or who has given to him first, and he shall be recompensed? For
of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be glory for ever.
Amen. Let men therefore be as wise as they may be: that is, even as wise as it
shall please God to make them: yet GOD only, is perfectly wise, like as our
Sau: Christ says of God, He only is good: to wit, as touching the fountain,
and also the perfection of goodness.

And thus God vouchsafes by speech of comparison, noting (as was said) an
infinite disparagement betwixt him and all creatures, to give us some help
toward the knowledge, which we in our weakness may be able to conceive of him.

Let us now come to those familiar similitudes, where by it pleases God, to
express himself in a certain proportion, for a further help of our weakness.

These similitudes whereunto God likeneth himself, they are partly in repect
of his Church and children: and partly in respect of the wicked.

And that we may by an hysterosis begin first with those that concern the
wicked: God is in respect of them compared to a mighty Warrior to overthrow
them: Exodus: 15.3. The Lord is a man of War, his name is Jehovah. And Psalm.
76.3.4.5.6.7. There brake he the arrows of the bow, etc. And Psalm:
78.65.66. etc.

He is compared to a jealous houshand, that will take revenge of their
spiritual fornication: as in the 2. Commandment, and Ezod: 34.14. The Lord
whose name is iealouse, is a iealouse God. And Deuterono: 32.21. They have
moved me to jealousy, with that which is not God. And Nahum: chapt: 1.2. He
is compared to a Lion, or Bear of the Forest, in respect of his fearful
vengeance, to terrify men from sin. Ps: 50.22. Amos 3.8. and Isa: 31.4. Yea
and sometime toward his own children, Isa: 38.13. Hosc: 5.14. and ch: 13.7.8.

Finally, our God is to the wicked, even a consuming fire. Deuter: 4.29. and
Hebr: 12.29. Read also Isai. 33.14.

(...) 1.2.3.10 2^. (...) G^^ is the (...) o^ his Servants. (...) 43.3.
But unto the Church and people of God, who truly believe in him, fear him,
and walk in his ways: The Lord is a quiet and peaceable resting place.
Psalm: 90.1. Lord thou have been our habitation, from generation to generation.

He is a Sanctuary of refuge in time of danger. Isai: 8.13.14. A strong Tower
of defense. Prou: 18.10. and Nahum: 1.7. The Lord is God, and a strong ho^de
in the day of trouble, and he knows: (that is, he tenderly regards them
that trust in him.) He is the rock of their salvation. Psalm: ^9.26. and the
^orne of their salvation. He is my rock and my fortress, says David: Psalm:
18.2. And Psalm: 92.15. The Lord my rock is righteous. And Psalm: 95.1, Let us
sing aloude to the rock of our salvation. Read also, Proverbs, 30.5. He is a
shield to those that trust in him.

And many times in the Psalms. Namely Psalm: 59.11. and Psalm. 115.9.10.11.
and 119. verse. 114. And Genes: 15.1. The Lord says to Abraham, Fear not
Abraham, I am thy buckler, and thy exceeding great reward.

According to that Deuteron: 33.29. Blessed art thou O Israel: who is like
unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thine help, and sword
of thy glory etc. And Psalm: 17.8. and 57.1. And again Psalm: 63.7. and 91.4.
He is compared to a hen, gathering her chickens under her wings, for defense
against the Kyte. Like as our Savior Christ speaks of himself. Matthew:
23.37. But among all similitudes, the Lord uses none so plentifully, as he
does man himself, for a representation of his Divine virtues, insomuch as he
made him of of all other earthly creatures, more answerable to his own
similitude and likeness, and so the more five to resemble himself by. And
therefore he speaks of himself, as having a resemblance to man, in all his
powers, and parts, both inward and outward. Yea therefore also, has he chosen
to represent himself, sometimes to his servants, in the likeness and shape of
man by vision. Yet with such a dissimilitude, as was most fit to set out the
excellency of the divine Majesty and glory, exceeding all humane
representation and likeness. 1. Kings. 22.19. Isai: chap: 6. 1. Ezech: ch: 1.
26. 27. and Dan: 7.9.10.

The particular speeches, (whereby the Lord is spoken of) as having a soul, a
heart, a head, face, eyes, nostrills, mouth, hands, feet, etc: they are so
frequent in the Scriptures, that it is needles, and would be ouerlong to
rehearse, in what respect the Lord does thus speak of himself. We may read
them to very good purpose, in the beginning of the first book Of the substance
of religion, by Amandus Polanus, who has diligently gathered them together,
and learnedly interpreted them to our hand. The eyes of the Lord, note his
wisdom and providence, his mouth, the declaration of his will, his arm and
right hand, his invincible power and government, his feet and footesteppes,
the proceeding and execution of his judgments, etc. Psalm: 68.24. and Psalm:
77.18. and 89 51.

But in all such speeches, we must beware that we conceive in our mind, nothing
carnally of the divine and Spiritual nature of God. For as it is said in the
book of Job: ch: 10.4. that he has no carnal eyes, neither sees as man
sees: so is it to be acknowledged concerning the rest. For in so much as our
Savior Christ says of Spirits that are creatures, that they have not flesh
and bones, Lu: 24.^9 much less is the Creator of Spirits, to be thought to
have so; or to be any substance of any shape and outward form.

And thus, if we seek to know God, according to the instructions and
testimonies of the holy Scriptures: we shall by the grace of God, know him as
he is to be known, a thousand fold more perfitly, the^ by all Philosophical
conceit and discourse of reason: and accordingly, we shall rightly believe in
him. Yet, when we have used all good and holy diligence, we must rest our
selves, in that know^^dge which is unto sobriety. For as touching the nature
of God, (as he is in h^mselfe we cannot know it but by his back parts, as he
himself speaks. As for his most perfect glory, which shines above all
visible brightness as it were in his face, we cannot possibly behold or look
upon it, It belongs to every Christian.
save only as he has revealed himself, in the face of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 2. Cor. 4.6. And yet this knowledge also is passing knowledge, as
touching the full perfection of it. Ephesians: 3.19. And Galat: 4.9. We cannot
know God as we are known of him. Hitherto therefore of the meaning of the
Article, I believe in God.

Now let us inquire of the third point: to wit, what promise we the
Gentiles have, that this only true God, who was in special manner the God of
Israel, will be likewise our God.



In the first chapter of the Prophecy of Hosea, verse 10: thus we read, In the
place (says the Lord) where it was said unto them, ye are not my people: it
shall be said unto them, ye are the Sons of the living God.

And again chapt: 2. the last verse: I will have Mercy on her that was not
pitied, and I will say to them that were not my people, Thou art my people, and
they shall say, Thou art my Lord.

This is indeed a general promise concerning the calling of us the Gentiles,
including every one of every Nation, whosoever shall (in the time and season
of this calling) have grace, truly to believe in God. Read Rom: 9.24.25.26.
etc.



In the 3. chapt: to the Rom: verse 29. the Apostle Paul affirms, that ever
since the Gospel has been Preached to all Nations by the Commandment of our
Savior Christ: God is to be acknowledged, not only the God of the Jews, but
also of the Gentiles. For (says he) it is one God that shall justify the
Circumcision of faith, and uncircumcision through faith.

Explication and proof.
By Circumcision of faith, the Apostle understands the believing Jews, that
were circumcised; as by uncircumcision the Gentiles believing, though they were
not circumcised. His meaning is therefore, that the same Faith in Christ, does
justify them both, in the sight of God. And let us mark to our comfort
(seeing the greatest cause and title that we have is pleaded) how earnest the
Apostle is in auerring and affirming the calling of us the Gentiles, into the
fellowship of the covenant of grace and salvation, together with the Jews. Is
God (says he) the God of the Jews only, and not of the Gentiles also? Yes
even of the Gentiles also. Read also. 1. Corint: ch: 12. verse 13. and Ephesians:
2.11. etc. And Act: 11.1. etc. and chap: 15. 7. etc.

This verily is worthy our special observation. For in so much as it is
certain, that we the Gentiles were cut off from Gods conuenant: it is
necessary, that we should have ground and warrantise of our insition and
ingrafting again. To this purpose, the testimonies alleged, are infinitely
more worth, then their weight in Gold, as a man may say.

I believe in God, etc: And not, We believe.

First, because it is of the very nature of the true Justifying Faith, to make
particular application of the Promises of Almighty God, to every one whom God
has endued with it.

Secondly, because it is the duty of every true believer, to make profession
of his own Faith, rather then of any other man's: in so much as no man knows
the truth and certainty of the says of any other, so undoubtedly as he may
do of his own.

Thirdly, because no man can be saved, but by his own Faith.

Finally, to the end that every believer might be admonished and provoked
(each by the example of other) to seek to have the ground of faith firmly
settled in him self: and every one to try and examine himself concerning the
truth of his own faith, lest he should (at unawares) deceive himself in a
vain opinion and imagination of faith, in stead of faith it self.

Explication and proof.
These are very good reasons in deed; for the particular confession, and
profession, of every Christian his own Faith. For the proof whereof, touching
the first, let us consider, that it is the usual manner of the publishing of
the Gospel, to apply it particularly: as Roman: 10.9. If thou shall confess
with thy mouth the Lord JESUS, and shall believe in thy heart that GOD has
raised him up from the dead, thou shall be saved. and Gal: ^.7. Act: ch: 16.
14. 15. and verse 31. Believe and thou shall be saved. Likewise Chapt: 8.37.
Philip says to the Eunuch (Lord Treasurer to Candaces the Queen of the
Aethiopians) If thou beleeuest with all thine heart, thou may be baptized.
And he answered, I believe that JESUS CHRIST is the Son of GOD. And then the
Evangelist Philip baptized him. The same was the ordinary manner of the
Ministers of the Gospel, in the primitive Church: to require a particular
profession of the faith of such, as were from time to time, converted from
Paganism, and admitted to be Baptized for members of the Church of Christ.

Yea, it was the very cause, why this form of profession was collected, and
set down in this particular manner.

Touching the second point, read. 1. Pet. 3.15.16. Be ye ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you. And that with meekenes and reverence, having a good conscience, etc. And
Reuelat: Chapt: 2.17. Where the assurance of everlasting life, and the care of
newnes and godliness of life here (either of them springing from faith) they are
fitly compared to the Manna that is hidden, and to a white Stone, wherein a
new N^me is written, which no man knows, saving he that receives it.

We may indeed, yea we ought charitablie, and that with good hope and trust
tow^rd God, conceive of such as are fruitful in good works, that they are the
true elect of God; specially, if they are in special manner fruitful, as the
Apostle Paul was very well persuaded of the Thessalonians. 1. Epi: 1.3.4. and.
2. Ep^: 1.3.4.

And of the Philipp: chapt: 1.6.7. But the certain, yea the only undoubted
certainty, is principally to be found of every man, in the persuasion of his
own heart, confirmed unto him by the testimony of the Spirit of G^d.

Thirdly, that every man lives by his own faith, and not by the faith of an
other. Read Hab: Chapt: 2.4. The just shall live by his Faith. Yea by that
faith whereby he is assured, that Christ lives in him; according to that of
the Apostle Paul, Galat: 2.20. I live, (says he) yet not I now, but CHRIST
lives in me: and in that I now live in the flesh, I live by Faith in the
Son of GOD, who has loved me, and given himself for me. And Rom:
8.3^.^^.39. He teaches that every Christian ought to be so persuaded, that
he may comfort himself: that neither death nor life, nor any thing else,
s^all be able to separate him from the love of God, which is, in Christ Jesus
our Lord.

For the last point, read 1. Cor: 11.28. and 2. Cor: 13.5. Prove your selves
whether you are in the faith: examine your selves: know ye not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? That is, no
better then such, as for the present, have no ground to think better of
themselves, then of such as be counterfetted Christians, and no true members
of Christ, etc.

So then, by all these reasons it is manifest, that the articles of our faith,
and the faith and belief of them, does belong to every true Christian, that
none may put them off from himself: as that the common sort of Christians
should say; these things contain such high mysteries, that they belong only
to learned men: or that any of the learned should say; these are so common
matters, that they are rather for children then for us. No, no: they are both
for children which be of years of discretion, and for grown men too: they are
for the learned to study a more exact and full knowledge of them, and also for
the most simple Christian to labor to understand and believe them in some
measure: whosoever do mind unfeignedly, the way of their eternal salvation.

It is not enough for any to say, I believe as the Church believes, unless he
do know that the Church believes as it ought to do. Nay rather, it is the duty
of every Christian, to seek after such a measure of knowledge, that he may be
able to discern betwixt the true Church of Christ, and every false or
Antichristian Church: betwixt the true faith of the one, and the erroneous
faith of the other, etc. according to that we read, 1. John, 4.1. Dearly
beloved, (says the Apostle) believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits
whether they are of God, etc. And Math: 7, 15. Beware (says our Savior
Christ) of false Prophets: that is, of such as teach false doctrine, etc.
Otherwise, we shall endanger our selves to the wrath of God, and to be
partakers of those plagues which GOD will cast upon them. Revelation: chapter:
14.9, 10.11, 12.

Let every true Christian therefore, not only say, I believe: but let us
every one be careful, to understand and believe those high mysteries which we
do commonly profess, every day better then other. For this we may be sure
of, that none can believe them in any measure, but such as do understand them
in some measure.

I believe in God: and do not content our selves to say, I believe God?

In the use of our language, when we say: I believe in God, it is a more
significant phrase of speech, to express that particular apprehension and
application of Gods mercy and goodness (as belonging particularly to every one)
then if every one should only say: I believe God.

Explication and proof.
It is so in deed. For a man may be said to believe God: to wit, that he is
true, though he be interressed in no part of the benefit of the justification
and salvation of God. And besides, this phrase of speech is very fit and
commodious, to put a difference betwixt our faith toward GOD, and that which
we believe concerning the Church of GOD. For albeit we do believe, that God
has his catholic Church, consisting of Jews and Gentiles, and that thereis a
communion of Saints, etc: yet we may not say without great caution, that we
believe in the Church, no not in the true Church of God.

It suffices that we believe, that God has his catholic and invisible
Church, in the which there is certainly a sweet communion of Saints: and that
to the true members thereof, forgiveness of sins belongs, and also the
resurrection of the body and everlasting life: though we do not believe in
it.

The most that we may believe concerning the true Church of God, is that it is
a faithful witness of Gods holy truth, to uphold it against all Infidels and
Athiests that deny it, and against all heretics which seek to deprave it: to
the end it may remain inviolable, to the posterity and ages to come,
according to that of the Apostle Paul. 1, Timoth. 3, 15. The house of God,
which is the Church of God, it is the pillar and ground of truth. But of this
more afterward.

There is a like good use also, of the difference which learned Interpreters
put betwixt the diverse phrases of the Latin speech: To believe that God is. 2
To give some credi^ to God, as true. 3 To repose su^e trust in God, as most
gracious and merciful to a ma^s self truly believing in him.
Credere Deum: sc: esse: Credere Deo: and Credere in Deum. For as touching the
former two, the wicked may do them: the last only, is proper to the children
of God.

And although in the holy Scriptures (as they are written in the Hebrewe and
Greek languages) there is not so exact a difference put between these kind
of phrases: yet they must be diversely understood and interpreted, according
as they are referred either to GOD, or to man. For although the preposition
Beth in the Hebrewe, be joined with the word of believing when it is referred
to men, as well as to GOD: as we find it. Exodus, 14.31. and 2. Chronicles,
chap. 20, verse, 20. (As though we should in our language read it thus.
Believe ye in the Lord and in his Prophets:) yet of necessity, must we use a
differing interpretation, because GOD only is simply and for himself to be
believed in; but no creature, no not the holy Prophets, are to be believed, but
for the Lords sake, and according to the Lord, as they are faithful witnesses
of his undoubted truth.

And again, although sometime the Preposition Beth which is in the Hebrewe, as
Genesis. 15.6. is left out in the Greek allegation: as Romans, 4, 3. yet we
are to understand Paul, as well as Moses, to speak of one and the same true
and undoubted justifying faith. For both of them, speak of one and the same
faith of Abraham: who most faithfully and firmly believed in God.

The same is to be said of diverse other places of the new Testament, that
the word of believing used without a preposition (as Acts, 27.25. and 2.
Timothy, 1.12. Acts, 8.37. Romans, 10, 9.) does note the true Christian faith,
as well as where the preposition is added: as John, 6.29. and 1. Ep: 5.10. Romans
4.5. and 1, Tim: 1.16.

Finally sometimes, though the preposition be added, as John, 2.23. and
chapters 12, 42: yet the word of believing so used, does not note a true and
undoubted faith, in some of those that are said to believe in Christ. But of
this enough, though not unprofitable, as I trust. Hitherto of the meaning of
this article of our faith: I believe in God.

Now let us come to the fourth point of our inquiry touching the same.



To speak generally, It is our whole blessedness and our only true glory and
rejoicing, that we have the only true GOD for our GOD. For our safety and
whole welfare under his protection and government, in the way of his true
worship and service, (yea even in the manifold afflictions and trials of this
life) it is infinitely to be preferred above all worldly riches, honor, and
pleasure, whatsoever might be enjoyed, under the most flourishing government
and defense of the richest, mightiest, and bountifullest Monarch, of the whole
world.

Explication and proof.
It is verily so, according as the Lord our GOD is of infinite wisdom and
power, and of unmeasurable riches and mercy, etc. above all the Potentates and
Rulers in the whole world. For the proof whereof, we shall not read in
vain, Psalm, 33, 12. and Psalm. 89.15.16. etc. and 144.15. and 146, 5. We
may see the confirmation hereof further, if we read Psalm. 84.4, 5, 9, 10,
11, 12. and Psalm. 141.4.5.

And seeing (as has been already showed) GOD is all only goodness, perfectly
good, and the alone fountain thereof: it must needs be, that it is the only
happiness, and (as we may say) the summum bonum, the perfect bliss of the
whole Church, and of every member thereof: to have God to be their God, and
to participate of that goodness, The Comforts and benefits.
which is infinite in him. Read Genesis, 17.7, 8. I will establish my covenant
(says the Lord to Abraham) between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in
their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be GOD unto thee, and to
thy seed after thee. etc.

It is the covenant of all mercy, not only concerning the blessings of this
life, but also concerning the happiness of the life to come: as our Savior
Christ interprets it, Matthew, 22.31.32. Luke, 20.35.36.36.37.38. Read also
Ezekiel. 36, 26.27.28. etc. 37, 38. And Hebr: 8, 10. And chap. 11.13, 14, 15, 16.

Verily, there is no doubt, but if we do truly believe in our only true God,
we may assuredly persuade our selves, that according to his manifold, and most
gracious promises; he will use his divine wisdom, power, mercy, justice,
faithfulness, and truth, to our unspeakable benefit above all that we can ask
or think. For what comfort and security can be greater: nay what can be
equal to this, to have the most gracious promises of him, who is most
faithful, made unto us? Psalm. 36.5. and 89.2. and 146.5.6. To have the most
ready aid of him that is the strongest? Romans 8.31. To be guided by the
counsel of him, that is the wisest? Psalm. 16, 7. and 73.24. Who knows how to
deliver those that be his out of their greatest perils and dangers: 2. Pet. 2,
9. in so much as to him belong the issues of death? Psalm. 68.20. and 1. Cor:
13, 13. Finally, what comfort can be like to the comfort of a great offender
(such as we are all before God) to stand at the mercy of him, that is most
pitiful and merciful: to all such as attend upon his mercy, and crave it of
him: Psalm. 86.15. and 147.11. Micah. 7, 18. etc. in so much as it shall never
be in vain to call upon him? Psalm. 17, 6, 7, 8.

Behold therefore, how all things are in all perfection, in the divine nature
of God: whatsoever may be required, to the grounding and establishing of
vndoubting belief in him. If he did only perfectly know how to do us good,
and were not able to perform it: Or if being wise and able, he were not
willing: Or being both wise, and able, and willing, if he were not faithful
and constant, to confirm and establish his goodness toward us: there might be
some occasion of doubting. But seeing the Lord our God, is both perfectly wise,
and sufficiently able, and readily willing, and constantly bent to do us good,
yea to make us for ever partakers of all his mercy and goodness: there is no
place left, why we should be in any the least doubt thereof.

These comfortable fruits, and prerogatives of faith, have heretofore caused
the Church of GOD, to place all faith and trust only in GOD: and so ought they
to do still. Yea, notwithstanding we should have at any time (if so it were
possible) as valiant and mighty Captains and Rulers, and as tender and
vigilant Foster-fathers unto us, as Moses, Joshua, David, and other were to
them: yet must our faith and trust, be fixed only in the living GOD: who
alone, makes all means of succor, mighty and effectual for the defense of
his people.

For the proof whereof, consider that which we read, Psalm, ^0. and Psalm,
21. Here call to mind again, Psalm, 89.15. etc. and Psalm, 144.15. Blessed
are the people whose GOD the Lord is. Whereupon also, justly is the exhortation
made unto all the people, that they would rejoice in him: Psalm, 66.1, etc.
and 67, 4. and 68, 32. yea many Psalms together, following after the 95,
Psalm.

The experience of this comfortable fruit of faith, is testified in the holy
Scriptures, both generally and particularly. Our Fathers trusted in thee (says
the Prophet David) they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them. They
called upon thee, and were delivered: they trusted in thee, and were not
confounded. Psalm, 22, 4. 5.

And more particularly concerning himself, In the Lord do I put my trust: how
say ye then to my soul, flee away from your mountain as a little bird? to
wit, as one chased away as easily as a silly bird is scared from place to
place: Psalm. 11, 1. And Psalm. 18.16, 17. Likewise Iehoshaphat, and Hezekiah,
godly Kings of Judah: they trusted in the Lord, and prayed unto him, and they
were delivered from their mighty adversaries. 2, Chron: 20, 20. and chap: ^^.
The Lions also did not hurt Daniel, because he believed in his God. Dan: chap.
6.23.

According to the comfort of the same experiments, justly may we hearken to the
general encouragement of the same the holy Scriptures of God: such as we may
read. Psalm. 31.24. All ye that trust in the Lord, be strong, and he shall
establish your heart. And Psalm. 37, 3, 4, etc. and 55.22. Read also Heb.
13.5.6. And consider that God has bound his holy promise with an oath: that
he might thereby, help the weakness of our faith. chap. 6.17.18.19* Yea, this
comfort may we have in our greatest afflictions, that the Lord will not leave
us. Prou. 24.16. and Romans 8.28. There are many comfortable testimo^ies, every
where in the holy Scriptures, to this end. Great therefore, is the general
comfort, and benefit of faith in one only true GOD, even one only, in his
divine nature and essence, as has been proved before.

And yet one thing more let us observe here, the which may be of good use for
afterward: and that is this. Whereas we do generally ascribe all comforts to
belief in GOD, as he is one only in nature, we do not exclude the Trinity
of Persons. For faith in the unity of the Godhead, and faith in the Trinity
of Persons, it is all one and the same faith: and the comfort of both, is one
and the same comfort. So that as a learned Father says well: Grego: Nazaa^z.
Ou phihano to en noesat, ca^tois tri^i per^^^mpomat. Ou phthano ta tria dic^em,
carets to en anapheromai.
I cannot think of the unity, but the brightness of the Trinity shines about
me: neither can I distinguish the Trinity, but my thoughts do send me to the
unity.

Only for orders sake, and to make the doctrine of faith, and the manifold
instructions thereof, more plain: we take the occasion here, to gather the
comforts of faith, as they are in the holy Scriptures rehearsed under the name
of God indefinitely, and without distinction of person; as afterward we shall
likewise, by the grace of GOD, observe the comforts which b^ ascribed to faith,
as it believes distinctly in every person: yet so, as it continually looks
to the unity of the Godhead, without all distraction or division of the mind.

The like is to be considered concerning the duties. But before we come to
them, let us more particularly examine the comforts of this principle of our
faith in one only true God; in that he is the eternal, and almighty, the
most wise, and gracious Creator, Governor, and Preserver of all things, the
most righteous Judge of all men, etc. according to the several titles
belonging unto him.

Jehovah, the only eternal and everliving God, in whom we live and move and
have our being, as the Apostle Paul teaches. Act. 17.28. Yea that he is in
his divine nature, a most holy GOD: What (I say) is the comfort of this?

The comfort arising from hence, is this; that the same our God, who has given
us a being and life, and moving, who also is the father of our souls and
spirits: will (no doubt) preserve and maintain us in this life, according to
his own good will and pleasure, against all adversary power whatsoever. Yea
more then this that he will sanctify us to himself, and effectually
accomplish all the holy promises which he has made, to his whole Church, and
to every true member thereof: concerning a most happy and g^orious estate after
this life, even for ever and ever.

So indeed, the Lord himself assures his people from this his name Iehoua; as
we read: Explication and proof.
Exodus chap. 6, 2, 3, 4, etc. Whereupon also, the Church of God prays against
the enemies thereof, that they may be so confounded in their wicked
enterprises, that they may know by experience, that God, who is called Iehoua,
is God alone, even the most high over all the earth: Psalm: 83, 16, 17, 18. Read
likewise, Psalm. 31, 14, 15. I trusted in thee o Jehovah, I said thou art my
God. My times are in thy hand, deliver me from the hands of mine enemies,
etc. And Psalm. 68: verse: 4. Exalt God in his name Iah, and rejoice before him.
For according as he is in himself eternal, so it pleases him to be our God
for ever, and ever: Psalm. 48, 14. And Psalm. 102, verse 24, etc. even to the
end of the Psalm. The eternity of the Church is lincked with the eternity
of God, by virtue of the most gracious and faithful promise of his covenant.
And Psalm. 111, ^. He has commanded his covenant for ever, holy and fearful
is his name. Finally, as our Savior Christ has testified, Matthew. 22, 33. God
is not the God of the dead, but of the living: he therein assuring the
faithful, of their imm^rtalitie with faithful Abraham, and that even from the
faithfulness of the immortal God. And that God, being in himself most holy,
will sanctify his people; it is evident by his ordaining and sanctifying of his
Sabbath, even from the beginning: Genesis 2, verses 2, 3. And Exodus 31, 12, 13,
14. And Ezekiel. 20, 12. God calls it a sign betwixt him and his people, that
he does sanct^fie them. Yea, and it is a special means of sanctification, to
all such as do religiously sanctify it by the exercise and practice of the
holy duties of Gods worship. Read also, Hab: 1, 12. Psalm: 22, 3, 4, 5. And the
prayer of our Savior Christ: John 17, verses 17, 18, 19. Sanctify them with
thy truth: thy word is truth, etc. All is very comfortable.

The comfort of faith in Gods almighty power, and in this, that he is our
Creator and Governor, follows next in order: but seeing we shall have a
special occasion offered us hereafter, to inquire of them: we will of purpose
omit them here.

Nevertheless, we will proceed to those comforts, which arise from other
consideration^; and namely from this in the next place: that the Lord our God
is of a most spiritual nature and being, of infinite Majesty, filling both
heaven and earth, etc.



The comfort hereof is this, that God every where present with us by his
spirit; is a merciful beholder, pittier, and moderator of all our troubles and
griefs: our vpholder in every grief and distress: and finally, our deliverer
out of all our troubles, though with our bodily eyes we see him not.

Explication and proof.
For the proof of this, read Exodus 3, 7, etc. I have surely seen the trouble
of my people which are in ^gypt (says the Lord) and I have heard their cry,
because of their taske-maisters: for I know their sorrows. That which the
Lord did then, he does continually, as the necessities of his people do
require; as we may further perceive, by other proofs of the same kind. As
Zech: 4, 10. The eyes of the Lord go through the whole world. Neither is he an
idle beholder, in seeing how things go, as we may further perceive by that we
read in the 9, chap. and 8. verse of the same prophecy. I will camp about
mine house against the army, against him that passes by, and against him that
returns, and no oppressor shall come upon them any more: for now have I
seen with my eyes. Likewise, Prou. 15, 3. The eyes of the Lord in every place
behold the evil and the good. And Psalm 33, verses 13, 14. The Lord looks
down from heaven, and beholds all the children of men. From the habitation of
his dwelling, he beholds all them that dwell in the earth. He facioneth
their hearts every one, and understands all their works, etc. Likewise,
Psalm: 34. verses 15, 16. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his
ears are open to their cry. But the face of the LORD is against them that do
evil, to cut off their remembrance from the earth. And Heb. 11.27. We have
the example of Moses, who comforted himself against the fi^ ce^es of the king
of Egypt, by looking up to him that is invisible as the Apostle teaches: that
is, by looking up to God who^ he describes to be he that is invisible:
according to that 1. Tim. 1, 17. where he is called the King invisible.

NOw let us go forward. What is furthermore the comfort of this, that he Lord
our God, is most perfect, entier, and absolute in himself: so that albe^t he
is every where present (silling heaven and earth, and upholding all things yet
he is nevertheless, altogether an other, and most perfectly, (in his divine
nature and essence) separated from them, neither is contained in any place nor
vpheld by any creature, etc.



This may exceedingly comfort us, that although a^l creatures in heaven and
earth should seem to forsake us, yea to be utterly bent against us: yet so
long as w^ put our trust in God, we may be sure that both he can, and also that
he will cherish and maintain vt, yea in this frail life, so long as he sees
so meet, against all creatures that should con^pire to discomfort and destroy
us.

Explication and proof.
It is true that you say. For God works most freely in all things: he is
nothing entangled and snared any way: he is not limited, nor tied to any
second means and causes. And for the proof of this comfort, read Heb. 13. c.
^. God has said, I will not fail thee, neither forsake thee. So that we may
boldly say, The Lord is my helper, neither will I fear what man can do unto
me. Read also, Psalm. 34, 19. The Lord is near to them that are of a contrite
heart, etc. Whereupon, well observes Master Calvin, that herein is contained
a doctrine, full of most sweet consolation and comfort; that God does not then
leave us, when a huge heap of evils do so ouerwhelme us, that we are (as one
would say) stuffled thereby: or so daunted, that we cannot tell almost what we
may do. His words upon those words of the Psalm, are these, Plena
suauissimae consolationis doctrine, Deum ne tunc quidem a nobis discedere, quum
malorum congeries not quasi exanimatos obruit.

Here also call again to mind, Psalm. 23, 4. Though I should walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me:
thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. A particular experience whereof, we
find recorded, 1. Sam. 3^, ^. Where we read that David comforted himself in
his God, when his own company mutinously intended forthwith to have stoned
him. Remember also to this purpose, the 46. Psalm. And Psalm 113. the third
verse. Our God is in heaven, he does whatsoever he will. Moreover, Deuteronomy, 8, 3.
and Mat. 4, 4. Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of the Lord. And 1. Sam 14.6, and likewise, 2. Chron. 14, 11.
The Lord helps with few, as well as with many. And Z^char: 4.6. Neither by
an army, nor strength, but by my spirit says the Lord of Hosts. And Isay. 59,
16, etc. and Chap. ^^.1. A^ God in the beginning made all things of nothing,
without any helpe^: so, (as it pleases him) he can help as it were without
help, etc. But let us proceed to some other particulars.

His greatness is incomprehensible so he is also in dignity and worthiness
infinitely excelling al creatures whatsoever?

The comfort hereof is, that when our God shall give judgment on our side: all
creatures must be silent before him and rest in his judgment.

In the mean while, it may justly be a special comfort to the servants of
God, that as they serve him, which is the chief Lord and master above all, so
their service is the most honorable and happy service that may be.

Here indeed, the common proverb may have chief place: There is no fishing to
the fishing of the sea, Explication and proof.
nor service to the service of the King. etc. The reward of no earthly Prince,
is or can be co^parable to the reward of the king of heaven. For this happiness
of the servants of God, Read how they are privileged above all other, yea even
in the times of greatest danger: Isay. chap. 6^, 8, ^, 13, 14. Thus says the
Lord, As wine is found in the cluster, and one says: destroy it not, for a
blessing is in it; so will I do for my servants sakes, that I may not destroy
them whole. As though he should say, were it not for my servants sake, Israel
should be whole destroyed. For so it follows in the next verse, in these
words: But I will bring a seed out of Iaakob, and out of Judah, that shall
inherit my mountain: mine elect shall inherit it, and my servants shall dwell
there. And Sharon shall be a sheepfold, etc. And verse 13. Thus says the Lord
God: behold my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed, etc. Read also
Mal^ch. 3, 16, 17, 18. The Queen of Sheba pronounced Salo: servants to be
happy men, in that they served so wise a King: 1. Kin. 10, 8. but more happy
was Solomon himself, in that he was the servant of the most wise God. Herein
also did king David his father rejoice: as Ps. 119, 124, 125. Deal with thy
servant according to thy mercy, and teach me thy statutes. I am thy servant
grant me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.

Finally, that Gods sentence shall stand on the behalf of his servants, so as
none shall be able to reuerse it: it may be perceived from that we read: Isay
chapter 41, 1, etc. Keep silence before me, etc. And Micah. 7, 16. The nations
shall see and be confounded for all their power. They shall lay their hands
upon their mouth, etc. And Habbak: 2, 20. When the Lord chief Justice of a
nation, gives sentence; none (no not of the bench) replieth: much less shall
any dare reply, when the Lord of Lords, the chief Justice of all the world
shall pronounce his sentence and judgment, Read Isay 52, 7, 8, 9. and Romans 8,
31, 32, 33, 34.

Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all) so does
he in like perfection of his divine wisdom, order and govern them all. What I
say, is the comfort of this?

It is very comfortable to us, in that, hereby we are assured, that there is no
wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel, which can possibly prevail against
the Lord.

And likewise, it is no small comfort to so many as are wise in the Lord, and
according to the instructions of his holy word: that they may thereby assure
themselves, that they are truly wise, and of the truth, as the Apostle John
writes. 1. Ep. chap. 3, and verse 19. And that no craft or subtlety of their
adversaries, shall finally prevail against them, no more then they can
prevail against God himself.

Expiratio^ and proof.
It is true: as it is expressly testified: Pro. 21, 30, Read also, Ier. 8, 9, and
ch 9:23, 24. Job. 5, 12, 13. Luke 1, 51, and 1. Cor. 3, 19, 20. Read also.
Psalm. 23.4. The Lord is my shepherd etc. Yea, though I should go through the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me, thy rod and thy
staff they comfort me.



It cannot but be exceeding comfortable, if we consider that no multitude or
greatness of sin, nor any indignity and unworthiness of person, can hinder the
most free course, (and as it were the stream) of Gods mercy, from those that
do truly seek mercy and forgiveness at his hands.

Ex^licatio^ and proof.
Likewise, it cannot be but exceedingly comfortable, to consider that the mercy
of our God, yea that the bountifulnes of his mercy, is greater then all our
wants and miseries can be: and that he will in his due time, abundantly
succor and relieve us, in and against them all.

This infinite goodness and mercy of God, is most comfortably described, and
testified, in the 103. Psalm. verses. 8, 9, 10, etc. Read also, Ier. 31, 10, 11,
12, 13, etc. and Mich. 7, 18, 19, 20, and Ezech. 16, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. God
is so exceeding in mercy, that the wickedness of the wicked, cannot altogether
alienate, and restrain his mercy from them: Act, 14, 17. Much rather then,
will he be merciful to his children, that fear him: Isay 30.18, 19, etc.
chap. 49, 15. etc. 1. Tim. 4.10. Yea, God preserves brute beasts: much more
will he preserve men; specially his own elect children, Psalm. 36.6. and 147,
9. and that also most freely even for his own sake Isay 43, 25. Romans 9, 15.

Let us proceed to the rest.



That he will in his good time, right all injuries and wrongs, done to his
faithful servants: and that he will certaine^y fulfill, both all his promises
toward his servants, and also all his threatenings against the wicked.

Explication and proof.
For a proof of this comfort, arysing from the most perfect and incorrupt
righteousness of God, Read Ecclse. 5. verse 7. If in a country thou see the
oppression of the poor, and the defrauding of judgment and justice, be not
astonished at the matter: ^or he, that is higher then they that be high,
regards, yea even he that is the most high, above them all.

And further for the proof of the rest of this answer, read 2. These. 1, 6, 7.
and Heb. 6.1^. Rom, ^, 25, 26, and Psalm. 119. verses 137, 138. Righteous art
thou o Lord, and just are thy judgments. Thou have commanded thy Testimonies,
which are exceeding righteous and faithful. And Psalm. 33, 5. The Lord loves
righteousness and judgment. And Psalm. 3^, ^^. The Lord loves judgment and
forsakes not his Saints: they shall be preserved for evermore, etc. And Psalm.
45, 7. Thou love righteousness and hate wickedness.



Nothing can be more comfortable, then the assurance of Gods everlasting mercy
and favor, to our eternal happiness and salvation.

Explication and proof.
It is undoubtedly true. The favor of God is better then life, as Psalm. 63, 3.
Thy loving kindness is better then life, therefore (says the holy Prophet)
shall my lips praise thee. And we may all of us justly say, as we read, Psalm.
60, 6, God has spoken in his holiness therefore I will rejoice. And again,
Psalm. 56, 10. I will rejoice in God because of his word etc. And Psalm. 119,
162. I rejoice at thy word as one that finds a great spoil.

Yet one thing more, and so an end of this point of our inquiry for this time.



What I say, is the comfort of all these, laid as it were in the schools,
together?

Answer Explication and proo^e.
The comfort hereof, shall be found by due estimate, to be above all valuation
and weight.

It shall verily be found to be so, to all true believers. If, (as was said in
the beginning of this part of our inquir^e) God did only perfitly know how to
do us good, but were not able to perform it: or if being both wise and able,
he were not likewise willing: or being wise, and able, and willing, if he were
not faithful and constant, to confirm and establish his mercy toward us:
there might be some cause of doubt and discomfort. But seeing all these meet,
and are perfectly linked together, yea infinitely above all that perfection,
which we are able thoroughly to discern: so that God is every way good, yea
perfect goodness it self, and therefore may justly be called the God of all
consolation and comfort, as was answered before: the comfort of the faith of
every true believer, must needs exceed all comfort of sense, yea of the
understanding it self. Let us therefore I pray you, here call again to mind,
The Duties.
the holy exhortation of the holy Psalmist, Psalm. 31, 24. All ye that trust in
the Lord, be strong etc. Psalm. 34, 8. Taste ye and see that the Lord is good:
blessed is the man that trusts in him. Let us again and again, to the
increase of our comfort, consider that which is written, Psalm. 37, 3, 4, etc.
and 55, 22, and Heb. 13, 56, and chapter 6, 17, 18. Where the Lord to the end he
might certify us, of his immutable counsel and purpose of confirming his
mercy to his faithful children, he has added his oath to his promise.
Doubtless the Lord will not leave the least of his, in the least of their
troubles; much less will he leave the^ in the greatest of them, Pro. 24, 16.
and Ps. 27, 3, 4, etc. and 76, 7, 8, and 145, 14, and 146, 7, etc, and Ps. 91.
Which is to this purpose a most comfortable Psalm.

And thus feeding and solacing our souls, with the comforts of our faith in
our one only true God, Let us cheerfully proceed to the consideration of the
duties belonging to the same.

FOr is it not, think you, most equal, that according to the comfort of
faith, which (as has been showed,) is unspeakable: that there should be, at
the least in some special measure, an answerable care and desire, to show
forth special fruits of true thankfulness and obedience, to so good a God, who
is all perfection of goodness it self:



It cannot, with any reason, be denied, but that it is most equal and just,
that it should be so: according to the determination of God himself, who in
the beginning of the 17. chapter of Genesis says thus to Abraham, the father of the
faithful: I am God all sufficient, walk thou before me, and be upright.

Explication and proof.
This indeed, may well be a general ground of all obedience, as a just fruit
due to the manifold comfort of our faith in one only true God. For in that the
Lord says: I am God alsufficient, he gives thereby assurance of al protection
and blessing (according to that ch, 15,1. I am thy buckler, and thine exceeding
great reward.) And the words following in the 17. chapter Walk before me; they are
words requiring all good service and duty, as it is further expressed in the
other words next after them. Be thou upright. Or as they may well be
englished: Be thou entire: that is, See thou detract no part of holy obedience,
but obey in one duty as well as in another. And accordingly there is no doubt,
but Abraham had conscience, and care of walking in such a kind of obedience
before God, even from the comfort of Gods covenant made with him, as the former
words of God do declare. Read also the notable example of Joshua, and of the
people of God: Judges. chapter 24, 14, 15, 16, 17. We will serve the Lord (say they
all) For he is our God.

But it shall be profitable for us, to inquire more particularly, into the
several duties, as we have done into the several comforts. The which (though
peradventure, it will be found painful to do) yet in so much as this our
labor, is employed about the getting of treasure, to the most precious
enriching of our poor souls; let us therefore, account no pains or travail,
too great to be spent about it: remembering well, what toil, with extreme
danger, worldly minded men are usually content to endure, in an uncertain hope
of obtaining earthly, that is to say transitory and deceiuable riches, as our
Savior Christ calls them Luke, Chap. 16, 9, etc.

And further also, let us herewithall observe (concerning the duties of faith)
that some of them may be accounted as more appertaining to the truth and
vprightnes of judgment. Others to the pureness of affection, answereable to the
vprightnes of the same good judgment and holy discretion. And some again, are
belonging to life and conversation as outward fruits of both the former.

Of these duties therefore, let us henceforth inquire, according as the
occasion shall be ministered unto us: and that in such order as we have inquired
after the comforts.

And first, which are the duties belonging to the comfort of this, that the
Lord, who has created us, vouchsafes to be our God; and that he h^th chose^
us for his inheritance, and therefore hedgeth and walleth about, builds and
planteth among us, as it were in his fee-simple; esteeming the children of the
world, but as common or wast and heath ground, in comparison of his church:
Which,

As the Lord of his most free grace, has set us up to be a precious and
peculiar people, (even as it were a choice inheritance to himself, as we have
seen before: ^ort is our most Founden duty as a necessary fruit of our
faith, to set up and advance him above all in our hearts; esteeming him as our
most honorable portion and inheritance for ever, yielding also at al times,
the best and most plentiful fruits of obedience which possibly we may.

Explication and proof.
It must needs be so, according to that we read: D^ut. 26, verses, 16, 1^, 18.
1^. And Psalm. 1^. verse. ^. and Psalm. 119. verse 57. And Isay, chap. ^.1, etc.
Read also, Leuit: 1^, ^, 4, etc. in many verses of that chapter. Ye shall do
thus, and thus, etc: For I am the Lord your God: And P^al: ^0.7. Hear o my
people. etc. For I am God even thy God Finally, Ps. 95.6.7. Come let us worship
and fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker. For he is our God, and we
are the people of his pasture, etc.

But proceed to some other duties belonging to the same comfort:



From this comfort, the grace of faith strives against natural infidelity,
and distrust, or doubting of the goodness and m^rcy of God.

It renounceth all selfe-trust, and trust in any creature.

It abandoneth all self love and vain glory yea and all inordinate love of
any creature, which would hinder or impair our love toward our God.

And on the contrary.

It delights it self in the knowledge of God, and labors after the own
growth and increase.

It makes every true believer, willing and ready, boldly to profess his
faith, yea even before the adversaries thereof to the glory of God: though (if
need so require) it be to the peril and ^^sse of their life. Finally, the
faith of every true believer, works by love, and is (to the power of every
one of them) beneficial and helpful, to every Christian brother and sister as
they themselves find all succor and help from God.

Explication and proof.
That t^^ f^t^^s at war with infidelity, it may be proved from the prayer of
^^e man in the Gospel: Lord says he) I believe, help my unbelief: Mark. ^
^^. And by the pr^^er ^f the more choice Disciples of our Savior Christ: L^^e.
17.5. Lord increase our faith. Read also Psalm. 42, and Psalm. 43. David was in
earn^st com^^te against his temptations of unbelief.

That it renounceth all selfe-trust: read ^. Cor. 1, 9. Likewise, all trust in
creatures; as the practice of the servants of God, evidently shows: as Psalm.
25. 1, and 31, 1. and eue^y where.

That faith strives against s^lf-loue: read Galla. 5. verse 6. and against
vain glory, as against a deadly enemy to the tru^ faith: John. 5.44. For how
can ye believe says our Savior Christ: speaking to the ambitious Pharisees,
who receive honor one of an other, and do not seek the honor which comes
of God alone? It s^r u^^h also against all ino^dinate love of the creature,
because it cannot stand with the love of the father: 1. John. 2.15.

That faith delights in the knowledge of God, and seeks after the own
increase, the prayer of the Apostles (before alleged) may confirm: as also
the excellent estimation which they have hereof, above all things of this
world. Philip. 3, 7.^. Read also, 1, Cor. 1^, ^4, and Isai: 43, 10. That it is
ready to profess and utter it self, to the glory of God; it may be considered
from the precept of the Apostle Peter in this behalf. 1. Ep, 3, 14, 15, 16,
and chapter 4, 16, 19. And the same is pl^ntifully confirmed, by the practice of
thousands, and ten t^^^sands of ho^y Martyrs: who have not regarded their
lives to that ende^^ead also. 2. Cor. 4, 13, etc.

Finally, touching that love, which every true believer bears to hi^
Christian brethren, as a fruit of their faith and love to God: read James,
1.14, 15, etc. And chapter 1, 27. Read also, 1, John. 4, 7, 8, 20, 21, and chap. ^,
1, These are the first sort of duties.



It is the duty of faith from that comfort, which the eternal, everlasting,
and most holy being of God yields unto it; to acknowledge an infini^e
difference and inequality betwixt him and all other: yea even the most
excellent of his creatures, whether men, or Angels; who as they have their
beginning of God, so they are either mortal, as men here in this world, or
else they have their immortality only from him, as Angels from their first
creation, and as the faithful shall have it in the kingdom of heaven.

And further also, seeing we, and all things else, receive our beeings, and
life, and all that we have from God: faith does likewise acknowledge, that it
is the bounden duty of all mankind, whom he has endued with reason and
understanding, both to employ themselves, and also to use all things whatsoever
they do through his goodness enjoy, so as he may have the whole honor and
glory thereof.

Moreover, faith (looking for immortality from the eternal and immortal God
provoke every true believer, the more seriously to follow after peace and
holiness, without which, none shall see God, as the Apostle teaches us. Heb.
12, 14.

Finally, faith (looking for immortality) endures with patience, all the
afflictions of this life, accounting the greatest of them (and those also of
longest continuance) to be but eight and momentary, in comparison of that most
excellent and eternal weight of glory the which, it does comfortably look and
wait for.

Explication an^ proof.
It is undoubtedly true: according to that profession, which the Apostle Paul
makes in the name of other, as well as of himself, 2. cor. 4.17, 18. And Heb,
10.34. And therefore much less will true believers sell their birthright, as
profane Esaue did, preferring the transitory things of this life, to
everlasting happiness: as it follows recorded in the same Chap. Read also
Leuit: 11, 44, and chapter 19, 2, and chapter 20, 7, 8. and 1. These. 4, 3. and 1. Pet.
1, 15, 16. Read also: Mal. 2, 11. where is set down an earnest reproof of the
Jews, for that they profaned the holiness of the Lord, which they ought to have
loved and reverenced.

And that all, whosoever have reason and vnderstancing (by the gracious gift of
God) ought to employ themselves; with their understanding, memories, etc. and
use all things else, to the honor and glory of God: it may be euid^nt from
that conclusion of the holy Apostle, Romans 11, 36. insomuch as of him: to wit,
as from the author: and through him, as the disposer and governor: and for him:
that is, for his glory, are all things. For this is the end and scope of all.
Therefore it is most meet, that the Lord our God should be glorified in and
above all, as faith does justly, and dutifully acknowledge. And in this respect
i^ is, that the Church of God is so often exhorted, and that it does also so
often praise God, in his glorious name Jehovah, and in his name Iah, used in
the same sense: as we read, Ex. 15, 3. and Ps. 68, 4. and in the titles of many
Psalms at the end of this word Halleluiah, praise ye the Lord. Read also,
Isay. 26.4. where this eternity of the Lord God (expressed in the names Iah,
Hallelujah Praise ye the Lord
and Jehovah) is noted for the ground of faith.

Finally, that we may end with the proof of that, which was first mentioned in
the answer: read Ps: 102.23. He abated my strength in the way, and shortened my
days. And I said, O my God take me not away in the midst of my days: thy
years endure from generation to generation. Thou have aforetime laid the
foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the work of thy hands. They shall
perish, but thou shall endure: They shall even all wax old as does a garment:
as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed. But thou art the
same, and thy years shall not fail. And Ps: 35.10. Lord who is like unto
thee, who deliuerest the poor from him that is too strong for him, etc?

These are the second sort of duties.

Show now in the third place, which those duties are, which faith yields
from the comfort of this, that the Lord our God is of a most spiritual nature,
i^finite and every where present, unmeasurable, invisible and incomprehensible.
Which be they?

A^^^^^^.
From the considerations, says does withdraw the thoughts of our minds from
thinking God to be like any bodily creature in outward form or shape; much
more the hands f^^m making and setting up any bodily representation of him;
most of all, the heart, from yielding any divine worship to any creature, the
which it does acknowledge to belong only to the Lord our God.

Ex^l^cation and pr^^^e.
This indeed is one special duty of faith, touching the spiritual nature of
God, in that he is infinite and every where present, etc. acco^ding to that we
re^d: Isay: 4^, 18. Ier. 16, 6. Deuteronomy. 4, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. And Act. 17, v.
24, etc. 29, What other duties do belong to the same comfort of faith?

It requires of every true believer, that he be wise unto sobriety, without
all curious search into the divine nature of God: the which may so only be
known, as it is always to be acknowledged infinitely exceeding all that our
weak knowledge and understanding can reach unto.

It teaches us to worship God in spirit and truth. It warns us to beware of
all hypocr^^^ie, and to take heed that we do in no wise pervert or corrupt the
most holy and pure doctrine of his truth.

These and such like are the duties belonging to the former comfort of faith.

Explicati^n an^ proo^e.
They are so in very deed: as may appear, first from that general admonition
which we read. Romans 12, 3. Let no man understand, above that which is meet to
vnde^stand, but let him understand acco^ding to sobriety, as God has dealt to
every man the measure of faith. For if we may not in things revealed, boast of
a greater measure of knowledge the^ God has given much less may we pry
curiously into his unsearchable secrets. Read also, Deuteronomy. 29. v. 29. Pro. 25,
1, 2, 1^, 2^. And Judge chapter 13, 18, 22. There is also a wise admonition (though
Apocriph^ll to the same purpose, Eccles. chapter 3, 22. Seek not out the things
that be too hard for thee, neither search the things rashly that be to mighty
for thee.

Secondly, call ag^ine to mind herein this place, that excellent example of our
Savior Christ: John 4, 24. God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must
worship him in spirit and truth. For such as God is, such also must his worship
be.

Thirdly, read Ps. 44, ^^, ^1, If we have forgotten the name of our God and
holden up our hands to a strange God shall not God search this out? For he
knows the secrets of the heart. And Ps. 1 29. O Lord thou have tried and
known, Thou know my sittin^ and my rising, etc. The whole Psalm. is of
exceeding good use to this purpose.

Finally, read, Ier. 23, v. 23, 24, 25. Am I a God at hand, (says the Lord)
and not a God far often? Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall
not see him. (says the Lord) Do not I file heaven and hearth, says the Lord?
I have heard what the Prophets said that prophecy lies in my name saying, I
have dreamed, I have dreamed, etc. And Ps. 119 verse 168. I have kept thy
precepts and thy testimonies: for all my ways are before thee. Hitherto of the
third sort of duties.



Th^^ ought to cause us to prefer: the Lord our God in our hearts, and to
love and embrace him infinity above all creatures: so that every one of us
should resolutely say in ^^m else, as we read Ps. ^^, ^^. who^ have ^^n heaven
but thee and I have desired none to the earth with thee. And so forth, as it
follows to the end of the Psalm.

^^ought to cause us to do so indeed.

^^^^ion.
ANd what are the duties belonging likewise to this comfort of faith, that the
Lord our God is the most worthy and excellent; yea even infinitely worst high,
and excellent above all?

An^^^^
We ought, for this, to reverence him with most high reverence above al as much
as we may p^^^bly attain unto: according to that in the 89. Ps. v. 6. and 7.
Who is equal to the lord in heaven, and who is like the Lord among the sons
of the mighty? God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints, and
to be reverenced above all that are about him.

This also is very right, and meet, and our bounden duty.



The duties hereof are these.

First, that we deny our own natural and fleshly or worldly wisdom,
condemning it as mere folly and enmity against God.

Secondly, that we make it our wisdom, to be wise in the Lord, and according
to the instructions, limits, and bounds of his holy word.

Thirdly, that we judge reuerendly of all those counsels and ways, and works
of God, whereof we cannot sound the reason.

Fourthly, that while we walk in his holy ways, yea, or having erred from
them, do unfeignedly return, and repent and seek the Lord; we do hope for a
blessed issue, out of the most intricate and confused temptations, fears and
dangers, and even out of death it self And therefore also, (as a further fruit
hereof) that touching all such deliverances and blessings, we submit even our
most holy prayers, desires, and endeavors herein, to the most gracious wisdom
of God: as to him that knows best, both what, and when, and how, every thing
may prove best for us, and accordingly, will most graciously dispose of the
same.

Finally, that we acknowledge all wisdom (whatsoever is in men or Angels, or
in any creature else, according to their kind) to be the gift of our only wise
God: and that we glorify him in this behalf, using our wit and all other his
good gifts only to that end.

For the proof of the first of these duties, read Romans 8.7. The wisdom of
the flesh is enmity against God. The issue whereof is death, to those that
follow it, as it is in the former verse. And Pro. 14.12. Read also 1, Cor.
3.18. Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you seem to be wise in
this world, let him be a fool that he may be wise.

Explication and proof.
For the proof of the second duty, Read Deu. 4, 6, 7, 8, and Ier. 8. ver. 9.
and chapter 9. verses 23, 24. as before in the comfort.

For the third, read To. 11, 33. and Eccles. 3, 11. He has made every thing
beautiful in the time and season thereof, etc. Yet no man can find out the
work that God has wrought from the beginning even to the end. And chap. 7,
15, 16. etc.

For the proof of the fourth duty, read Psalm. 34.17, 18, 19.20. and 68.20.1.
Cor. 10.13. Eccles. 7, 28. Read also Psalm. 25.10. The way of the Lord, is
strength to the vtright man. In which respect, well says our learned
Interpreter, Via Domini est per invia. That is, God makes way where there is
no way.

For the last duty of giving God the glory, for the gift of all wisdom and
understanding: Read Exodus 31, 1, 2, 3.4.5.6. 1, Sam: 18.14. and Isai. 28.23.
etc. to the end of the Chapter. Read also Prou. 6.6.7.8. and cha. 30.24.25.26.
27.28. Ier 8.^. And yet more principally: Read Dan. 2, 19.20, 21, 22, 23 And in
the Ep: of Jude verse, 25. To God only wise our Savior be glory, and
majesty, and dominion, and power, both now and for ever, Amen.

The duties belonging furthermore, to the comfort of faith in the almighty
power of God, and generally touching the work of creation and government, we
do here of purpose omit, as we did before in the comforts: because we shall
afterward have a special occasion to consider of the same.

WE come to the duties of faith concerning the long suffering and patience, yea
the infinite mercy and goodness of the Lord our God.



By how much the mercies of the Lord our God are more abundant toward us, by
so much ought we, first of all, to take the more diligent heed that we do
not in any wise despise or lightly esteem them.

Secondly, that we do not distrust or despair of the same his mercies, as if
there were any defect or failing in them.

Thirdly, that we do not in any case presume or wax wanton against them,
albeit, God is easily entreated, and ready to forgive such as offend him.

Explication and proof.
These evils (even as very wicked extremities) are carefully to be avoided; yea
to be accursed, and abhorred of every true believer. For they are most contrary
to the nature of true faith.

Against the first whereof, read Romans 2.4. Despisest thou the riches of Gods
bountifulnes, and patience, and long suffering? We must take heed therefore,
that we be not like those graceless subjects, or children, which are ready to
despise the clemency and lenity of their gentle Princes and Parents.

Against the second, read Ier: Lamen. chapter 3.22. His compassions fail not. Read
also Isai. 1.18. and ch 40. 28. 29. 30. 31. And Rom: 5.20. Though sin
abounds, yet grace abounds much more. and 1, Tim: 1, 15.

Against the third, read Rom: 6, 1, etc. What shall we say then, shall we
continue still in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid. etc. Read Ep: Jude,
1, 4. Though God be perfectly merciful, yet we must know, that he is not so
merciful, but that he is just also.

We may not think God to have but one eye, as it were. As he has an eye of
mercy, so he has an eye of justice. As he knows how to pity humbled
sinners, and repenting sinners, etc: so will he surely punish severely, every
obstinate and presumptuous transgressour and rebel. He will deal well, with
these that are well disposed, etc: but he will deal roughly with those that be
froward, according to that which we read, Psalm. 18.25.26. This, has God
himself, with so loud a voice proclaimed of himself (as we saw before) that
we need to speak the less of it now.



Yes: it is on the contrary, the most bounden duty of every one of us,
whosoever do believe in the mercies of the Lord our God; to be so much the
more loath to displease him in any thing: yea rather to be so much the more
careful and studious to please him in all holy obedience; by how much he is
not only more loath to enter into judgment against us, but also more ready,
every way to do us the most and greatest good.

Explication and proof.
Thus general indeed, is the duty, or (as we may rather say) the dutifulnes of
faith, is the comfort of Gods abundant, yea infinite mercies. The mercies of
the Lord our God, ought to be esteemed of us, as the most precious and dainty
Jewel that we have to deal withal. And accordingly, they are most charily
and holily to be dealt with of us. For if we should profane the mercies of
God, what refuge or sanctua^ie should be safe for us to fly unto for rescue,
against the hot and fierce pursuit of his justice? For the proof whereof,
read Romans 2.4. The bountifulnes of God leads thee to repentance. And ch:
12.1.2. I beseech ye therefore brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye give
up your bodies, a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God, which is
your reasonable serving of God. And fashion not your selves like unto this
world, etc. Read also 2, Cor: 7, 1. and 1. Sam. 12.^^. and Isai, 5.1. etc.
Moreover, call to mind, Mat. 4.17. 1. John. 3.8.9.10. and Genesis 29.9 And Psalm.
1^0.4. Mercy is with thee (O Lord) that thou may be feared. And Psalm. ^.7.
In the multitude of thy mercy, I will come into thy house, and in thy fear
will I worship toward thine holy temple. Yea, we ought to serve the Lord with
ioyfulnes, and with a good heart for the abundance of all things: Deuteronomy. 28.47,
And Psalm. 119, 64. The earth, o Lord, is full of thy mercy, teach me thy
statutes.

But show you, yet something more particularly (if you can) what some of the
duties of faith are, which do belong to the comfort of Gods infinite mercy and
goodness toward us.

Seeing the Lord our God is so abundant in mercy to us, that he forgiueth us
all our sins, though never so great and grievous, so often as we do truly
repent and turn unto him: it is our duty, to be readily affected, to forgive
one another our mutual offenses, and both to admit and seek reconciliation,
how often and in how great matters soever we have ^ust occasion, even so far
as they concern one another. Moreover, seeing the Lord our God is in all
things beneficial to us, pitying and tendering us in all our necessities,
though we are altogether unworthy: it is likewise our duty, to our ability to
do good unto all, though specially, to those that be of the household of faith,
as God himself commands.

Finally, it is our most bounden duty to yield unto our God the whole glory and
praise of all his mercies: Yea even of those, which he makes us partakers of,
by any of his good and holy instruments.

Explication and proof.
It is most meet that we should do so indeed. For whosoever the instrument may
be, and howsoever we are to be in some measure thankful to them; Yet God is
the only author, and therefore the whole praise, must principally redound to
him alone: according to that which we read, 1. Cor. 3.21.22.23. Read also Psalm.
13.5. I trust in thy mercy, mine heart shall rejoice in thy salvation: I will
sing unto the Lord because he has dealt lovingly with me. And Ps. 22. ve. 22.
etc. Praise the Lord ye that fear him, etc. For he has not despised nor
abhorred the affliction of the poor, etc. and 27.6. and Ps. 30. verses, 11.12.
Thou have turned my mourning into joy: thou have loosed my sackcloth, and
girded me with gladness. Therefore shall my tongue praise thee, and not cease: O
Lord my God I will give thank^ to thee for ever. And Psalm. 71.14.15.16. Read
also Psa. 103.1. etc. and Psa. 116.1. etc. and Psa. 136. The whole Psalms is
singular to this purpose. And Isai 63.7. There are many other places like to
these.

Touching the other branches of this answer, read for the proof of mutual
forgiveness: Math. ch: 5.23. etc. and chapter 18.21, 22, etc. to the end of the
chap: And Luk: 17, 3, 4, and Col: 3, 12, 13. Now therefore as the elect of God,
holy and beloved, put on tender mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind, meekenes,
long suffering: forbearing the one the other, forgiving one another. etc.

And for mutual beneficence, read Gal. 6, verses, 9.10. Let us not be weary
of well doing, etc. And, while we have time, let us do good unto all, etc.

Thus much for the present, touching the duties of faith, from the comfort of
Gods mercies.

IT follows that you show, what duties belong to the comfort of faith, in
respect of the incorrupt and most perfect righteousness of the Lord our God:

The righteousness of God, notes his faithfulness in the certain and sure
performance of all his gracious promises: and therefore we are in this respect
most thankfully and dutifully to praise him. It notes also the severity of
his Justice in the punishment of the wicked: for the which we are not only to
praise him, but also to fear before him.

Finally, the righteousness of God, does note the whole vprightnes of his wi^
and nature, as the perfect rule and ground of all righteousness: and therefore
we are justly to account every word of God and all his ways and works, above
all exception, most perfectly just.

Explication and proof.
It is very just indeed, that we should so do. The just Lord (says the holy
Prophet) is in the midst of his City: he will do no iniquity: every morning
does he bring his judgment to light, he fails not: but the wicked will not
learn to be ashamed, Zeph. 2.5. Nevertheless (as the Lord in the same place
shows further by his holy Prophet) it is the duty of his people, to fear
him, because of his judgments, and to receive instruction, etc. Read also Isa.
chap. 26.9. And Psa. 52, 6. The righteous shall see it and fear. And Heb.
11.28, 29. Let us have grace, whereby we may so serve God, that we may please
him with reverence and fear. For even our God is a consuming fire.

I know, O Lord (says the holy Psalmist) that thy judgments are right, and
that thou have affl^^ted me justly. Or in truth (in fide) that is, no otherwise
then thou have forewarned in thy word.

That we are to praise God for his righteous judgments against the wicked,
read Psalm. 9.11.12. and 35.8.9. etc. and 44.5.6.7.8. and 47.11. etc. and 52.9.
and 38.10.11. and 64.9.10. and Psalm, 119.62. At midnight will I rise to give
thanks unto thee, because of thy righteous judgments. That is, for those
righteous laws of God, the breach whereof he justly punishes upon the wicked,
which band themselves together, to rob and spoil his faithful servants.

Touching the faithfulness of God, the which (as was answered) is sometimes meant
by the righteousness of God: It is written Ier. Lament. chap. 3, 23. His
compassions are renewed every morning. Great is his faithfulness. For the which
(as was answered in the beginning of the answer) we stand bound most
thankfully and dutifully to praise our God. And so we read Psalm. 89.5. Where,
often mention is made of the faithful covenant and oath of God. O Lord (says
the Prophet Ethan) even the heavens shall praise thy wondrous work, yea thy
truth in the congregation of Saints, etc.

But there are other duties, belonging to the comfort of faith in the constant
faithfulness and unchangeable truth of God. Of who^ it is written. 2, Tim: 2.13.
Though we believe not, yet abides he faithful, he cannot deny himself. And
Ti^. 1.2. God that cannot ^ie, has promised eternal life before the world
began. And To: 3. ve: 3.4. What though some did not believe? Shall their
unbelief make the faith of God without effect? God forbid. Let God be true,
and every man a liar, etc.



An^^er.
It requires earnestly of us, first that we depart from iniquity.

Secondly, that we join to our faith every other virtue of true godliness, and
the holy fruits an^ practi^e of them, to the warranting unto our own
consciences, the truth of our assurance touching our election and salvation.

Thirdly, that we remain firm and constant, in the faithful profession of
our hope, without wavering: as also in the practice of true love toward our
Christian brethren without ceasing.

Fourthly, that we do not only continue, but also grow and increase in all
holiness, continually.

Finally, the comfort of God his most steadfast fidelity and truth, requires of
every faithful believer, that he admit nothing, either interpretation of holy
Scripture, or prophecy, or miracle, or any pretended revelation, or assertion,
either of man or Angel, to the prejudice of any the least part of the divine
truth of Gods word, which is most perfect and entire in it self.

Explication and proof.
It is very true: every part of this your answer has express warrant from the
holy Scriptures of God.

For the proof of the first, read 2. Tim. 2, 19. where the Apostle making
mention of some of corrupt mind; that had erred from the faith, who also had
destroyed the faith of certain; he affirms nevertheless, that the foundation
of God remained sure, and both had and has still this seal; The Lord knows
who are his (that is, he so k^oweth them, that he will certainly preserve them,
to wit so many as shall truly ^or^ake their sins: according to that which
follows in the same text) let every one that calls on the name of Christ,
depart from iniquity.

For the proof of the second part, read, 2. Pet. 1, 5. etc. Therefore give ye
even all diligence thereunto: join moreover virtue with your faith, and with
faith knowledge and with know^edge temperance and patience, etc. And thus
brethren (says the Holy Apostle) use diligence to make your calling and
election sure: for if ye do these things ye shall never fall For by this means,
an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting
kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Notable to this purpose, is the profession of the holy Prophet, Ps. 119, v.
166. and v. 1^^. Where he ioineth this trust and longing after salvation, with
delight in obeying the law of God. Lord (says he) I have trusted in thy
salvation, and have done thy commandments. And again, I have longed for thy
salvation o Lord, and thy Law is my delight. To this purpose also, is that of
the Apostle Paul. Phil. 2.12. My beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in
my presence only, but now much more in my absence, so make ye an end of your
own salvation with fear and trembling. And Romans 11, 20, Thou stand by
faith, be not high minded, but fear, etc.

For the proof of the third part of the answer read Heb: 10, 22.23, 24, 25,
Let us draw near with a true heart, in assurance of faith, etc. And let us
keep the p^ofession of our hope without wavering: for he is faithful that
has promised. And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to
good works, not forsaking the fellowship which we have among our selves. etc.

Touching the 4. part, read 1 Thessalonians: 4.1. etc. Furthermore, we beseech you
brethren, and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that ye increase more and more,
as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk, and to please God, etc. And
chapt: 5.23.24. Now the very God of peace, sanctify you throughout; and I
pray God, that your whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be kept blameles,
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he which calls you,
who will also do it. Brethren pray for us.

For the proof of the last branche, read, Rom: 12.6. All Prophecy must be
according to the proportion of faith: Read also, Galat: 1.8 9. Though that we
or an Angel from heaven, preach unto you otherwise, then that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we said before, so say we now again
etc. And again. 2. These: 1.2.2. We beseech you, etc. Be ye not suddenly moved
from your mind, nor troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter:
etc. let no man deceive you by any means, etc. and verses, 9.10.11.12. And 1,
John 2.21. No lie is of the truth.

Hitherto of the duties of the particular comforts.



It is our duty, both generally, and in every particular respect, in most
solemn, reverend, and religious manner, to magnify the most glorious and
reverend name of the Lord our God.

Explication and proof.
This is indeed a general duty as it were, belonging both jointly and
severally, to all the former comforts of faith. The practice whereof, we may
read to our own instruction, and for our example, and imitation. 1. Chro:
29.10. etc. King David blessed the Lord before all the congregation: And David
said, Blessed be thou, O Lord God of Israel, our father for ever, and ever.
Thine O Lord, is greatness and power, and glory, and victory, and praise: For
all that is in heaven and in earth is thine: Thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and
thou excellest as head over all: Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou
raignest over all, and in thy hands it is to make great, and to give strength
unto all. Now therefore our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name.
Read also, Psalm: 47. and Ps: 72.18.19. and Ps: 89.52. and 106.48. Romans 16.25,
27. 1. Tim. 1.17. and ch: 6, 15, 26. and 1. Pet: 5.10.11. and in the Epistle of
Jude, verses 24.25. and Revel: 5.13.

Thus therefore, according to the holy exhortation, Psalm: 34.3. Let us every
one, for our own parts, praise the Lord with the rest of his faithful
servants: and let us all magnify his name together. Yea, let us, to this end,
abound in all particular fruits of true thankfulness, to his most plentiful
honor and praise, as much as we may possibly attain unto. For assuredly,
faith receiving the manifold and abundant comforts, of the manifold and
superabounding grace of God, it stands deeply bound to yield all the fruits
of thanks that may be: neither can it receive the grace of our most gracious
God in vain.

THe last point of our inquiry, now only remains, concerning this Article
of our faith in one only true God: that is, touching the danger of no^
believing in h m:



Such as will not believe in him to their comfort, neither walk dutifully
before him in the obedience of faith, as a fruit thereof: besides that they
shall want that unspeakable peace and comfort of conscience which faith
yields (the which of it self is a heavy punishment) they shall find in the
end that both the wisdom, and power, and justice of God: yea, that even God
himself, and all that he is in his eternal and infinite nature, will be armed
against them, to their everlasting and most woeful destruction.

Belief in one (...) God, three d^stinct (...)
It shall certainly come so to pass indeed, The Danger of not believing.
If ye believe not (says the Prophet (...) chap: ^. verse 9.) sure^y ye
shall not be established. And further, Ier: chapt: Ex^^^cation (...).
17.^. Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and
withdraws his heart from the Lord. For he shall be like the heath in the
wilderness, etc. And yet further. Psalm: 73.27.28. Lo (says the Prophet) they
that withdraw themselves from thee shall perish, thou destroyest all them that
go a whoring from thee. And again Psalm: 78.21.22. Wrath came upon Israel,
because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his help. For they
perished in the wilderness, chiefly because of this their sin. Likewise Hebr:
10, 38, 39. They that withdraw themselves from faith, do it to their
perdition. Finally Reuelat: 21.8. The fearful and unbelieving, shall have
their portion in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death. And if, moreover and beside all these testimonies, we would see
a very evident (and as one would say) a pregnant judgment of God, upon
unbelief: Read 2. Kings. 7.19.20. The Prince which answered the man of God,
and said: Though the Lord would make windows in the heaven, could it come so to
pass. That is, could corn be so cheap in Samaria, as thou have said? To whom
the Prophet answered. Behold thou shall see it with thine eyes, but thou shall
not eat thereof. And so it befell him: for the holy story testifies, that
the people preas^ing to buy the corn, trod upon him in the gate, and that
so he died.

From the says of this Article, (as it is recorded in Ecclesiastical
histories) those Heretics have dangerously and damnablie erred, who are
condemned by the name of Tritheites: who are said to have held, that the three
persons of the Dei^e, are three several and separated Gods: and the
Triformiani, who, of the oath r side, held that they were only three forms
and differences in one G^d, as it were accidentally belonging to God, without
any personal s^b^istence.

To c^^cl^de, all that believe not rightly in the one only true God, (as ha^^
be^e declared from the holy Scriptures of God) both Atheists, Epicures, and
World^ings, etc. They have the Devil for their God; they make their belly
their God: their riches their God, etc. whose end (no doubt) shall be most
^uefull, and their judgment sleeps not.

Wherefore, we earnestly calling upon our good God, for his most holy and
he^uenly grace, to preserve our hearts and minds in all faithfulness and good
duty to him: let us with all our power, mightily strive against infidelity,
and in all holy wisdom, circumspectly avoid and abhor all heretical
o^inion and fancy. Our good God, of his infinite mercy, grant it unto us,
and to (...) and every one of his elect children, for our Lord Jesus Christ his
sake Amen.

Thus fair of these first words of the Creed. I believe in God. From the
which has been declared, how we and all true Christians, are to believe in
God, as one only in his most Divine nature, or spiritual Essence and being,
together with the comforts and duties thereof.

Belief in one only God, three distinct Persons.
LEt us now come to that which was further answered, that the Articles of our
faith, do teach us, that we are to believe so in God to be one only in
nature: that we hold him nevertheless, to be three in a most holy and
glorious distinction of persons. And first, how can you make it plain, that
this is the true meaning and intent,

A^swere
Because after the name of our one only true God, once only set down, they
do thenceforth make express mention, both of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost: ^ea and that also in the same form of words and
profession, as if every one should say: I believe in the Son, and in the
holy Ghost, as well as in the Father: the which verily, we might in no wise
do, unless either of them were very true God, The Ground and meaning of it.
as well as the Father.

It is very true. We must only trust in the true and everliving God, and in
no other, Explication and proof.
either person, or thing whatsoever: according to that we read. 1. Timoth.
4.10. And according to that which was lately alleged out of the Prophet Ierem:
chapt: 17.5. And as we may perceive by the practice of the servants of God in
their prayers. etc. Psa: 42.2. Read also Psalm: 146.3. Put not your trust in
Princes, etc. And Ier: 3.23. Truly the hope of the hills (that is, of the
Idols accustomed to be worshipped, in such places of Idol worship) is but
vain, or (the hope) of the multitude of mountains. But in the Lord our God,
is the health of Israel. Wherefore seeing (as by the grace of God it shall be
plentifully declared from the holy Scriptures) we are to believe both in the
Father and also in the Son, and in the holy Ghost: It follows necessarily,
that the one as well as the other, is very true God. And therefore also, it is
even of it self manifest and clear: that when we say, I believe in God the
Father, our meaning is, not that God is only a Father. For then where were the
Son, and what should become of the holy Ghost. But our meaning is, and so
ought to be, that God is so a Father, and wholly very true and perfect God:
that yet the Father is no more the only God, then is the Son, neither the
Father and the Son, more then the holy Ghost. For every one is whole God, and
yet all three are but one God: as has been allreadie, and shall again further
be confirmed.

Person: what may we answer to this?

Insomuch as mention is made of three, necessity of interpretation requires,
that we shou^^ use this word Person, as well for the discovery and
confutation of Heresy, as for the help of our understanding, to conceive and
believe rightly this most high Mystery: because we have no other word, more
fit and familiar, to express that very true Subsistence, which each of the
three, has distinct from either of the other, albeit every one, and all of
them, are really and truly but one and the same Divine essence, or being and
nature.

Explication and proof.
It is ve^ilie so indeed. For seeing mention is made of three, it may justly
be demanded, what three they are? whereunto we may not answer, that they are
three Gods, for that is contrary to the doctrine of faith, in one only true
God. What are they then? Are they three Divine natures or beeings? We may not
say so, least we should at the least seem to say as much as before, that they
are three several Gods. What shall we say that they are then? Are they only
three diverse Names, to express one and the same thing to our capacite,
without the truth of any distinct Subsistence? This may in no wise be affirmed:
for it is slatte contrary to the holy Scriptures. What shall we say then, to
those that shall urge us to declare, what the meaning of our faith is? It is
necessary that we say, that God the FATHER, God the SON, and God the HOLY
GHOST, in whom we believe, are three distinct Persons; as well to express
the true meaning of the holy Scriptures, concerning this most high Mystery; as
also to defend the truth thereof, against all misconceiuing, and against every
profane or heretical gainsayer Of the which there are many sorts, as we are
hereafter to note, in the convenient place of this our inquiry.

Person, so sit for this purpose?

Because the word Person, does to the familiar and common understanding of
every man, not only note that thing which is verily and in truth to be
distinguished from every other: but also that, whereby the same thing, may be
most lively so distinguished and discerned of them.

Explication and proof.
It is most certainly true. For the word Person, does in the vulgar
construction and conceit, not only signify a man himself alone, as when we
say, there were about you. Persons at the Sermon: etc. But also it signifies
that, whereby every man may be most certainly discerned from other.

That is to say, his favor, or countenance: and his stature, The Ground and
meaning of it.
but chiefly his favor or countenance: as we use to say of such or such, that
they are beautiful persons, comely persons, goodly persons of flesh and
blood, etc.

The same is the use of the Greek word (Prosopon,) which we, in this mystery
and otherwise, do often english by the word Person. For 2. Cor: 1.11. the
Apostle Paul requires, that many persons, (that is, many Christians both men
and women) should give thanks to God, for the deliverance of himself and
Timotheus, from a very imminent death.

There might other such like places be alleged. But most usually, and properly
it signifies the face of a man, whereby (as was said) every one is most
apparently discerned from other, as Matthew: 6.17. Wash thy face. And cha: 17.2.
the face of our Savior Christ did shine as the Sun. And Act: 6.15. the face
of Saint Stephen, was before the Council as the face of an Angel: that is,
having a most comely grace, full of all reverend grauite, etc. Read also James,
1.^3. and often in the new Testament. Hence also, and that more near to our
present purpose, it does metaphorically, or in way of a speech borrowed to an
other purpose then it is properly applied, signify a more clear
manifestation of that which is in it self more secret, and hidden. As for
example, the face of God, notes the brightness, and glory of God, so far as
it pleases his divine Majesty to reveal himself: according to that Matthew:
18.10. where our Sau: Christ says, that in heaven the Angels see the face of
his Father, which is in heaven. And as we read, 2. Cor: 4.6. God that
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, is he that has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face,
(that is,) in the revelation of Jesus Christ: to wit, by the preaching of the
Gospel, the which does manifest unto us, the glory of Gods grace and mercy
represented (as it were) in the sweet face and countenance of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST. And as we read, 1. Cor: 13.12. the same Apostle affirms, that we
shall see face to face: that is, we shall have more clear knowledge of God
there, then now we have, or can possibly have here.

The same is the signification of the Hebrewe word (Panim:) according to that
Genes: ch: 32.30. I have seen GOD (says Iaakob) face to face: that is to say,
appearing most graciously and familiarly unto him. And Psalm: 27.8.9. And psalm:
1^^.4. By the face of God, is meant God himself, in respect of his man
festation of himself among his people, in the holy Temple, etc. And in this
respect, our Savior Christ is called the Angel of the face of God, Isai:
63.9. And the Angel in whom is the Name of God. Ezod: 23.21.

But more properly, the same word signifies the face of a man, and
Synecdochicallie, the whole man or Person: as Genes: cha: 32.20. the face of
Esau, and the face of Iaakob, do note Esau and Iaakob themselves. And chap:
46.30. The face of Joseph is mentioned to express the person of Joseph. And 2.
Kings, chapt: 3.14. The face of King Iehoshaphat, is put for the person of
Iehoshaphat. Whence also, it is not less fitting (as we may perceive) that
the Hebrew writers, treating of the distinction of persons in the Divine
nature, should (as they do) call and express them by this word (Phanim) then
we do, by our word Person.

M^^n^^s (...) verit: E^. ^^ cap: ^.
So then, according to the use of this word Person, both in our own language,
and also in the Latin, Greek, and Hebrewe tongues; our one only true God is
called of the Church of God three Persons: even because God himself has,
according to this manner of his Being or Subsistence, made him self more
clearly and comfortablie known to his Church, then otherwise they could ever
have conceived of him.

And verily, the doctrine of the holy Trinity of Persons, in the unity of
the most sacred Godhead or Deity, it is the only lively vnvailing, as it
were, and discovering of the glorious face of God unto us. Yea so, as no doubt,
he is not truly known and believed in of any, to whom this mystery is not
in some good measure truly understood and believed.

Nevertheless, even herein, according to the most reverend greatness and
glory of so high a mystery, it becomes every one of us, to humble the
very Spirit of our minds, with most humble and low humiliation, before the
footestoole of the Throne of Grace: and to take diligent heed, that we do not
carnally conceive or fancy in our thoughts, any thing unworthy the most
glorious and incomprehensible Majesty of God. For all be it the divine
Persons in God, are truly, and in very deed so perfectly distinct, that
the one neither is, nor can be the other: that is to say, neither can the
Father be the Son, nor the Son the Father, nor the holy Ghost either of
them both, no more then of any three men, one of them can be personally the
other. Yet we must in no wise think, the Persons in the Godhead, to be
severed as diverse persons are separated, in one and the same nature of man.
For as the Divine nature is infinite, so are also the Persons, and therefore
there cannot be any partition, or division and separation, betwixt them.

Neither may we suffer our selves once to think, that the Divine nature has
a natural and visible face, like to the face of Man: for God is a Spirit, that
is, (he is a spiritual and invisible Nature) as has been declared before.

Vultus inac^canimi. The countenance is a representation of the mind
Only thus much are we to apprehend and conceive in our minds by comparison,
that like as the face of a man, is that whereby he may be discerned from other:
yea and further, that as the excellent countenance of a man, is a resemblance
of that excellent Spirit which is in him, above any other earthly creature: so
the Doctrine and Revelation of the Trinity of Persons, in one and the same
Divine nature of God, does make God most clearly and comfortablie known to
his people, as one infinitely unlike to all false Gods or Idolles, etc.

For he is that God, who being Eternal and Almighty, etc: is not only
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: but also a Father to us, for the Sons
sake, according as the holy Ghost, both from the Father and the Son bears
a most effectual witness to our souls and spirits. And this is unto us, as
the face of God, most comfortablie shining upon us.

To this end also, let us diligently observe, that God is not called a Father,
only in way of comparison: to signify his love toward us, as tender and dear
as the love of a natural Father here on earth toward his natural child.

But he is a heavenly Father, in respect of his eternal Son most
naturally, and in all perfection of truth. And accordingly the Son of God is
the natural and only Son of the Father. And the holy Ghost likewise, is
naturally, and in all perfection of truth and substance, the Spirit of them
both: far above and beyond all that we, or any Angel of heaven can
thoroughly conceive.

So then, whatsoever similitude we do allege one way or other, to express
this singular and pierelesse Mystery, we must of necessity acknowledge, that
there is in the things themselves, an infinite dissimilitude also: so that the
similitude, can, but only in some respect, shadow out that, which the holy
Ghost alone, must cause us to understand, so far as it is meet for us to
understand; even far above that, which any similitude, of it self can teach
us.

If we might behold in any outward representation, the nature of God; whether
should we rather cast our eyes, then upon the sweet face of the Son of God
INCARNATE: in whom GOD has revealed his glory, as it were with open face, as
we read, 2. Cor: 3.18? And yet, as experience has showed, the natural face,
or outward Person of our Savior Christ, (if we may so speak) could not
suffice to the manifesting hereof, no not to those, who were daily conversant
with him.

For many looked upon him bodily, while he was here on earth, who by that
outward view, knew God never the more spirituallie.

It was his holy Doctrine, and his most gracious and Divine works, and his
excellent virtues, which caused the face and glory of God, to shine forth from
him, unto those only, who had the eyes of their minds opened so to behold
him. And this was that, which moved the Apostle Paul to say: Hence forth know
we no man after the flesh, yea though we had known Christ after the flesh,
yet now hence forth know we him no more. And much rather, would the Apostle
refuse to know Christ, and the holy Trinity, by any bodily, and dead
pictures, or images of them by Crucifixe or any other way.

And as for similitudes borrowed from any spiritual thing, the soul of man,
made in the image of God, may seem of all other things that we have occasion
to be best acquainted withal, to be most like; in that, it being a spiritual
substance, is only one, though it have diverse distinct properties,
understanding and reason, memory, will, and affection: yet how infinite odds
there is, it is easy to understand. For the soul of man, though it be
spiritual and immortal, yet it is a created substance. And the qualities
thereof are created qualities in the soul, and not the soul it self, either
any one, or all of them together. What then? We must of necessity content
our selves, and our souls, so to know, both the nature of God, and the
Persons of the Godhead perfitlie distinct in the same: that we may, as the
truth it self requires, acknowledge, that in the full perfection of it, the
Divine nature is infinitely, above the weak capacity or understanding,
either of us, or of any other creature.

Wherefore, we, most humbly, and thankfully acknowledging the unspeakable
mercy of God, for that measure of the revelation of this most high and
inco^prehensible Mystery, which it has pleased him to reveal unto us in his
holy Scriptures; and holding our selves fast and Religiously to them: Let us
in like humble manner, beseech our most good and gracious God, to vouchsafe to
give us of his grace, that we, soberlie captiuating all similitudes, yea and
reason it self, to the obedience of Faith, whose nature is to believe, that
which is above all natural sense and reason, whatsoever has witness and
warrant from the word of God: let us, (I say) as on the one hand, cast away all
ignorance and neglect of due search after the due knowledge hereof; so on the
other hand, let us in like manner, beware of all presumptuous and vain
curiosity; lest preassing too far, we be confounded and overwhelmed of the
brightness and glory of it.

For like as our bodily eyes, are not able to look directly upon the seat,
or as it were center of brightness, which is in the Sun: no more, nay much
less, are we able, with the eyes of our minds, to behold the infinite
brightness, and most glorious Majesty of the Lord God, the Father of all
Light, as he is in himself: whether we look to the unity of his Divine
nature, or to the distinction of the Persons in the same. According as it is
said, No man can (so) see God and live. Exod^ 33.20. 1. Timoth: 6.16. Read also
Genes: 16.23. Trem: interpret: And Judges, chap: 13.22. where it is recorded,
that the Parents of Samson were afraid they should die, as if they had seen
God, above that had been meet for sinful creatures to see him.

God, who set bownds for the people, which they might not pass toward the
mountain, at the giving of the law. Exodus: 19.12.13. Neither would have the
arc of the Testimony, commonly looked upon, uncovered. Numb: 4. verse 5.
etc. 20. and 1. Sam: 6.19. The same our God, no doubt, cannot like, that any
should vnreuerendlie prye into this most holy secreat, concerning his own
Majesty and Divine nature: with a mind to see further into it, then it has
pleased himself to reveal the same.

We may most justly say of this knowledge of the Divine nature of God, and
of the manner or order of the Being thereof, as touching the Existence of them
internallie, or (ad intra) as the learned speak: to wit, how the Father is
of himself and of no other, eternally without all beginng; the Son
eternally begotten of the Father, before all time; and the holy Ghost
proceeding from them both, and yet nevertheless, being always Essentiallie
present, in and with them both: we may (I say) justly determine of this
knowledge, according to that we read, Psalm: 139.6. It is too wonderful for
us: it is so high, that we cannot attain unto it.

We know not the way of the wind (or as some translate, of the Spirit) to
wit, how it comes into man, nor how the bones do grow in the womb of
her that is with child: Eccles: 11.5. nor how the soul of man, dead through
sin, is again regenerated and renewed within him. John. 3.7. much less can
we understand, what the eternal generation of the Son of God, or the
eternal proceeding of the holy Ghost, do mean.

Nevertheless, as touching the manner of the working of God externallie, or (
ad extra as they say) the Father by the Son, and both the Father and the
Son by the holy Ghost, and the holy Ghost from them both (whether in the
works of the common creation and government of them all, or more specially,
in the special work of the redemption of the elect children of God) this
knowledge from outward effects, declared from the holy Scriptures, and
testified by the holy Ghost, inlightening and certifying our minds, and
consciences thereof; it is, through the grace of God, so familiar, and so full
of comfort, that the more we understand and taste it (the which no doubt, we
may do with daily increase so long as we live) the more may we, with holy
reverence and boldness, even to the same end, look into it: according to
that Ephesians: 2.18. By him (that is, by the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ)
we have an entrance unto the Father by one Spirit. And chapt: 3.12. etc. By
faith in him we have boldness and entrance with confidence. Read all that
follows, to the end of the Chapter. But of the comforts more afterward.

Person of the blessed TRINITY, in the one only most holy and Divine nature
of God?

A Person in the Divine nature, is an eternal Subsistence, the which having
the whole Deity or Godhead (as it were in common, or rather in a most holy
Communion) the one equally as well as the other: it is nevertheless, distinct
from either of the other, in way of a supernatural relation, and according to
the Divine manner or order of their Being and working; only by one
propriety, which it has incommunicable to either of the other.



The FATHER, who is the first Person in the holy Trinity, though not the
first in time or dignity, but only in the order and manner of Being, as was
answered even now; he has eternally, and without all beginning, begotten the
Son, and so has, both taken to himself, and also communicated to the Son,
the whole nature or Essence of the Deity.

The SON of GOD, is the second Person of the same most holy and blessed
TRINITY, eternally, and without all beginning, begotten of the Father; and so
has eternally received the whole Deity, or Essence of the Godhead from the
Father.

The HOLY GHOST, is the third Person, eternally proceeding, both from the
Father and also from the Son; and so has the whole essence of one and the
same DEITY, eternally and coequallie communicated to him from them both.

Explication and proof.
This is indeed the true and only distinction of the Persons, in the one only
and undivided Nature or essence of God. For as touching the Deity or Godhead
it self, it neither begets, nor is begotten, neither yet proceeds. The
distinction therefore, by the proprieties rehearsed, it does only concern the
Persons of the Divine Nature. And although the Divine nature belongs equally
(as has been observed) to every one of the Persons: For the Father is God,
the Son is God, and the holy Ghost is God, not three Gods, but one only God,
one in nature, one in wisdom, one in power, one in will, one in glory: (for
the Father is the Father of glory, Ephesians: 1.17. the Son, the Lord of glory.
1. Cor: 2.8. John: 1, 14. and ch: 12, 41. and ch: 17.5. and Heb: 1.^. Iam: 2.1.
and 2. Pet. 1.17. Matt: 16.27. and cha: 25.31. the holy Ghost the Spirit of
glory. 1. Pet: 4.14. and 2. Cor: 3.17.18. so that the Father, who is the God
of glory, Act: 7.2. and gives his glory to no other. Isaia: 48.11. Yet he
does after a sort, give it to the Son, and to the holy Ghost: that is, he is
well pleased that they should have it, because they are one with him)
howesoeuer no one Person can be any of the other. The Father cannot be the
Son, or the holy Ghost: the Son cannot be the holy Ghost, or the Father:
neither can the holy Ghost be either the Father or the Son, as was said
before.

But of this, that the Father is very true God, and consequently eternal and
everliving, infinite in wisdom, power, mercy, justice, etc: and that the
Son is so also; and likewise the holy Ghost; we shall, by the grace of God,
make it plain, in the handeling of the several Articles of our belief, the
which do concern every one of them.

In the mean while, let us make some further search after those grounds of
holy Scripture, which God, of his infinite goodness and mercy, has vouchsafed
us, for our assured direction and warrant, touching the things allreadie
affirmed by us.

Persons?

In the 5. chap: of the first epist: of the Apostle John, verse, 7. There are
three (says the holy Apostle) which bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the holy Ghost: and these three are one. And in the Gospel,
according to the same Apostle. chapt: 10.30. I and my Father (says our Savior
himself) are one.

Explication and proof.
Read also cha: 17.21.22. where our Savior Christ prays for all true
believers, that they may be one, as he and the Father is one: the Father in
him, and he in the Father, etc. And as the Father and the Son is one, so is
the holy Ghost one, with and in them both: according to the first testimony,
alleged in the answer, out of the 3. epi. of John. For there it is said, that
all three are one: not only consenting in one, as it is said in the next
verse, that the three which bear witness on earth; to wit, the Spirit, and the
water, and the blood, are (Eis to en,) that is agreeing in one: but the Father,
and the Word, (that is the Son, as he is called in the Gospel, ch: 1.1.
etc.) and the holy Ghost, are one: (En eifi:) that is, they are naturally, and
Essentiallie one, and consequently also, most perfectly consenting in one. It
is evident therefore, by the testimony of the holy Apostle: that God being
but one in Nature, is nevertheless three Persons.

This distinction of Persons in one God, may also be proved from the holy
Scriptures of the old Testament: partly by such testimonies, wherein God is
spoken of, in the plural number: as Genes: ch: 1.1. Bara Elohim. The Gods he
created the heavens, etc.

And likewise verse 26. and ch: 3.5. and ch: 20.13. and chapter 35.7. Job: 35.10.
and Ps: 149.2. Laetetur Israel in facientibus ipsum. Let Israel rejoice in
them that made him. Deuteronomy: 4.^. Joshua. 24.19. Elohim quedoshim hu. The Gods
he is the holy ones. Eccl: 5.7. Gebohim, he is the high ones. And Ier: 10.10.
Jehovah Elohim, hu Elohim chaijm (that is) the Lord Gods, he is the living
Gods. And 2. Sam: 7.23. Read also Isai: 6.8. and chapt: 54.5. Thus, the
distinction of Persons, may be proved, partly by the usual phrase, or form of
speech in the holy language. And partly, it may be proved by such testimonies,
as do, in our own translation, make more express mention of the Persons: as
Psalm: 33.6. By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host
of them by the breath of his mouth.

That is, as Iunius interprets: Pater in filio per spiritum. The father in
the son by the spirit. And Isai. 63.9.10. In all their troubles he was
troubled; and the Angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his
mercy he redeemed them, and he did bear and carry them always continually.
But they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit: etc. Haec tota narratio (vt idem
Interpres) est in primis euidens si qua in vetere Testamento, ad confirmandum
doctrinam Christianam de vno Deo and tribus Personis. This whole narration (as
says the same Interpreter) is as evident, as any in the old Testament, to
prove the Christian doctrine, concerning one GOD and three Persons. Likewise
Hagg: 2.5.6. Yet now be of good courag^ o Zerubbabel, etc. for I am with you
says the Lord of Hosts. According to the word that I couenanted with you,
when ye came out of Egypt: so my spirit shall remain among you, fear ye not.
Est hic locus de sancta Trinitate euidentissimus. This place (say Trem: and
Iunius) is a most evident place concerning the holy Trinity.

But it will peradventure be objected of some, that in none of these places, no
nor in that of the Apostle John, where he says: There are three which bear
witness in heaven, there is any mention of the word Person.

Persons?

In the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, verse. 3, the Apostle
says of our Savior Christ, the Son of God; that he is the brightness of the
glory, and the engraven form of the Person of the Father. Wherefore, seeing
the Father is a person, in a respect or relation to the Son; so is the Son
in a like respect or relation to the Father: and consequently also, the holy
Ghost is a person, in a like respect and relation to them both.

Explication and proof.
There is in deed, the same reason of all three persons mutually, which is of
any one, to either of the other. And touching the Son, of whom it is said,
that he is the engraven form of the person of the Father: the Son himself
our Lord Jesus Christ, says in this respect, that he which knows the Son,
knows also the Father: John, ch: 14.7. etc. If ye had known me (says our
Savior Christ) ye should have known the Father also, etc. I am in the Father
and the Father is in me, etc. Read also chap. 8.19.

Only it must be confessed, that the Apostle in the place of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, uses the word Hypostasis, the which, word for word, is a
Subsistence: but assuredly, he uses it altogether in the same sense, as we
commonly use the word person, as it is rightly translated, according to the use
of all true Christian Churches. For these words Hyphistamenon, Hypostasis,
Prosopon, with the Christian Grecians, are the same in common interpretation
with our English word Person, as it is used of us from the Latin word Persona,
in such sense as it is applied of all Latin Divines, to the opening of this
mystery. Of this therefore, for this present, enough.

Show now likewise, what ground you have, that the Persons in the Deity, are
to be distinguished: not only in the relation of words, but also really as we
may say, and in respect of the order of the Being of the divine nature it
self.



At the baptism of the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, Math. chap. 3.
verses, 16.17. God the Father, did actually make it most clear: in that, by
audible voice from heaven, he pronounces of the Son, then upon earth in the
nature of man: This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. And the holy
Ghost, in the likeness of a Dove, descended and lighted upon our Savior Christ
the son of God, at the very same time.

This is a lively proof, and declaration of it, in very deed.

by proceeding?

In the 14. verse of the first Chapter of the Gospel according to John, our
Savior Christ the Son of God, is called the only begotten Son of the
Father, full of grace and truth. And chap. 3. verse, 16. God so loved the
world, that he has given his only begotten Son. etc. And Heb. chap. 1,
verse, 5, 6. Unto which of the Angels said he that is, God the Father) at any
time: Thou art my Son, this day begat I thee? And again: I will be his
Father, and he shall be my Son. And again, When he brings his first
begotten Son into the world, he says: And let all the Angels of God worship
him.

Explication and proof.
Here it is plain, that the Father has begot, and that the Son is the only
begotten of the Father. The which generating or begetting, that it was
eternal, and before all beginning, we read Prou. 8, 22. etc. The Lord says
wisdom, even the eternal wisdom of God, the everliving Son of the
Father) he has possessed me in the beginning of his way: I was before his
works of old. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning and before the
earth. When there were no depthes was I begotten, etc. And must it not needs
be, that the Son of God is begotten in special manner (that is after a most
divine manner) seeing it cannot agree to the Angels of God, though they be the
chief of all his creatures? Neither is it against the eternity of this
generating and begetting of the Son of God, that he says: This day begat I
thee. For these words, concern only the manifestation of the Son of God, in
the nature of man: either typicallie in King David, who was a figure of him, or
properly by his own appearance in the flesh, in the due time and season
thereof. But the former words: Thou art my Son (as they are referred to our
Savior Christ) they are spoken of the eternity of the Son of God before all
worlds: according to the witness of the Son of God himself, John 17.24.
Father thou louedst me before the foundation of the world.

No^ show likewise some testimony, for proof of the eternal proceeding of
the holy Ghost:



In the 1^. chapter of John, verse, 26. our Savior Christ certifieth us, that
the Father sends the holy Ghost in his name. And chap. 15. the ^6. verse, he
says further, When the Comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from
the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds of the Father, he shall
testify of me.

Explication and proof.
This sending and coming of the holy Ghost in time for our benefit and comfort,
is but an effect (as it were) of that natural proceeding of the holy Ghost,
which is eternal before all time, and from everlasting to everlasting, without
all limitation of time. Nevertheless, we may from hence, evidently discern
the eternity of the proceeding of the holy Ghost. For that which is h s
natural property now, or ever was at any time heretofore, it is his natural
property still: and so was before beginning, and shall for ever so continue.

Now that it has been always, the natural property of the holy Ghost, to
proceed from God: it may appear, both from the beginning of the works of the
Creation, and also from the perpetual government of the same. From the
beginning, Genesis, 1. verse, 2. The Spirit of God moved upon the waters: or as
the Hebrew word (merachepheth) signifies, he did support the waters, and even
the whole indigested substance of the world, as being the mighty arm and
power of God: or, as we may say, the wing of God spreading it self over it,
in a tender and cherishing manner. And further, for the continual supporting,
and preserving of all creatures, after their Creation, we read Genesis, 6.3,
My Spirit shall not always strive for these men: to wit, about their
preservation, as hitherto it has done, seeing they will not be reclaimed from
their extreme wickedness, etc.

Read also Job. 26.13. The Spirit of God has garnished the heavens. And chap.
32.8. The inspiration of the almighty gives understanding. And Psalm. 104. ^0.
and Psalm. 33.8. Read also John. 20.22. Our Savior Christ breathed on his
Disciples when he gave them the holy Ghost. Now the same holy Ghost, is both
the Spirit of the Father, and also of the Son our Lord Jesus Christ.
Wherefore, even as God the Father, at the beginning of the creation of man, did
by his Spirit brea^h natural life into him. Genesis, 2, 7. so did the Son of
God our Lord Jesus Christ by his Spirit: that is, by the same holy Ghost,
breath the spiritual grace of life and holiness, into those, whom he made
his special and most choice instruments, for the rectifying and reforming of
the wicked and crooked world. But of this more afterward.

I believe in that one only God, who is three distinct Persons?

The meaning of them is this: I believe that in the one only divine nature, or
essence and Being of God, there are neither more nor fewer, then three
Persons, even the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. I believe also, that
they being coessentiall, coeternall, and coequall: have equally, and eternally
consented, both in decreeing before all time, and also in performing in due
season, all the works, not only of creation and government over all the
world: but also, (and that in a singular manner) the most wonderful work of
the redemption, and salvation, of all and every one of the elect of God from
the beginning of the world, to the end of the same.

The truth and certainty of these things, may partly be discerned from those
Scriptures which have been already alleged: and they shall (by the grace of
GOD) be more fully confirmed hereafter, when we shall come to the handeling
of the several Articles concerning every Person.



God the Father, of his most free and unspeakable, yea even of his
incomprehensible love, has given his only begotten Son, to abase himself,
by taking our nature, by subiecting himself to the law, and by dying the
death, yea even the most cursed death of the cross, for our sins.

God the Son, according to the same most gracious good will and pleasure of
the Father, most willingly yielded to the same.

God the holy Ghost (by whose most holy conception, the Son of God took our
humane nature, and by whom he offered up himself an everlasting sacrifice, to
satisfy the wrath of God for our sins, and to purge our consciencs from dead
works to serve the living God) he, according to the good will and pleasure of
them both, does likewise, of his own most gracious accord, seal up the whole
fruit of the death of the Son of God, to our endless salvation and comfort.

Explication and proof.
It is very true, which you have answered. For although in some respects
(according to the Articles of our belief) the Father is more expreslie
acknowledged, the Creator of all things: the Son, the Redeemer: and the holy
Ghost, the sanctifier of the Church of God. Yet the whole Trinity, does so
wholly consent in all the works, both of the creation and government of the
world, and also in the work of the redemption and salvation of the Church:
that the Father does nothing, either in the one, or in the other, without the
Son, but by and with the Son; neither do the Father and the Son any
thing, but by and with the holy Ghost: as Genesis 1.26. Let us make man in our
image, etc. And Ioh. 5.17. My Father (says our S: Ch:) works hitherto, and I
work. And verses, 19.20. The Son can do nothing of himself, save that he
sees the Father do: for whatsoever things he does, The Promise.
the same things does the Son also. etc. And Zech: 4.6. Neither by an army
nor strength: but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts. Read also Luke, 4.1.
and verses, 14.18. But of these things likewise, we shall have further
occasion to speak again more fully, afterward.



Our Christian baptizing into the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost by the commandment of our Savior Christ: it is from God himself, as it
were the broad seal of the Kingdom of heaven, to confirm the holy promise
and covenant hereof unto us, and to so many as shall believe, under the warrant
of them all.

It is true indeed. This form of our Christian baptism into the name of the
holy Trinity, Explication and proof.
does so verily assure us, that it is the good will and holy pleasure of GOD
our heavenly Father, even for his Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and
through the sanctification of the holy Ghost, to take and adopt us for his
children: that we may after a sort, sensibly feel and handle the undoubted
certainty of one covenant made by them all. Wherefore, like as it is written
of circumcision, that it was unto the believing Jews, a seal of that
righteousness which they had by faith, Romans 4.11: so may we, assuredly say of
our Christian baptism (the which is unto us the same, which that was to them)
that it is a most gracious and authentical seal of our justification, through
faith, by the consent of the whole Trinity.

Yea, so assured a co^firmatio^ hereof is baptism, that the Apostle Peter
doubts not to affirm, that we are already saved thereby. And so we are
indeed, as touching the blessed entrance into the state of grace and salvation:
(I speak of all such, as do by the grace of God, truly believe and trust in
that grace, which by the will of God himself, is signified and sealed thereby)
yea and we may also, and ought of duty, by the virtue of the promise of God,
to be as verily persuaded of our full and perfect salvation in due season yet
to come, as it we ^a^ presently the full fruition of it: 1. Pet. 3.21. Read
also: John, cha. 14. verses, 1^.16. etc.

This promise therefore, must needs be exceedingly comfortable, according as
the benefit is most singular and great. The which comfort of the promise, is
the next point of our inquiry, according to our order propounded.

Show therefore in the next place, some proof of holy Scripture, for that
comfort which we may justly take, in the most blessed testimony and consent
which the holy Trinity gives, concerning the promise of our redemption,
justification, and salvation.



In the 5. Chapter of the first Epistle of John, verses, 9.10.11. the holy
Apostle sets out the greatness of this comfort, by a familiar comparison.

If says h^ we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater:
for this is the witness of God, which he testified of his Son. He that
believes in the Son of God, has the witness in himself: he that
believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believed not the record
which GOD has witnessed of his Son. And this is the record, that God has
given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.

Explication and proof.
Here is in deed a very plain, and familiar demonstration of it. For seeing
among men, the confirmation of every matter, is established by the testimon^e
of two or three witnesses: Deuteronomy. 19.15. Math. 18.16. 2. Cor. 13.1: infinitely
much more, ought the threefold divine witness of the most holy Trinity from
heaven, prevail with us, to the establishing and confirming of our faith, in
the most certain truth of the promise of God. And the rather also, are we to
comfort our hearts in this assurance, The Co^forts and benefits.
because the Lord our God, every way tendering our weakness, has added to
this threefolde witness in heaven, a like threefold witness on earth. For so
says the same Apostle John, in the 8. verse of the same fifth Chapter. There
are three also which bear record in earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the
Blood: and these three agree in one. And I beseech you, let us mark this
comfortable addition, diligently. For (as was observed before) if we should
only look to this mystery of the Trinity, as it is hidden in it self, and
as it were in the most secret closet of the highest heaven, it would rather
astonish and confound us, then comfort and cheer up our hearts: at the least
we should find it so high, that we could not be able to reach unto the
comfort of it. It is Gods exceeding mercy therefore, that he has vouched safe
to descend (as it were down to the earth, to succor and help our weakness:
and to this end, not only to give us the witness of his holy spirit inwardly
in our souls, but also, to let us (after a sort) to see with our eyes, and to
feel (as it were) with our hands, life and salvation brought to light for us:
insomuch as the blood of our SAVIOVR CHRIST, yea even that water and blood
which issued out of his most holy side, they do cleanse us from all our
sins, and set us in the high favor of our most good and gracious God.

Thus then, we looking to the testimony of the Father, manifested by the
Son appearing in our nature, and immediately sealed up in our hearts by the
holy Ghost, who is even therefore called the Comforter: great and singular,
well may the comfort of our faith be, in the holy Trinity. Yea justly may it
be esteemed the very treasury of our comfort. According as when the Apostle
Paul would wish and pray the greatest comfort, yea even all the true and best,
and most complete comfort that might be, to the Church of GOD, in the City of
Corinth; he concludes his holy Epistle which he wrote unto them, with this
most sweet farewell: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God,
and the communion of the holy Ghost be with you all. Amen.

To which purpose also call to mind that which is written, John, Chap. 17.3.
and Romans 5.1.2.3.4.5. and Ephesians. 2, 18. And in the beginning of the first
Epistle of the Apostle Peter: his entrance, is likewise most comfortable, from
this doctrine of the Trinity, in respect of the consent both of the Father the
Son, and the holy Ghost, in the election, redemption, justification and
sanctification of his people.



The duty hereof, is generally all duty; and the same also to be performed in
the most dutiful, cheerful, earnest, and constant manner that may be: even
the same, which our Christian and holy Baptism into the name of the most holy
Trinity, does require.

That it to say, that by the grace of our God we do (as becomes the obedient
children of God, our heavenly father) most carefully endeavor, to show forth
the fruits of the spirit, in the obedience of the Gospel of our Savior
Christ the Son of God: and that in all things, we worship the unity of the
Godhead, in the Trinity of the Persons, and the Trinity in unity, as the
Churches of God have of ancient time, right Christianty professed, and so do
also even at this day.

Explication and proof.
It is very true, that you have answered. For Baptism, being the seal of GODS
covenant to us, as circumcision was to the Jews: Genesis. 17. it does likewise
answerably require of us, that we do enter into covenant with God, in all
holy care and conscience of walking in all good duty before him, as Abraham
and all the faithful of his posterity did. For as our Savior Christ says,
The duties.
the children of Abraham will do the works of Abraham, etc.

And verily, all the duty that we (yea that all the Church of God can yield)
is too shallowe a fruit of obedience and thankfulness to God, for the
revelation and comfort of this most deep and high mystery. For insomuch as
the Lord God, our only Lord, of his infinite mercy, wholly consents, both
in unity of nature, and according to the eternal distinction of the persons,
to the endless perfitting of our redemption and salvation: what duty of ours
(though we were able to yield him all the service, both of understanding, and
reason, of will and affection, yea both of spirit, soul, and body) could be
answerable to this his infinite goodness and mercy?

But to speak something more particularly: it is the duty of the whole church
of God, and of every true believer, to hold, maintain, and defend this most
holy doctrine, against all Anti-trinitarians, Atheiests, or Profane persons,
whosoever shall show themselves, to be despisers, gainesayers, and blasphemers
thereof. In which respect, the holy and diligent labors of Athanasius,
Nazianzene, and many other in former times; as also of Calvin, Beza, Vrsinus,
Zanchius, etc. they are in these our days very excellent.

The adversaries of this most high point of doctrine, have been, from time to
time, many and great in the church of God: the less to be marvelled at;
because it is the doctrine of a most secret and high mystery, infinitely
exceeding all comprehension of corrupt natural reason. The less also is it to
be marvelled at, because the Devil (who in all things, enuieth the glory of
God, and every way maliceth the salvation of his people) takes all the
occasions he can, to hinder, yea to corrupt, and utterly to pervert, the true
knowledge, and faith of this most glorious and healthful mystery.

The former, and more ancient of these wicked adversaries (as learned Danaeus
has gathered and sorted them together in his book of heresies) they were
first, the Apellites, Messa^ians, Deites and Monarchites, who denying the
distinct Persons, held that God is only as it were a sole and solitary
Monarch of the world.

Secondly, the Simonians, Ptolemies, Colarbasies, Montanistes, No^tians,
Praxcans, Sabellians, Apolanaristes, who affirmed that there is but one person
in the Trinity, only called by these three sundry names: Father, Son, and
holy Ghost.

Thirdly, the Marcellians, who taught that the Trinity is but an extension or
d^lating of ^ne and the same thing, as it were wax.

Four^hly, the Hieracites, who said that the Persons in the Trinity, are but
as it were two lights of one candle.

F^f ly, the Metangismonites, who imagined the Persons to be like to diverse
vessels, the one contained within the other, and as a scroule of diverse skins.

Sixthly, the Tritheites, and Triformians, who contended that the three Persons,
are three diverse and sundry Gods.

Seauenthly, the Marcites, and Tetratheites, who make a quaternitie of Persons.
The which heretical blasphemy, when Anastasius the Emperor, attempted to
establish by his Edict, about the year of our Lord, 485. he was by the hand of
God, stricken with lightening, and died miserably. Danaeus, chap. 47. in his
book of Heresies.

The last of the more ancient adversaries, which the same writer rehearses,
were the Actians, who made no more account of the three Persons, then of three
qualities. All these were worthily resisted, and refuted by the excellent
M^nisters of Gods word in former times.

Now, in these latter days, rose up one Seruetus, and other, who went about to
revive the former heresy of the Simonians and such like heretics of their
rank.

Wherefore, by how much the Devil raises up more hostile war, against this
sacred ground of our Christian faith, to the dishonor of our God, The Danger
of not believing this Article.
and to the endangering of our souls to everlasting perdition; as also to the
opening of the mouths, of the profane and ungodly, to blaspheme that most holy
and sacred mystery which they know not, neither have learned to reverence and
adore: by so much ought all the servants of God, at this day, and from time to
time, according to the example of those that have been before us; to be the
more studious and careful, both to settle our own understanding and faith
more firmly, and also more wisely, soundly, and faithfully, every one
according to his place and calling, to teach and strengthen one another: and
all of us, with one consent, to pray the more fervently to God, that it would
please his divine majesty, still to uphold this his blessed truth of doctrine,
which teaches the truth of his most blessed nature, and the manner of his
glorious Essence, against all adversaries thereof, as ever heretofore he has
done. Amen.

THat which now remains, concerning this article, is the danger of not
believing in the blessed Trinity.



It is impossible, that any which believe not in the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, three Persons one only true God; should either know rightly the
fountain from whence, or the means by whom, or the manner how, life and
salvation is brought to light: much less can they feel the comfort of it
here; and least of all, shall they be partakers of the happiness and glory of
it, in the kingdom of heaven.

Explication and proof.
It is impossible in very deed. For all is contained within the revelation, and
faith of this most blessed mystery, as we may clearly perceive, by calling to
mind that which we read in the places of holy Scripture before alleged: To:
5.1.2.3.4.5. Ephesians. 2.18. and. 1. Pet. chap. 1. v. 2. and 2. Cor. chapter 13. v. 13.
which is the last of the whole chapter. Yea, so is all contained and treasured
up in this mystery, that whosoever do not rightly believe it Understand it of
those that be willingly ignorant, or heretically minded against this holy
Mystery.
, they shall most assuredly, woefully perish for ever from the most glorious
presence of God, and have their portion among the most hellish and devilish
adversaries of his glory. According as it has been long since, well
acknowledged and determined, and so is still in the true churches of Christ:
that whosoever desire to be saved, must necessarily and before all things, hold
the true Christian and Catholic faith. And that whosoever do not keep it
holy and undefiled, shall without doubt perish everlastingly. The which
Catholic faith (that is to say, the common faith of all true beleeu^rs) is
this, that we do acknowledge, and worship one God in Trinity, and the
Trinity in unity. Neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the
substance, etc.

Whosoever do not believe thus, it is most certain that they do not believe
in the true God rightly. Nay it is impossible, that any, who professing
Christa^tie, do not believe in one only God, three distinct Persons; should
avoid the opinion, either of many Gods, or of the inequality of Gods. For the
name of God, is communicated to every one of these Persons, in the holy
Scriptures. Finally, they that do not thus believe, do deny unto God his due
worship and honor, seeing the Father requires to be honored in his Son,
and that his Son should be honored with him, and that both Father, and Son
should be honored, in and with the holy Ghost.

From all miserable unbelief therefore, specially from all heretical,
blasphemous, and obstinate contradiction, to this so chief and foundamentall a
point of our only orthodoxe and true Christian faith: the Lord our most
gracious and merciful God, even the Father, for his only Son our Lord Jesus
Christ's sake, by the grace of the holy Ghost, preserve and keep us for ever
Amen.

Thus much, concerning the doctrine of belief in the most holy and glorious
Trinity of Persons in one only true God, more generally or coniointly.

Be^^efe in God the Father
Belief in God the Father. The ground of it.

HEnceforth we are to examine the doctrine of our faith, concerning every
distinct Person.



They do teach us to believe in the Father, as in the almighty God the maker
of heaven and earth.

It is so. They are the very words of the Creed: I believe in God the Father
almighty, maker of heaven and earth. Here are many things to be considered.



Beside other divine testimonies, we have the witness of Saint Paul in the 8.
Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, the 5, and 6. verses. And
likewise in the 5. and 6. verses of the 4. chap to the Ephesians.

Rehearse you the words of the holy Apostle, in the first of those places.



Though (says the Apostle) there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven or
in earth as there be many Gods and many Lords) yet unto us, there is but one
God, who is the Father of whom are all things, and we in him.

Explication and proof.
The meaning of the holy Apostle is, that howsoever, partly by most wicked and
abusiue custom, the name of God, has by idolaters, been usually attr^buted
to their idols, and false Gods: (for so, as he says, there be many Gods, and
many Lords, to wit, commonly so called: according to that, 2. Kings chap. 1, 2,
and chap. 18, 33, 34, 35. and Amos. 8.14. and Ier. 2, 26. They say to a tree
thou art my father, and to a stone thou have begotten me for they have turned
their back unto me, Read also Isa^. ch^^ ^, 1^ ^^.
and not their face: but in the time of their trouble, they will say: Arise and
help us. But where are thy Gods which thou have made thee? Let them arise, if
they can help thee, in the time of thy trouble: for according to the number of
thy cities, are thy Gods o Judah.) Thus I say, howsoever, (as the Apostle
says) partly by abusiue and idolatrous custom, the name of God is ascribed to
idols and false God^: and partly also, albeit God himself, do in most wise
considerations as has been declared in the Treasury upon the 5. Commandment)
impart his most holy and honorable names, God and Father, to civil Magistrates,
and to natural Parents etc. Psalm. 82, and John, 10.34.35, 36. and in many
other pl^ces. Yet to speak properly, and from the original root and
fountain of all Father-hood, and power, or authority: God the father only,
is both Father and God, according to that of our Savior Christ. Matthew. 23, 9.
Call no man your Father upon earth: for there is but one your father, even he
that (...) in heaven.

The other place to the Ephesians (mentioned in the former answer,) is like to
that already rehearsed out of the Epistle to the Corinthians. For these are
the words of the Apostle in that fourth Chapter to the Ephesians. There is one
Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of all, who is above all,
and through all and in you all. Not that the divine nature of God the father,
is mixed ^ith ours, or with the nature of any other creature (for he is only,
and altogether entire and perfectly consisting in and by himself) but because
it is his power, which continually supporteth all creatures, as well as at the
beginning, he did originally, create and make them all.

Thus therefore, seeing God is a father, yea rather the only father of all
fatherhood: that is, so a father as none else is, or can be (as was said) we
have no cause to doubt, but that we are to believe in him accordingly, that
he is such a Father, as is very true God, even God the Father almighty, etc.
And thus, when the Apostle Peter, 1. Epist. Chap. 1. verse, 21. (writes) that
God has raised up Christ from the dead, and given him glory, that our faith
and hope might be in God: it is plain from that which goes before in the 17.
verse, that the Apostle writes of that God, who is the Father. Yea even our
Father, and the Father of all true believing Christians, by the grace of that
adoption and covenant, which of his infinite mercy, it has pleased him to
make with us, through his own only and natural Son, our Lord Jesus Christ;
as we are hereafter further to consider.

And now furthermore, this also we are to understand, that insomuch as our
heavenly Father, in whom we are to believe, is very true God: therefore, all
the essential attributes of the divine nature, do essentially belong unto
him, in that he is the Father. So that we are not only to believe in him, as
in an Almighty Father (of the which his almighty power, we are to consider
afterward) but also, as in our eternal Father, according to that which we
read: Isay: chap: 63.16. Thou o Lord art our Father, and redeemer, thy name is
for ever. Neither are we to believe in the Father, only as in an almighty and
as in an eternal Father, the maker of heaven and earth: but also, as in a most
provident Father, even the most gracious ruler and governor of all things,
specially over his Church. As John. 5.17. My Father works hitherto, says our
Savior Christ. And Matthew. 6.26. Your heavenly Father feeds the fowls of
heaven. And Chap. 10, 29.30. A Sparrowe falls not to the ground, without your
Father. Yea and all the hairs of your head be numbered. Read also, chap. 18.10.
and 24.36. and 26.53. and Act. 1.7. But of the fatherly providence and
government of God our heavenly Father, we shall likewise have just occasion, to
consider more fully afterward. Wherein also, the most perfect wisdom of this
our Father, will be made more manifest unto us. And that, yet further
accompanied with his most tender mercy, according to that thanksgiving of our
Savior Christ: Matthew. 11.25. etc. and according to that of the Apostle. 2.
Cor: 1.3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of mercies, and God of all consolation and comfort.

Moreover, we are to believe in him, as being most righteous; according to
that, 1. Pet. 1, 17. For he is such a Father, as judges without respect of
persons. And therefore does our Saui: Christ pray to him, as being a righteous
Father John. 17, 25. And likewise also, as being a holy Father, in the 11.
verse of the same chapter. Finally, we are to believe in him, as being most
faithful and true according to that which we read in the same Evangelist, chapter
8, 14, 16. Though I bear witness of my self (says our Savior Christ) yet
my record is true: for I know whence I came, etc. And if I also judge, my
judgment is true: for I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me. And
ver. 26, 27. He that sent me is true, and the things which I have heard of him,
those speak I unto the world. They understood not (says the Evangelist) that
he spoke to them of the Father, etc.

And thus, we may see, that we are to believe in God our heavenly Father, the
first Person in the holy Trinity: as being an eternal, almighty, the most
wise, most holy, most righteous and most merciful Father, the most faithful
and true, etc. For whatsoever is ascribed to the Father, who is God; it must be
understood, as attributed unto him absolutely, and in all divine perfection,
above all comparison to be made with any creature. Yet so do we attribute
these things to the Father, that we do not, neither may we exclude either the
Son, or the holy Ghost; as has been observed before: and is more fully to
be cleared and confirmed hereafter.

These things thus observed, let us now go forward, to those points, which are
to be furthermore considered, for the understanding of this Article.

And first, insomuch (as was a little before touched) God is termed, and is in
very deed, a Father in diverse respects: I desire that you do make a more full
rehearsal of this point.



First, God is called, and is in truth, most properly a Father; only in
respect of his natural, and only, eternally begotten Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Secondly, in respect of his works of Creation.

Thirdly, in respect of his fatherly providence, preservation and government,
over all his creatures, ever since he created and made them.

Fourthly, in respect of his holy Church, and elect people, whom he has in
special manner, most graciously adopted, in his beloved and only begotten
Son by nature, to be his children, of mere favor and grace.

Explication and proof.
That God is most properly a father in respect of his natural and only
begotten Son, it is even of it self evident. For Father and Son, are
naturally, and properly relatiues even here among men on earth; but
principally, when we speak of God the heavenly Father, and his Son. For
though, as touching the earthly nature of man, one Father may have many
natural Sons, the which have all of them their several participation in the
nature of their Father: yet in the divine nature, there cannot possibly be more
then one Son, seeing the whole nature of the Father, is essentially,
eternally, and everlastingly, communicated unto him alone. And likewise,
howsoever the natural Father on earth, having many children, does by natural
instinct, divide as it were his affection among them, according as he had, even
by nature, a distinct and often renewed affection and desire to enjoy them: yet
the heavenly Father, having but one entier, infinite and eternal desire of
generation in his divine nature, he has wholly, and without all possibility
of distribution, or reiteration; from before all beginning, and for evermore,
placed his whole desire, delight and affection, in his own only Son. And even
so much, does the Father himself testify at the baptism of the same his
Son; he having then taken to his divine nature, the nature of man. This is
my beloved Son (says the Father) in whom I am well pleased. And thus does
the word (Abha) used in the holy language for Father) signify, from the root
(Abha) which is in the proper signification of it, so to desire or affect a
thing, that the desire and affection does rest it self in the same, being once
attained unto. This is perfectly and naturally, to be found only in the mind
and will of God the Father, according to that in the Prophecy of Hosh. chap:
11.1. I called my Son out of Egypt, because I loved him (Ahabehu). For these
words do principally respect our Savior Christ the Son of God, eternally,
and most perfectly beloved of him; yea so, as he is for ever setteled in this
his love: as we read, Mat: chap, 2.15. Thus then in the first place, God is a
Father in respect of his own one only begotten and natural Son our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, that he is called a Father, in respect of his works of creation, it
may appear by this: that the Angels of heaven, are called the children of God:
as Job: chap: 1.6. The children of God, came, and stood before the Lord: Satan
came also among them. And again, Chap: 2.1. And Chap. 38.7. All the children
of God rejoiced from the beginning of their Creation. Read also, Dan. 3.25.
Where the Angel that preserved the three children of Israel from burning in
the fiery furnace; is said to be like to the Son of God, as one of singular
comlines and beauty, etc. Thus Adam also, though in a degree a little
inferior to the heavenly Angels, is called the Son of God: as we read, Luke
chapter 3.38. And the posterity of Adam also, though degenerated; are called the
offspring of God, Act. 17.29. Not by generation (to speak properly) but by
Creation. And so is that word offspring to be understood. According to that,
Isai: ch: 64.8. O Lord thou art our Father and we are the clay etc. And Mal:
2.10. Have we not all one Father? has not one God made us? And Heb: 1^.9. God
is called the Father: that is, in a special manner, the creator of spirits. For
he has made our souls, as well as our bodies, yea our souls, by a most
excellent creation, as shall further appear, when we come once to the purposed
handeling of that doctrine.

Now in the third place, that God is a father in respect of his most fatherly
providence, and of the souereigntie of his government: it may hence appear, in
that he is called the father of the fatherless, Psalm. 68.^. And again, as
was alleged before, in that our Savior Christ says, Call no man your Father
upon earth: for there is but one your Father, who is in heaven. Nevertheless
(as was also alleged) God does not refuse to impart this his name, not only
to natural Parents; but also to civil Magistrates, in regard of that dignity
and authority, which they have received of him, as Ps. 82, 6. John. 10.34.

Fourthly, that God is a father, in respect of the adoption of his holy Church,
and elect people (both Jews and Gentiles) even so many as shall truly believe
in him, as in their heavenly Father: and likewise, that he is a Father, in
respect of his most gracious providence and government over it: this may be
made plain, and confirmed, by that which we read, Deuteronomy. 14.1. Where Moses
says to the Jews: Ye are the children of the Lord your God. And Chap. 32.6.
Do ye so reward the Lord, o ye foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy
Father that has bought thee? he has made thee, and proportioned thee.

Likewise, Elihu of old, called God his father: as Job. Chap. 34. v. 36. My
Father (says he, as Trem: and Iunius do well translate that word) let Job be
tried, etc. And thus also, Isaiah: Chap: 43.8. the Israelites are called the
Sons and daughters of the Lord: And Chap. 63.16.

Doubtless thou art our Father, etc. This dignity, and pre-eminence of the
Filiation or Sonship (as one may say) of the Church, is fitly expressed by
this, that God calls it, his first borne: to wit, in comparison of all the
world beside. As Exodus: 4.22, 23. the Lord says to Moses. Thou shall say to
Pharaoh, Thus says the Lord; Israel is my Son, even my first borne.
Wherefore, I say unto thee, let my Son go, that he may serve me, etc. And
Ierem: 31.9. I am a Father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first borne. And thus
King David, and King Solomon, (special tipes and figures of our Savior
Christ, the only natural Son of God) they are by special grace and favor,
called the Sons of God: as Psalm: 2. Thou art my Son, and 2. Sam: 7, 14. I
will be his Father, and he shall be my Son. And Psalm. 89, 26, 27. He shall
cry unto me, thou art my Father, etc. But more generally, concerning both Jew
and Gentile, the Apostle Paul says, Ephesians. 3, 15, 16. Of the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, is named the whole family, in heaven and in earth. And in
this respect, does the Evangelist John teach us, that the children of God, are
borne not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
God. To the which purpose also, serves that which we read, Romans 8, 14.15.16.
Gal. 4. verses, 5.6. and 1. Pet. 1.3. Blessed be God the Father, who according
to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again, unto a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. To an inheritance immortal, etc.

It is true indeed, that in respect of this work of our spiritual
regeneration and sanctification, and of our preservation in the same; the Son
of God has the name of an everlasting Father given unto him. Isay: chapter 9.6.
And chapter 8.18. mention is made of his children. And chapter 53.10. the promise is
made by God that he should see his seed. The accomplishment whereof is
testified: He^: 2.10.11.12.13. He brought many children to glory. And therefore
is he brought in, speaking thus: Behold here am I, and the children which God
has given me. In which respect also, he said while he was yet with his
Disciples: I will not leave you as orphans (that is) fatherles or comfortles:
John, ch: 14.18. Likewise, the holy Ghost, whom our Savior Christ thus
promised to send, for the comfort of his church, is in the same work of our
spiritual regeneration and sanctification, as a father to us, and to the whole
church, together with God the father and the Son: according to that we read,
Ioh. chapter 3, 5, 6. Except a man be borne again by the holy Ghost, etc. and Romans
8, 14. As many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. The
Meaning.
Yet this joint work of the whole Trinity in this whole spiritual work of
grace, must so be understood, to wit: in a certain metaphorical or borrowed
sense when it is attributed to the Son and the H.G. as it may in no wise
prejudice the distinction of Persons, nor impeach the propriety of this name
Father, as properly attributed to the first Person of the holy Trinity, of the
which we treat. IT is therefore to very good purpose, that you do in the next
place express what you mean when you say, I believe in the Father almighty
maker of heaven and earth.

My meaning is, to profess that (according to the two former acceptions of the
word Father) I do undoubtedly believe, that God the Father, the first Person
in the most holy and blessed Trinity (even the natural Father of his eternal
and only begotten Son) has by the same his Son, together with the holy
Ghost: in infinite wisdom, and by his almighty power, made the heaven and
the earth, the Sea and all that in them is, of very nothing at the first.

Here in, your meaning is agreeable to the truth it self: according to that we
read, Ioh. chapter v. 1, 2.3.4. Col: 1, 15, 16.17. and Heb: 1, v. 2. Read also Gen:
ch: 1. verse 2.26. And Job: 26.13.



Nothing less, And therefore according to the third acception of the word
Father: I do believe, that God in his most sovereign and fatherly providence,
has from the beginning of his creation, does still, and will likewise (by the
same his Son, together with the holy Ghost) continually even to the end of
the world, universally rule, govern, and preserve, all his creatures, in all
wisdom and righteousness, according to the most holy and determinate pleasure
of his own most gracious and divine will.

Explication and proof.
This also is very true, and agreeable to the holy Scriptures, as we may read
further: John ch: 1. verses 5, 9.10. and chapter 3.17, Col: 1.17. In the Son all
things consist, from the Father. And Heb: ch: 1.3. The Father, by the Son,
bears up all things. Read also, Psalm, 104.30. If thou send forth thy Spirit,
they are created and thou renewest the face of the earth. And in the 24. v. of
the same Ps. O Lord, how wonderful are thy works! In wisdom have thou made
them all: the earth is full of thy riches. So is this Sea great and wide, etc.
Ier: 10.12, 13. and Mat: 6, 26. Your heavenly Father feeds the fowls of
heaven (says our Savior Christ) And ch: 10.29. A Sparrow falls not on the
ground without your Father. And as it follows in the next verse of the same
ch: he gives to understand, that the Father has a special regard of his
adopted children, through his own Son our Lord Jesus Christ. For our Savior
himself says, the hairs of their head are numbered.

This special providence of God the Father toward his Church, you also
mentioned a little before.



I do, in this respect, according to the last acception of the word Father,
furthermore undoubtedly believe, that God the Father, of his most free grace,
and in most tender pity and compassion, according to his divine counsel,
purpose, and predestination, even before the foundation of the world was laid:
has in his beloved Son chosen and adopted us, and all the elect people, to
be his children, through the sanctification of the holy Ghost: to the end that
we truly knowing and trusting in the same his grace, should obtain the glory
of our Lord Ie: Ch: yea and that eue^ in this life also, we should enjoy a
special fruit of the fatherly providence of our most good and gracious God,
above all the children of this world.

Explication and proof.
You may safely, and with good assurance, believe this also: according to the
testimony of the Apostle Paul, as we read. 2. These: 2, 13, 14. and in many
other places. For one and the same (though it may be in some differing measure)
is the happy and glorious estate of al true believing Christians, in the
kingdom of heaven. Read also, Ps: 4, 6, and Ps. 31.19, 20, and 46, 7, 8, 9.
But of al these points, which you have answered for the clearing of this
article (insomuch as they are all of them matters of great importance) let us,
trusting in the grace of God, The Promise
set our minds to inquire more particularly, into the grounds and doctrine of
them; by a more large discourse, to the more plentiful enriching of this part
of the Treasury of our faith. First concerning this, that God is our Father.

Secondly, concerning his almighty power.

Thirdly, concerning his creation, and the several works thereof. And
fourthly, concerning his fatherly providence, both generally over all the
works of creation, and also more specially toward his Church, in the election
c^lling, gathering together, and preservation thereof.



In the 2. Epistle to the Cor. chap. 6. The Apostle alleges the Prophesies of
the old Testament, concerning us the Gentiles in this behalf.



In the 16, verse of that chapter, the Apostle has these words, God has said,
I will dwell among them, and walk there, and I will be their God, and they shall
be my people. And verse 17. I will receive you. And verse 18. I will be a
Father unto you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord
almighty.

Explication and proof.
These Prophesies (the which, as the same Apostle calls them in the beginning
of the next Chapter, are so many promises) they are diligently to be marked,
and to be surely laid hold upon, and apprehended of us; because, if God were
only a father in respect of his natural and only begotten Son, and not also
for the Sons sake, a Father to us, by the covenant of grace and adoption: we
could not possibly believe in God, to our comfort. For by our Apostacy in
Adam, we are wholly fallen from God: not only from the Father, but also from
the Son of God simply considered in the Deity of his person, and from the
holy Ghost also, the only Spirit of them both. Yea we are so fallen, that we
cannot possibly, by any means, be raised up and restored again: but by the
free grace of the Father, through the mediation of the Son taking our nature:
and in the same, by his redeeming, justifying, and sanctifying of us unto
himself by the holy Ghost. And for this cause it is, that our Lord Jesus
Christ, of his t^nder love, is so earnest, to assure us in his holy Gospel,
that God is our Father. For so he speaks oftentimes of him before his death;
teaching us to pray to him, as being our heavenly Father; and after his
resurrection also saying: I go up to my Father and your Father, etc. John,
chap. 20.17.

Such therefore, and so worthy and necessary, is the observation and faith of
this most comfortable promise of God, that he will be a Father unto us,
reconciled in and by his son our Lord Jesus Christ.



First, insomuch as God vouchsafes to be a Father unto us: his love toward us,
must needs be more pure and tender (in that he is of a most holy and merciful
nature) and infinitely more constant also in his love (in so much as he is
most faithful) then can be the love of any the most loving and tender natural
Parents, to their most dear and natural children.

Secondly, the comfort of this, that God is our Father, is very great: in that
according to the exceeding greatness of his love (infinitely above the love of
all natural parents) so are his gifts and and benefits to his children,
infinitely above theirs: both in number, measure, weight, and value.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. And therefore it is, that the Lord says thus, by his Prophet
Isaiah. chapter 49.1^.16. Though a woman should forget her child, and not have
compassion of the son of her womb, yet would not I forget thee. Behold
(says the Lord) I have graven thee upon the palm of my hands, thy walls are
ever in my sight.

And chap. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father: The Comforts.
Though Abraham would not know us, nor Israel acknowledge us (to wit, to be
kindly children to them, insomuch as we have not walked in their straight
steps, nor done their good works, but have committed much wickedness, etc.)
Yet, O Lord (says the holy Prophet in the name of all the faithful, repenting
them of their sins) thou art our Father, and our Redeemer: Thy name is for
ever.

God loves all his creatures, even for that they a^e ^is creatures, and
specially mankind. From hence does Job make it a part of his ple^ding with
God, chap. 10.8. etc. Thine hands have made me, and fashioned me who^e round
about, and will thou destroy me? Remember I pray thee, that thou have made me
as the clay: and will thou bring me into dust again? etc. And chap. 14. verse,
15. Thou ^onest the work of thine own hands. In which respect also, God
expresses the grea^nes of the provocation of the wicked, in that he is caused
by the grieuousnes of their sins, as it were to forget them to be his
creatures. As Isaiah. chap. 27.11. Therefore (says the Prophet) he that made
them, will not have compassion on them, and he that formed them, will have no
mercy on them.

But the love which God bears toward all men, in respect of Creation: is
little in comparison of that love, wherewith he loves his elect children, in
respect of their redemption. Whence it is, that Job (of whom we made mention
before) does afterward principally comfort himself in respect of this love of
God, saying as we read, chap. 19.25. O that my words were now written: O
that they were written even in a book, and graven with an Iron pen Lead, or
in Stone, for ever. For I am sure that my Redeemer lives, etc.

This singular and matchless comfort, does our Savior Christ most lively lay
forth in the parable of the prodigal Son: Luke, chap. 1^. For when all
comforts failed the most vnthrif^ie, and riotous spend-all: Yet this comfort
stood him in good stead. I will rise (says he) and go to my Father, and say
unto him. Father I have sinned against heaven, and before thee. And I am no
more worthy to be called thy Son: make me as one of thy hired servants. So
he arose (says our Savior Christ) and came to his Father, and when he was
yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell
on his neck, and kissed him etc.

So that well may it be said (as a most learned Interpreter has written) That
Quicquid beneuole^tiae, amoris, studij, curae, officij inter homines ^^^eniri
potest long inferius est paterna Dei mi^^recordia, qua suos complectitur, etc.
whatsoever good will, love, study, care, and duty may be found among men:
it is far inferior to that fatherly pity, wherewith God imbraceth those
that be his.

And again, Vnde sequitur perperam a nobis estimari Dei gratia^, nisi omnes
carnis sensus fiaci nostra superet. Centies enim co^tinget eueri^ natura
orainem ^otius qui vt Deus su^^ ^es^.
Albeit earthly parents are naturally inclined, to succor those that are
borne and bred of them: Yet, when all pity shall fail in the world, God will
do the part, both of a Father and also of a Mother, to all that believe in
him. Whereupon it follows (as he further adds) that we shall make too l
ght account of the favor of God; unless our faith do s^rmount all that we
can conceive by our carnal and fleshly wisdom. For be it (says he) that
the course of nature be an hundredth times perverted: ye^ God will never fai^e
those that be his.

Calvin: Commentar: in Psalm. 27.19.

Secondly, concerning the exceeding effects of Gods most bounteous and fatherly
love; it is of it self most clear, that they are infinitely above all gifts
and benefits, which natural Parents can bestow upon their children. The very
mention of the benefits will show it to be so. Yea, when natural Parents
cannot help at all, God remains a sure defense: according as the Prophet
David says in the Psalm. even now alleged, Though my Father and my Mother do
forsake me (^o wit, as being unable to relieve me) yet the Lord will gather me
up, etc. But which,

First, that he, by the grace of his adoption in taking us to be his
children, does therewithal make us heirs annexed with his own only Son
our Lord Jesus Christ, of a ^ike excellent Patrimony: that is, of eternal
happiness and glory, in the heavens with him.

Secondly, that he will indue and furnish us, with all spiritual gifts and
graces, necessary and meet, to accompany the same our everlasting happiness
and salvation.

Thirdly, that he will suffer us to want nothing which he knows shall be
necessary and good for us, here in this transitory life.

Fourthly, that whereas we cannot in this our frail life, live so well as we
gladly would, much less so well as in most bounden duty we ought: he will most
tenderly bear with our infirmities so long as we are unfeignedly desirous, with
a child like affection, to serve and obey him.

Fifthly, that whenever he sees it meet to correct and chastise us, he will
not do it, but of the same his most tender and fatherly love, and not
otherwise. So that neither in the greatness of the measure, or in the length of
the continuance of the correction will he proceed any further, then he will
dispose of it to our best good.

Finally, that he will most graciously hear us, in all our holy complaints and
prayers, which we have at any time need to make unto him: and especially, in
the times of our greatest distresses.

Explication and proof.
Touching the first branch of this Answer, call here again to mind, John,
1.1^. and Romans 8.15.16.17. Ye have not received the Spirit of bondage to fear
again: but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba,
Father. The same Spirit, bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the
children of God. If we be children, we are also heirs even the heirs of God,
and heirs annexed with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may
also be glorified with him, etc.

Most sweet and comfortable to this purpose, is that preceptorie exhortation of
the Apostle John, 1, Epist. chap. 3. verses, 1.2. Behold, what love the Father
has showed on us (to wit, as a gift of free grace and favor: for so is the
speech of the Apostle, Behold what love the Father has given unto us) that we
should be called the children of God. etc. Dearly beloved, we are now the
children of God, but it does not appear what we shall be, etc. The Apostle
gives to understand, that the gift and preferment, is greater then can be
conceived of us, till we shall have the actual fruition of it.

Thus then, whereas it is the property of every good and kind Father (as a
learned Teacher observes) First to desire that his son might be like him in
graces and virtues; secondly, that he may leave him some patrimony, Pet. Mart.
in Symb.
to be as a comfort and countenance unto him, etc. So, yea infinitely much more
does our heavenly Father desire, not only that his children should show forth
his virtues, but also that they may be partakers of a most rich patrimony and
inheritance. Whereupon our Savior Christ, Luke, 12.32. does notably encourage
his Disciples, saying, Fear not little flock, it is the Fathers pleasure to
give you a Kingdom.

Secondly, that God (as a most loving and bountiful Father) will indue and
furnish his children, with all spiritual gifts and graces, etc. consider it
from the parable of our Savior Christ. Luke, chap. 15.22.23.24. The prodigal
child has spent all his worldly riches: but his Father inricheth him with a
spiritual treasure: and feeds him with heavenly dainties, etc. Read also
Isa. chapter 11.9. and chapter 54.13. Call to mind again, Ephesians. 1.3. and verses 16.17.
etc.

For the third branch, read Math. 6.31. Take no thought, saying, what shall we
eat, etc. For your Father (says our Savior Christ) knows that ye have need
of all these things. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be ministered unto you.

Seeing God is minded (as we have seen before) to give his children a heavenly
Kingdom: doubtless, he will not deny them earthly things, so far as is
meet for them. Seeing he has already given his own son for us: how shall
he not with him, give us all things also? Romans 8.32.

Fourthly, that God is minded to bear with the infirmities of his children,
that are careful to obey him: read Mal. chap. 3.17. They shall be to me, says
the Lord of Hosts, in that day that I shall do this (that is, execute my
judgments against the wicked) for a flock, and I will spare them as a man
spares his own son that serves him. Then shall thou return and discern
between the righteous, and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him
that ^erueth him not. Read also Psalm. 103.8.9. The Lord is full of compassion
slow to anger, and of great kindness. He will not always chide, neither keep
his anger for ever. He has not dealt with us, after our sins, nor rewarded
us according to our iniquities. As high as the heaven is above the earth, so
great is (the mercy of God) toward them that fear him. As far as the East
is from the West, so far has he removed our sins from us. As a Father
has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on them that fear
him. For he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are but a^st. And
Psalm. 13^.3.4. If thou Lord straightly markest iniquity, O Lord, who shall
stand? But mercy is with thee that thou may be feared.

Fifthly, that when God corrects his children, he does it in love: read Heb.
12.6. And that as a fruit of his love, he keeps measure: we read Psalm.
89.32.33. And Psa. 125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of
the righteous, etc.

Finally, that God of his most gracious and fatherly goodness, will hear the
complaints and supplications of his children, in all their necessities: i^ is
evident by this, that our Savior Christ has most comfortably taught, and
commanded, and encouraged us to pray to God, as to our heavenly Father: Math.
6.9. etc. And chap. 7. verse. 7. etc. Ask (says our Savior Christ:) and it
shall be given unto you, etc, For what man is there among you, who, if his
son ask him bread, would give him a stone? Or if he ask fish, will he
give him a Serpent? If ye then who are evil (says our Savior) can give your
children good gifts: how much more shall your Father, which is in heaven, give
good things to them that ask him? Yea as we read further, Luke, chap.
11.13. How much more (says our Savior Christ) shall your heavenly Father give
the holy Ghost to them that desire him? It is very comfortable also, that we
read in the same Chapter, from the ^. verse. Which of you shall have a friend,
etc. And John, chap. 16.23. Our Savior Christ is earnest in this point.
Verily, verily (says he) I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father
in my name, he will give it to you. For (as it follows, v^rse, 27.) the
Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, (says our Savior
Christ) and have believed that I came out from God.

Thus far of the comforts of this, that God vouchsafes to be a Father unto
us.

THe duties pertaining to the comfort of this Article of our faith, are next to
be considered of us.



First, in so much as it is our principal comfort, that God is our Father, and
that of his mere ^auour and grace; it is our duty, first of all, to bear in
remembrance, what our miserable estate is, from our natural parents, of whom
we are conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity: Yea, that as we ar^
naturally descended of them, we are no bett^r then the children of the Devil,
to whom the wrath of God is due for ever and ever.

This, I say, we are first of all, to call to remembrance, to the end we may
continually put our selves in mind, of that constant and ever increasing
thankfulness, which i^ due for so iuestimable and everlasting a benefit and
advancement.

Secondly, it is our most bounden duty, to withdraw our selves from all the
ways, motions, and lusts of our own sinful flesh, and of this world, and
of the Di^ell.

Thirdly, it is our duty, to walk most cheerfully, The Duties.
in all humble obedience and childe-like duty toward God our heavenly Father:
being sorry, above all things, that we have hitherto been so undutiful unto
him.

Fourthlie, we are likewise admonished, that it is our duty (in that we are
children of God) to be imitators and followers of the same our heavenly
Father, in all his most noble and divine virtues: so far as we may imploye
our selves for the common benefit of all men, specially concerning our
Christian brethren, who are members of the same household of faith with us.

Finally, in that we believe in God to be our Father, it is our bounden
duty, to depend upon his Fatherly providence; and in all things to account
our selves to be most graciously dealt with and ordered, in whatsoever estate
and condition of life, he has placed us, for the time of our so being: and so
long also, as it shall seem good unto him, that we do so abide and remain.

Explication and proof.
These special duties, do very justly arise from the comfort of this so
principal a point of ourfaith: as may appear by the proofs hereafter
following.

Touching the first, the Proph: Ezekiel may be a worthy admonitor vnvnto us,
in the name of God himself, chapt: 16. of his Prophecy, from the beginning of
the chapter in a very large and elegant discourse, many verses together:
though very sharp and reprehensiue, as the intolerable ingratitude of that
people had fully deserved. Son of man (says the Lord) cause Jerusalem to
know her abominations. And say thou, thus says the Lord God unto Jerusalem,
Thine habitation and thy kindred is of the land of Canaan: thy father was an
Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite. And in thy nativity when thou wast borne,
thy navel was not cut, etc. And when I passed by thee, I saw thee polluted in
thine own blood, and I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood: Thou shall
live: even when thou wast in thy blood, I said unto thee, thou shall live. I
caused thee to multiply, as the budde of the field. etc.

Who, duly considering this forlorn estate of the Church, and of every
member of it, as the Lord finds it; and the great pittle which he takes on
it, and the manifold blessings which he bestows upon it: Who, I say (duly
considering these things) can do less then acknowledge, that God is most
highly to be honored and praised for ever therein, and that the forgetfulness
thereof, is a most heinous sin?

And herewith also, how can it be thought, but that it must be one bounden
duty, to love the Son of God with a singular love; in so much as God is not
our Father but by means of him? According to that which our Savior Christ
himself says, John: 8.42. If God were your father, then would you love me.
And likewise, it is our duty to love the children of God, for Gods cause, who
is their Father. 1. John: 5.1.2. Every one that loves him which begat,
loves him also which is begotten, etc.

Secondly, that this reason ought effectually to move us to withdraw our
selves from the lusts of sin, etc: the Apostle John tells us plainly, saying:
1. Epi: 2.15.16. That the love of the Father cannot be in them that love the
world and the lusts thereof: etc. And ch: 3. verse. 3. That every one that has
the hope of everlasting life and glory, through the mercy and goodness of God,
purges himself (that is more and more indeuoureth after it, by using all good
and holy means appointed of God) considering that God our heavenly father is
pure, and that no unclean thing can have any abiding with him.

Read also verse 9. Whosoever is borne of God, sins not. etc: that is, he
does not give himself over to sin, but earnestly resists it, etc.
Moreover, read Deuteron: 14.1.2. Joshua: 24.1.2. etc. Read also, 2. Corinthians:
6.14. etc. The want of this care in the people of God (who glory in this, that
God is their father) it is no less justly, then vehemently reproved, in the
holy Scriptures: as Deuteron: 32.4.5.6. Isai: chapt: 1. verses 2.3.4. and
Ierem: chap: 2.26.27.28. and chap: 3. verses. 2.3.4.5. and verses. 19.20.21.22.

The third part of the Answer, rests upon as good reason, and is a
consequent of the former. For wherefore is undutifulness reproved, but to the
end that the children of God should be stirred up to care and conscience of
all good duty. To this purpose therefore, let us think often of the holy and
zealous exhortation of the Apost. Pet: 1. Epist: chap: 1. verses 13, 14, 15,
16. etc. in these words, Wherefore gyrde up the loins of your mind, etc. as
obedient children, etc As he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy,
etc. And if ye call him Father, who judges without respect of persons, etc.
Let no word of so weighty and pre^ious an exhortation be vnweighed and
vnvalued of us. Read also John, 4.23. The hour comes, and now is (says our
Savior Christ to the woman of Samaria,) when the true worshippers, shall
worship the Father in spirit and truth: for the Father requires even such to
worship him. And 2. Cor. chap: 7.1. The holy Apostle of our Savior Christ,
having made mention of the most gracious promise of God, (that he will be a
Father to all such as shall forsake Idolatry, and the fellowship of Idolater^)
he thereupon infers this his earnest exhortation: Seeing then we have these
promises dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh, and of the spirit, and grow up unto full holiness in the fear of God.
Read also 2. Epist: of John: verses 4.9. And Mal: cha: 1.6. A Son honors
his Father (says the Lord by his Prophet) and a servant his master. If then,
I be a Father, where is my honor? And if I be a master, where is my fear,
says the Lord of Hosts? etc.

In all these places of holy Scripture, we see how the spirit of God calls
for all manner of good duty toward God: in this respect especially, that he
is a most gracious and honorable Father, above all other. And he does it most
justly. For seeing there are no natural parents, which do not, or which may
not of good right, look for ready and constant duty from their children:
while they themselves perform the care of good parents toward them. And on the
contrary, if children shall stubbornly refuse to yield good duty to their
parents: they a^e so far from taking delight, to heat their children to call
them Father, that they rather enter into purpose to cast them off, and to
refuse to take them for their children. Infinitely much more, may the Lord
God our heavenly Father, cast off all such as hypocriticallie call him Father:
and in the mean s^ason, deny the obedience of children unto him. For in very
truth, they show themselves not to be the k^ndely children of God, but the base
borne of their father the Devil, as we shall have further occasion to
observe, and to produce some proof of it by and by.

In the mean while, for the shutting up of this point: worthy is the example
of him, whom our Savior Christ describes, for the common imitation of every
true child of God, that after former ^eglect of his duty, shall return to
perform the duty of a child again. Father (says he, and so is every one
of us to say, in remembrance of our former undutifulness) I have sinned against
heaven, and against thee, I am not worthy to be called thy Son, etc.

Now further, as touching the fourth branch of the answer, which shows that
it is required of every true child of God, that he be an imitator of God
himself in all goodness, and helpfulnes toward others: read Matthew: 5.43. etc.
and Luk: 6.35.36. And Ephesians: chapt: 5.1.2. Be ye therefore followers of God as
dear children, and walk in love, etc. And Coloss: ^.12. Now therefore, as
the elect of God, holy and beloved put on tender mercy kindenes, etc. And 1.
John. ^.10. in this are the children of God known, and the children of the
Devil: Whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves
not his brother. For this is the message that ye heard from the beginning,
that we should love one another; Not as Caine, who was of the wicked, and slew
his brother, etc. Read a so in the Gospel according to John: chap: 8.44. They
that do the lusts of the Devils as our Savior Christ says) they are not the
children of God, but of their father the Devil. To conclude this fourth
branche, that the household of Faith, is chiefly to be respected, in the
practice of the offices and duties of love and kindness: The Danger of not
believing.
let us call to remembrance the wise advertisement of the Apostle Gall: 6.10.
etc.

As for the fifte, which is the last branch of this Answer, we have partly
seen the ground and proof of it in one point of the former answer: and we
shall have further occasion to set down more to this purpose, in the doctrine
and use of Gods holy Providence: and therefore we will here, by reference to
other places, pass it over, for this time.

Thus much therefore, shall for the present suffice, concerning the duties
belonging to God, in that (of his great mercy) he vouchsafes to be our
Father.

Now for the full conclusion of this point of our Faith, according to the
order of our examining the doctrine and use of it: what is the danger of not
believing in this first Person of the most blessed Trinity, the natural
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him our Father, through the adoption
and Covenant of his most free grace and favor?



All such are hitherto the base-borne of this world. They lie yet in the filth
of their sins. They are the seed of the Serpen^, even the children of the
Devil: and so consequently the children of Gods wrath, and of everlasting
misery and condemnation.

They are not to be reputed among the honorable Offspring of God, nor to have
any part or portion with the children of God, in their spiritual inheritance
or heavenly preferment and dignity.

Explication and proof
It is very true. For by faith only, we have assurance that we are the
children of God: as John chapt: 1.12. before alleged. And likewise Gal: 3.26.
Ye are the Sons of God, by faith in Christ Jesus. And Acts: 15.9. By faith
our hearts are purified. And Acts: 26.18. It is faith, whereby we are
delivered from the power of Satan. Whereby also we overcome the world. 1.
John. 5.45. and whereby we are still preserved against the power and rage of
the Devil. 1. Pet. 5.9. Finally, faith is that, whereby we attain to
everlasting salvation. Ephesians: 2. By grace are ye saved through faith, and that
not of your selves: it is the gift of God.

Wherefore it cannot be (but as it was alleged a little before, out of the 8.
chapt: of John: verse 42. etc. and 1. Epis: 3.8. and as we may perceive
furthermore, by that which we read: Act: 13.10. and Ephesians: chap: 2.2.) that
all such as be without faith in God the Father, are hitherto in the state of
the children of the Devil. They may justly say to corruption, Thou art my
Father, and to the worm, thou art my mother, and my sister, as we read in the
book of Job: ch: 17.14. But not as Job, who by faith overcame this fear, as
we have seen before, from the 19. chap: of his book: in so much that he knew
that his redeemer lived, etc: But so far from all conceit of true comfort in
affliction, that every former punishment, may be unto them a forerunner of a
far more heavy and terrible wrath shortly to follow: and the fear of death
it self, may justly be most horrible to them, as being the very mouth of
hell, to swallow them up into the gulf of everlasting and most woeful
destruction. And that they have no portion with the children of God: read Gal:
4.30. The son of the servant, shall not be heir with the son of the free
woman. According to that also which the Apostle Peter says to Simon the
sorcerer, Acts. 8.21. Thou have no part nor fellowship in this business, etc.

To conclude. Touching this Article, albeeit (as is observed by some of the
learned) no heretic either old or new: have ever denied God to be a Father
personally subsisting in himself. Yea and the heathen also, have declared by
their writings, that they have acknowledged God to be a Father.

Nevertheless, in so much as many of the same heretics, which seem to
acknowledge the person of the Father, do (as is afterward more fully to be
considered of us) deny the eternal person of the Son, (in respect of whom,
and his Eternal Deity, God is naturally and chiefelie, The ground of it.
yea only and properly a Father) and likewise, Almighty.
insomuch as the Heathen, have for the most part esteemed God a Father, only
as a fountain or author of goodness toward his creatures. Yea to speak of
the chief of them (in so much as they have for any thing we can perceive by
their writings, only some dark conceit of the Deity of the Son; either by
tradition from the first Fathers or Patriarchs in the church of God, before
the dispersion of the Nations, or by conference with some true worshippers of
God in latter times, or by reading some of their writings: but never
apprehended God as a Father to his elect children, according to his free
covenant of Grace, made in his eternal Son, in regard of his mediatorship,
by taking the nature of man, etc: for this has allwaies ben a secret, truly
known and acknowledged, only in the true Church of God, as that wherein
stands the very marrow, as we may say, and life of faith.) Upon all these
considerations I say, we may boldly conclude, that neither the one, nor the
other, have believed God to be a Father, according to the true sense of this
Article: and therefore also, that they could not have the true comfort and
benefit, which belongs thereunto.

The same in effect, may we affirm of all Idolatrous and obstinate Papists,
who (though in words they go further, and acknowledge God a Father, in respect
of the eternal Son incarnate) yet do they not worship the Father in the
Son, spirituallie and in truth. For herein, they are within the compass of
the Idolaters of Israel, of whom the Lord himself speaks shame, and
refuses to be their father, because they set up Idols unto him: as we read:
Ier: chapt: 2. verses 26.27.28. As the thief is ashamed, when he is found
(says the Lord by his Prophet) so is the house of Israel ashamed, (he
shows how it was, or at the least how it ought to have been with them,)
they, their Kings, their Princes, and their Priests, and their Prophets.
Saying to a tree, thou art my father, and to a stone, thou have begotten me.
For they have turned their back unto me, and not their face: but in the time
of their trouble they will say, Arise thou and help us. But where are thy Gods,
that thou have made thee? let them arise, if they can help thee, in the time
of thy trouble: for according to the number of thy Cities, are thy Gods, o
Judah. Wherefore will ye plead with me? ye all have rebelled against me,
says the Lord.

Thus far of our true Christian says, in the first Person of the holy
Trinity, God the Father: so far as this word Father, expresselie leads us.

Belief in God the Father Almighty.
THe same our FATHER, is called the ALMIGHTY: and for the declaration of the
omnipotency or allmightines of his power, by a most noble and admirable
effect: he is furthermore entitled in the Articles of our belief, the maker
of heaven and earth. Let us therefore, henceforth proceed to these other
points.



In the 10 chapter of the Evangelist John, our Savior Christ says, My Father
is greater then all, and none is able to take them out of my Fathers hand.

And again, Mark 14.36. Abba Father, all things are possible unto thee.

The Apostle John also, 1. Epist: ch: 4. verse 4. speaking of God the Father,
says: Greater is he that is in you, (to wit, by his holy Spirit, in the
Name and power of his Son Jesus Christ) then he that is in the world. That
is to say, God is of greater power, to preserve us by his grace, then the
Devil and Antichrist (with all their hellish craft and power) are to pervert
and destroy us.

Explication and proof
These indeed are plain Testimonies, to prove the Almighty power of God:
even in that he is the Father, the first Person of the holy Trinity. Yea,
and all the Scriptures, The Ground and meaning.
which speak of the Almighty power of God inindefinitly, albeit they may and
ought to be referred to the whole Trinity: yet for orders sake (which is to be
most religiously observed, concerning the most holy Trinity) they may be
said principally to confirm unto us, the omnipotency of the Father, and so
consequently of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, the second and third Persons
in the same most blessed Trinity. Such as are these places, Genes: 18.14.
Shall anything be hard to the Lord? And Ier: 32.27. Is there any thing too
hard for me, says the Lord? Likewise, Job: chap: 42.1. I know (says Job)
thou can do all things. And Deuteronomy: 32.39. None (says the Lord by Moses) can
deliver out of my hand. And 1. Sam: 15.29. God (says Samuel) is the strength
of Israel. Read also Isai: 8.10. and chapt* 43, 11, 12, 13, etc. and ch:
46.10. And Ps: 62.11. Power belongs to God. And Ps: 115.3. Our God is in
heaven, he does whatsoever he will.

These and all such places, do (as was said) for orders sake, principally
confirm unto us, the Almighty power of the first Person in the most holy
Trinity, God the Father.

Now therefore, that we may go forward.



The meaning of it is thus much: that by Faith we are persuaded, that as God
our heavenly Father is most willing, and al^o for wisdom knows best how: so
he is also most able to do whatsoever best pleases him, both in heaven and
in earth, for the full and perfect benefit, comfort, and Salvation of all, and
every one of his elect children.

Explication and proof
The meaning of it is thus much indeed. And so we ought every one of us to
believe: as it is evident from the holy Scriptures before alleged. The sum
whereof is this, that as none can take any of the wicked out of the hands of
God, to deliver them from his just vengeance: so likewise, none can take any of
his children out of his hands, to bereave them of his mercy and salvation. In
your answer also, it is to very good purpose, that you join the power, and the
will, and the wisdom of God, together. For we may in no wise separate them,
lest we should deceive our selves, by building upon false grounds and
principles, contrary to the true faith: as some do in their fancy, touching
the vbique tarry presence of the humanity of Christ in the sacraments, etc. For
it is most certain, that God will not do all that he can do. Nay, we may
assuredly persuade our selves, that he will never do any thing, which
stands not with the most high honor of his wisdom so to do. Yea, to go
further; we may without impeachment to his Almighty power, truly believe:
that he can do nothing which should be in the least point, to the dishonor
of his most excellent Majesty.

It is impossible that God should deny himself: that he should lie: that he
should do any iniquity, etc: yea, that he should not faithfully, and to the
uttermost perform all whatsoever he has in his word revealed to be his holy
will and pleasure to do.

Not that there is any inabilitie, or weakness in God: but because of the
perfection of his power, joined with the infinite holiness of his wisdom,
mercy, justice, faithfulness, etc. All true strength is in virtue: but all
strength of sin is of corruption, and weakness, and hasteneth to utter
destruction.

This therefore, must be our Faith, in the Almighty power of our heavenly
Father; that although he can do all things, yet his power, is ordered, yea
limited according to the wisdom and holiness of his blessed will: yea even
of that will which he has revealed to us in his holy word, and propounded to
himself, in his own unchangeable Counsel. So that it falls out to be to no
purpose, for any to reason from the Almighty power of God, to confirm any
thing that he has not the warrant of the word, that it is agreeable to his will
to work as great a work in the same or like kind: at the least, The promise.
so far forth, as he may see it to be meet for his glory, and the benefit
of his children: unless only to show man his own weakness, and to beat
down his vain and hautie presumption, as John the Baptist reasons against
the proud Pharisees: Matthew: chap: 3.9. and tells them, that God is able,
even of stones to raise up children to Abraham.

This may for this time suffice (as I trust) for the ground and meaning of
Faith in the Almighty and Fatherly power of God.



In the first verse of the 91. Psalm: the holy Prophet of God assures us,
that whosoever dwells (to wit by Faith) in the secret of the most High, he
shall abide in the shadow of the Almighty.

Explication and proof.
This agrees with the promse which we had before 2. Cor: 6.18. where the
Almighty Lord promises to be a Father to his people, and to receive us for
his Sons and Daughters.

Yea, and wheresoever the promise is repeated (as it is very often in the
holy Scriptures) that God is the God of his people: under that word God,
(which notes his Almighty power) this promise is always assured unto us. Of
the which point (seeing we have spoken before) we will not now stay any
longer, to allege the particular testimonies of it.

LEt us come to the comfort, which may arise in our hearts, from belief in
the Almighty power of God.



First, faith in the Almighty power of God our heavenly Father, is exceedingly
comfortable: because hereby we are assured that no strength of sin, or of the
world, or of the Devil, shall be able utterly and altogether, to hinder the
conversion of any, whose hearts God minds to convert and turn unto him; nor
to with-holde any grace from us, which is necessary to salvation, or to the
comfort of this life.

Secondly, because nothing can at any time utterly perverte and turn away
any from God again: after that God has once converted them to him, and given
them a true and lively Faith.

Thirdly, because it is a special encouragement and prop, to the supporte of
our faith, in all our prayers which we do make unto God.

Fourthly, because it animateth and incourageth us, against all tyrannical and
boisterous terror, which any would dismaye us withal: in so much as we know
certainly, that none can do the ^east evil against us, further then our
heavenly Father shall think good to per mitte them.

And hereupon arises another comfort, that although it do please God to let
any trouble tarry long upon us, as we count length of time (yea though he
should not at all deliver us, out of the present trouble and trial) that it is
not, because he is not able: but because he sees it not, either to be so
meet for us, or that it is not so much to his honor and glory, that we
should be delivered according to our desire.

Last of all, faith in the Almighty and Fatherly power of God, is in special
manner comfortable, because it gives us singular assurance, that nothing
shall be able, finally to frustrate our eternal happiness and salvation.

Ex^^^cation and proof.
The comfort of these excellent fruits and benefits of belief in the
almighty power of God, it is included in this, that GOD is our FATHER, as we
have seen before: like as also, the promise of God in the same respect is, as
we called to mind even now.

Nevertheless, in so much as this comfort, that God is our Father, is more
expreslie enlarged, from the further consideration of this, that the same our
Father is Omnipotent or Almighty: it shall, The Comforts.
(through the blessing of God) be worth our labor, to seek after those
confirmations, from whence this further enlargement of these excellent
comforts, may be more plentifully warranted unto us.

First therefore, that nothing is, or can be able, by any resistance against
the most gracious and fatherly power of our good God, utterly and altogether,
to hinder the conversion of any that do belong unto him: it is evident from
the testimony of our Savior Christ, Mark, chap. 10. verses 23. etc. 27. How
hardly (says he to his Disciples) do they that have riches, enter into the
kingdom of God? But he himself, answers the difficulty, and says: With
men it is impossible, but not with God. For with God all things are possible.
And Matthew: 3.9. God is able (says Saint John Baptist) of these Stones to raise
up children unto Abraham. And Rom: chap: 11.23.24. God (says the Apostle Paul)
is able (to wit, by his all-sufficient grace, and powerful mercy) to graf^e
the Jews into their Olive tree again. And 1. Cor: 1.25. etc. The weakness of
God, is stronger then man. etc. And again, God chooses the weak things of
the world, to confound the mighty things, etc. And things that are not, to
bring to naught, things that are. Moreover Acts: 11.17. the Apostle Peter,
reporting the conversion of the Gentiles, to the other of the Apostles:
Foras-much (says he) as God gave them alike gift as he gave unto us, when
we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could let God? Then
(as it follows in the Text) The rest hold their peace, and glorified God. So
then, no sins, great or many, or of never so long continuance, nor any
thing else, is any kind of way, able to hinder the strong streams of Gods
great mercy, whereby he makes glad the hearts of his children.

And let it be diligently observed of us, concerning this first branche: that
neither this Knowledge, nor Faith, nor Repentance, nor any other Grace, can be
begone in us, much less continued, and augmented; but by the powerful
working of Almighty God, even against the strongest gates and power of hell.

For the proof of the second branche of this Answer, call to mind, that
mentioned before, out of the 10. chap: of the Evangelist Ioh: verse 29. where
our Savior Christ, (after that he has assured his Disciples of his own
constant mercy,) he testifies thus of God the Father, My Father (says he)
is greater then all, and none is able to take my sheep out of my Fathers
hands. And again the same Evangelist, in his first Epistle chapt: 4. verse 4.
Call to mind also Rom: 11.20. The gifts and calling of God, are without
repentance. And 2. of Timoth: 2.19.

Thirdly, that our faith in the Almighty power of God our heavenly Father, is
a singular encouragement to Prayer, and a chief Supporter even of faith it
self: it may be evident from the practice of our Savior Christ, in his Prayer
which he m^de in one of his chief distresses, saying: Abba Father, all things
are possible unto thee. Mark 14.36. And likewise, the conclusion of that
prayer, wherein he has taught us how to pray, it is an evident proof of it, in
that he appoints this to be the conclusion of our prayer: For thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory. Amen. Read also the practice of the
Apostles, Act: 4.24. etc. For they make the power of God manifested in the
Creation, a ground of that their prayer, wherein they entreat the manifestation
of Gods divine power in the Ministry of the Gospel: to a new creation (as it
were) of all the faithful, that they might be made new creatures, to God the
Father, through Jesus Christ his dear Son. Coloss: 1.11, 12, 13, etc.

Fourthly, read Dan: 3.17.18. For whereas king Nebuchadnezzar, had threatened the
three men of Israel, with the fiery furnace: saying proudly, Who is that God,
that can deliver you out of my hands? They answered the Tyrant boldly, and with
good courage in the Lord: Behold (say they) our God whom we serve, is able etc.
Read also Psalm: 3. and Ps: 27.1, 2, 3. and Psalm: 43. Isai: 8. verse. 9, 10, 11,
12, 13. Matthew: 10, 28, 29, 30, 31. and 1. Pet: 3.14.15.

Fiftlie, for that comfortable consequence, The Duties.
which arises from the former comfort, consider again the notable example of
the three men of Israel there mentioned: who professed that they would not
worship King Nebuchadnezzars Idol, though God should not see it meet for
them, or for his own glory, to deliver them.

Finally, for the proof of the last branch, Read Romans 8.31. For seeing the
Almighty God is our Father, we may boldly comfort our selves, with the
words of the Apostle there: saying, If God be on our side, who can be against
us? And so forth as it follows in a most comfortable triumph of Faith,
described to the end of the chapter. Read also Hebr: 6, 17, 18, 19, 20. Where
the Apostle teaches us, that the promise and oath of God, being both of them
immutable: do minister unto us strong consolation, and a most sure refuge, to
hold fast the hope that is set before us. Read also, 1. Pet: 1.5. We are kept
by the power of God, through faith, unto salvation. Hereunto also belongs the
comfort of the resurrection of our bodies: and of the renewing of all the
creatures, to a far more excellent state and condition, then they were
created in, at the first. For all these are effects of the almighty power of
God. For by the same power wherewith God made the world, and after destroyed it
by water, and restored it again, and shall at the last day destroy it yet
again with fire: by the same power (I say) shall he restore it at the last of
all, and set all things in a more comfortable estate, then at any time before.
According to that which we read, Rom: 8, 19, 20. and 1. Corinthians: 6.14. and 2.
Thessalon: 1, 9, 10, 11, 12. And as we read further, 2: Pet. 3.10, 11, 12, 13.
and Reuelat: chap: 21.1. etc.

These are the comforts: and we cannot, but (to the glory of God) acknowledge
that they are very gracious and great.



First, it is the duty of a true, and lively faith in the almighty power of
God our heavenly Father, to acknowledge and ascribe all power to God, as
belonging only to him: and according^ie to give the whole praise and glory
thereof to his Name alone.

Secondly, it is our duty to pray unto God, that he would, to the further
glory of his name, make his power more and more manifest, in, and toward his
whole church, and every one of us his weak and frail children: specially, that
power which he has made known by his Gospel, through his Son our Lord Ie
us Christ, to the crucifying of sin, and to the quickening of us to newenesse
of life, with mighty increases against all natural strength of corruption,
and against the supernatural power of the Devil.

Thirdly, it is our duty, believing in the almighty power of God, so to
tremble at his judgments: that we do make his fear as a bridle to hold us
back from sin.

Fourthlie, it is our duty, from the same comfort of Faith, to animate and
encourage our selves, and one to encourage and imbolden another, against our
own timorousnes, or distrustfulnes: and against every terror, whereby,
either the Devil, or any of his instruments, would go about to discourage and
dismay us, from doing of our duties, in our several places and callings.

Finally, it is our duty in all things, yea even in the doing of our best
duties, either to God or man: to humble our selves under the mighty hand of
God.

Explication and proof.
That these are duties belonging to the comfort of faith in the Almighty power
of God. First, Read Psalm: 62.11. God has spoken once, yea twice (that is
often) have I heard the same: that power belongs to God. And Rom: 13.1. There
is no power but of God. Read also John 19.11. It follows therefore, according
to that we read, Psalm: 68.34. that we are to ascribe All power to God: for
his Majesty is upon Israel, and his strength in the clouds.

O God (says the Psalmist in the next verse) thou art terrible out of thy holy
places. The God of Israel is he that gives strength and power unto the
people: praised be God. See the practice, 1. Chronicles. 29.10.11.12.13, etc.
and Psalm. 44.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8. Read also Psalm. 21.13. Be thou exalted, O
Lord in thy strength: so will we sing and praise thy power. And Psalm,
28.7.8. The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart trusted in him, and I
was helped: therefore mine heart shall rejoice, and with my song will I praise
him. The Lord is their strength, and he is the strength of the deliverances of
his Anointed.

And then in the same place, the last verse of the Psalm, there follows a
prayer, according to the second branch of your answer, Save thy people, and
bless thine inheritance, feed them also, and exalt them for ever. Read also
the next Psalm: which celebrateth the power of God, etc. But more near to the
purpose of this second point, lay the Answer of GOD to the prayer of the
Apostle Paul. 2. Corinthians. 12.8.9. My grace (says the Lord to Paul) is
sufficient for thee: for my power is made perfect through weakness. Most of all
consider to this purpose, the earnest and (as he professes) the often prayer
of the same Apostle, for the Ephesians. chap. 1. of that Epistle. verses, 16.
etc, 19.20. etc.

For the third point, read Hebrews, 10.30.31. We know him that has said,
Vengeance belongs to me, and I will recompense, says the Lord. And again,
The Lord will judge his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God. And 1. Corinthians, 10.21. Do we provoke the Lord to
anger? Are we stronger then he? And Psalm, 90.11. Who knows the power of
thy wrath? For according to thy fear is thine anger. That is, No man can fear
more then there is just cause. The anger of the mighty God scareth us not in
vain. Worthily therefore (says the Prophet Ier. chap. 10.6.7. In so much as
there is none like unto thee, O Lord: seeing thou art great, and thy name is
great in power: who would not fear thee, O King of Nations? for to thee
appertained the dominion or power, etc.

For the fourth point, concerning encouragement to well doing, against all
distrust, and against every timorous and servile fear, etc. Read Matthew
10.18. etc. Fear ye not them which kill the body, but rather fear him which
is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell. In which words our Savior
Christ incourageth his M^nisters to preach the Gospel boldly, without fear of
any man. Read also, 2. Corinthians. 5.11. and Jeremy. chap. 1.17. Trusse up
thy loins (says the Lord to his Prophet) and arise, and speak unto them, all
that I command thee: Be not afraid of their faces, lest I destroy thee before
them. But not only the Ministers of the word, but also every faithful servant
of God, ought to be of good courage for the truth, and to use all holy boldness
in doing of their duties. Yea even women (though naturally most subject to
fear and discouragements) they ought to be of a good and cheerful heart, in
all well doing, not being afraid of any terror: no not from their most
churlish husbands, etc. 1. Pet. 3.6. Read also verses 13.14.15.16. etc. See the
practice of this: Psalm. 42.5. etc. 9. Why art thou cast down my soul? etc.
I will say unto God, who is my rock, etc. And Psalm, 43.1.2. etc. Judge me O
God, etc. For thou art the God of my strength, etc. And Psalm. 46.7.11. The
Lord of Hosts is with us, etc. The contrary faint-heartednes is reproved.
Ierem. 9.9. Yea and grievously threatened, both there: and also Revelation,
chapter. 21.8. The fearful and unbelieving, etc. shall have their part, in
the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

And that the due consideration of the almighty power of GOD, is an argument
of great strength to encourage to all good duty, we may profitably see it by
some instances: namely, 2, Corinthians. 9.7.1. Where the Apostle uses it for a
special reason to persuade the Corinthians to the exercise of liberality. The
Danger of not believing.
For God (says he) is able to make all graces to abound toward you, that ye
always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound in every good
work.

And by the same reason a Prophet sent of God to King Amaziah, persuaded and
prevailed with the King, to lessen his Army, and to loose a great sum of
money, which he had allreadie defrayed about the leuying of it. God has power
(says the holy Prophet) to help and to cast down. And again, The Lord is
able to give thee more then this. 2. Chron: 25.7.8. etc. The same reason is of
like strength, to encourage the faithful, to every other good duty: if it be
duly pondered and weighed.

Finally, that it is our duty, in all things to humble our selves under the
mighty hand of God: Read 1. Pet: 5. verse 6. Humble your selves under the
mighty hand of God, (says the Apostle) that he may exalt you in due time.

For as it is in the verse before that: and likewise as we read James chap: 4.
verse 6. God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

Thus much for the duties.



Without Faith, in the Almighty power of God, we cannot possibly, truly
believe any of those works of God, to have been wrought by him, or which are
hereafter to be wrought by him: to the working whereof, an Almighty power
both was, and is allwaies necessary.

Neither can we possibly be established with sound and stayed comfort, in
our own hearts: but contrariwise, we shall be overwhelmed and confounded, with
every vain fear. Yea so, as the shaking of a leaf, or any like sudden
(though a small noise) shall terrify and dismay us, special^ie in a time or
place of any great danger, and in the dark or dead of the night.

Explication and proof.
So indeed we read Leuit: 26.16.17. The Lord threatens unfaithful and
disobedient persons, that he will appoint over them fearfulnes: to wit, as a
Tyrant, to vex them, etc. And that they shall flee when none pursues them.
And again, verse 36. that he will send even a faintnes into their hearts, in
the land of their enemies, and that the sound of a leaf shaken, shall chase
them, and that they shall flee as fleeing from a sword, and that they shall
fall, no man pursuing them, etc. Likewise Deutero^omy. 28.65. The Lord (says
Moses) shall give thee a trembling heart. Read also agreeable to this. Psalm:
14.5. They shall be taken with fear. And Psalm: 53.^. There they were afraid
for fear, where no fear was.

Yea, not only the wicked, but sometimes the children of God themselves, for
want of faith, or ^t the least, through the weakness of their faith, are thus
terrified with small and sudden causes of fear: as Peterat the speech of a
maid, etc.

The ground or cause of this fearfulnes, no doubt, is the want or weakness of
faith in the Fatherly and powerful goodness of God.

And therefore it is, that the Prophet Isaiah does so peremptorily tell Ahaz,
and the people of Judah (whose hearts were moved for fear of the Aramites, as
the trees of the forest are moved with the wind,) that Surely, if they
believed not, they should not be established. Isai: chap: 7.1.2. etc. 9.

For want of this Faith, we re^de a fearful example of Gods judgment, upon
a noble man in Israel. 2. Kings chapt: 7.1.2. Read also verses 19.20.

And I beseech you, how should we believe firmly, and without wavering,
that the whole world was at the beginning, created by God the Father of
nothing: if we do not believe in him as in the Almighty.

Likewise also, how shall we possibly believe the Resurrection of our own
bodies, and of the bodies of the thousand thousands of those that have died,
Belief in God the Father, maker of heaven and earth.
and shall dye, and rot away, or otherwise be consumed, The ground and meaning.
and brought even almost to nothing: unless we believe, in the almighty power
of our God? And how, shall we undoubtedly look for a new heaven, and a new
earth, after the resurrection, and that the power of the Devil shall be
utterly and for ever overthrown: if we do not believe in the almighty power
of God? Yea in the almighty power of God our heavenly Father. The Sadduces not
considering nor believing this almighty power of God, could not believe the
resurrection of the dead. Ye err (says our Savior Christ) not knowing the
Scriptures nor the power of God.

Finally, to the establishing of the hearts of the children of God, these two
(the power of God, and the mercy of God) must go linked together, and
accordingly be apprehended and believed of the faithful: even as to the
terror of all infidelles and ungodly ones, the fearful justice of God shall
be armed with his infinite power, and so shall for ever confound them all.

To God therefore almighty, and everlasting; yea, even to GOD our most
gracious and merciful Father, be all praise, and honor, and glory. Amen,
Amen.

Belief in God the Father, maker of heaven and earth.
LEt us now come to the doctrine of creation, the which is of all other, the
first and the same also a most notable manifestation of the almighty power of
God.

And first, what ground of holy Scripture have you, that this work of Gods
Creation (being most outward and sensible) should nevertheless, be a matter of
faith? For faith is described to be of things that are not seen, as we read in
the beginning of ^he 11. chap. to the Hebrews.



In the 3. verse of the same 11. chap: thus we read. Through faith (says the
holy Apostle) we understand that the world was ordained by the word of God, so
that the things which we see, were not made of things which did appear.

Explication and proof.
This Testimony indeed shows plainly, that this visible work of Gods
creation, is a matter of faith. But how? Not in that it is visiblie and
sensibly, every way s^ene, felt and discerned of us, but in respect of the
original of it: in that, first of all, it was by the almighty power of God
made of mere nothing. For that is the meaning of the Apostle, in that he
says, it was not made of things which did appear. So that, even that which
was nothing before, was made something; contrary to the rule of man's
philosophical principle, from the which they do stiffly (though falsely
contend) that nothing can be made of nothing. It is faith therefore, that must
teach us this principle, which is so contrary to carnal reason. And the
rather, when we see so goodly and magnificent a work to be so aptly composed
and made, as the word (K^tertisthai) englished (ordained) does signify.
Whereas being nothing at the first, it was also at the beginning only a rude
heap, utterly void of all the present furniture and beauty: according to the
beginning of Gen: chap: 1. v. 2. So that then, hereby we may perceive, that the
office of faith is twofold as it were. For it looks both retrorsum and
antrorsum: that is backward and forward, as one may say. Backward, to those
things which being now, had never any being before: until God by his
almighty power gave a being unto them. And forward, to such things, as though
they are not yet, be nevertheless (by virtue of the word and promise of God) as
surely expected, as if they were already performed: namely, that these heavens,
and this earth (being, through our sins, made subject to vanity, and shall
certainly be dissolved) shall be renewed, yea in ^ffect made new again: and
that, in a more glorious and excellent manner (and the same also as certainly)
as they were at the first made and disposed, in such manner as we see them now
to be.

It looks also forward, to the expectation of the resurrection of our bodies,
after this life, at the last day: and after the glorifying of them then, etc.
as certainly, as we know that we are now mortal creatures, and have the
feeling of our present miseries, etc.

So that faith, being of a spiritual nature (a very divine gift of God to man)
it rests it self, and as it were hides it self only in the eternal and
almighty God. Who, as he was before the beginning of all creatures, so shall
he, and so will he continue for ever the same: and give all true believers, a
most happy and everlasting estate and condition, after that this world, and
all things touching their present, vain, and transitory estate, shall come
to an end.

But thus we are, as it were upon the wings of faith, carried very far. Let
us return to the doctrine of creation, having already seen, that howsoever,
the world now made is a matter of sense, and not of faith: yet in respect of
the creation and making of it, it is a singular point of belief.



It is every where testified in the holy Scriptures: but first of all, and most
fully and plainly in the two first chapters of Genesis, which is the first
book of the Prophet Moses.

Explication and proof.
It is so indeed. For as touching the often witnessing of Gods creation of all
things: we may remembe^, that diverse testimonies of the holy Scriptures, have
been mentioned already. And we may every where find more. As namely, Isai,
40.26. The Lord has created all things, he brings out their Armies by
number, and calls them all by names. By the greatness of his power, and mighty
strength, nothing falls. And verse, 28. The everlasting God the Lord has
created the ends of the earth. He neither faints, nor is weary, there is no
searching of his understanding. And again, chap 42.5. He has created the
heavens, and spre^d them abroad, he has stretched forth the earth, and the
buds thereof: he gives breath to the people upon it, and spirit to them that
dwell therein. And yet again, chap. 45.11.12. Thus says the Lord, the h^ly
one of Israel, and his maker, etc. I whose hands have spread out the heavens, I
have even commanded all their Armies. And Psalm. 89.11.12. The heavens are
thine, and the earth also is thine, thou have laid the foundation of the
world, and all that therein is, Thou have created the North and the South,
etc. And Psalm. 148.5. He commanded, and they were created.

Likewise Psalm. 33.6. though expressed by another Hebrew word then is used in
the former places. By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the
host of them, by the breath of his mouth. And Psalm. 121.2. and 124.8. And
Psalm. 136.5.6.7.8.9. Which by his wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy
endures for ever. Which stretched out the earth upon the waters, etc. And
Psalm. 146.6. Which made heaven and earth, the Sea and all that in them is.
Read also Exodus 20. in the fourth Commandment. And Isa. 44.24. I am thy Lord
that made all things, who spread out the heavens alone, and stretched out the
earth by my self.

Likewise Ier. 10.12. He has made the earth by his power, and established the
world by his wisdom, and has stretched out the heavens by his discretion.
And chap. 32, verse. 1^. Ah Lord GOD (says the holy Prophet in his prayer to
GOD) Behold thou have made the heaven and the earth, by thy great power, and by
thy stretched out arm, and there is nothing hard unto thee, etc. Read also
Acts 4 24. in the prayer of the holy Apostles. O Lord (say they with one
accord) thou art the God, which have made the heaven, and the earth, the Sea,
and all things that are in them, etc.

And chap. 17, 24. The Apostle Paul, describing the true God to the ignorant
and Idolatrous Athenians, Whom ye ignorantly worship (says he) him show I
unto your God that made the world, and all things that are therein: seeing that
he is Lord of heaven and of earth, he dwells not in Temples made with hands,
etc. And if we would read yet a more large discourse, concerning the works of
Gods most mighty and wise creation, more immediately as it were from the Lords
own mouth: we may have our recourse to the 38. and 39. chap: of the book of
Job. The Psalmist does also excellently celebrate the praises of the Lord, for
the same his notable works, Psalm: 104. And thus we may see the works of Gods
mighty creation, every where testified in the holy Scriptures. Nevertheless,
insomuch (as it was further truly answered) the holy history of them is first
of all, most fully and plainly (and as we may say originally) described in the
2. first chapters of Genesis: we will in this our exercise of gathering the
doctrine of the principles of religion, fundame^tally inquire of the^,
according to the ground and direction of those chapters. Now therefore that we
may proceed, in as plain and familiar a course as we can: Let us make our
entrance from the consideration of the meaning of this word, to Create.



This word (to Create) signifies most properly to make a substance or being
of a thing, where there was nothing at all before.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. And thus did the Lord at the beginning create the substance
and being both of the heavens and also of the earth: that is, he caused them
to be, when they were nothing at all before. For this is the most proper and
original signification of the word Bara.



Yes, and therefore I said (as I have been further taught) that it signifies,
not only to make a substance, but also to give a being, which is more
general, and notes the quality and whole estate and condition of the thing,
as well as the substance it self: this being the creation of God, as well as
the other.

Explication and proof.
You have learned to answer as the truth it self teaches. And therefore do
the best learned, upon diligent observation affirm, that the word Bara does
not only signify, producere a non esse, ad esse: that is, to bring forth the
being of a thing from no being: but also, that God has herein wrought as
excellently for the manifestation of his divine wisdom and gracious goodness,
as of his almighty power. And therefore well says Iunius, a learned
Interpreter of Gods word, Genesis 1.1. Annot: post:
God created: that is, Fecit ex nihilo: he made of nothing. Et quidem
potentissime ac magnificentissime: no less stately or gorgeously, the^
mightily. Na^ haec propria est Hebraei verbi significatio: For this (says he)
is the proper signification of the Hebrew verb. And besides, it is easy to
observe, that the same verb is used to note wisdom in discerning of a thing
upon mature deliberation, or in making of a special choice: as 1, Sam: 17, 8.
Choose you a man for you etc. And Ezekiel: chap: 21, 19. Choose thou a place, and
choose it in the corner of the way of the City. In the Hebrew distinction of
this chapter, it is the 24. verse.

Furthermore, as touching the quality and excellent estate and condition of a
thing, whereto the word of Creation extends it self: it is evident in that
it is expressly said, that the Lord created all things very good. And Psalm.
51.10. King David repenting him, of his own corruption, whereby he had
perverted his own soul, prays God to create in him a clean heart, Read
also, Isay. 54.16. behold I have created the smith, etc. and I have created the
destroyer to destroy. And chap. 57.19. I create the fruit of the lips to be
peace etc. And 65.17.18. New heavens and a new earth, and joy to Gods people.

And besides all this, the word of creation, does not only signify, the
making of the first matter and ground of all things, called the heaven and the
earth: but also the first producing and making of all Creatures, in their
kinds from them, or like to them: as the Sun, and the Moon, and the
Stars, like to the matter of the heavens in proportion: as Adam and other
earthly creatures were created from the earth, and out of the water, Genesis 1,
20.21. and ch: 3.19. And Eve of the ribbe of Adam. For God created them male
and female Genesis 1.27. and ch: 7.1.2. yea, and the propagation of all creatures
in their kinds, it is called a new creation, Genesis 6.7, Psals 102.18. and
104.30. and Ezekiel: 28.13, 15. Job: 31.15. He that has mad me in the womb, has
he not made him? Has not he alone facioned us in the womb? And Ier: 1.5. To
this purpose it is, that to the clearing of the full signification of this word
of Creation, diverse words are sometimes put together. And namely these two,
(Iatsar) and (Gnasa) are joined with (Bara) the one signifying to do a thing
in a more general signification; the other, to make one thing of another,
giving it a new form and beauty etc as the potter does his pot out of the
clay. From the which similitude, the Lord expresses the creation of the body
of Adam, out of the dust of the earth, as it were mixed with water: and so
molded up to a lump, and fashioned, to his excellent form and shape, and to
that excellent estate and condition wherein God did set it, As The Lord God
made man of the d^st of the ground, and breathed in his face breath of life:
and man was a living soul. The Greek words answering to these as the learned
ob erue: are K^^^s) for creat ng of nothing. Po^^sis) for making into some
outward ^orme. P^^sis) for a through working an^ ^a^^o^ing both within and
without. Iun^^s Annot. post:
Gen: 2. verse 7. So that although the soul is signified to be by creation
most properly taken, yet it is more immediately from God. Concerning the
similitude of the Potter, read Isaiah: chapter 45.9. Woe unto him that
strives with his Maker, the pot shard with the potshardes of the earth: that
is, as well one as other, all being frail and earthly, etc. In the which
Chapter also, are the former three words, noting this more full signification
of creation, joined together: as we may read them, verse 7. I form the light,
and create darkness, I make peace and create evil: I the Lord do all these
things. And in the same chap: verse 18. Thus says the Lord, that created
heaven, God himself that framed the earth and made it: he has prepared it, he
created it not in vain: he formed it to be inhabited, etc. And before this,
chapter 43.7. Every one (says the Lord) shall be called by my name: For I created
him for my glory, formed him and made him. Moreover, G^n: ^.22. there is yet
another word used, to express the manner of the creation of Eve. For the Lord
taking a ribbe, as it were a rafter or sparre out of the side of Adam, is said
to have builte Eve: that is to say, to have framed and fashioned her as an
excellent building: yea with a body of more large capacity, and with move
rooms and enclosures (as one well says) for the more commodious propagation
of children. And as touching her soul, that also was properly created as was
the soul of Adam, and so are the souls of all men and women to this day.

Finally, in respect of the most proper signification of creation, every new
and strange work or judgment of God, is diverse times expressed by the word
Bara: as Exodus 34, 10. I will do such miracles (says the Lord) as have not
been wrought in all the world. Likewise Numbers 16.30. Likewise Isai: 41.20.
and chapter ^8 6. and Ier: 31.12.

Thus much for the opening of the signification of the word (to create) whereby
every way may appear the infinite excellency of Gods making of things: from
all that making which is, or may be attributed to man. For although, by the
gift of God, and in an artificial imitation of his works of nature, man does
make many beautiful forms of things: yet he cannot possibly make the least
substance of any thing, nor inspire any life or lively and natural motion in
the least degree. And even his forms also, are infinitely inferior, to the
beauty of the things themselves, which God forms and beautifieth, above all
the most exquisite artificers skill.

NOw after the understanding of the meaning of the word: let us go forward to
the matter it self.

When you say that the substance, and frame, and whole furniture of the
heavens, and of the earth, were created when they were nothing at all before:
You do therein affirm, that the world is not eternal, and without beginning,
as God himself is; but that in time it had a beginning.



Yea the holy Scriptures teach me to believe that the whole world, both the
heavens and the earth, had their beginning with the beginning of time it self:
and that also within less then the space and term of six thousand years.

It is very true, as the certain and undoubted Chronology of the holy
Scriptures themselves, Explication and proof.
do evidently declare, to all such as do make diligent and religious search
thereinto. The which verily, is the duty of every true believer, to do more
or less either by his own industry, or by the help of others, for the
confirmation of his faith therein. And that from thence also, our faith may be
confirmed, concerning the appearing of our Savior Christ in the fulness of
time, according to all the holy Prophesies thereof.

But this were too long a business, and peradventure too troublesome, for the
present exercise. Nevertheless, it shall be meet and profitable for you, at your
leisure, to read that diligently, which has been purposedly collected out of
the holy Scriptures, for your instruction in this point: or else to read the
labors of some other. The which their labors may easily come to your hands,
if you show your selves to have any godly desire after the same. The sum
of al, we will here set down, as it is comprised in certain verses, already
gathered to your hand for some furtherance of your understanding, and for a
familiar help of memory herein.

SAcred Genesis first of all,
The Scripture story does contain:
Of years two thousands, hundreds three,
And sixty eight since world began.
The second Book which Moses wrote,
Called Exodus of going out:
One hundred forty adding six,
This is the sum whereto it is brought.
The third, of Levy bearing name,
Shows many things, but eeks the skore,
With never a year: but Numery
Has thirty eighte, and near one more.
Then Deutronomie does supply,
All which that year to want we see:
So all five books, to thousands two,
Add hundreds five, and fifty three.
Next, Joshua space of 17. years,
Judges two hundreths, ninety nine:
The first of Samuel fourscore,
The next has forty, David's reign.
The first of Kings from Solomon,
Has years one hundred and seventeen:
Next, hundreths three, forty and five,
As by due trial may be seen.
This story reaches to the time,
When captive state to Judah fell:
Yea to the year of forty five,
That they were thrall in strange Babell.
The books of days or Chronicles,
No longer story do set down.
Save forty five, to Cyrus reign,
They make increase to seventy one.
Then Ezra, Nehem' and Esters book,
Show captive Jews sent home again:
Where they abode.4. hundred years,
Yea ninety more, till Christ was slain.
For thus is Daniel rightly skand,
I mean the speech of Angel there:
Who thither, from thrall seuenties end,
Defines seven times seventy year.
So then since man was first create,
And likewise, since his woeful fall,
Till Christ his death: it is thousands three
Hundreths nine, and sixty six in all.
Whence, take we thirty three, and then,
There do remain, but thousands three:
And hundreths nine, thirty and three,
Till Christ took flesh to make us free.
Now since that time, how many years,
Have passed just, by yearly count:
He knows but little, that cannot tell,
The sum whereto they do amount.
But use hereof, what should be made,
Most wise may live, and still may learn:
Christ taking life, and dying death,
To life does call, from sin does warn.
For as he came in base estate,
And sta^ed no whit, the time once come:
So will he have a glorious Judge,
Of life and death, to give last doom.
Repent therefore, thy sins forsake,
Believe in him whom God has sent:
Be sorry for all days and times,
Wherein thou have thy life misspent.
Thus, times and seasons if thou weigh,
The more exact, the better stay:
But if thou do, this use neglect,
The greater skill, the worse defect.
Thy friend does friendly wish thee well,
Let small default, not much offend:
One year, yea more may pen escape,
But Gods accounts, can none amend.
The more full opening of these verses, is to be examined from the Book it
self, printed to that end.



Because it cannot be conc^iued by reason, or compassed by our vain, or
curious, and confused thought: therefore do the holy Scriptures teach us, to
understand and believe it by faith, as we have learned before.

Explication and proof.
It is Gods great mercy, that he has vouchsafed to reveal this to be so. And
it is our duty, in the humble obedience of faith, withal thankfulness, to
acknowledge the same: and to restrain our thoughts, from all wanderings any
other way; which cannot but be infinitely confused, and very sinful and
perilous to our souls. Only therefore let it content us to know, that God
himself, was in himself, the perfect fulness of all in all things, before
there was any thing at all: as well as now, and ever since he has given to all
things their proper continuance and being. And that we may the better help
our selves, to give credit to the doctrine of the creation of the great world:
let us consider our selves, who are (after a sort so many little worlds, for
the wonderful manner of our creation. And herein let us all consider
earnestly, what we were but one hundredth of years ago: yea a great deal
less. And as for many of us, what were we but even a tewe years since? Where
were we in all the world? what were we? were we not just nothing? Our own
creation therefore, may justly be a strong argument unto us, of the creation of
all other things, and of the world it self. For seeing that God by his
almighty power, has made our selves in this our time as all other in their
ages: why should it be strange to us to hear the word of God to teach us, that
all things were created of nothing? Surely, that creatures who have reason,
should call into question the truth of the doctrine of creation: it is not
only without reason, but also even unnatural. For a created nature having
reason, and not being perverted in it self: must needs easily see, and
(feelingly, as it were) acknowledge, even from the own state, the creation of
all other creatures.

WE therefore putting away all doubt herein: Let us proceed to the manner of the
creation, as the Lord himself, has (of the same his most gracious goodness)
made it known unto us.



All things at the beginning, that is, so soon as time it self had any
being; they were created and began to take their being: only by the word and
commandment of God, according to his own eternal decree in this behalf.

Explication and proof.
This is indeed the t^^e meaning of the first words of the holy Bible: even of
the first words of the first book of the Scriptures of God. In the beginning
(says the Prophet Moses, who has this testimony of God, that he was very
faithful, Heb: ^, 5.) God created the heavens and the earth. In the beginning:
that is to say, even so soon as there was any beginning of any creature, did
the creation of all things begin: yea even so soon a^ time it self began. The
which time God made also, as the measure of all the rest of his creatures and
works, in regard of their first being, when they began: and also of their
continuance, as they are former or latter, even to the last end of the longest
time that may be, of this short and transitory world. According to that, Psalm:
102.2^.^6.27. They shall perish, but thou shall endure, etc. And 1. Cor: 7.29.
The time is short. And verse 30. The fashion of this world goes away. And 1.
Pet: 4.7. The end of all things is at hand. But touching the new heaven, and
the new earth which shall be established, (the time of the continuance of
this present evil, and sinful world once ended) as they shall be in a more
excellent estate, so shall their continuance for ever, be measured by another
kind of measure, even above measure; that is, by time as it were timelesse,
for ever and ever: even by time, and times, time without end. As Revel: 21,
23. The City shall have no need of the Sun, etc. Neither is there any night
there, etc. Of the which enough for this time.

Wherefore, that we may proceed. It is true also, that you have answered,
that the only immediate cause efficient, of the creation, was the word and
commandment of God: without all instruments and means, which the wicked and
ungodly Epicures, and Atheists of the world, mockingly ask after. According to
the holy testimonies of the divine Scriptures, Ps. 33.6. as it has been
alleged before. And again, Psalm: 148.5. He commanded, and they were created.
Even according to the historical narration of Moses in this our first Chapter
or Gene: God said, let there be light, and there was light. Let there be a
firmament, or spreading out of the aierie regions etc. And all were presently,
so as God spoke and commanded.



I have been taught to understand them otherwise then so.

Explication and proof.
There is good reason thereof. For hitherto, there was no use of vocal and
sounding speech: seeing there was yet no creature to hear it, nor instrument
to sound it, or place whether the sound thereof should be carried no nor air
wherein it should be sounded: I mean at the first instant of the creation?



It notes the execution of his eternal decree, in the beginning of time,
Loquutus est Deus: hoc est (inquit Caluinus) aeternum suum decretu^ protulit.
Comment: in Genesis 1.11. God has spoken (says Calvin) that is, he has
performed his eternal decree.
according as eternally, and before all time (without beginning) he purposed in
himself, to accomplish his work, by his Son, together with the holy Ghost:
who are eternally and without all beginning, the essential wisdom and power
of God.

Explication and proof.
Thus indeed, concerning the son of God, does the holy Evangelist John most
divinely expound this creating WORD: chap: 1.1. etc. In the beginning (says
he) was the word, and the word was God. The same was in the beginning with God.
All things were made by it, and without it was made nothing that was made. In
it was life, and the life was the light of men, etc. And verse 10. The world
was made by him, etc. And thenceforth, he proceeds to show, that as the
world was at the first made by him, and set in good estate: so it being
perverted by the sin of man, it is again renewed and delivered from vanity
and corruption by him, etc. 2. Cor. 5.17.

And touching the holy Ghost, that he was as the hand and even the very power
of God, in this mighty work of his creation: Moses himself expressly
affirms it, in the second verse of his first, chapter.

So then, by the testimony and interpretation of the Evangelist John, it is
plain; that as well the heaven and the earth at the first instant, as
afterward, the whole disposition of them, and the creation of all the other
earthly and visible creatures out of them: were created by the word or speech
and commandment of God, in such sense as has been already expounded.

John?

It is very clear and plain: And the Apostle Paul also, does as clearly
confirm the same in his Epistle to the Colos: chap: 1.15.16. and 17. verses.

Rehearse you the words of the Apostle.

Which are they?

Who (that is the dear Son of God, whom he had mentioned a little before)
is the Image of the invisible God, the first begotten of every creature: that
is, eternally begotten and having his personal subsistence from God the Father,
before there was any creature at all.

For by him (as the Apostle says further) were all things created, which are
in heaven, and which are in earth, things visible and invisible: whether they
be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities or Powers; all things were created
by him and for him.

And he is before all things, and in him all things consist.

Explication and proof.
This place indeed being as clear as the former of the Evangelist John: it is
also more particular and full, then that is.

For in this, the Apostle, according to the excellent knowledge which was
revealed unto him, he sets out the most high excellency of the most
glorious Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ; in that, not only the inferior
creatures were created by him, and therefore be inferior to him: but also even
those that are most excellent above the rest. That is, not only were these
visible heavens created by him but also the heavens of heavens, as King Solomon
calls them, 1. Kings: 8.27. Even those which the Apo: understands by the
third heaven, whereunto he was taken up: 2. Cor: 12.2. Neither was man only
created by him, but also even the Angels themselves, how high soever above
men: and by what high names or titles soever they may be esteemed: whether
Thrones, as it were the Lords chayer of estate: or Dominions, by whom it
pleases his divine majesty (as by his servants) to execute and administer his
government over the rest of his creatures: or Principalities, as chief in any
special service: or Powers, as being endued with special might and strength,
most effectually to accomplish the service appointed to them: according to that
Psalm: 103.20. And all these are infinitely inferior to the Son of God,
insomuch as they were created by him: not as by an instrument, but as by their
very Lord and sovereign maker. Yea, so that though the Angels be admitted
to be as the Thrones of God: yet they may not be permitted to sit once at the
right hand of the Majesty of GOD, as the Son of God is, yea even in that
nature of man, wherein he abased himself for the deliverance and advancement
of man.

Thus therefore I say, this testimony of the Apostle Paul, does most fully, as
well as most clearly, lay open unto us, the most high excellency, and
sovereign dignity of the Son of God, from the whole work of creation: the
which, God the Father, has begun, and perfected all together by him,
together with the holy Ghost, the divine spirit of them both. Read also, Ephesians.
3.9. God has created all things by Jesus Christ.

But now, that we may go yet one step forward, though somewhat slowly and at
leisure, wading as it were in so high a stream, wherein, without sure footing,
the tallest wader, may easily be overthrown.



No, but the contrary, is most evident, and plain.

So it is indeed. Show therefore in what space of time, they were created.



The heavens, and the earth, and all creatures therein, even the whole company
of the thousand thousands of Angels in heaven, the Sun and the Moon, and all
the Stars of heaven: and all earthly creatures, in their several kinds, they
were all created within the space of six several days.

Explication and proof.
This also is manifest in the. 1. chapter Gen: and in the beginning of the second
chap: verse. 1.2.3. Where, not only the finishing, and perfecting of all the
works of the creation is assured unto us: but also the several works of
every day, are distinctly described unto us, for the more certain credit of
the holy story; which God himself has revealed, and caused by his faithful
Prophet Moses, to be recorded and delivered over unto us. The ground and first
matter of all (the Angels and souls of mankind excepted, as we must confess)
was created at once, and in the beginning of the first day: but the several
kinds, were not all finished till the sixth day.



Herein, it pleased God to tender our weakness, to the end that our minds,
which are of themselves vain and flitting, being held in the distinct
consideration of the particulars: might receive our more full instruction,
concerning the mighty power, manifold wisdom and bountiful goodness of
God, expressed therein: and so also might be provoked thereby, to give the
greater glory, and to power forth the more plentiful praises and thanksgiving
to his most excellent and divine Maistie, for the same.

Explication and proof.
These are sufficient reasons thereof, and we cannot sufficiently glorify and
praise the Lord our God, for the same. I mean, not only for the Creation it
self, but also for the excellent order, which the Lord has observed in the
working of it, most graciously and wisely, for our better instruction and
comfort: as by the grace of GOD, we will observe in the particulars, as the
occasion, shall by the goodness of GOD, be offered unto us, in the
examination thereof.

LEt us therefore come to the works of the several days.

In which of them, were the Angels, and the invisible heaven, created and
made? Is there any certain ground for this? It seems that Moses minded to
write nothing of their Creation, but to hold himself within the compass of the
visible creatures, for the instruction of the more rude and simple:



Although the Prophet Moses, do in the holy history of the creation, set
down nothing expressly, concerning the Creation of the Angels: nevertheless,
insomuch as in the process of his writings, he does afterward make often
mention of them: as being the most excellent creatures and servants of God:
there is no doubt, but he minded to comprehend them, within the compass of
the creation of the heavens. And that also most likely, in the first day with
the first of the creatures as being the chief of them: even so soon as GOD
had prepared, a meet place of heavenly habitation, for them.

Explication and proof.
It is most likely so indeed. I mean as touching the point as it were, of the
time: even with the first of the Creatures in time, as they are the first in
dignity. But that they were created within the space of the six days,
wherein God perfected all his works of Creation, it may justly be a matter of
faith, and out of all question with us; according to that general testimony,
Gene: 2.1. Thus the heavens and the earth were finished and all the host of
them, And again, verse, 2. and verse 3. they are said to be all the works of
God, which he had created and made. So that it is plain, that the whole work
of creation, was a continued work, without any interruption, or intermission;
from the very first point of the beginning, to the last accomplishment of the
same,

The invisible Angels therefore, and so likewise the invisible heavens, must be
in that space created: or else they should be, to our knowledge, no creatures.
For we have no warrant of any creation, but of this one; which God has, of
his mercy revealed to his Church, by his faithful se^^ant Moses. Neither can
there any sufficient reason be alleged, why any one of the Creatures, should
prevent the time of the universal creation of the rest. For God, the Creator
of all, to be blessed for ever: he both is, and was from before all beginning,
most perfect and entire in himself, without any creature whatsoever; lacking
nothing, either for necessity of his being, or for happiness and delight, or
for most high glory and majesty therein, etc. above all that can enter into
the conceit of man: yea above all that the holy Angels can conceive. Read
John, ch: 17.5. and 1. Tim: 6.16. What reason therefore may we have why we
should go about to fancy any creation, before this that Moses, by the
commandment of God, does certify us of. Verily no reason shall be found
worthy, the moving of one step, (as a man may say) to seek after it: it shall be
but as the catching at a shadow, etc.

Now, that the holy Prophet of God Moses, does write expressly of the Angels,
it is evident: even immediately after the history of the Creation, so soon as
Adam and Eve were fallen away from the Lord. Gen: 3.24. For under the name of
Cherubims, he notes the Angels, as it was familiar to the Israelites, for
whose instruction first of all he wrote: insomuch as they were to them; in the
Tabernacle of God, representations of the Angels attending the presence of God
among them: Exodus: 25, 18, etc. 22. and ch: 26.13. Read also, Psalm. 18.10. and
Ezekiel. chapter 10.

But that Moses does yet more plainly write of the Angels, yea even in his
first book, in such sort that it may appear, that the servants of God did
understand this part of Gods creation: read Gen: 24.7.40. and Chap: 28.12. and
chap. 31.11. and chap: 32.1, 2. and chap: 48.16. Albeit in this last place now
cited, and also in the first of them: we are to understand them prophetically,
of him that is the prince of all Angels, Christ the Son of God. As though
Abraham and Iaacob should have said. That great Angel by his servants the
Angels, will go with ye, and deliver ye, and prosper ye, etc. Yea, and that
long before this, the Church of God, was possessed with this part of the
doctrine of creation; it is evident by the Testimony of the Apostle Jude, who
affirms planly and undoubtedly, that even Henoch the seventh from Adam,
prophesied of the coming of the Lord, to the last judgment, with the
thousands of his Saints: or rather as it is in the Text, with his holy
thousands (to wit of his Angels) according to that which our Lord Jesus Christ
said concerning himself, Mat: 25.31.

The like is to be observed, concerning the ancient knowledge and faith of the
invisible heavens: according to that, Gen: chap: 38.17. where after that Iaacob
had seen a vision of Angels, etc. This is the house of God (says he) and the
gate of heaven. He takes his comparison, no doubt, from the invisible heaven;
above the top of that ladder whereupon he saw the Lord to stand. Of these
heavens, had all the faithful Patriarch, the promise of God, under the sign
of the earthly Canaan: as the Apostle to the Heb: does assuredly confirm unto
us. chap: 11. v. 8.9, 10.13.14.15.16. They looked for a heavenly City; that
is, for heaven it self, whose builder and maker (as the Apostle says) is God.
These heavens, are that habitation, or dwelling place, which so many of the
Angels, bereaved themselves of, as from the beginning fell away from the Lord,
Jude. v. 6. And Henoch mentioned before, was known to be taken up by the Lord,
even in that young age of the world, into these heavens. Genesis 5, 24. So that,
thoroughly waying all things: we may justly conceive, that the doctrine of the
Creation, even touching these points; was known and believed in the church of
God, from the beginning of the world.

It is true indeed, that Moses does not at the first, so distinctly speak of
them: because in the wisdom of the holy Gho: he hastes to those things which
do more immediately concern our selves. Nevertheless (as was truly answered)
that which he himself writes afterward, and (as we may add further) that
which we read in other pla^^s of the holy Scriptures, (though written by the
appointment of God, in times more or less removed from the days of Moses:
they are so many testimonies that this point of doctrine was known and believed
in the church of God, from the beginning.

Such places as we may take for instance, Job. chap: 38. where, the Lord
himself speaks of the Angels, whom he calls the children of God; as having
their beginning at the same time, when the foundations of the earth were laid,
and when the stars of heaven were created, etc. And of the invisible heavens:
that which we read, Neh. chap. 9.6. and 1. King. 8.27. where King Solomon
calls them the heavens of heavens: and Ps. 68.18.33.35. Ps. 148.1.2.3.4.5.
Where they, together with the Angels, are expressly named among the other
creatures. And yet more fully, in the New Testament, as has bin mentioned
before: in so much as the creation of all invisible creatures, is joined arm
in arm as it were, with the creation of those that are visible: Col: 1.16.
Luk: 2.14. And Acts chap: 1, 9, 10, 11. and chap: 7, 55, 56. 2. Cor: 12, 2.
Heb. 7 26, and chap: 8.1. Wherefore from these after testimonies, we are to
hold, that Moses (as we may truly call him) the first Canonical and
fundamental writer of all holy writ: did set down the ground of our present
doctrine, even from the beginning of his writing. For doubtless there is no
other doctrine, not only of creation, but also even of redemption (which yet
was more leisurely opened to the full, in the Church of God) in any or all of
the latter Scriptures; the entyer ground, and as it were the seed whereof, was
not laid by Moses, in his writings; which are as the first original ground of
all the holy Scriptures: God evermore by his Spirit, directing all his Prophets
to look back, and to have their reference to him, etc. The latter always to
the former, and the former, to him whom God made the foremost of all: that is to
Moses, unto whom our Savior Christ himself appealeth, for proof against the
abuse of marriage, that it was not so from the beginning.

Thus much, for the time of the creation of the invisible heavens, where the
Angels stand in the presence of the majesty of God: and for the time of the
creation of the Angels themselves.

The Angels were created, most spiritual, but finite in substance: most mighty
and wise, most holy and righteous in quality: and in estate and condition,
most happy, above all other creatures. And the invisible heavens, above
comparison, were created more glorious, then are these visible heavens, which
we daily behold with our bodily eyes.

Explication and proof
So indeed we may perceive by that which the holy Apostle Paul writes, 2. Cor:
12, 4. And by that we read, Ps. 11, 4. For how should it be, that the place
where God appears in special majesty and glory, should not be most
glorious? We may reason in this case, as the Apostle does in his comparison,
betwixt the law and the Gospel: 2. Cor: 3, 11. If that which should be
abolished, were glorious, then much more shall that which remains for ever be
glorious. Those heavens no doubt, shall remain for ever unshaken, yea
untouched: when these shall be changed, at the least from that vanity, which
hitherto they are subject unto.

And as for the Angels of heaven, which for number are innumerable, even
thousand thousands, as the holy Scriptures assure us: that they were created
in substance most spiritual, and for quality, most wise and mighty, etc.
above all other creatures: the same holy Scriptures do plentifully confirm.

That the Angels are in number above all that we can, or ought to go about to
take the account of them: we may read Ps: 68, 17. and Dan: 7.10. Heb. 12.22.
They are innumerable.

That they are spiritual substances, even such as have every one of them, a
proper being and life; each of them, distinct both in nature and quality,
from other: it is evident, Hebr: 1, 7. where the Apostle calls the Angels by
the name of Spirits.

Now a Spirit, is not a body, as a man is: as our Savior Christ teaches us,
Luk: 24, 39: howsoever they have diverse times, by special dispensatio^ (and as
it were by commission from God) taken to them, some bodily shape and substance
for a time, and afterward laid it down again, as not belonging or agreeing
to their nature. But that they are every one finite and distinct, and not of a
mixed or confused nature (as a man might peradventure imagine by taking a
similitude from the likeness of the air; which is after a sort spiritual) it
is evident, by those actions which are attributed to them: sometime to one
alone, sometime to many together. For they move from place to place. They
defend and comfort the godly. They discomfort and destroy the wicked, so soon
as God commands them. God has used them for his instruments to give his
law, to publish his Gospel, to declare the secrets of his kingdom and
government. They do most purely and zealously bless and praise the Lord
continually.

And hereby also does it appear, that they are creatures of singular wisdom:
for else God would never use them, in such services, whereunto special
wisdom is necessary.

Their holiness also is thereby manifest, as also their religious will and
nature. In which respect, they are called holy Angels: Luke 9.26. and Mat.
25.21. And as we saw from the Apostle Jude before, the holy thousands of the
Lord. Such were all of them in the beginning, by creation.

But many corrupted themselves, and so became (as we may say) reprobate Angels:
and are now wicked and unclean spirits, and devils. Of the which (by the grace
of God) more afterward. Wherefore they only that continued in their first
estate, wherein God created them, are called the elect Angels: to show that
their surenes, stands in the free mercy and favor of God the Father, in his
Son, through the holy Ghost: in such a manner, and upon such a ground as is
unknown to us, save only that it was the good will and pleasure of God it
should be so. But that they are elect, the Apostle shows, 1. Tim. 5.21. These
are also, for excellencies sake, called the Angels of the Lord, and the Angels
of God in many places. As also the Angels of heaven, and the Angels of light.
The other are devils of hell, and of darkness, etc.

That the holy Angels (yea that all the Angels generally) were at their
creation, endued with great power, the which also remains to the wicked
Angels, far above the power of man, though inferior to the power of the good
Angels: Read Ps: 103.20.2. Pet: 2, 11. We may see it also by the effect. 2. Ki:
chapter 19.35. Reu: chapter 12.7, 8. The excellency of the holy Angels, does every way
appear, in that they are reckoned for the nearest unto God, in dignity and
glory. As 1. Tim: 5.21. Mar: 8.38. Heb: 2.9. Ps. 8.5. Read also Mat: 25.31. And
for that the chiefest excellency and happiness of men, is this: that they shall
be like to the Angels. And here upon earth, God giving to Stephen (when he
witnessed his holy truth before the adversaries thereof) a singular grace and
comelines, or beauty of face: the same is expressed by a comparison taken from
the likeness of an Angel, Act. 6.1^. And likewise all excellency of speech (as
we know) is expressed by a comparison borrowed from the tongue of an Angel, 1.
Cor: 13.1.

Thus then (as you answered) the Angels were created by God, spiritual
substances, endued with singular power and wisdom, etc. above all other
creatures.

And all this is insinuated, yea groundedly affirmed (though not so plainly
expressed and opened, by the holy and wise Prophet of God Moses) in the very
first words of the holy Bible: in that he says, In the beginning God created
the heavens.

NOw let us come to the visible works of Gods creation, and consider (as
briefly as we can) of the several works of every one of the six days, which it
pleased the Lord to employ about the same?



The principal matter, and groundwork (as one may say) of all the rest, was,
as we were taught before created at one instant, in the beginning of the first
day: even all the wide heaven, and the huge and thick earth which we see. Yet
so, as the heaven which we see, and the whole air, had then no light at all:
and so continued the space of the whole first night, twelve hours at the
least, together.

The earth also, had no seemly form or shape: neither was it furnished with
any creature, which now we see it to be in great variety stored and adorned
withal. Only the waters, as a deep poole or devouring gulf covered it all
over: and from the face thereof, a most black (and as we may say) even a
palpable darkness, more gross and thick then that of Egypt, did lift up it
self as high, and spread it self as large as the heavens, which are now the
instruments of this bright and comfortable light, which shines forth unto us.

Nevertheless, so soon as the space of one night, (that is of the first night
which ever was) came to an end; the Lord God, by his gracious word and
commandment, created and brought forth light: yea, before there was yet either
Sun, or Moon, or any one Star in the whole compass of heaven; o the end
it might most evidently appear, that God is the immediate author of this
excellent creature. And thenceforth, did the Lord, in his wisdom, establish
the order and succession of the day and night, even to this day: so to continue
to the end of the world.

Thus, the whole space of the first day, and of the first night, does by the
determination of God himself, of the more worthy and excellent part: take the
denomination of the first day.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. And thus, you have in one Answer, laid open the meaning of
Moses, in the first four verses of our first Chapter of Genesis: according as
it is both plain in it self, and also confirmed by other testimonies of the
holy Scriptures of God, in this behalf. As first, touching the heavens (which
we do vulgarly call the Element) and the large spreading thereof: read Job 9.8.
He himself alone spreads out the heavens. And chap: 37.18. He has
stretched them out firm, as mou^ten glass. And Psalm: 104.2. He has spread
them like a Curtain. This large extension and spreading out of the highest
visible heaven, is also called the Firmament, from the Greek and common Latin
Translations: as Dan: 12.3. They that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of
the Firmament. Read also Isai: 42.5. He has created the heavens and spread them
abroad. And chap: 44.24. Read also Psalm: 1 36.5. He has made the heavens by
his wisdom, etc. And Ier: 10.12. He stretches them out by his discretion.

And touching the earth, it is written in the Psalm: 104.5. mentioned even now:
that God has so set it upon the foundation, that it cannot be moved. And Psa:
102.25. Thou have laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the
work of thy hands. Read also Job: 38.4. and Prou: 8.29. The earth therefore
may justly be called the Lords earth, as Ps: 24.1.

Touching the covering of the earth by the waters: read Ps: 104.6. Thou
coueredst it with the deep, as with a garment; and by their own nature, they
would stana above the mountains.

Touching the creation of the light and darkness: read Isai 45.7. I (says the
Lord) form the light, and create darkness. Hereupon also, the day and the
night, is by good right, ascribed to the Lord. Psalm: 74.16. The day is thine,
and the night is thine. And hereunto has the Apostle James respect, when chap:
1.17. he calls God the Father of lights.

The constant order and succession of the day and the night, according to the
law which God has set in nature, is set down to the praise of God, Ps: 19.2.
And Ier: 33.19.20.21. The Lord makes it an argument of his faithfulness in his
covenant of everlasting mercy, toward his people. This breaking forth of the
light, is to be thankfully acknowledged for ever, for a very gracious and
glorious work of the Lord. Read Psa: 104.23.24. and Job ch: 38. 12. 13. 14.
But ch: 24. 17. The morning is to the wicked, as the shadow of death.

Now let us hear the holy words of Moses himself, from whence all these
things are cleared unto us.

In the beginning (says Moses) God created the heavens, and the earth.

2 And the earth was without form, and void, and darkness was upon the deep,
and the spirit of God moved upon the waters.

3 Then God said, let there be light: and there was light.

4 And God saw the light that it was good, and God separated the light from
the darkness.

5. And God called the light day, and the darkness he called night: so the
Evening and the Morning were the first day.

In these words, we have the ground of your former answer: and we may see the
truth of it, fully warranted unto us.

And besides, the holy Prophet shows us, how the rude, lumpish, and
indigested matter of the earth, and the huge gulf of waters, above the same:
were as it were molded up, held together, and made apt and fit, to receive
that excellent form, which, in the third day, they were fashioned into. That
is, how they were thus supported: to wit, by the holy Ghost, the divine Spirit
and power of God himself.

Moreover, we have a singular commendation of the light, as of a most
comfortable and commodious creature, even from the approbation of God himself:
who saw, that it approved it self to be good, according to that Eccles. 11.7.
Surely, the light is a pleasant thing. So that hereby we are admonished, to be
in special manner thankful to God for it: and that we ought to be careful to
use it well, even as we may thereby, give the greatest glory to God that we
can: walking as becomes those, whom he has vouchsafed to call, to be the
children of light: and to this end has caused the light of his Gospel to
shine forth unto us. Yea even to this our God, who thus, at the beginning,
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, as the Apostle Paul writes. 2.
Cor: 4, 6. ought we to give all the glory we can. On this first day also, it
may appear, that the upper Region of the air, was made apt to send forth
thunderings and lightenings, by the fiery brightness of it: the which, as we
know, is a very glorious and fearful creature of God. Read Job: chap: 37.1,
2, 3, 4, 5. and chap: 38.24, 35.

But whereas Moses tells us, that God calls the light day, and the darkness
night: he would not have us to think, that he gave those names unto these
things, but that he appointed, and ordained the things themselves, to continue
such, and in such order, as he had already created and made them. For so the
Lords calling, does usually note his effectual establishing of things
themselves, rather then the giving of them their names: according to that of
the holy Apostle, Rom: 4.17. God calls those things that be not, as though
they were. And 1. Cor: 1.26. Brethren, ye see your calling. And our Savior
Christ in the Gospel: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance.

Finally, Moses in saying that the evening and the morning were the first day,
he speaks by a double Synedoche. First, putting the part for the whole; that
is, the day, both for the day, and also for the night: and then the beginning
of the day, and of the night, both for the whole day, and also for the whole
night. This first day of the creation, is that which since the resurrection of
our Savior Christ, is called in the holy Scriptures, the Lords day to
Christians, even that wherein our redemption was perfected: as the 7. day which
was the next day after the creation finished, was then the Lords day to all
people: that is, a day of special worship to God, even from the beginning of
the world.

THese things thus observed: Let us now come to the second days work: the
which,

The Lord so cleared and ordered the regions of the air, as they might be most
commodious for the placing of all heavenly creatures in their proper seats,
limits, and circuites, as it were in their chambers and lofts, each above
other: and likewise, that all earthly creatures might live comfortably upon the
earth, every one according to their kinds, when they should afterward be
created. As it follows in the 6.7. and 8. verses of this first chapter of
Genesis.

Moses his own words, as they are there contained. Which are they?

They are these. Again God said; Let there be a firmament (or as it is
Englished more agreeable to the Hebrew word, in the margent of our Bibles) Let
there be a spreading over (and therewithal air) in the midst of the waters:
and let it separate the waters from the waters.

7 Thus, God made a certain firmament, (or spreading over, as before) and
separated the waters which were under the same firmament, from the waters which
were above it: and it was so.

8 And God called this firmament heaven: so the evening and the morning were
the 2 day.

The work of the Lord in this second day, though it be recorded but as one: yet
it is a very great and a gracious one. For therein he fitted the regions of the
air for all excellent uses: that the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, might
have their places and courses in them: that the clouds might have their place,
and course, as the bottels of God, to water the earth in due time: and that the
snow, and the hail might be congealed and spread abroad in their due seasons,
etc. And that the earthly creatures, might have a clear and thin, not a gross
and foggie aier to draw their breath in: and that also, to this end, the winds
might with their blasts purge the same. For to these, (and if there be any such
like purposes) God in this second day, fitted the whole aier: and disposed of
the several regions, (as it were the sollers and loftes, and chambers thereof,
according to that of the 104. Psalm: verse 3. The Lord lays the beams of his
chambers, in the water, and he makes the clouds his Chariot, and walks
upon the wings of the wind. And verse 13. He waters the mountains from his
chambers. And Gen: 7.11. it is said (to note abundance of rain^) that the
windows of these chambers were opened, the which are called the windows of
Heaven. Likewise Mal: 3.10. In this respect also, the clouds are called the
bottels of Heaven. Job: 38.37.

On this day also, this part of the firmament had a disposition given it, in
the times and seasons thereof, to engender snow and hail, etc. Of the which
we read in the same 38. chapt: of the book of Job.

So that from hence, we may not unfitly gather, that the clouds and the
winds had their creation in this second day: besides that all was fitted to
all ends before specified. Read also Job: chap: 38.9. where the clouds are
said, to have been the covering of the Sea, while darkness, was as the
swaddling bands thereof. Amos 4.13. God is the Creator of the winds.

Thus therefore did the Lord in the second day, clear and order the air, in
most excellent manner: even before the deep gulf of the waters were emptied
out of the earth, and before there was any dry land at all: to the end that
herein as well as before (and as we shall have occasion to observe afterward)
the wisdom, and power, and goodness of God, might rather be considered in it
self, then from the reason of natural causes, as the ouerwise Philosophers of
the world, have too busily accustomed themselves to do, for want of the true
knowledge of the word of God herein.

This firmament, or spreading out, and the ordering of the air, and namely of
that region or circular space, which the Lord has appointed for the rain and
moisture of heaven, to be stayed in over our heads: and even this lower air
also, wherein we live and breath: God called heaven; that is, he appointed them
to be (as we may say) the aerie heaven, according as we use to call the
fowls, or rain, and such like things, which are in these parts of the aier,
the fowls, or clouds, or rain of heaven, etc.

This (as Moses assures us) was God his wise, gracious, and mighty work, in
the second day. For the which we ought to glorify and praise his most holy
and glorious name: as Ps: 148.4.

Moses report that?

It follows thus, in the 9. 10. 11. 12. and 13. verses of the same 1. chap: of
Gene.

9 God said again, let the waters that be under the heaven, gather themselves,
(or flow together) into one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was
so.

10 And God called the dry land Earth, and he called the gathering together of
the waters, Seas: and God saw that it was good.

11 God said also, let the earth bud forth the bud of the herb, that seedeth
seed, the fruitful tree, which bears fruit according to his kind, which
has his seed in it self, upon the earth: and it was so.

12 Thus the earth brought forth the budde of the herb that seeedeth seed,
according to his kind: also the tree that bears fruit, which has his seed
in it self, according to his kind. And God saw that it was good.

Expl^cation and proof.
13 So the evening and the morning were the third day.

This day was that which we commonly call Tuesday. Here are two mighty works
of God. The one, the clearing of the land, as before the Lord had cleared the
air. The other, the replenishing of the earth, with herbs and trees, bearing
their seeds and fruits.

But because the clearing of the earth from the waters, could not be done,
without another work, for the conveyance, and (as we may say) channelling, and
banking in of the Seas: Note also, that the rivers and fountains or springs of
water, were ordered and dis^o^ed in this day, read Revel: 14.7.
therefore we may justly understand this to be a third work of God, upon the
third day. The least whereof, could not possibly be wrought, and brought to
pass, but by an Almighty and creating power. Of these things therefore, let us
stand to consider a little: that our minds may be the better informed,
concerning the greatness and excellency of them; by the help of some other
testimonies of the holy Scriptures, which do worthily stand in the
commemoration of the same.

And first, for the clearing of the earth, by the emptying of the waters: it is
spoken of, as of a work of a new creation. For before this, it was as if it
had not been, in so much as it was covered with most thick darkness, in the
former part of the first day: and yet still remained rude and covered with the
deep waters, until this third day. Wherefore, as the creation of the visible
heavens, are noted by the spreading of them out: so this clearing and drying of
the earth, is reckoned for the creating and making of it, for the use of
habitation to man, and to all other earthly creatures; though as touching the
substance of it, it was made and created of nothing before. Read Psalm: 136.6.
The Lord has stretched out the earth upon the waters (or rather as we should
read it) above the waters: for his mercy indureth for ever. So before, in the
24. Psalm: verse 2. Gnal bamaijm.
He has founded it above the Seas, and established it above the floodes. For
naturally, And ^o likewise P^al 57 verse 5. is the same preposition v^ed.
as the first creation shows, and as has been already alleged out of the
104. Psalm: They would stand above the mountains. But at thy rebuke (says the
holy Ps:) they flee: at the voice of thy thunder (that is, when thou as it were
thunderest out thy commandment) they have away. And the mountains ascend, and
the valleys ^escend, to the place which thou have established for them. Thou
have set them a bound which they shall not pass: they shall not return to
cover the earth. And Job: 38.10.11. The Lord himself says, that he has
established his commandment concerning it, and has set bars and doors. And
said, hitherto shall thou come, and no further, and here shall (the banks)
stay thy proud waves. Read also Ier: ^.22. Fear ye not me? (says the Lord)
and will ye not be afraied at my presence? who have placed the sand for the
bounds of the Sea, by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it, and though
the waves thereof rage, yet they cannot prevail, though they roar, yet can
they not pass over it: that is, beyond the limit of Gods decree and
appointment. So that the waters, which are naturally above the earth: they are
by an ouerruling power of God, made under the earth., as Exodus: 20.4. The waters
under the earth. And for the streatching out as it were, of the earth, by this
remoouing of the water: read further, Isai. 42.5. Where the Lord God, by his
holy P^ophet, describes himself, to be that God, who beside that he has
created the heavens, and spread them abroad, has also stretched forth, the
earth, and the buddes thereof (that is) all whatsoever springs out of it. And
again chap: 44.24. The Lord that made all things, who alone spread out the
heavens, and by himself likewise stretched out the earth. And 2. Pet: 3.5. The
earth had the being of it from the water, and in the water, by the word of
God. Wherefore, justly is he celebrated, to be the God, that made not only the
heavens, but also the earth, and the Seas: Exodus: 20.11. Acts 4.24. And Psalm:
95.3.4.5. The Lord is a great God, and a great King above all Gods. In whose
hands are the deep places of the Earth, and the heights of the Mountains are
his. To whom the Sea belongs: for he made it, and his hands prepared the
dry Land. etc.

This work of God, is worthily commended by the Lord himself, to be good and
commodious; for so it is indeed, a very gracious work, a fruit of his mercy,
which indureth for ever: as was alldged before, from the 5. verse of the 136.
Ps: It is also a very mighty work, in that the waters are thus against kind,
tumbled together as it were on a heap, and laid up in the storehouse of the
Lord. Ps: 33.7. And all this for our benefit. The turning of a little part of
the red Sea, into dry land for a while, is justly recorded to be a great work
of God, and a testimony of his favor, toward his people, the children of
Israel: but it was not so great, nor so general, nor so durable a work, as
this of the first creation was; for the constant benefit of the Church, and of
all mankind, from the beginning to the end of the world. How can we therefore
sufficiently praise God, for the earth, and our so commodious and kindly an
habitation therein: the which (as it is in the 16. verse of the 115. Psalm)
He has given to the sons of men? Let us therefore, more and more, bless and
praise the name of the Lord, who has made the heaven, and the earth, the Sea,
and all that is in them, from this time forth and for evermore. Amen. Consider
also the greatness of this work, wrought in one day, by comparing it with the
slow abating of the waters, after the drowning of the world: Gen: ch: 8. 1. 2.
3. 4. 5.

And furher, touching the fruits of the earth, the which our good God has
created in so infinite variety, both herbs, plants, and all kind of trees,
with their several fruits, for present use, at the very first beginning, and
with their several seeds, for future propagation and increase: O how can we
possibly magnify the goodness and bounty of the Lord, as we ought to do?

Verily, this one and manifold work, is every way, very gracious and
admirable. For as touching the creation of all herbs, plants, and trees, with
their just stature and ripe fruits: and that at one instant, or at the most in
the space of one days grows (whereas naturally, it would as we have
experience, have required the space of many years, although all the best helps
and furtherances, which God has set in nature, be granted for the cherishing
of trees: and many days and weeks, for the cherishing up of the least herb
to the natural perfection thereof) O how wonderful a piece of work is this
also? And the rather, because as yet, no rain, nor so much as a mist had
fallen upon the earth: neither was there any man to till it, as it is expreslie
noted. Genes: chapt: 2. verses 5.6. Neither was there any Sun, or Sunshine,
to vegetate and warm them, etc.

Nevertheless, in one day, and as it were at one instant, was the Garden of
Eden, (tha^ is, the most pleasant and excellent garden, wherein Adam was
placed, so soon as he was created) from the very beginning adorned with all
trees and herbs, pleasant for sight, and wholesome for meat: in the which also,
was the tree of life, etc: as it follows in the same chapt, verses 8.9.10.
etc: with goodly fresh water springs, and rivers, etc. Ps: 104.10. and with the
silver veins of the earth, Job: 28.1.2. etc. All therefore does wonderously
preach the glory of God. Yea, let us but lay together, and consider a few of
the least seeds of things, if ever we have marked them, with the
interchangeable variety of them, in form, in color, etc: but specially if we
weigh in our minds, the qualities and virtues of them: and of the fruits of
trees, etc: yea, but in one nation; yea but of one kind in one little country,
yea but as they are now in the decayed withering estate of the world: who is
able? and who has the wisdom thoroughly to observe the wonder of Gods
creation in these things? And finally, (who duly considering the power and
goodness of God, in this part of his creation) can otherwise choose, but he must
needs acknowledge it to be an easy thing with the Lord, to turn the greatest
dearth that can be, into the greatest plenty, etc: were it not, that our
sins, (do as it were) strengthen Gods justice, to the weakening of his
mercy toward us, although in it self, there is no weakness. Read Psalm:
107.33.34.35. Mal: chapt: 3.10.

Wherefore, setting it down with our selves, to endeavor more and more, to
ponder the goodness of God, in this third fruitful days work of the Lord:
Let us proceed to the consideration of the fourth day, the which was that,
which we call the Wedensday.

Moses commend the works thereof unto us?

It follows from the beginning of the 14. verse, to the end of the 19. In
these words:

14 Afterward God said: Let there be lights in the Firmament of the heaven, (to
wit above the clouds) to separate the day from the night: and let them be
for signs, both for the seasons, (to wit, of the year) and also for days,
and years themselves.

15 Yea let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven, to give light
upon the earth: and it was so.

16 Thus (as Moses says) God made two great lights: the greater light to rule
the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: and (he made also) the Stars.

17 And God set them in the firmament of the heaven, to shine upon the earth.

18 And to rule the Day and the Night, and to separate betwixt the Light and
the Darkness: and God saw that it was good.

19 So the evening and the morning were the fourth day.

Explication and proo^e.
The fourth days work, is likewise a gracious and glorious work of God. For
notwithstanding God had showed before; that he stood in need of no
instruments to give light, and to make the distinction, betwixt the day and the
night: for he had done this already, before there was any Sun or Moon, or
any one Star: yet for the beautifying of his work, and for a further help and
comfort to man, for such singular good uses, as Moses rehearses, both natural
and civil: to wit, that they might be, as it were a general clock or dyall
of time, to determine the years and passages thereof, and every season of the
year; Summer and Winter, seed time and harvest, yea and the days and nights
of the year, either shorter or longer, as the Sun should come nearer, or go
further from the Equinoctial point, etc: and for the historical memorial of
things, in respect both of civil policy, and also of Religion: therefore it
pleased the Lord to create thi^ his excellent creature of the Sun. The like
use is of the Moon for the nights of the months. The Stars also, are both
for singular ornament, and for light in the night, and for assistance to that
gouernmen^ which God has honored the Sun and the Moon withal. Read Job:
chap: 9 verse 9. God makes (the Stars) Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and
those also of the Climate of the South.

And chapt: 38. verses 31.32.33. Can thou restrain the pleasures of the
Pleiades? that is, the pleasant spring which comes with them. Or can thou
loosen the bands of Orion? a star which uses to come with cold and tempest.

Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth in their time? that is, the stars of the
South. Can thou guide Ar^turus with his sons? that is, the Northern
stars. Know thou the course of the heavens etc? And Amos chapt: 5. verse
8. God makes Ple^ades and Orion: that is, he o^dereth them, acccording as at
the first he made them, and appointed them their courses. And Psalm 147.4.
God alone counts the number of the stars, and calls them all by their
names. They are unto us innumerable. Genes: 15.^. God has placed them all in
their seats, and he continues them as his servants therein, according to the
most holy and Divine pleasure of his own will. Psalm: 119. verses. 89.90.91.

The Sun and the Moon are justly called the greater lights, because they are
so unto us, both to sight, and also to use. And therefore let Astronomers
curiously dispute of the greatness of any star above these: we will rest in
this holy Philosophy, which Moses teaches us, as most fit both to express
unto us the great goodness and mercy of God, and also to stir us up, to be
thankful unto him for the same.

Thus then, this fourth days work is very glorious, and therefore justly is
the Lord to be glorified and praised of us therein: according to the profession
and practice of the Church of God. Psalm 8.3.4. and Psalm: 19.1.2. 3.4.5.6.

LEt us now proceed to the works of the fifte day, as the Lord created them.



The Prophet Moses shows which they were, from the beginning of the 20.
verse, to the end of the 23. as it follows in our Text thus:

20 Afterward God said, Let the waters bring forth in abundance, every
creeping thing, that has life (or as we may read, every living creature that
creeps) and let the fowls fly above the earth, toward the face of the
firmament of heaven. To wit, that part of the firmament of heaven, which is
under the clouds next to us.

21 Thus (says Moses,) God created the great Whales, and all living creatures
that creep, Heb: Fowls that have wings.
the which the waters brought forth in abundance according to their kinds,
and all feathered fowls according to their kinds: and God saw that it was
good.

22 And God blessed them, saying. Bring forth fruit and multiply, and fill
yea the waters in the Seas, and let the fowls multiply in the earth.

23 So the evening and the morning were the fifte day.

Explication and proof.
This fifte day, was that which according to the custom among us, is called
Thursday. In it (as the Prophet Moses, by the Spirit of God, reports) were
two very mighty and gracious works of Gods Creation perfected.

The first was the creation of the Fishes of the Sea, in their great and
unknown variety, from the huge Whale to the little minnome: that is, from the
greatest to the least of them, in their several kinds.

Of the which it is thus written, to the celebration of the gift of God in this
respect: Psalm: 104.24.25.26. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom
have thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches, (or as the Hebrew
word Quinianecha signifies, of that which is thy possession.) So is the Sea
great and wine: for therein are things creeping innumerable, both small beasts
and great. There go the Ships, yea the Leuiathan (that is, the great
Whale-fishe or Balaena, so called in the Hebrew language,) whom thou have made
to play therein. All these wait upon thee.

Of the stately description of the Whale-fishe, read (to the glorifying of the
name of God,) how God himself has set it down in the 40. chapter of the
book of Job, from the 20. verse: and in the 41. chapter from the beginning, to
the end of the same.

And as the salt water of the Sea, is replenished with an unknown variety,
(as was said) the which, the strangenes of some fishes now and then taken,
does by experience confirm: so is the fresh water also, in every several
river, as well as in Lakes and Ponds, etc: with such diverse sorts, according to
the diversities of Nations and Countries, that no one country fishermen can
know them all.

These are called creeping things, by a general name: as differing from such
creatures, as have feet to move themselves withal.

This first part of Gods creation, on this fifte day, being well considered
of us: ought to provoke us, to bless and praise our most gracious God, so
often as we are partakers of these kinds of his creatures: which the Sea, and
all other waters, do very plentifully yield us, for a great part of our food
and nourishment.

And likewise it ought to stir us up to praise the Lord, for that he did
not only at the first, make them in their full perfection, acccording to
their kinds, to declare his Almighty power: but also for that he does
continue and multiply them, by their natural propagation and increase, to
this day, according to the bountifulnes of his goodness and mercy.

The second part of Gods mighty and gracious Creation on this fifte day,
were the Fowls of the air, in the like manifold, and exceeding great variety
of their kinds, above all that any man can know, or hear of, from every
part of the world: whether we look to the wild fowls, or to those that be
of the more tame kind. For these therefore, are we likewise, and all
mankind, to be abundantly thankful to the Lord our God, as for a great part
of our sustenance, not only for necessity, but also for delight. And also for
that sweet melody, that many of them make us, by their continual pra^sing
of the Lord in their kinds. Likewise when we behold the beauty of their
goodly colors, besides their daintiness for food, etc. In which respects,
(as we read in the 104. Psalm, verse 12.) the ^^eet singing Psalmist
praises the Lord. And namely for this, that (according to this part of his
creation) the fowls of the heaven, dwell by the clear running springes of the
valleys, and sing among the branches of the trees: where also they make their
nests and breed, etc.

If any shall ask, of what matter the Fishes, and the Fowls were made?
Touching the fowls of heaven, Moses himself tells us expreslie, that God
formed them of the earth, Genes: 2.19. The Lord God formed of the earth every
foul of the heaven. The same may we justly hold, concerning the creation of
the fishes of the Sea, and of all in other waters. Neither does any thing
hinder, why we may not conceive in our minds, that they were made of the
watrie slime, or mudde of the earth: as being more watrie and aierie creatures
then the rest.

These two sorts of creatures, were made together, in one, and the same day;
because they agree something in more near proportion of nature, the one,
living altogether in the water, the other, in a great part upon the water: and
all of them delighting greatly to be by the water. And besides, the air and
the water, are in themselves of a very near affinity or kindred, as we may
say.

Finally, so far as it might best be so ordered, God in his Wisdom making
the most heavenly creatures first: to wit, the Regions of the heavens
themselves, and their hosts, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars he
proceeds to the making of the aierie and watrie creatures that have life,
before he make h the living creatures of the earth.

LEt this for the present suffice, concerning the fifte days work. And let us
come to the good and gracious works of God in the sixte day: which answers
to that which we usually term by the name of Friday. The works of this sixth
day, the last of the creation, were of two sorts. The former were all earthly
living creatures, except mankind. The latter, and the same also the very last
of the creation, were mankind themselves.

Moses report the creation of the former sort of the living creatures: which
are in some special respect, the most natural, and as it were the
domestical, and household creatures of the earth?

This part of Gods creation, is contained in the 24. and 25. verses, where
Moses writes th^^:

24 Moreover God said: Let the earth bring forth the living thing according to
the kind thereof, cattle, and creeping things. And beasts of the earth,
according to their kinds: and it was so.

25 For God made the beast of the earth according to his kind, and the catell
acding to his kind, and every creeping thing of the earth, according to his
kind: and God saw that it was good.

Explication and proof.
In this first part of the last days creation, there are three sorts of Gods
works rehearsed unto us. The first is of those living creatures, which are
called Cattle (in the Hebrewe language Behemah) a word which is applied, to
note those kinds of brute beasts, which are commonly the more tractable, and
tame among other.

Of the which it is said in the 4. Commandment: Thou and thy cattle shall
rest. And in the holy Proverb, A righteous man regards the life of his
beast. chapt: 12.10. The which word in a little differing form, is by a
certain excellency of speech, used to signify the Elephant, or some other
creature, of special bigness, and stature, among earthly creatures: such as
the Whale is among the watrie ones, as we read Job: chapt: 40. verse 10.
behold now Bebemoth (says the Lord to Job) whom I made with thee, which
eats grass as an Ox. Behold now his strength is in his loins, etc. Where,
follows likewise a stately description of him: as afterward another of the
Whale-fishe, etc. But not only the greater were created as on this day, but
the lesser also, yea, even the least of all: from the Elephant to the Ante, as
a man may say.

The second sort of the living creatures, created in this first part of the
creation of the sixth day, were all creeping things: that is, such as upon the
land do move without the natural help of feet, gliding as it were upon the
ground, with their bodies lying along upon the same. Of the which, are those
that are called more properly, by the name of Serpents in the Latin tongue,
by reason of their creeping: and also all kinds of other such like worms.

Concerning the least, and vilest, and even the most hurtful among them, (as
they be now) it is specially to be observed, that they were all good by
creation: according to that honorable testimony, which the Lord our God
gives of them.

Nevertheless, such things as come of putrefaction, as maggates, etc. though
they be the creatures of God, yet they come into the world through sin, as
punishments thereof: and are not of natural and kindly creation. They are
created for punishment, as a fruit of man's sin, and corruption: and not for
comfort or relief, as any fruit of Gods mercy, as all things were, before
the fall.

The third sort of living creatures, such as live upon the earth, and are the
last sort of the first part of the creation of the sixte day: they were
those that are called the beasts of the earth, according to their kinds.

Whereby is meant all kind of Beasts, which are more wild and sauadge then
the other be. Such as are Lions, Bears, Wolves, etc: the ravenous hurtfulnes
whereof (specially against mankind whom God made their ruler) it came in with
man's own sin against God; whereby he has been most hurtful to himself, as we
shall have further occasion to observe afterward.

For by creation they were all good, and easily subject to the government of
man, according to the appointment of God himself: as it follows, concerning
the second part of the creation of this sixte days work, the Historical
report whereof, we are now to consider of.

Moses, wherein he reports the same?

They are these which follow, as they are written in the first Chapter of
Genesis, 26. verse, to the end of the Chapter.

26 Furthermore (says Moses) God said, Let us make man in our image, according
to our likeness, and let them rule over the fish of the Sea, and over the foul
of the heaven, and over the beasts, and over all the earth, and over every
creeping thing, that creeps upon the earth.

27 Thus God created the man in his image, even in the image of God created he
him: male and female created he them.

28 Moreover God blessed them, and God said to them, Bring forth fruit, and
multiply, fill the earth, and subdue it: and rule over the fish of the Sea,
and over the soul of the heaven, and over every beast that moves upon the
earth.

29 God said also, behold, I have given unto you every herb bearing seed,
which is upon all the earth, and every tree wherein there is the fruit of a
tree bearing seed: they shall be to you for food.

3^ Likewise to every beast of the earth, and to every foul of the heaven, and
to every thing that moves upon the earth, in the which is a living soul, I
have given every green herb for food: and it was so.

31 Then God lo^ked upon every thing that he had made, and lo all was very
good. And the evening and the morning were the sixte day.

In this latter part, of this last days work of the creation: there are
sundry things, worthy our special observation, as was somewhat at large
declared in the opening of it. The same things are now to be called again to
our remembrance.



First the holy Prophet shows the manner of the Lords proceeding to this
last part of his work, in the creation of mankind: to be much differing from
the course which he took in the creating of all other his works before.

Secondly, he describes the excellency of the work it self.

Thirdly, the excellent estate and dignity, whereunto the Lord advanced the
same his excellent work.

Fourthlie, the reason is, as it were insinuated, why the Lord made mankind,
after that he had made all the rest of his creatures.

Finally, we have a general commendation of all the works of Gods creation:
not only from Moses, but even from the most holy Testimony also, and divine
approbation of Almighty God himself.

These are things worthy our special observation indeed: according as they
are contained in our Text. Let us therefore, as briefly as we can renew the
consideration of them again.



God does not herein forthwith say, Let the earth bring forth mankind, as
he had said before, L^ther be a light, and so forth in the rest: but he does
as it were take advise and counsel with himself, before the action, saying:
Let us make Man. And so forth, as ^t follows in our Text.



Let us make Man.

GOD being one only in Nature, is nevertheless three distinct Persons, the
FATHER the SON, and the HOLY GHOST, (as was seen at large before who consent
all in one, in the works of creation, and in all things else, as we have
likewise seen rehearsed.



The words of consultation, are figuratively applied to God, in way of a
similitude or comparison only, taken from the use of men: who when they go
about any special work, do first of all, enter into earnest deliberation
about the same.

Explication and proof.
It is true, and we have the like kind of consultation: though to a contrary
purp^se, of a great confusion and destruction. As Genes: chapt: 11.6.7. Behold
(says the Lord) the people is one, etc. Come let us go down and there
confound their language, etc. And chap: 18.20 21. I will go down and see
whether they have done altogether according to that cry which is come unto me:
and if not that I may know. etc.

By thi^ kind of speech therefore, the Lord does most plainly and familiarly
give to understand (as was observed in the second place) that he would have the
making of mankind, to be accounted a special work of his creation.

But why should this be so accounted: insomuch as Man was made of the earth,
as well as other earthly creatures were?

It is so much the rather to be accounted an excellent work of God: because he
made man so excellent a creature, of so base and vile a matter.

Here therefore, for the clearing of this point; Let us more particularly call
to mind, after what sort God created mankind. How does the Prophet Moses
report that unto us?

God made the body of man of the dust of the earth, moulding it (as it were
moist loame, or claie) into that outward form and shape which we all bear:
God turning (or as we may say, transubstantiating) it into flesh, blood and
bone. Whereupon, the first man from the Hebrew word (Adamah, which signifies a
red kind of earth) is called Adam. And after the body was thus framed and
made, God breathed into it the breath of life: and so made man, of senseless
and dead flesh, a living and reasonable soul.

He made woman of the ribbe of man, and endued her also with a like living and
reasonable soul like unto him; yea as it were another (as near as might be)
the very same, a helper every way most meet and commodious for him. Whom, Adam
called first Isha, of the Hebrew word (Is^) which signifies man: like as we in
our language, by a likeness of sound, may seem to call her woman, as it were of
man, or with man, because she was taken out of man, and is one man with him.
And afterward Adam called her (Heuah) comforting himself in hope, that
notwithstanding his great and grievous sin, God would of his free grace and
mercy, let her live to be a mother of the living; answerable to the meaning of
the same Hebrew word.

Explication and proof.
So indeed Moses reports the true History of the creation of man, Gen:
chapter 2. verse 7. And of woman in the same chapter, verses 18, 21, 22, 23.
where he sets down, how the Lord took a rib^^ from Adam, of the which he
made woman: namely, after that he had ca^sed an heavy sleep to fall upon him,
and likewise after that he had closed up the flesh in stead of the bone, which
GOD took from him. Adam therefore, acknowledges her to be bone of his bone,
and flesh of his flesh: and thereupon (as was answered) gives her the first
name Isha, of Ish, as we say woman of man; because as was said even now, she
was taken out of man. And for the second name, read Chapter 3.20:

And thus, (as the Apostle Paul says, from the faithful testimony of Moses)
Adam was first formed, and then Eve. 1. Tim: 2.13. Either part of which work
of God, must needs be wonderful to all but profane Infidels. As first, to see
a lump of earth changed from the natural substance, to be flesh, yea and
blood and bone; framed together by joints, knit by sinews, ouerspread with
veins and stringes as with net-worke, to carry the vital blood to every part
of the body: to feel such a fire kindled in the stomach, the liver and
lights, and kidneies, to have their several offices assigned them; the heart
to be made the seat of life and affection, the brain of understanding and
memory, the eye to have such an excellent faculty to see, the ear to hear,
etc.

Who of any capacity, and of the least good disposition, can consider these
things; but he must needs wonder at them, as being more then a world of the
wisdom, and power, and goodness of the Lord, in the making of this his little
admirable world, from a rude piece of earth: and afterward, to do as much
again with a little bone? This verily does infinitely surpass all man's power
and skill.

Our neglect of glorifying God for this his wonderful wisdom and goodness in
our exquisite creation, is the just cause why God sends so great distemper
and so manifold diseases and disquietments in soul and body, in eyes, ears,
hands, feet, heart and all: as he does oftentimes. Yea, it is the cause of the
decay of all at the last, touching this life: Eccles: chapter 12.1.2.3. etc.



That he might thereby show it to be his pleasure, that man should have
authority about the woman: and yet so, as every man's wife should be as a
companion and not as a servant or drudge to her husband.

So indeed it is evident, in that place of Tim: Read also to this purpose,
that which the same Apostle writes, E^^licatio^ and proof.
1. Cor: 11.7.8.9. where the authority of man over the woman, is notably
qualified in the 11. and 12. verses of the same chapter Read also chap:
14.34.35. And here we come now to a few such other points, belonging to this
history of the creation of mankind: hoping that we shall not herein be
curious, or over inquisitiue: seeing that the knowledge thereof, serves
greatly to the glorifying of God in this behalf. I do therefore ask further,

Hereby God would teach both the first man and woman, and us, and all their
posterity: to humble our selves, under the mighty and glorious hand of our
Creator.

Explication and proof.
This is evident, from that which follows by and by after the fall. For the
Lord looking hereunto, tells Adam that he was dust: and that he should
return to dust again. Gen: 3.19. Read also Ps: 9^.3. Isai: 45.9 and Ier. 18.6.
For unto this ground of our creation out of the earth, has the Lord a respect,
in the similitude of the Potter, in those places. Many say, that the Peacock
garnished with goodly feathers, and therewith advancing himself; yet so soon
as he looks upon his black feet, lets down all his bravery again.
Howsouer it is with the Peacocke, it ought certainly to humble man, even in his
greatest excellency, when he duly considers that his original is from the
earth: and that now by reason of his sin, he must to the earth again. And in
this respect, the excellent virtue or humility seems (from the latin word
hum^^, which sign^^ the ground or earth) to have borrowed the name whereby it
is named among us.

To the end, that both they, and we, and all their posterity, knowing our
selves to be in a most near conjunction of one and the same nature: might from
time to time, live together, in a most sweet and amiable fellowship and
society, every one with his companion and neighbor.

Explication and proof.
This is that which the Apostle Paul does plainly teach us, Act: chap: 17. 26.
27. And further also, that which he makes a ground of the general duty of
all mankind, even truly to acknowledge and worship the Lord our God together,
according as he has made us of one blood, etc. But specially this
consideration binds man and wife, to a singular kind of amity and
friendship between themselves, above any other: according to that we read,
Ephe: ^.22.23.24, 25. etc. Also, according as Moses writes, that God built
woman out of man: taking the ribbe of man, as being a most fit r^fter to build
withal; and so made them both one house, and a perfect building, as it were.

Adam, to have his r^bbe taken from him?

No, for (as was said before) God caused a very heavy sleep to fall upon
him, while he took it out of him.

So indeed Moses certifieth us, in the 21. verse of the 2. chap: of Genesis.
But why was this?

Adam had yet no sin: and therefore the Lord would lay no pain or grief
upon him. For that is indeed a part of the stipend and wages of sin.

Explication and proof.
It is true For not only death is the wages of sin, (specially eternal death,
which is as the last pa; Rom: ^.23. but also all whatsoever is a forerunner and
causer of the n^turall death. And therefore this is reckoned to the man, a part
of that curse which he brought into the world by his sin, that he should
eat his bread in the sweat of his face: and to the woman, that she should
travel and bring forth children in sorrow and pain.

You answered a while since, that God in making man, created the body first,
without all life or sense, and after that, inspired a living soul into it: but
that as touching all other living creatures, he made them living from the
first instant of their creation.

Can you yield any reason, why the Lord should do thus?

There is no doubt but God would hereby declare, that the nature of the souls
of mankind, are greatly differing from the nature of their bodies: yea and
also, even from the nature in ^ife of all other earthly creatures.



The soul of mankind, is a spiritual and immortal substance, not having the
original from the earth as the body had: but more immediately from the author
of life, even from the Lord God himself, whose glorious Image it bears.

This is very evident from the Text it self, and it agrees as well to woman,
a^ to man: for the one, as well as the other, is said to be created in the
Im^ge of God. And herein especially, consists the excellency of this special
work of Gods creation, according to that which was said in the Answer: and
for the same cause to be a thing worthy of our special observation.

LEt us therefore in the third place, consider as diligently as we can,
concerning this p^^^.



Nothing less for as we have already learned, God is an infinite and
incomprehensible Spirit, and has no bodily shape at all.



It stands in the spiritual nature and immortality of the soul, in the
soundnes of the wisdom, and understanding of the mind, in the p^^ ^^e of the
will and affection of the heart: and in true right u nes and holiness of life
conformable to the mind and will, and after the example of God himself, in
the imitation of his divine virtues.

Yea, it stands in that honorable estate, wherein God created and set the
whole humane nature: even so far above all other earthly creatures, that they
are but a little inferior to the holy Angels.

Explication and proof.
Read for the proof of this, Psalm: 8.5. Hebr. ^.9. And Ephesians: 4.24. And
Colloss: 3.10. For God renueth us being corrupted, to that integrity wherein
he had at the first created us.

Wherefore concerning the Image of God, which man bears, let it be observed:
that a God is a Spirit, so is the soul, though finite. As God is immortal, so
is the soul: but not as having the fountain of life in it self, as God has.
The soul is wise, etc. but not infinite in wisdom, etc. a, God is. This l
kenes therefore, though it be a true likeness to God in many things, as touching
the nature or kind of them; yet it admits an infinite dissimilitude in the
degree and measure of all things.

And touching t^^ soul, let it be further noted, that it is of so excellent a
creation, that it (^^bsis^ing in it self, by the gift of God) so gives life,
moving an^ sense to the body, that though the body die, yet cannot the soul
die: but in it self (howsoever by the natural death separated from the body)
yet ^^^th, understands, and reteineth affection, either of joy and desire in
the godl^, or of grief and fear in the wicked, though wi hout the body: even
until the reuniting of soul and body again, thenceforth so to continue for
ever and ever; although we cannot now conceive the manner how. So wonderful is
the creation of God in this his creature.

Now verily (touching this first creation of mankind) if God had made us only
a little superior in dignity to the other creatures of the earth, we cou d
not but have acknowledged it for a great mercy: but in that he has made us
by creation, only a little inferior to the heavenly Angels: the bounty of
his goodness, is even herein infinitely above all that we can conceive.

Here therefore, without any further discourse, we may see (according to the
third thing worthy to be observed in the creation of mankind) that God did
advance them to a very high and excellent estate of honor and dignity. And
it is particularly evident in this, that the Lord placed them in the most
fruitful and pleasant place of the whole earth, as it were in a most fine and
delicate Orchyard and Garden: and gave them also therewithal, the sovereignty
over all the fowls of the heaven, over the fishes of the Sea, and over the
beasts of the Earth; as we read, how God from the beginning both purposed and
also performed to authorize them thereunto, not only in the Text of the 1.
chap: of Genesis, already rehearsed: but also in the 2. cha: verse 8. etc. A
portion of the which authority, he has continued to mankind for Christ's
sake, even after the fall: and revived it again after Noah's flood; as we
read, Gen: 8.20. etc. and chap: 9.1.2. etc. And as we have experience even to
this day.

Yet note, that all that is said of the excellency of man's creation, is to be
referred only to the glorifying of God: and in no wise to puff up man in any
proud conceit of himself. For alas, he did through his pride, loose all his
dignity by and by.

To conclude this third observation, concerning the excellent estate and
dignity whereunto God advanced mankind:

He did it to the end he might institute and give a lively example, of that
matrimonial estate, whereby only, the Lord required a holy propagation of
mankind, in a more honorable manner, then any other creatures are multiplied
and increased.

So indeed it is declared to ^ro^ been the mind of God, by the Prophet
Malachie, chap: 2.15. and by our Savior Christ, Matthew: 19.4.5.6.

NOw let us come to the fourth observation, touching the creation of the first
man and woman, in that they were created the last of the creatures of God:

Herein, God does really utter and declare, his most bountiful favor and
good will toward mankind: in that he would not create them, until he had made
all other his creatures, and so had prepared as it were a princely palace, most
stately and delightfully furnished for them.

Explication and proof.
It is ve^^e true. For in so much as we account it a testimony of singular love
among our selves: when a natural father shall build his son a house, and
furnish it with all things before hand, for his use and comfort, against the
time that he is to keep house. Infinitely much more great was the bounty of
God, toward mankind, in the first creation.

This (as was answered) is as it were insinuated; yea more then insinuated: in
that God tells Adam, that he had provided him all meet food before he had
made him. Yea, and for all other creatures also: so that Adam might well be
without care, either for himself, or for them. Gen: 1.29.30. as was rehearsed
before. And specially, the love of God appeared, in that he had appointed one
tree above all the rest, to be a Sacrament and assurance of everlasting life,
and happiness to mankind, if they would continue in faithful obedience unto
him. Gen: chap. 2.9.

THe last observation only, is now behind: the which concerns not only the
commendation of Gods work in the making of mankind: but also a general
commendation, (and as it were a ratification) of all the works of God; from
the greatest to the least, and from the last, to the first of them. To wit,
that all were in their kinds created very good, every one in themselves of
sound constitution, and most apt to their several ends and uses appointed of
God; and all of them in a perfect sympathy and consent, for the uniform
conservation of the whole world.

Why is this general commendation, or ratification, thus set down: yea, why
is it so often and so particularly set down, even six times before: that God
saw that every part of his creation was good?

This is set down to diverse very notable ends and purposes.



First, that the divine nature of GOD himself, might be discerned, even by
the nature and quality of his works: to wit, that it is infinitely and
most perfectly good; in that no evil thing, but all only goodness,
proceeds from the same.

Secondly, that mankind might from the beginning, be advertised, how
infinitely they were bound unto God, not only for their own creation in a
special degree of goodness and honor: but also, for that all other creatures
were not only created good in their own nature, but likewise very good,
commodious, and comfortable for man's use; and the same also in so great
variety, as nothing might be desired or wished more.

Thirdly, that it might for ever be known to all posterity, that man may
justly thank himself (as we use to speak) for all want of goodness, and
for every evil excess: and for whatsoever troublesome distemper, or disorder,
which it come into the world, or upon himself. That is to say, he is to thank
himself only for every evil of punishment; even because he himself, of all
the creatures of this world, had first made himself most evil and wicked,
through the most contagious evil of his transgression and sin.

Finally, the commendation of the goodness of the works of Gods most mighty
and gracious creation, being often repeated (that is six times more
particularly, and ^ast of all generally) it ought to be unto us, as a strong
threefold cord, yea even of triple twine, to hold us from all thinking or
speaking any evil of the least of them, and from all murmuring against God,
what want, discommoditie or annoyance soever we either see or feel, or may at
any time expect and fear. And on the contrary, to take and fasten the whole
blame thereof upon our selves alone.

Explication and proof.
These indeed are notable good ends and purposes, why the commendation of the
works of God, should be so often repeated, and the rather ever since the fall
of mankind: by means whereof, all men grew to be over light and forgetful, yea
very malignant esteemers both of the Lord God himself, and also of all his
blessed works.

But now, that we may induce our selves to be of better minds; let us consider
first, of that which our Savior Christ testifies in the Gospel, as we have
seen before, that God only is good. And of that we read in the Ep: of James
chap: 1. verse 13. Let no man say when he is tempted (that is, when he is moved
and provoked to any wickedness) I am tempted of of God: for God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither does he tempt any man. But contrariwise, as it
follows, verse 17. Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above,
and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness,
neither shadowing by turning. And Psalm: ^2.1. The loving kindness of God
indureth daily.

Secondly, i^ must needs be confessed, that although God had created and set
mankind down a great deal lower: and though, he (having given them reason
to shift for themselves) had thought good to exercise them with the fear of
many dangers, as our condition is now; yet had he dealt very graciously. But
seeing God vouchsafed mankind not only a chief dignity above other
creatures, but also made them very commodious, and willingly serviceable unto
them: o how greatly does this amplify the largeness of his goodness and
mercy! So that justly may we wonder at his goodness, according to that we
read, Psalm: 8. and Psalm: 104. How manifold are thy works! etc. According
also to that we read, Psalm: 31.19. and Zach: 9.17. O how great is thy
goodness!

Thirdly, for the clearing of God from all evil, or cause of evil in any of
his creatures, specially to the hurt and annoyance of mankind; let us consider
the gracious warning, which the Lord himself gave to Adam, even from the very
beginning; to the end he might prevent the danger of all evil: Gen: 2.17. It
is manifest therefore, that man not observing duly that gracious warning which
God gave him; pulled all evil upon himself, and all his posterity, by his
transgression: and had them not imposed upon him by creation. For as touching
sickness, death, and Hell, etc. they come in all by man's sin, and are not
(to speak properly and originally) creatures of Gods making. They are rather
the decay, defacing, and destruction of his creation, so far as the creature
it self could weaken, deface, and destroy the work of God.

Hell indeed, the place now appointed for the torment of the wicked, may be
said truly to have been created of God, when he created and distinguished all
places: but it was not by creation Hell, that is a place of present torment.
The Devils sin, and man's sin, caused that name and use unto it. And
concerning sickness, and death, and the rest: that they came in all by sin,
read Rom: ^.12. and chap: 6.23. Let us consider it also from that we read,
Hos. 2.21.22. and Job: 5.23. So then, this is to be held always for a firm
principle: God made man righteous, but they have sought to themselves many
inventions. Eccles. chap: 7.31. All evil is come upon man, from man himself.
Let no man therefore, be so wickedly bold, as to frame any the least cavil
against any of the works of Gods creation. Nay on the contrary, let us (for a
most just and well beseeming conclusion) take the whole blame of all evil to
our selves: and groan under the burden of our sins, as the true and proper
cause thereof, according to the last branch of the answer.

And thus, through the goodness of God, we have renewed the remembrance of the
holy doctrine, concerning the works of Gods most wise, mighty, and gracious
creation. The excellent perfection whereof, God has most solemnly confirmed,
by his sanctifying of the seventh day: wherein he ceased from any further work
of creation, to the end that mankind might worship God their Creator, in the
celebration of the same his divine wisdom, power and goodness, which are most
perfectly manifested thereby.

The which holy doctrine (according to the most faithful and true history
thereof every Christian must believe: or else, he cannot rightly believe in
God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, as the Articles of our
belief teach us to do.

And now touching the manifestation of the wisdom, and power, and goodness of
God in them; it is evident to the faith of every true believer: while,
according to the instruction of the holy Scriptures, he pondreth in his mind,
both the manner, and also the order, which God took, in performing the works
of his Creation.

And first, concerning the manner: if we consider, how the Lord (beginning in
darkness, deformity, and confusion, as touching the great world: and in
baseness, and deadnes, when he created man the little world) does nevertheless,
perfectly and at an instant cause light to shine out of darkness, and in a
short space of time turns deformity to beauty, vacancie and voidenes to all
sufficient furniture and plenty, deadnes to life, discomfort to comfort, and
baseness to glory (to that according to this beginning of the works of God, the
common proverb might well take beginning, in that we commonly say: A hardor
uncomfortable beginning, makes a good ending) thus I say, the manner of the
creation manifests the wisdom, power, and goodness of God.

The like will be evident, if we shall well observe the order which God takes
in the disposing of his works. For he creates his spiritual and invisible
creatures in heaven, before the visible and bodily upon the earth: the simple
elements, before compounded bodies: the fiery region, before the aierie: he
clears the lower region of the aier, before he emptieth and clears the
earth from the waters thereof: he makes grass for cattle, before he makes
cattle themselves: the fowls of the aier and fishes of the Sea, before the
beasts of the earth: finally all other creatures before he made mankind,
insomuch as it pleased God to make all things for the comfort of man, that so
by him, they might be to the glory of his own most holy name.

And yet again, he does so break that which we would think should have been
the best order, that he does in most excellent wisdom, take all glory from
the creatures themselves: and makes it so much the more clear, and plain,
(as it is meet) that all the praise both of wisdom and power, and goodness,
does belong only to him. For therefore it is, that God made light, before he
made the Sun. Caused trees to bring forth ripe fruit, before any shower or
dew had fallen upon the earth And also made all earthly creatures, and
governed them in perfect order, before he appointed man, to be the ruler and
orderer of them.

Who therefore among all men; yea how could all mankind (though they were as
dutifully affected to God as might be) how I say, could they for all that,
sufficiently praise his most glorious name, for his so great, wise, mighty,
gracious and glorious works? Yea if it were but for our own creation alone,
for our outward senses, and the excellent gift of speech, etc. and for our
inward understanding and memory, etc. Let every one of us therefore, conclude
with the holy Prophet. Thou (o Lord) possessest my reins (that is, I am by
good right altogether and entirely thine) thou did cover me in my mothers
womb. I will praise thee, for I am drawn into admiration (by considering) thy
reverend works: yea I will praise thy wonderful works, as much as my soul
can attain unto. My bones (or strength) it is not hidden from thee, from the
time that I was made in a secret place, and skilfully fashioned as in the lower
parts of the earth. Thine eyes did see me when I was without form: for in thy
book were all things written even from the time that they were first
fashioned, yea while as yet there was none of them at all. O how dear
therefore (or precious) are thy thoughts to me o mighty God! o how great are
the Sums of them! I would count them, but they are more then the sand: I will
awake, (that is, I will stand diligently upon my watch) that I may still abide
with thee. Psalm: 139.13.14.15.16.17.18. Trem: and Iunio Interp.

But of the duties, whereby we stand bound unto God, for his mercy toward us
in our creation; more afterward.

Hitherto, our purpose has been, to gather together, and interpret the holy
doctrine of Creation: according to the historical narration and report of it,
from the holy Scriptures of God, the only faithful and incorrupt witnesses
thereof. The which also (as you know) has been set down to your hand, in a
few verses: to the end it might happily be thereby, made so much the more
familiar, and if it might be also, the more easy to be remembered of you. It
shall not be amiss therefore, as I think, here to make rehearsal of them.



They are these which follow.

Genesis chapter 1.
The world six days in making was,
As Moses truly says:
God would not only show his power,
Verses.
But likewise help our faith.
1. In first of six, both heaven and earth,
A Substance they receiu'de:
2. Though formeles and unfurnished,
The Earth with waters covered.
And darkness was upon the deep,
As high as heaven did reach:
The holy Ghost these depths uphold;
3. The Father by his speech:
Not sound of voice, but mighty power;
With wisdom, even his Son:
Commanded light, so light brake forth,
And whole Either because the world began at the equin^ctiall: or to speak
according to the use of the Jews who always accounted twelve hours for the
day, according to that of our Savior Christ: John. chapter 11.9. Are there not
twelve hours in the day.
twelve hours shone.
4. Yet darkness was not quite cut off,
But sundred from the light:
It took his turn, the light gave place,
So ganne the second night.
Thus, first days mighty work we see,
How day it self was made:
5. Yea day and night of better part,
First day so calde of God.
I^a^: 45.7.
And though the darkness was not ill,
A thing which God had made:
Yet light by name God called good,
More ioious far then shade.
6. God said again, let spreading out,
The waters go between:
And part low deep from lofty clouds,
Whence fall down shall the rain.
7. And every upper region,
So high as may be seen:
With sundry loftes, which God prepared,
For all the Hosts of heaven.
8. This space so high, so wide spread forth,
And chambred in such sort,
God called heaven: so second day,
To end was fully brought.
9. In third day cleared was the earth,
And clean from waters rid:
Both Islands small, and countries great;
which acepes before had hid.
10. For waters huge at Gods command,
Did gather to their place:
So ^u^es and dales with champion fields,
Gave earth a goodly face.
Gen: 2.10, etc. and 104 10.11.12.
All springs and channells were likewise,
11. Disposed on third day:
12. Yea trees and herbs, all good with fruits,
13. God made without delay.
14. The fourth was spent in making lights,
Though light was made before:
It pleased God that Sun and Moon,
With Stars of endless skore,
15. Should order day and night thence forth,
16. Yea months and years define:
17. And to all works wrought under heaven,
18. Fit seasons to assign,
19.
20. The fifth days work was water work,
21. In it the seas were storde;
22. With fishes great, with fishes small,
23. All sorts made very good.
Fifth day likewise, was aierie work,
For fowls therein were made:
All sorts were made in sky to fly,
As fish in Seas to wade.
24. When sixth day came, the Lord did make,
All creatures, earth to fill:
25 Beasts wild and tame, with creeping things,
All good of Gods good will.
26. But man was last of all the rest,
Though chief by Gods intent:
As God himself does plainly show,
That so at first be meant.
For making man by chief advise,
Most like unto himself:
He gave him rule of all below,
With flore of heavenly wealth.
H'inricht his soul with gifts divine,
In knowledge and in will:
Not man alone but man's fit help,
Made fit by heavenly skill.
This is in brief, whole six days work,
All wondrous works of God:
Think on them well, yield him all praise,
He made all perfect good.
God our Lord, even for Jesus Christ's sake, give us all grace so to do. For
there is exceeding great cause thereof in respect of God himself, who is most
worthy all honor and glory. And it is also very good and comfortable even to
our ^wne souls, that we should so do: as we are hereafter in the collection
of the duties further to observe.

But before we come to the duties, we are to consider the promise, and then
also the comforts, which belong to that faith or belief, which we have
conce^ning the almighty creation of God our heavenly Father, and the several
works thereof.

First therefore, what say you of the promise?



Concerning the creation, considered in it self from the beginning of it, The
Promise
it cannot be said that there was any promise made of it. For there was no
creature to whom the performance of it should be promised. And therefore it
must needs rest altogether in the hidden secret of Gods own most fatherly and
divine purpose and counsel.

But so soon as God had once created all his works, forthwith it pleased him
to make known to mankind, the last of his creatures, that he had made all
his creatures of this visible world, for their benefit, comfort, and service:
upon condition, that they would faithfully serve, and honor his divine
Majesty, first in themselves, and then in the right use of the rest of his
creatures.

And this most gracious manifestation of Gods purpose herein, was as speedy a
promise and assurance as might be: that the creation of God, and the several
works thereof, were at the least in a very great part, even for them; and
consequently, for all the posterity that should come of them.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. For so do the words of God himself, immediately after the
Creation was finished, give plainly to understand, Gen: 1.26.27.28.29. where
we see both the divine purpose, and also the performance of God, in this
behalf. Yea Gen: chap; 2. uerses 19.20. we may perceive the purpose and will
of God to be such, so soon as Adam was created, even before woman was yet
taken out of his side.

The same promise of God, thus intended and revealed from the beginning; is
afterward, more plainly repeated and expressed, after the deluge or drowning of
the world, as we read, Gen: 8.21.22. The Lord (as the prophet Moses writes)
smelled a savor of rest, and the Lord said in his heart, I will henceforth
curse the ground no more for man's cause, etc. Hereafter seede-time and harvest,
and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease,
so long as the earth remains. And yet further. chap: 9, 1.2.3, it follows
thus: And God blessed Noah and his Sons, and said to them: Bring ye forth
fruit and multiply, and replenish the earth. Also the fear of you and the
dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every foul of
the heaven, upon all that moves on the earth, and upon all the fishes of the
Sea: into your hand are they delivered. Every thing that moves and lives
shall be meat for you: as the green herb so have I given them all to you.
And this verily, is a very princely and comfortable prerogative: that God has
given man authority, to kill and destroy those creatures, which either prove
hurtful while they live, or may be profitable to them by their death.
Moreover, Job: chap: 5.23. It is affirmed from this promise and charter of the
Lord, that the stones of the field shall be in league, and the beasts of the
field at peace, etc. with the servants of God. Likewise Hosh: 2.21.22. thus we
read. And in that day I will hear (says the Lord) I will even hear the
heavens, and they shall hear the earth. And the earth shall hear the corn,
and the wine, and the oil, etc.

Nevertheless, because these and such like promises, do rather pertain to the
providence of God, in the government of his creatures, then to the creation of
them: therefore it shall be sufficient, thus far forth to have touched this
point, reserving the more full handeling thereof, till we come to the promise
belonging to the providence of God.

NOw in the next place, let us proceed to the comforts arysing from belief in
God the Father, in respect of his almighty creation.



The comforts hereof may be considered, either as they are more general: or
else more special.



First, this is generally very comfortable, that we know that the most wise
and gracious providence and government of God over all his creatures: is most
nearely and indissolubly linked to the most wise and mighty creation of them.

Secondly, there is an other great comfort issuing from the faith of the
creation, insomuch as the creation being believed, we are from thence more
easily induced, to believe all the like wonderful works of Gods most holy
providence and government; The Comforts.
yea, even those which are in themselves more hard to be believed: namely our
eternal redemption, and by the grace thereof, our restoring, and the restoring
of all creatures, to a more happy and glorious estate, then Adam was set in at
the beginning, by the benefit of his creation.

Explication and proof.
These are generally, very great comforts indeed. And they have very good
warrant from the holy Scriptures.

For in respect of the first general comfort, the Apostle Peter 1. Epist: ch:
4. 19. verse, assures us that God is a faithful Creator. From whence he
proves, that his faithful children, may justly (and that also in special
manner) be trust him with themselves, and their whole estate: nothing doubting,
but he will have a very vigilant and tender care over them. Likewise, in the
book of Job: chap: 10. verses 8.9. etc. Job uses a speech taken from a
familiar similitude of the dairie woman, who when she has taken all her pains
in milking, in setting of her milk, in breaking her curde, in pressing her
cheese, etc. she will in no wise throw it aside, that the hogs or dogs
should spoil it; but she lays it up carefully, and reserueth it to the best
use that may be. Much more therefore does Job comfort himself, that seeing God
had made him, as it were the cheese, out of the milk; that he would not
destroy him. Thine hands (says he) have made me, and fashioned me wholly
round about: and will thou destroy me? Remember I pray thee, that thou have
made me as the clay, and will thou bring me into dust again? have thou not
powered me out as milk? and turned me to c^rde^ like cheese? Thou have clothed
me with skin and flesh, and joined me together with hon^^ and sinews. This
therefore gave the servant of God, good and comfortable trust, in hope of
preservation, from untimely and miserable death. Read also, Psalm: 89.47.

But for the general care of God over all his works, which is the ground of
our general comfort, and that which we do presently inquire after; read Ps.
33.4. etc. All the works of God are faithful. Where also the holy Psalmist
lincketh the providence of God with his creation. And Psalm: 146.6. He has made
heaven and earth: and all that therein is, he keeps his fidelity for ever.

Hence therefore (as was answered in the second place) very comfortably, may
we justly be induced to believe, that more special goodness and mercy of God
concerning our redemption, and the re^toring of all the creatures, which lost
the dignity of their creation, through the sin of man. For the proof
whereof, read Isai: chap: 4^. verses 26.27. etc. to the end of the chap: Lift
up your eyes on high, and behold who has created these things, and brings
out their armies by number, and calls them all by names? By the greatness of
his power, and mighty strength, nothing fails. Why say thou o Iaakob, and
speak o Israel, My way is hidden from the Lord and my judgment is passed
over of my God? Know thou not? or have thou not heard that the everlasting
God the Lord has created the ends of the earth? He neither faints nor is
weary, etc. But he gives strength to him that faints, and unto him that
has no strength, he increases power, etc. And they that wait upon the Lord
shall renew their strength, etc. Read also, chap: ^3. verses 1.7.15.16. And
chap: 44.24. and 45.8. and 50 1.2. etc. and 51.12.1^. Likewise, Iere: 31,
verses 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. etc. And again, chap: 33.1^. etc. Thus says the
Lord, if you can break my covenant of the day and my covenant of the night
that there should not be day and night in their season. Then may my covenant
be broken with David my servant. And Ps. 89. v. 36.37. Read also Ps 11^. v. 89,
90, 91, 92. O Lord thy word indureth for ever in heaven. Thy truth is from
generation to generation thou have laid the foundation of the earth, and it
abides, etc.

Finally, touching the last point of this second branch: to wit, that from
faith in respect of the creation of God, we do the more easily proceed to
believe the restoring of all things: it stands with good reason, insomuch as
they do both belong to one and the same almighty power.

And because, if we believe not the lesser: how should we believe the
greater. If not this (which stands more with the light of natural reason)
how then should we believe that, which is above all humane conceit or
understanding? Thus much for the more general comforts of faith, touching the
Creation.



They are either such, as arise in respect of other creatures: or else, from
the considerati- of our own creation.

It shall be profitable for us therefore, in this order to inquire of them. And
insomuch as of creatures beside our selves (as we have seen before) some are
invisible, and other visible, like to our selves: let us inquire of the
invisible first, namely of the invisible heavens, and of the holy and elect
Angeles.



The comfort hereof, may justly be exceeding great, to every true believer;
insomuch as God has not only made the heavens, which are yet invisible unto
us, that they might be as the Throne of his divine Majesty, to represent his
glory in them, and that they should be an habitation and dwelling place to
the elect Angels, from the beginning and for ever: but also, that we our
selves might in the time appointed of God (that is, the natural life once
ended) have our most sweet and comfortable abiding place there; to behold the
glory of God, and to enjoy an estate like to the glorious estate of the holy
Angels, even for ever and ever.

Explication and proof.
This may justly be exceedingly comfortable indeed: according to that of our
Savior Christ: John chap: 14. verses 1.2.3. Let not your heart be troubled: ye
believe in God, believe also in me. In my Fathers house are many dwelling
places, etc. According also, as the same our Savior prays to God his
heavenly Father, on the Churches behalf. John. 17.24. Father, I will that they
which thou have given me, be with me even where I am, that they may behold my
glory, which thou have given me: for thou louedst me before the foundation of
the world, etc. This indeed, may justly be comfortable to every true
believer; yea so comfortable, that well may it abundantly mitigate the
greatest discomforts that may at any time assail us. Yea also it may justly
hearten, and harden us, with a spiritual fortitude, and boldness of heart,
against death it self: yea, even to make death welcome unto us, according to
that 2. Cor: 4.16, etc. We faint not, etc. (says the Apostle) while we look
not on the things which are seen, but on the things which are not seen: for
the things which are seen are temporal: but the things which are not seen,
are eternal. And then it follows, chap: 5. verses 1.2. For we know that if
the earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building given of
God: that is, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. For
therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with our house, which is from
heaven, etc. And verse 5. He that has created us for this thing is God, who
also has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit. Read also, Heb:
11.13.14.15.16.

The comfort hereof (to speak familiarly) may be conceived, by a similitude
from the usual affection, and practice; even of the poorest sort of men. For
as experience shows, every one is the better contented with a mean Hal or
Kitchen, a room of common abode: so as he have a commodious, and well trimmed
Parlor, or Chamber, whereunto he may resort when he will, to his good liking
and delight. And shall we not then, be infinitely much more comforted, from
this so great a ground of comfort: that God our heavenly Father, has prepared,
not only one withdrawing room (as it were handsome and neat in heaven) to
solace our selves in now and then; but even a royal Palace, for our continual
abiding in his presence? And that also such a one, as in comparison whereof,
the most sumptuous buildings of this world, are but as the Hall or Kitchen of
the most base cottage that may be?

(we speak now only of the holy and elect Angels) What is the comfort of our
faith, concerning their most holy and happy creation?

This also, may in like manner, be exceedingly comfortable to our faith while
we consider, that albeit God our heavenly Father, is of himself alone
all-sufficient, for our defense and preserua^ion: yet it has pleased him; even
for the further comfort of our weak faith, to let us understand, that he has
created millions of Angels, to be our faithful and trusty assistantes and
friends; against all the legions of Devils, who are our most ^^dicious
adversaries: as also against all their wicked Instruments.

Explication and proof.
That this is so; as it is evident from many testimonies of holy Scriptures,
heretofore alleged, when we spoke of the Creation of the Angels: so the
comfortable speech of Elisha the Prophet to his servant, may at this time, be
to special purpose called again to mind of us; in that from thence we may
evidently perceive, that there are more on our side, then be against us, etc.
2. King chap: 6. verses. 16.17. And the greater will the comfort be, if we do
herewithall, call likewise to mind, that which has been declared, concerning
the excellent nature of the holy Angels, both for wisdom, and also for power,
etc.

Neither may we (speaking of invisible creatures) neglect that sensible
comfort, which God of his goodness gives unto us continually, from those
purging winds of the aier, and from the sweet aier it self, wherein we live
and draw our breath.

But of these things, we shall have the occasion renewed, to consider more
fully, when we shall come to the comforts of the fatherly providence of God:
and therefore we will not now, stay any longer upon them.

Wherefore, leaving thus, the invisible creatures for a while: we come to those
that are visible.



The comfort of all the visible creatures, in their several kinds; it is
sensible, like to themselves. For the goodly and beautiful forms, and colors
of things, as also the light it self by the which they are represented unto
us: together with the instruments of light, the Sun the Moon, and the Stars;
they are all of them, very pleasant to our eyes. All the sweet voices, and
sounds which we hear, from the sweet singing birds, and such like, they are
very delightful to our ears. The excellent variety of flowers, by their
manifold sweet smel^, and savors which they cast forth: they likewise are very
comfortable to our nostri^s. The plentiful fruits of the earth which God has
sent for our food; they are delicate and dainty to our taste. Neither may we
pass by the great goodness of God toward us in this, that for the more full
measure of our comfort in his sensible creatures: whereas every creature has
but his short season, he has appointed one sort to succeed another. And
whereas winter puts an end to all summer fruits, till the Spring of the
year return again: God has given men wisdom, to preserve his creatures,
by distillations, by s^rrups and many other ways, so that they retain them
for their comfort till new come again.

Nevertheless, this we may herewithall truly affirm, that no one of these
outward visible and sensible creatures, c^^ be truly comfortable, either to the
soul, or body of any man: but through the spiritual grace, and comfort, of a
true and lively faith.



By the fall of our first parents, and through our own original guiltines,
sin, and corruption: we have lost al our interest, and right title to the
least comfort of any of the creaturs.

Neither can we otherwise be restored again thereunto, but through faith; and
that only by the free grace of God our heavenly Father: who has adopted us in
his beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ, to be his children, and heirs of all
things, even heiers annexed with him.

Explication and proof.
This is indeed a sufficient reason, that without faith, no man can take any
sound comfort, or pure delight in the creatures, because we are in our selves
corrupt and carnally affected: and without Christ no better, then usurpers of
them. And that we are altogether without interest in the creatures, until we
be restored to the rightful possession of them, by faith in Christ: it may
plainly be gathered, by the expulsion of Adam out of the garden of Eden, so
soon as he had fallen away from his faith and allegiance to God, Genesis
3.23.24. But by faith in Christ, all things are made ours: in so much as we our
selves are thereby made the children of God, according to that we read, Gal:
3.26. and chap: 4. verses 6, 7. and Rom: 8.15, 16, 16. and 1. Cor: 3.21, 22,
23. Let no man rejoice in men; for all things are yours. Whether it be Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death: whether they be things
present, or things to come, all are yours. And ye Christ's, and Christ Gods.

HItherto therefore, of the comfort which we have from all other creatures,
through faith in God, and in our Lord Jesus Christ. Now concerning our selves:

The comfort hereof is manifold.

So indeed we have learned out of the holy Scriptures: whether we consider the
creation of our bodies, or of our souls: or of the condition of our whole
Person and estate, wherein God has created, and set us in the beginning.



Not so much, for that it has pleased God to give them a special dignity in
outward form, in that both face and hands, are made apt and fit above all
other creatures, to look and lift themselves upward to his Majesty, toward
heaven: as it may be observed, from the practice thereof. Psalm: 123. and
Lamentations of Ier: chap: 3.41. But much rather, because he has made even our
bodies, to be the temples of the holy Ghost, here in this life. 1. Cor: 6.19.
and to be partakers of the resurrection of the righteous to everlasting life,
at the last day. Ioh. 5.28.29.

These comforts, cannot but be very comfortable, to all such as have faith, in
any measure of truth, to believe that they do belong unto them; according to
the Scriptures by you alleged, and many other of like sort.

Show now likewise, the comfort which faith finds, in the work of Gods
creation, concerning our souls.



The comfort hereof is singular, in that mankind, (in respect of their souls
especially) were created in the Image of God. The which, though we have lost in
our selves, yet by faith in Christ it is already in part, and shall for ever
be wholly and perfectly restored again.

So indeed we may perceive, by the doctrine of the Apostle Paul: Colos: 3.9,
10. and by his exhortation concerning the same Ephesians: 4.23, 24. For it can not
be that either the doctrine, or the exhortation of the holy Ghost, should be
without certain and infallible grounds. Read also for this, 1. Cor: 15.49. As
we have borne the Image of the earthly, so shall we bear the Image of the
heavenly, etc.



The society of mankind betwixt themselves, was, by Gods creation, exceeding
comfortable: as may appear, even by the relics thereof, which remain still.
Yea their whole estate and condition, was in dignity and comfort, little
inferior to the Angels. The which also, though we have wholly lost in our
selves: yet by faith in Jesus Christ, we have it restored again, and shall be
partakers of it through the rich mercies of God our heavenly Father.

Explication and proof.
So indeed we may perceive, by comparing the 5. verse of the 8. Psalm: with
Heb: chap: 2. verse 6. etc. As also, because we are in respect of our whole
person, both bodies and souls, the temples of the holy Ghost: 1. Cor: 3.16.
and 2. Cor: 6.16. and Ephesians. 2.22. The duties


But in this rehearsal of the comforts of the creation of God, in all his
creatures toward us: we must at no hand forget, that our God himself, (who is
the God of all consolation and comfort) is infinitely more comfortable,
pleasant, sweet, and delightful, then any, or all his creatures, can be to
the least of his children.

Such therefore are the comforts arising from the faith of the creation of all
sorts of the creatures of God; whether visible, or invisible: and as well of
man to himself, in respect of his own creation; as in regard of all other
visible creatures, in that behalf like to himself.

The which comforts, albeit they are not so much comfortable to us, by the
creation it self, as in respect of the fatherly purpose, and providence of God
toward us: seeing man himself (as was before observed) had forfetted all: yet
(because as was likewise further noted) the creation and providence of God, are
most nearly lincked together; and whatsoever man has lost in himself, is
recovered and restored again to all that truly believe in the name of God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ: therefore we might not altogether suppress, and
conceal, the comforts of this part of our faith; howsoever we do reserve the
more full declaration and proof of some of these things, till we come to
gather the comforts of the fatherly providence of God. Thus therefore, we (for
the present) leaving the comforts, both of the Creation, and also of the
Providence of God (they being mutually respective each to other, these looking
forward to them, and they looking backward to these) let us in the mean
season, have to the Duties: and that also upon like equal and indifferent
condition, as the matter it self, prepared of God, may most fitly, by his good
providence, offer it self.



I heard you say that it shall be best for us, to observe the same order, in
seeking out the Duties; which you have already observed, concerning the
Comforts.

It may well be so indeed: if for no other cause, yet for some help of
memory; the which we ought to have great respect unto, because of the weakness
of it.

Well therefore, let us trusting in the grace and blessing of God our heavenly
Father, proceed and go on forward.



It is our duty first of all, to esteem of them all very reuerend^y, yea even
of the least and basest of them, in regard that they are the creatures of our
most wise, and reverend God: acknowledging from our very hearts, that they are
all, and every of them (in their kinds, and to their several ends and
purposes) created in most perfect and divine wisdom.

Secondly, it is our duty, to glorify and praise the Lord in them all: and to
be heartily thankeful for them.

Thirdly, it is our duty, to uphold and maintain the due credit, and
estimation of all the works of Gods creation: against all such as speak evil
of any one of them, to any the least reproach and ^^shonour of his most holy and
reverend name.

Finally, Faith concerning the works of Creation, and the comfort of them:
teaches all true believers, to humble themselves unfeignedly before God, the
most gracious, and almighty Creator of them.

Explication and proof.
Here again, let us call to mind; that of duties belonging to God in respect of
his works of Creation. Some pertain to judgment, other to affection: some to
speech, and some to the actions of life.

Now, that it is our duty, first of all, to esteem of all the works of Gods
creation, very reuerendly: yea even of those that be the least and basest of
them, in comparison of other; it stands with very good reason, in so much as
the same God, who made thee one, he made the other also. He that created the
greatest, created also the least: the basest, as well as the most noble: the
most deformed (as we account deformity) as well as the most comely and
beautiful, as we esteem of beauty: they have all one and the same Author
and Maker. And therefore well may we reason for the honor of the works of
Gods creation, as the Apostle James does for the authority of every
commandment of the law: because one God and Lawgiver, gave them all. Chap:
2.11. Read Psalm. 104.24. and 1.39.14.15.16.17.18. Read also Prou. 6. ver.
6.7. etc. and chap. 30.24. etc.

Yea and the Lord has of purpose put a difference betwixt creature and
creature; that the excellency and beauty of the one, might the rather
appear, by comparing it with the other: the lesser, with the greater: the
weaker, with the stronger: the slower, with the swifter: the lighter, with the
heavier: the colder, with the hoter: etc. And all this the Lord would have so,
for a more perfect declaration of his manifold divine wisdom, according to
that. Psalm. 104.24, O Lord how manifold are thy works! In wisdom have thou
made them all: the earth is full of thy riches, etc. Read also Romans.
1.19.20. etc. Acts. 17.24 etc. For even to this end, God made the world, and
all things therein: that by the creation thereof, his eternal power and
Godhead, being considered in his works, might be made manifest to all men:
that they might seek him, yea and sensibly find him. etc.

And thus also, it is plain, that it is our duty to glorify and praise God
in all his works: according to that notable admonition, which we read Job:
chap. 36.24.25.26. Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold. All
men see it, and men behold it a far off, Behold God is excellent, etc. And
according to the general exhortation of the 148. Psalm, where, all creatures
are stirred up to praise God, even in this respect, that they are his
creatures. Read also Revelation, chap. 14.7. the exhortation of the holy
Angel there.

And the rather are we thus to glorify God in his creatures, because they
being the works of his hands, do make the difference betwixt him, and all
false Gods Ier. 10.16. and Acts; 17.23.24. etc.

Wherefore (according to the third branch of the answer) it is further
manifest, that as we must for our own parts, esteem reuerendly of all the
works of God, and accordingly glorify his name therein (yea in such manner
that even those that are pudenda, and a cause of shamefulnes and blushing to us
by reason of our sins, ought to be accounted honorable as they proceed from
the most wise and just God:) so must we have care to cause others (as much as
lies in us) to do the like. For who looking upon the Frogge, or Caterpiller,
or little Fly, or poor disdained Lowse: but so soon as he remembers, that
God did even by these his creatures, confound one of the proudest and cruellest
Kings and people of the world; even the Egiptians: Who (I say considering this)
can but praise God in this respect, that God should, by such base and
contemptible creatures, work so glorious a work? According to that Psalm,
78.45.46. etc. 105.29.30.34.35. And as we must of duty, speak honorably of
God, for them: so may we not endure, to hear any thing spoken, to the
contrary dishonor of his most blessed name.

Well have the Ministers of Gods word (as we read in ancient record)
zealously reproved, and condemned those blasphemous heretics, who have
ascribed any part of the work of Gods creation to the Devil: such as the
heretics called Paternians, E^^omians, and Ethicoprucopta, are reported to
have been, who feared not to affirm that the inferior parts of the bodies of
^^en and women are the work of the Devil.

Likewise, well have they reproved and condemned the Heretics called
Seu^riani, who condemned wine, as not being a creature of God. And with them,
well also have they condemned the Marcionites, who accounted this whole world,
to be a work unworthy to be ascribed unto God.

The like reproof, and zealous condemnation, is to be continued, and
maintained, of all faithful Ministers of the holy word of God, and of all
faithful Christians: against the same, and all other the like blasphemous
maligners and railers against any of the works of our God. God himself no
doubt, will take our parts herein: and justify himself, against all their
blasphemous derogations, Theater of Gods judgments, chap. 31 Concerning
Blasphemers. M. Perkins Exp^^: Sy^: speaking of Gods Omnipotency Mornaeus, cap:
11. de Verit: Religionis. Act: and M^^u. in his collection of Gods severe
judgments against Blasphemers, a little before the end of the Book.
whatsoever they may be. And very worthily also have other the good servants
of God, to the same end, recorded the just judgments of God, against such
lewd and wicked persons from time to time. Against some for reproching his
thunder, and against other, for other their devilish and licentious
calumniations and contempts.

And namely, right worthily is it recorded against a King of Spain, Alphonsus
the ninth, that he bare his punishment from the just hand of God: because he
presumed to say, that if he had been at the creation, he could have disposed
of the world in a better manner then now it is.

Read the notable admonition of M. Fox, to beware of blaspheming of Gods
wisdom, or works any way: from an example of a fearful judgment of God,
upon a Girl about 12. years old. The grave Father, upon, a special
occasion, makes a very notable and large admonition worthy to be diligently
read, attended, and obeyed, of all that shall read the same. The which, for
their sakes who have not that book: yea, and to the end that such as have the
book, may yet have so necessary and worthy an admonition, more near hand,
and in their present view; I will not think it tedious to copy out at large,
both it, and the occasion of it, as the godly Father himself has set it
down.

The wife of one William Mauldon, (as he writes) dwelling at a Town six
miles from London, called Waltam-Stow, taught young children to read: which
was about the year of our Lord, 1563. and the fourth year of Queen
Elizabeth's reign. Unto this School, among other children, came one Benefields
daughter, named Dennis, about the age of twelve years.

As these children sat talking together, they happened, among other talk, (as
the nature of children is to be busy with many things) to fall into
communication of God: and to reason among themselves, after their childish
discretion, what he should be. Whereunto, some answered one thing, some
another. Among whom, when one of the children had said, that he was a good old
Father: the foresaid Dennis Bennifild casting out impious words of horrible
blasphemy: what he (said she) he is an old doting fool.

What wretched and blasphemous words were these, ye hear. Now mark what
followed.

When William Mauldon heard of these abominable words of the Girl; he willed
his wife to correct her for the same. Which was appointed the next day to be
done. But when the next morning came, her mother would needs send her to the
market to London; the wench greatly entreating her mother she might not go,
being maruellously unwilling thereunto. Howbeit, through her mothers compulsion,
she was forced to go: and went. And what happened? Her business being done at
London, as she was returning again homeward, and being a little past Hackney;
suddenly the Girl was so stricken, that all the one side of her was black.
Whereupon, immediately she was carried back to Hackney: and there the same
night was buried.

Witness of the same Story, William Mauldon and his wife: also Bennif^ld her
Father, and her mother.

A terrible example (no doubt) both to old and young: what it is for children
to blaspheme the Lord their God. And what it is for parents to suffer their
young ones to grow up in such blasphemous blindenes: and not to nourture them
betimes, in the rudiments of the Christian Cathechisme: to know first their
creation, and then their redemption in Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior, to
fear the most holy name of God, and to reverence his Majesty. For else, what
do they deserve, but to be taken away by death; which contemptuously despise
him, of whom they take the benefit of life?

And therefore let all young maids, boys, and young men, take example by this
wretched silly wench: not only not to blaspheme the most Sacred Majesty of
the omnipotent God their Creator, but also not once to take his name in vain,
according as they are taught in his commandments.

Secondly, let all Fathers, Godfathers, and Godmothers, take this for a
warning, to see to the instruction and Catechizing of their children, for whom
they have bound themselves in promise both to God and his Church. Which if the
Father, and Godfather, the Mother, and Godmothers, had done to this young Gyrle:
verily, it may be thought, that this destruction had not fallen upon her.

Thirdly, let all blind Atheists, Epicures, Mammonists, Belly-Gods of this
world, and sons of Belial, hypocrites, infidells, and mockers of religion,
which say in their hearts, There is no God: learn also hereby, not only what
God is, and what he is able to do, but also in this miserable creature here
punished in the world, to behold what shall likewise fall upon them in the
world to come; unless they will be warned betimes, by such examples as the
Lord God does give them.

Fourthlie and lastly, here may also be a spectacle, for all them which be
blasphemous and abominable swearers, or rather tearers of God: abusing his
glorious name, in such contemptuous and despitefull sort, as they use to do.
Whom, if neither the word, and commandment of God, nor the calling of the
Preachers, nor remorse of conscience, nor rule of reason, nor their withering
age, nor hoarie hairs, will admonish: yet let these terrible examples of Gods
district judgment, somewhat move them to take heed to the^ selves. For if this
young maiden, who was not fu ly 12. years old, for her irreverent speaking of
God (and that but at one time) did not escape the stroke of Gods terrible
hand: what then have they to look for, which being men grown in years, and
stricken in age, being so often warned and preached unto, yet cease not
continually with their blasphemous oaths, not only to abuse his name, but
also most contumeliouslie, and despitefully to tear him (as it were) and all
his parts in pieces? Thus far M. Fox admonishes all sorts, both young and
old, to beware of all blasphemy against the Lord our God. Now let us proceed.

Finally, that faith in the creation of God, may justly teach us true
humilitie^ Read Job chapt: 38. And chapt: 39. etc. It is the argument whereby
God himself teaches Job to humble himself. Read also, Ier: 5.21.22.

Hitherto of the Duties more generally.

We come now to the particulars.

Wherefore, touching the more particular Duties. First and foremost, which are
they that belong to this comfort of Faith, that God our heavenly Father has
created the most glorious and invisible heavens: to the end they may be our
everlasting habitation, with the rest of his faithful servants, together with
his holy and elect Angels, after this transitory life once past and ended.



In that, the Lord God our heavenly Father, has created invisible creatures,
not only the heavens, which we see not: but also the holy Angels far more
glorious and excelient then any of the visible are, which our eyes do see.

First it is our duty, to conceive more highly and gloriously of the most
high and excellent Majesty of God, then all outward creatures can thoroughly
express unto us.

Secondly, insomuch as it has pleased God our heavenly Father to create the
most glorious heavens to be our everlasting home, and most blessed and
comfortable dwelling place: we are admonished thereby, to take heed, that we
do not addict our minds to these earthly creatures, and present vain and
transitory world; but that we do wholly set our hearts, to seek after
heaven and heavenly things, and in comparison thereof, to esteem lightly of the
greatest riches and pleasures, or of the highest preferments and honors of
this life. But most of all we are hereby admonished, to take heed that we
continue not in the f^^the of our sins, which would utterly bar us from the
kingdom of heaven.

Explication and proof.
Touching the first part of this answer, let us first of all consider, that the
Angels themselves cannot comprehend, nor behold the full brightness of the
excellent glory and Majesty of God, in which respect they are described with
wings covering their faces: Isai: chapter 6. verse 2. And therefore much less
are we able to conceive how these creatures which we see, should fully
represent the same unto us. Let us consider also, that the children of Israel
could not look upon the glory of Moses his face, after became from the Lord,
out of the mount. Neither could Moses himself see any more, but as it were the
back parts of the Lord, and that through a crannie of the rock. Exodus: 33.18.
etc. and chapter 34.33. etc. and 2. Corinthians: 3.7. Read also Ier: 10.6. Isai:
40.12. etc. Rom: 11.33. etc.

And as touching those things, which apperteine to the kingdom of heaven: they
are far above those which the eye has seen, or ear heard, or ever came
into man's heart. 1 Corinthians: 2.7.8.9.

It follows therefore, according to the second part of the answer, that
these things, and this everlasting mansion place, is by all good reason to be
principally sought after, and affected: according to that of our Sau: Christ,
First seek the kingdom of God. etc: Hereunto also, does the example of the
holy Patriarchs call us, according to that which we read, Hebr: chapt: 11.
verses. 13.14.1^, 16. Neither may we in any wise, neglect the holy
exhortation of the Apostle Paul: Coloss: 3.^. etc. Set your affection on things
which are above, and not on things which are on the earth, etc. And verse 5.
Mortify therefore your members, which are on the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, etc. For as we read Reuelat: 21. verse 27. There shall enter into
the heavenly Jerusalem, no unclean thing, neither whatsoever works
abomination and lies, but they which are written in the Lambs bo ke of life.

O therefore, how vain! yea how absurd and mad a choice is this, of the
children of this world! who for earthly things which are but smoke and do;
yea for the pleasure of sin, which is abominable skum and filthy dish-wash:
do lose the most durable, pure, and pleasant joys of the kingdom of heaven.
And for the love of houses of clay, whose foundation (as Eliphaz says truly
in the book of Job 4.19.) is in the dust, and shall be destroyed before the
mothe, (that is, most sodeinlie, as a flying mothe may be crushed to nothing,
with a man's finger) to loose the glorious and eternal Palace of heaven.

Th s verily is intolerable madness and folly. But let us, who mind the
kingdom of heaven, proceed to consider the ways which guide us thereunto.



As we ought from Gods creating of the holy Angels for our comfort, to
provoke our hearts to most an tifull thankefulnes to God our heavenly Father,
who thereby does exceedingly commend his love and regard of us, though most
unworthy: so ought we from the example of the holy Angels themselves, (who
at the commandment of God, do willingly attend upon us their inferiors
(yea even upon us most unworthy and miserable sinners) to learn to be so
humble and lowly, every one of us for our parts: that we be not only
dutifullie subject to all higher powers, according to the ordinance of God: but
even to the owe also. Yea, and that even the chiefest themselves, should
likewise willingly be the servants of God, for the benefit and comfort, of
the poorest and lowest of the whole Church and people of God.

Explication and proof.
The reason is plain, and lightsome of it self: and has great force in it, to
persuade every faithful magistrate of Justice, and every faithful and
belee^ing minister of the Word, even with their best gifts, and with their most
royal power, which they have received of God: to be therewithal willing
servants to the lowest of the Church; and therein also, to think themselves
nothing abased, but greatly honored of God.

Moreover, the wicked may by this ministry of the holy and mighty Angels
(if they had grace to consider it) be feared from all wicked attempts against
the Church, or any the least members thereof. Numb: chapt: 22. verse 22. etc.
Math: 18.10. And we our selves, that we do nothing unbeseeming the presence
of so holy ministers, and glorious servants of God: who (though invisibly)
are yet oftener present with us, and among us, then we are ware of. 1. Corinthians: 11.10. According also to that Exodus: 23.21.22.23. For notwithstanding
that is spoken of our Lord JESUS the Prince of Angels: yet such as the Lord and
Maister-Angell is, such also are the servants on their Lords behalf, according
to that Commission which he gives unto them.

Thus much for the Duties from the comfort of Faith, concerning the invisible
creatures of God. Let us make speed to the Duties, concerning those that are
called visible.

ANd first, concerning the creation of other Creatures besides our selves.



What I say, are the Duties belonging to the bountiful and Fatherly goodness of
God herein?

It is our bounden Duty, to use every of them, with all wise and holy
discretion; and in all good and sober moderation, as becomes those that are
called the children of the light: even to those blessed ends only, whereunto
God himself has appointed them.

And furthermore to the end we may in all ho^e, wise and sober manner, use
these kinds of creatures: it is likewise our bounden duty, to bless God in
all, and for every of his blessings, which we behold with our eyes, which
we hear with our cares, wherewith we cloth our bodies. etc. And according to
the approved examples of the holy servants of God; it is our duty in
special manner, and with open profession of thankfulness: to bless God for the
continual renewing of our food, which is the most sensible and necessary
means, for the ordinary maintenance of our life.

Such is our bounden Duty indeed: according to that ancient preceptorie
admonition of the Lord by the Prophet Moses Deuteronomy: 8.10. Explication and proof.
When thou have eaten and filled thy self, thou shall bless the Lord thy God,
for the good land which he has given thee. Beware that thou forget not the
Lord thy God, etc. This holy commandment, has been regarded of the faithful
in the Church of God, from time to time, no doubt. And it is approved even by
the practice of our Savior Christ himself. Of whom it is recorded in the
Gospel, that he blessed God for the bodily food wherewith he fed the people.
Matthew: 14.19. Yea after his Resurrection, his disciples knew him by his
breaking of bread, in that (as it is most likely) he used a form of
thanksgiving, which he had before acquainted them withal: Luke 24.30.35.

Moreover, that we are to bless God in the beholding of the Sun, etc: the 8.
Psalm, may teach all that account themselves scholars in the Schoole-house of
the holy Ghost. And for the renewing of the creatures, when we behold them:
what our duty is, we may learn from the ordinance of God, in the children
of Israel their offering of the first fruits to God. Read Deuteronomy: 26.1.2. etc.
And by the practice of the Church, in the song of thanksgiving, for the
renewing of the pastures, and of the sheep, and of corn, by the seasonable
showers of heaven: while yet they grew in the fields Psalm: 65.9. etc. And by
the example of Hezekiah, and his Princes: who blessed God for the heaps, which
they saw chambred for the maintenance of Gods worship, and for the ministers
thereof. 2. Chron: 31.8.

Finally, that we may end with the proof of the beginning of the answer:
Read Rom: chapt: 15. verses 12.13.14. and 1. Corin: 6.12.13. and chap:
7.29.30.31. and Ephesians: 5.17. etc. Be ye not unwise, but understand what the
will of the Lord is. And be not drunken with wine, wherein is excess, but be
fulfilled with the Spirit, speaking to your selves in Psalms and hymns, etc.

Thus then, all the creatures and ordinances of God, marriage, and whatsoever
does most affect the senses, and the natural man: they must all and every of
them be so used, and in the use so moderated; that we take heed, that by the
use of them, we be furthered, and not hindered in the holy worship and
service of God, our heavenly Father. For otherwise, as we have learned before,
out of the 1. Epist. chap: 2. of the Apostle John: the love of the Father
cannot remain with us.

Let this suffice for the duties of faith, concerning the comfort of other the
visible creatures of God.



Insomuch as our bodies (being in themselves no better then dust, from the
dust of the earth) are nevertheless, by the Fatherly goodness of God, thus
highly advanced: it is our most bounden duty so much the rather to yield them
wholly, and every member thereof, to the service of his heavenly Majesty.
And to this end, to pray earnestly to God for holy wisdom and understanding:
according to that we read Psalm 119. verse 73. Thine hands have made me, and
facioned me, give me understanding therefore, that I may learn thy
commandments.

In this respect also, are we very lively and sensibly admonished, to
consider and acknowledge our own humane frailty; and for ever to humble our
selves, under the mighty hand of God: by whose power alone, we line, move,
and have our being, as the Apostle Paul teaches us. Acts 17.28.

Explication and proof.
It is very true (poor souls that we are) the pot-sheard with the
pot-sheardes of the earth, says the Prophet Isai: ch: 45.9. That is, one in
this respect is no better then another: the King is even as the poor man, the
strong, as the weak, etc: according to that Psalm; 62.9. The children of men are
vanity yea even in their best estate. Plalm: 39.5. And again Isai: chap:
40.6. All flesh is grass. For so great is our humane frailty, even in our
best and most healthful estate; that every sixth hour, we are feign to seek
relief from other, the pore and frail creatures of God; even such as the
earth, from whence we our selves are taken, sends forth and cherishes: to
wit, corn, flesh, fruits of the trees, butter from the kine. etc.

We cannot one hour, forbear apparel in the colder season of the year. And
this we borow from the fleece of the silly sheep, or from the poor silly
worm. etc. How little a distemper will put us into a fit of an ague? how
little a thing will offend our queisie stomach? who can make his own heart so
much as to pant in his body? or his pulse to beat in the wrest of his arm?
Half our life time we pass away in sleeping. And if we want but a little of
our ordinary sleep, our senses are greatly dulled. We are ever and anon out
of tune, in one part or other. We are like the instrument of Music, which
though it be exquisitelie and finely made: yet it must be often new set. etc.

And within a short time, all will be out of frame, and hasten to an utter
dissolution, till the time of restoring do come: according to that excellent
description of our bodily and earthly frailty: Eccles: chapt:
12.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8. etc. ch: 3.20. and Job: 34.15. Ps: 146.3.4.

Frail creatures are we therefore, as was said: and so let us acknowledge our
selves: and humble our selves unto the Lord, by whose power we live, etc.
Hereof we have Abraham for a notable example, Gen: 18.27. Read also Job. 4 19.
and 10.9. Psalm: 103.14. and 2. Corin: 5.1. Hence comes this phrase, God
raises out of the dust. 1. Sam: 2.8. 1. King: 16.2. Psalm: 113.7. Hence also
was the ancient ceremony of sprinkling dust upon the head: Job. chapt: 2.12.
Lament: ch: 2. verse 10. and ch: 3.29. The afflicted puts his mouth in the
dust, if there may be hope. Read also, Ezekiel. 27.30. And Micah: 1.10. Roll thy
self in the dust.

Now therefore to the end we may find favor with God, and be supported by his
good hand, for that short time which we have here to live: Let us use our
members as weapons and servants to righteousness, according to the excellent
instruction of the Apostle Paul: Rom: 6, 13. etc. Read also Psalm: 24.8.9.10.

Singular preparation is to be made, to give intertainment to the Majesty of
so glorious a King. And Luk: chapter 3, 4, 5, 6. But who is he that has not
great cause to lament the abuse of his body, and of the members thereof? so
that he may justly say, I have looked upon that with mine eyes, which I ought
not to have seen. I have hearkened with mine ears, to hear that which I
should not have heard. I have spoken with my mouth, such words as I should not
have spoken. I have put forth mine hands, to that which I should not have
meddled with, etc.

Verily, the more we boast our selves of the creatures, as of apparel, etc.
the more do we abase our selves, and our own bodies. The more we seek to
delight our selves with delicate fare: the more costly medecines and
preservatives we use, etc: by so much the more we preach our own frailty.
But with no good use or profit, till we learn thereby to humble our selves,
and our bodies; to the good pleasure and will of our Lord God: etc. But from
the body, let us come to the soul.



This does teach us, that we owe to be more careful for the everlasting
welfare of our souls: then for our outward and bodily estate here in this
world, for a short and uncertain time.

And seeing we have lost the beauty and dignity of that holy image of God,
wherein at the first mankind was created: it may justly teach us also, to be
singularly careful and diligent, in using all means, for the recovering of
it again.

Explication and proof.
This is the true beauty and dignity indeed, which we ought most carefully to
labor after. It is more then to seek after the lost groat. It is the seeking
after a Jewel of the highest price: yea after the ground and title of a man's
whole state. For as our Savior Christ tells us: What should it profit a a
man to win the whole world, and to loose his own soul?

The Duties belonging to the comfort of our whole person and estate, wherein it
pleased God at the beginning to set and place us: to wit, above all other of
his visible Creatures; they are yet behind. For albeeit our first parents
Adam and Eve, lost this dignity: yet the gift of God to them must not be
unthankfully neglected of us. And the rather, because it is the good pleasure
of God, to restore us: yea to establish us more firmly, in a more excellent
estate, through our Lord Jesus Christ.



We are taught hereby, that it is our most bounden Duty, to glorify God for
this his most bounteous goodness toward us: and to take the whole blame of our
misery, altogether upon our selves.

We are hereby admonished also, most carefully to avoid all those ways and
means, whereby our good and happy estate was at the first lost.

To the which end and purpose, we are furthermore to believe the word of
God, to be most certain and true, both in every promise, and also in every
threatening thereof: and that without all wavering and doubting.

And moreover, we are to beware of all pride and ambition: and on the
contrary, to be always well content with that estate, which our heavenly
Father sees to be best for us; and therein continually to acknowledge his
gracious dealing with us.

Finally, we are to the same end and purpose: to resist the Devil in all his
wicked tentations, with an irreconcilable, and invincible resistance.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. The woeful example of our first parents, may be our full
instruction in all these points. For in so much as they failed in these duties,
as it is plain in the text Gen: 3.1. etc. therefore were they vanquished by
the Devils wicked and subtle tentation: as may appear by the particulars
following.

Touching the first, Eve her self, can not but acknowledge, the bountiful
goodness of God toward them: verse 2. of that 3. chapter.

But she does neither hold her heart firm in faith, to believe and fear the
threatening of God, which the Devil in her hearing; depraved and eluded: verses,
3.4.5. Neither was she content with her present estate: nor constant in
resisting the Devil, as it follows verse 6.

And as touching Adam, he was altogether negligent in examining and avoiding
the evil: nay rather he willingly suffered himself to be mislled by the
suggestion of his wife, whom he should have reproved or warned hereof: they
fell both of them most pitifully, and lost their natural, and (as we may
say) native dignity: not only from themselves, but also from all their
succeeding posterity.

Justly therefore, are we from the example of their fall, to admonish our
selves; lest after our restitution through the Fatherly grace and mercy of
our gracious good God: we should at any time fall away, by the like negligence,
and unfaithfulness of our own parts; and by the like malicious and crafty
practice of that old Serpent the Devil against us.

Nay rather, according to the first point of the answer, and according to the
end of our excellent creation, and of God his placing of us in so excellent an
estate: it is our bounden duty, to be in special manner, most earnestly and
constantly zealous of Gods glory, as God himself has given plainly to
understand; in that he sanctified his Sabbath, immediately after he had
created and made mankind.

Read also Isai: 43.7. I created him for my glory (says the Lord God)
formed and made him.

And worthily also, is the exhortation made unto us, Psalm 95. verse 6. Let
us worship and fall down before the Lord our Maker, etc. And Psalm 100.
verse, 1. etc. For he has made us, and not we our selves. etc. Likewise
Psalm. 149.1.2. And Psalm: 139, 14. etc. I will praise thee, for I am
fearefullie and wonderouslie made. etc.

This our special care, of gorifying Almighty God our heavenly Father, it is
due unto him, even from our first years, as we are admonished and exhorted
Ecclesiast: chapt: 12.1. even to the last of our days. Psalm: 146.2. The
Danger of not believing.
The want of which chief and principal care, is justly reproved Job:
35.10.11. None says, where is God that made me, who gives songs in the
night? who teaches us more then the beasts of the earth, and gives us more
wisdom then the souls of heaven.

But much more is condemned, all undutiful cauilling against Almighty God:
according to that Isai: 45.9. Woe to him that strives with his Maker, etc.
Furthermore, we ought to be so far off from cloking of any sin, by the
abuse of this, that God has created us all (as the wicked Jews went about,
from hence to countenance their unlawful marriages, Malac: chapt: 2.10. as
Trem: and Iun: do well interpret that place) that it should on the contrary,
be always a strong reason, to move us to all good duty; as some other have
in another godly sense, understood the same words of the Prophet.

According also to that of the Apostle Paul, Acts: 17. verses 24.25.26.27. GOD
that made the world, etc. has made of one blood all mankind, to dwell on all
the face of the earth, and has assigned the times which were ordained before,
and the bounds of their habitation. That they should seek the Lord, if so be
they might have grope^ after him, and found him, though doubtless he is not
far from every one of us. For in him, we live, and move, and have our
being. etc.

Finally, seeing God has created us in his own image: who shall dare attempt
to deface this image of God? yea who shall dare to offer any violence, to the
outward hurting or dismembring of any part of this his creature: either eye,
hand or foot, specially to the taking away of life, without special
commission and commandment from God himself? Certainly they shall bear they
punishment, whosoever they be. Gen: ch: 9.6.

Now therefore, for the conclusion of our inquiry, concerning this Article, of
the creation of all things: What is the danger of not believing in God the
Father, Moses; and not otherwise?

What I say is the danger of this?

They that believe not in God the Father as in the Creator: and that also even
according to the holy history of the Creation, wherein God himself, has by
his faithful Prophet revealed the same unto us and to his whole Church: it is
impossible, that they should truly believe in him, as in the Almighty, most
wise, righteous and gracious Lord God; but that with one heretic or other,
they should falsify this holy Article of our Christian belief.

Explication and proof.
It must needs be so indeed. For from whence shall any truly understand the
Almighty power of God, his divine goodness, etc. if they do not learn it from
the introduction as it were, of his own works: yea even from these his most
mighty, most wise, and gracious works of his Creation? And who could have
been able so faithfully to report them as we should find our selves
sufficiently warranted to give our undoubted credit thereunto: but even God
himself, by the holy ministry of his own approved and faithful
Secretaries and servants?

And touching the discovery of that danger of error, which every one is ready
to fall into, whosoever turns his eyes and his heart from the holy word and
faithful Scriptures of God: it shall not be amiss for us, to take our
admonition, from the manifold examples of such, as turning aside from the
word; have heretofore fallen into many foul and absurd heresies.

For some (I speak not of heathen and profane Aristotle, or of any of his
philosophical Sectaries, but even of such as have taken upon them, the
profession of the true Christian religion in the Church of Go) they have denied
the world (as touching the first matter of it) to have been ever created, but
to have been without beginning coeternall with God himself. Of the which
sort, were the heretics called Seleuciani, Hermians, and such like.

Others also of the like sort, have held that these three beginnings, the
water, fire, and darkness are uncreated. Such were the heretics called
Audiani.

Some have more particularly insisted in the element of the water: affirming
that to be coeternall with God, and thereupon, (as it seems,) are called
Aquei.

But leaving these: and to come unto those that have in some sort yielded that
the world has been created. They have nevertheless accounted it a work
unworthy the good God: such as were the wicked and blasphemous Marcionites:
and also the Cerdonians, and the Apellites.

The heretics called Caiani, denied that the God of Abraham was the creator of
the world.

The Simoniani, Nicolaitae, and others: taught that the world was created by
the Angels, and not by God himself.

The Saturninians, and the Basilidian heretics, are said to have attributed
the creation to seven Angels.

The Corinthians, and diverse others of like leaden and drossie stamp, feared
not to say, that the world was made by an inferior sort of Angels, and the
Devil.

Thus, and many ways beside: many have hereticallie erred, about the
creation of the world.

So have many done also, concerning the creation of the Angels and mankind.

Some have been missled, to imagine and hold, that the good Angels were
propagated of the essential wisdom of God. Such are the Basilidians recorded
to have been, and likewise the Gnostici and Archontici.

Other have taught, that the Devil is a bodily substance: as did the
Messa^ians.

And as touching mankind, the Manichai, held that Adam and Eve were not
created by God.

The Patricians, that the flesh of man was not the creature of God. The
Paternians, Ennomians and some other: that the lower parts of the bodies of
mankind, were the work of the Devil.

The Melitonij and the Anthropomorphites: that the image of God is in the body
of man, and not in the soul.

The Seleuciani, and others, that the soul of man was not created by God, but
by the Angels.

The Gnostici, Manichaei, and Priscilianists, that the soul is of the same
essence that God is.

The Nazaraei, on the other side: that the souls of men, are of the same
nature, with the souls of the brute beasts.

The Arabici, that the soul of man is mortal, and that it perishes with the
body.

Thus, and sondrie other ways, most fowllie and contrary to the doctrine of
the true Christian faith, have very many sorts of men erred, for want of
sincere and humble attendance upon the holy word of God: and namely, for
neglecting this part of the word, concerning the holy history of the
Creation. All which examples, ought mightily to school and admonish us, to
look religiously thereunto, to the end we may be sound in this Article of our
Christian faith: and so avoid all the rocks, boggs, and quake-mires of man's
wicked and corrupt imaginations, and every erroneous suggestion of the Devil.

Thus much, concerning the doctrine of faith, in the Almighty power of God our
heavenly Father, manifested by the manifold works of his Creation.

Belief in Gods Fatherly providence.
Belief in the Fatherly Providence of God. The ground and meaning of it.

LEt us now henceforth, proceed to inquire into the doctrine of the divine
providence of the same our God and heavenly Father: the which he does
continually exercise over all his works which he has once made. For (as was
truly answered) he does at no hand, leave any one of them so to themselves,
that they should be, as one would say, at uncertain to him.



The Providence of God, is his most mighty upholding and continuing, as also
his most wise and watchful most righteous and merciful, most constant and
sovereign, ruling and governing of all his creatures once made: in that he
effectually works all good things in them and by them; but restrains,
corrects, and turns all evil things, both counsels, words, enterprises,
and actions: as may best serve, to those most holy uses and ends, which he
himself, has most holily propounded to himself, in his own eternal
counsel and decree; according to the pleasure of his most free and blessed
good will.

Explication and proof.
It is so in deed as you say. For to speak in few words, that which for
plainenes sake, you have uttered in more. The providence of God, is the
execution of the decree of God, concerning the disposing and ordering of all
his creatures; and of all their qualities and operations whatsoever, to their
proper uses and ends: even as his creating of them, was the execution of his
purpose and decree, to give them their several qualities, natures, and beeings
themselves.

So then, we must understand the Providence of God, to be as large as his
creation: that is to say, that it does universally extend it self, to the
continual ruling, ordering, and governing, of every creature which he has
once made: and that even by the same almighty power, wisdom, justice, and
mercy; by the which, he at the first made them. As Nehem. cha. 9. ver. 6.
Thou Lord preseruest them all.

But that we may understand the better, what is meant by the Providence of
God: there are certain things to be inquired into, for the more full opening
of that which you have already answered.

And first concerning the word Providence; we are to inquire, how it may be
said to contain all that you have set down in your answer, for the
description of it: in so much as in the literal or strict signification of it
as a man may say, Providence is no more then a foreseeing of things to come.



The foreseeing of God, is no idle, or impotent and weak foresight: but as
it is essentiallie joined with preordination and fore appointment and decree;
so it cannot be but it must needs take due effect, with every ordinance and
decree thereof, in the proper times and seasons of the same.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. And therefore it is, that in the holy Scriptures, Prognosis
and Pronoia, joined with Proorismos.
the fore-appointment or predestination of God is joined most nearely with his
foreknowledge or foresight: as Acts: 2.23. delivered by the determinate
counsel, and foreknowledge, and providence of God. And Rom: 8:29. Those whom
he knew before, he also predestined, etc. And 1, Peter. 1.2. Elect
according to foreknowledge.

And that the effectual government of God is noted by his foresight: read
Gen: 22.14. In the mount the Lord will see (or provide). And Psalm. 34.15. The
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous. And Zech. cha: 3, 9. and cha: 4.10.
The seven eyes of the Lord go throughout the world.

It is true that the Lord fore-seeth and fore-knoweth more then comes to
pass: for he does of purpose frustrate many counsels and purposes which he
knows to be intended of the wicked, so that they cannot take effect. But as
touching all his own most holy counsels and purposes for all time to come: he
does so know them before hand, that according to his foreknowledge; he does
always most certainly guide them to take their full effect, so as nothing is
able to hinder the same. To this purpose, read Psalm. 94.11. And 1. Corinthians.
3.20. The Lord knows that the thoughts of the wise be vain. And 2. Kings.
19.27.28. I know thy dwelling, etc. I will put my hook in thy nostrils, etc.
Read also Psalm. 1.6, The Lord knows, (that is, he allows and blesses)
the way of the righteous, and the way of the wicked shall perish. Likewise
Psalm. 37.18. Deuteronomy. 2.7. and Amos 3.2.

Thus we see that the actual government of God is noted by his seeing or
foreseeing, by his knowledge or foreknowledge of all things: the effect being
implied by the cause or rule and ground of it.

Now a second thing, to be likewise considered, concerning your former
description of Gods holy Providence; is the reason, why you make mention of the
restraining, and correcting of evil things, etc: in so much as we have seen
in the former doctrine of the Creation, that the Lord made all things very
good.



Because shortly after the creation, a great multitude of the Angels fell away
from God: and of themselves, most wickedlie perverted themselves. Mankind also
(both Adam and Eve) were very soon drawn away from God, by the wicked
suggestion of the Devil; whence has followed, a wonderful disorder and
corruption of all things through the continual rebellion of the wicked Angels,
and of all wicked men against the Lord our God.

This is indeed, a sufficient reason of it: the ground and proof whereof, we
shall see anon.

In the mean while, there is yet a third thing remaining, for the further
clearing of the former description of the holy Providence of God: to wit,
concerning those most holy uses and ends, the which God has in his own
eternal counsel and decree propounded to himself; in his provident
supporting, ruling, and governing of all his creatures.



The most holy ends of Gods universal providence, are the eternal happiness
of all his elect Angels: and the like eternal happiness and salvation of all
his elect children, from among the rest of the lost posterity of mankind.

And on the contrary; the frustrating of all the wicked and rebellious
counsels and enterprises of all the reprobate, both Angels and men: to their
everlasting confusion, and condemnation. All to the glory of God, in the
declaration both of the bountifulnes of his most free grace and mercy: and
also of the deserved severity, of his most holy and perfect justice.

Explication and proof.
These are in deed, the principal ends of the most holy providence of God. In
respect whereof, it is said Proverb. chapter. 19.21. Many devises are in man's
heart; but the counsel of the Lord shall stand. And Psalm. 33.10.11. The Lord
breaks the counsel of the heathen, and brings to naught the devises of the
people. The counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever, and the thoughts of his
heart throughout all ages.

And Isai. chapter, 46.9.10. Remember the former things of old, for I am God
and there is no other God, etc. My counsel shall stand, and I will do
whatsoever I will.

And therefore justly does the Lord, by the same his holy Prophet, in the
beginning of the 30. chapter, pronounce a woe against them that take counsel
but not of him.

And thus far also, well says Gamaliel: Act: 5.38.39. If this counsel, or
this work, be of men, it will come to naught. But if it be of God, ye cannot
destroy it, lest ye be found even fighters against God.

The like is to be said, concerning all the crafty counsels, and enterprises
of the Devil, in that he inciteth the wicked to rebel against the Lord God,
and practices the same himself. For they shall not prevail, as will further
appear afterward.

But whereas we ascribe counsel to the Lord, the which is (as one may say)
the maturitie and ripeness of former thoughts, or as it were the choice
flower, flote, or distillation of them: we are to understand this ascription
of counsel to GOD, as spoken to our capacity, after the manner of men. For if
we shall consider exactly of the nature of God, whose wisdom is infinite, and
most perfectly present at every instant, and so abides for ever, and has
been most perfect from all eternity: there are neither former, nor latter
consultations with him.

THese things thus cleared, let us now go forward. Wherein, that we may
proceed in some order: howsoever the holy Providence of God is one only
entier in it self, let us (for our instruction, and for the help of our
infirmity) consider of it, as being either more general over all creatures,
or more special concerning some above the rest. And that also, either before
the fall of mankind: or concerning the fall it self; or else, ever since the
fall.

And touching the more special providence of God, let us consider of the
grounds and declaration of it, according to the order of the creation it self:
that is, according to the works of God, in every several days creation as
has been, from the history thereof, set down before.



For the providence of God in the general upholding of his creatures, this may
be a sufficient proof and declaration: in that so soon as mention is made of
the bringing forth of the creatures, it is said forthwith, that the Spirit of
GOD sustained and vpheld them.

Explication and proof.
It is true. For that is the true sense and meaning of those words, in the
beginning of Genesis, That the Spirit of God moved upon the waters: as they
have been more fully opened, and interpreted before. From whence, it is well
worthy to be marked: that the providence of God, in the supporting of his
creatures, is as ancient as the creation it self. The which, as it had the
beginning with it, (I mean as touching the actual operation) so it both had,
and has still, the perpetual continuance, with the continuance of the
creature it self, to the upholding of it. For the creature can no more
consist, and continue by the own power: then it could possibly consist, and
take the being, and beginning, of it self.

THus much therefore may briefly suffice, for the proof of the general
providence of God; in the continuing and upholding of his creatures, from the
first moment of the creation, and so forth.



The ground of this, is determined with the history of the creation, contained
(as we have seen before) in the two first chapters of Genesis: so much as
concerns all visible and earthly creatures, by express mention of them.

And touching the invisible Angels, though Moses writes nothing expressly of
them by name, before the fall of mankind: yet from other hely Scriptures, we
learn for certain thus much, that the Lord upholding and continuing his elect
Angels, in their holy and pure estate, as they were created; he left the rest
to themselves, who of their own accord fell soon away from their holy
original, and so deprived themselves of the favor and grace of GOD, and
became liars and murderers from the beginning.

Wherefore even thenceforth: that is, from the very beginning of their fall
from their obedience; God has begun to reserve them in everlasting chains,
under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day.

Explication and proof.
So indeed we read expressly in the 6. verse of the Epistle of Jude. And John
chap: 8.44. And this is briefly, the sum of all that, which God has judged
meet to teach us, concerning his government over his Angels, before the fall
of mankind. Let us therefore, leaving them for a while, come to his government
over the rest of his creatures. the which the Prophet Moses does expressly
describe unto us.



It appears in this, that he appointed such food and nourishment, as was
meet to support and maintain every living creature in life: and that even as
well in the vegetative life, more proper to trees and plants, as in the
sensitive life of men and bruit beasts, and also of the fowls of the aier and
fishes of the Sea, and whatsoever else.

And in that he blessed them all, with the power of generation, conception,
and bringing forth increase and multiplication, according to their several
kinds.

Explication and proof.
So indeed we read Gen: ch: 1. verses 12.22.28.29, 30. And in this respect
also, the Apostle Paul speaking of the continual providence of God, in his
upholding and governing of his creatures, says thus. Act: 17, 25. He gives
to all life, and breath, and all things else. And again verse 28. In him we
live, and move, and have our being.

This is therefore the more general providence of God, in his governing of his
creatures.



God continued the orderly succession of the night and day, according to the
ordination of it in the first days work. And to the same purpose, he
likewise confirmed the instrumental government and ordering thereof: as it were
in the hand and ministry of the Sun, and the Moon, according to the
creation of the fourth day.

God also, according to the creation of the third day, continued the limitation
and bounds of the Seas within their compass: so that they could not return
to ouerwhelme the dry land again, as of their own nature they would.

Moreover, albeit God continued his own sovereign and imperial government,
over all his creatures, as well earthly, as heavenly: yet he honored Adam
(the first man whom he had created) with a ministerial government over all
earthly ^reatures, to rule and order them, so far as should be to his best
commoditit and comfort.

Finally, God did in this his more particular providence: make a more special
prouiso (as we use to speak) for the propagation and in crease of mankind,
above all other creatures.

Explication and proof.
That these things are so, we may easily perceive by that which we read, Gen:
chap: 1.16.17.18.

Secondly, read again, Psalm: 104.6.7.8.9. Thou coueredst the earth with the
deep as with a garment: the waters would stand above the mountains. But at
thy rebuke they flee away, etc.

Thirdly, read, Gen: 1.28. and chap: 2.15, 16.19.20. For God allowed man a more
liberal ordinary and dieate, then to any other creature. And for the
authorizing of him above the rest: he warned as it were, and gathered together
all creatures before Adam, to take their names as he should think good to
call them. For that was a special token of subjection, like as when one man is
content to wear the liuerie which annother bestows upon him.

For the last point of the answer, read Gen: chap: 2. verse 22. the last part
of the verse, and verses 23.24. And let it be considered to the illustration of
Gods holy providence in this behalf: that God did not only (as was observed
before) create only one woman for one man, according to that which we read,
Mal: 2.15. (When he could have made many weomen for one man) but also he made
the woman cut of man: the like wereof he did not, in the making and producing
of any other creature.

But I desire, that you should express, and declare, by your answer: the
special providence of God, touching that special manner of the propagation of
mankind, which he himself has appointed.



God gave plainly to understand, that he would not hold it lawful, that man
and woman should come together wanderingly, to satisfy their natural lust,
after the manner of the bruit and unreasonable creatures.

And therefore it pleased God, even from the beginning, to ordain and
sanctify the holy estate of marriage; to the end he might have a blessed and
holy posterity, propagated and borne of them.

Explication and proof.
This is that which our most blessed Savior has respect unto, Mat: chap: Mal.
2.14.15.
19.4. yea which he does (verbatim) even word for word repeat; and opens the
holy will and pleasure of God to have been always constant therein: as it
follows in the same, 19. chap: verses 5. and 6. Have ye not read (says our
Savior) that he which made them at the beginning, made them male and female.
And said, For this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother and clean unto
his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh. Wherefore they are no more twain
but one flesh. Let not man therefore put a sunder that which God has coupled
together.

Thus then, we have sufficient ground for the holy providence of God: both in
the upholding, and for the continuing; as also for the ordering and governing
of his creatures: as well more generally, as also more particularly.

NOw last of all, what ground have you, for the proof of those ends, which God
in his divine providence has likewise propounded to himself, in the same
works of his creation: both generally toward a^l visible and earthly
creatures, and more particularly, toward mankind? For as touching the Angels we
have already considered, so much as we have any ground for before. What ground,

The ground of the ends of Gods divine providence in all the visible works of
his Creation: it is comprehended in that most memorable narration, which is set
down, Gen: chapter 2. from the 8. verse to the 18. as has been once mentioned,
not long before.

I remember it well. Nevertheless, to the end that we, resuming the work in
the due place thereof, may carry all so much the more commodiously before us:
let us repeat the same here again, so far as may serve to our present
purpose; and namely concerning the special providence of God toward mankind.

God created all things for his own glory, and mankind especially, above al
earthly creatures, for the declaration of the most bountiful riches of his
goodness and mercy upon them to their everlasting happiness and glory: upon
condition, they would continue constant in their holy faith, and obedience unto
him.



He further purposed, upon that occasion, to magnify the severity of his most
holy and high justice, even to the everlasting condemnation, and torment of all
such, as should continue without repentance, in their rebellion against his
most sovereign and divine Majesty; and refuse to seek their deliverance, by
that means only which he minded to tender and offer unto them.



By that tree of life, which God had planted in the midst of the garden, or
orchyard, of Heden, a most pleasant plot of ground for the exceeding
fruitfulnes and delicacie of it, according to the signification of the name of
the country Heden, where it was situated: the Lord, of his most gracious
goodness, gave Adam and Eve assurance, both for themselves and their posterity,
of everlasting happiness and glory, if they would faithfully and constantly
serve and obey him.

But on the contrary, if they should disloially break the commandment of
their sovereign (namely by eating of the fruit of that tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, which was likewise planted in the midst of the same
garden, and was the only tree which was forbidden unto them) God did as
certainly threaten the everlasting curse, both of b^die and soul against them
and all their posterity: and that also, without any hope of recovery for ever
for any thing, that he did for the present, let them understand or have any the
least inckling to the contrary.

Explication and proof.
All that you have answered is very true, as the text does plainly give every
attentive reader, to understand. And it is further confirmed most evidently, by
the effect it self which followed: according to that which the Prophet Moses
has recorded, Gen: 3. the two last verses of the chapter. For so soon as Adam
and Eve, had eaten of the same forbidden fruit: they were for ever cast out of
the garden of Heden, and might not be suffered thenceforth, once to eat of the
tree of life. And thus bereauing themselves of all former solace and comfort;
they did also make themselves, through their own sin, altogether naked,
destitute, and forlorn. In the which estate also, should they have continued
for ever, yea increased more and more, according to the further increase of
their sin: had not God of his infinite mercy, given them the promise of such
a remedy and relief, as they themselves could never have thought upon.

And thus have we also, together with the conclusion of that which we have to
observe, concerning the providence of God before the fall of mankind: we have I
say, herewithall, made an entrance upon the other part, or proceeding of Gods
holy prouidenc^ which we are now in the next place to consider of, touching the
fall of mankind.



We are to understand by this word fall.

First their unfaithfulness and disloialtie to God, in breaking his most holy
and gracious comm^ndement.

Second^y the loss of that good and blessed estate; wherein they were by the
goodness of God, created and set.

Third^y, all the misery and confusion, both of soul and body, which they
pulled upon themselves, and their posterity. Yea all that they pulled down
upon the very earth, the which God did justly accurse for their sake.

Explication and proof.
That Adam and Eve, did transgress the commandment of God: loose their blessed
estate: pull upon themselves and their posterity, yea upon the earth, all
curse and misery: it is evident, Gen: chap: 3, verses 6.7.17.18.19.23.24. And
all this, according to the threatening, or warning of God, Gen: chap: 2.17. Of
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it (says
the Lord) for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death.

That is to say: death shall be as it were the last pay and wages of sin
here in this world, beside many forerunners and punishments, making way unto
it: and then also, an entrance into a worse death, if it be not prevented. For
under the the name of death, God threateneth all the punishments of sin: both
in this world, and after in Hell. The fore-running punishments, making way to
this death; they did speedily take hold, and as it were arrest both Adam and
his wife, so soon as they had contented in sin against their God.

And that the punishment of their sin, as well as the guiltines and contagion
of it, has spread it self upon their posterity: we read Rom: 5.12.13.14. As
by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death went
over all men, etc. And in many other places, as they have been elsewhere
gathered together, and set down by us.

Now further, that the word (fall) is of so large a signification, as was
observed, it may be perceived from the use of it, in diverse places of the holy
Scriptures: as we read, Ier: 8.4. Shall they fall and not arise? shall he turn
away and not turn again? The holy Prophet speaks thus, to note the sin,
yea the obstinacy of the people, in their sin. And Prou: 11.5. The same word
notes the punishment of sin. The wicked shall fall in his own wickedness.
Likewise Rom: 11. verses 11, 12. and 1. Cor: 10.12. Let him that thinks he
stands take heed, lest he fall. And Heb: 4.11. Let us study therefore to
enter into that rest (to wit, the rest of God) lest any man fall after the same
ensample of disobedience. And again, chap: 6.6. And Revel: 18.2. The Angel
cried out mightily with a loud voice, saying, It is fallen it is fallen,
Babylon the great City etc.



No doubt it was. And so much the rather, because the commandment of God,
whereby he tried their faithfulness, and obedience to him, was so gentle and
easy a commandment. And also, because in this one sin of theirs; many, yea
in effect, all sins concur and meet together.

Explication and proof.
The commandment of God was indeed very favorable and easy; in that he
restrained them only from one tree, and gave them the free use of abundant
variety; yea and also in that he placed the tree of life, so as it might well
have been in their eye continually: to admonish them, from the midst of the
garden, of the singular love and favor of God toward them; Gen: 2.9.16. Read
also, chap: 3.2. where Eve her self acknowledges this bounty of God; and so
is, from her own knowledge and conscience, a witness against her self. Thus
the sin may easily appear to be very heinous.



First, they trod under foot the gracious commandment of God, together with
the earnest warning and threatening, which he gave them; as if there had been
neither equity, nor truth therein.

Secondly, they did most unthankfully neglect the exceeding great benefit of
their creation with all the bountiful mercies and dignities belonging
thereunto, which God had most graciously bestowed upon them.

Thirdly, they did most proudly and ambitiously aspire to be equal with God.

Finally, they did unnaturally, and securely pass by, the consideration of
that most woeful misery, which they might well know, they should by their
sin, bring not only upon themselves, but also upon their whole posterity.

All these things are very plain and evident against them: as every one of any
understanding may easily see.



The first motion, was not of themselves, but of the Devil: who (as was noted
before) being at the beginning created a good Angel, did soon after, of his
own accord fall away from the Lord; and then also, speedily by his malice and
craft, brought mankind to the like defection, through his most wicked and
subtle temptation.



He persuaded them, that if they would eat of the fruit of that tree, whereof
God had forbidden them to eat: they should then forthwith, be in a far more
excellent estate, then that was, wherein God had created and set them. And that
God forbad them to eat of the fruit of it; because he would hinder them, from
that more high advancement, which he knew, that they might, by this means,
easily attain unto.

That indeed was his subtle temptation. Ye shall not certainly dye (says
the Devil) but God does know, that when ye shall eat thereof, your eyes
shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil, Gen: 3.
verses 4.5.



The Devil used the Serpent, which of all other creatures, he knew to be most
fit for him to deceive by. So by the Serpent, he assalted woman first, whom he
knew also to be the weaker vessel: and then having deceived her, he did by
her, induce man likewise to consent and join in the same transgression with
her.

Explication and proof.
This also is plain, Gene: 3. verses 1.2.3. etc. Now the Serpent was more
subtle then any beast of the field, etc Wherein, that the Devil had his hand:
we may evidently perceive by that which we read, John: 8.44. Where our Savior
Christ affirms that of the Devil which is here ascribed to the Serpent. And
it is evident also, in that other where in the holy Scriptures, even from the
ground of this history: the Devil is called by the name of the Serpent, even
that old Serpent the Devil, etc. as Revel: chap: 12.9.

Adam and Eve. in that it was not originally of themselves, but from the
suggestion of the Devil?

It does not so lessen it, that they should not fully deserve that punishment,
which is most justly fallen upon them for it.

Nay rather, herein the sin of Eve was the greater, because she suffered so
base a creature, as the Serpent was, to blaspheme God as it did: and did not
rather forthwith even at the mention of the first word abhor it, yea because
she did not rather put it to present death then to have consented.

Explication and proof.
This indeed, would have been a worthy sacrifice as it were, unto God, if she
had had the grace so to have done: or at the least, to have most vehemently
rebuked it, and to have taken advise with her husband, what had been best to
be done, in so great and blasphemous an indignity, offered principally to God,
and then also to themselves.

And the sin of Adam also was the greater, because he did give place to the
persuasion of his wife: whom, he as her head and guide appointed by God, should
have reproved, and dissuaded from so heinous a sin.

Hitherto we see what is meant by the fall of mankind.

NOw therefore, that we may proceed to consider of the holy providence of God
herein. First, how can you show, that it may stand well with the good providence
of God, that so many of his chief creatures, created very good, (to wit, all
mankind beside many of the Angels) should be so left of God, that they should
thus woefully fall away from him, and plunge themselves for ever into so
grievous misery: when as he could by his holy providence (as we would
think) most graciously have preserved them from the same.



The wisdom and justice of God is so high above all that we can conceive:
that we need not doubt, but he knows a perfect reason, and is able
thoroughly to justify himself, though we should plead nothing on his behalf.

It is very true that you say, according to that which we read, Psalm. 51.4. God
will approve himself to be righteous when he speaks, and pure when he
judges.

Explication and proof.
Nevertheless, it will not stand with our duty, so to leave the defense of
GOD, against those which cavil at his most holy justice. If the cause of a
false God came into question, we might well say with Ioash, the father of
Gideon, Let Baal plead for himself, Judges: 6.31. But seeing it is the most
holy and just cause of the only true God, even the Lord our God and heavenly
Father: howsoever, he is able indeed, most sufficiently to plead his own
cause without us; yet (as was said) it stands not with the duty of the least
of his servants, to neglect to allege what they can, for the maintaining of
his righteousness, against every adversary, that fears not to speak evil of
the same. I do therefore very earnestly desire, that you should, for the
discharge of your most bounden duty, and therein, for the glory of God, and
peace of your own conscience, say something to this point. How may it stand
with the good providence of God?

God of his goodness, gave both the Angels which fell, and also mankind in the
beginning of their creation: a pure and holy freedom of will, yea and power
also to have continued therein, if they would have earnestly settled themselves,
to have aboade in obedience to that most holy commandment, which he had made
known unto them. But they of their own accord; contrary to his revealed
will, forsaking his commandment, lost their freedom: and so have lost the
favor of God, and made themselves both vassalls to sin, and also subject to
Gods wrath, as a just punishment of the same.

And beside this, it must needs (in all good reason) be judged most equal
and meet, that the Creator should in such sort create his creatures: and also
set them in such an estate, and condition, as they might know and find in
themselves, that they are but creatures.

This could not have been, unless they had been created so, as they must
find it necessary for them, to depend continually upon the favor and
supportance of their Creator: and that for the same cause they should see
themselves to stand most bound to humble themselves, and to yield all faithful
and constant service and duty unto him.

Yea moreover, this could not have been, unless also, they had been set in
such an estate, as it might be possible for them, by undutifulness to fall from
the same favor and supportance of their most gracious Creator.

Finally, it could not have been, unless through their own default, God
himself justly permitting the same, they might have sinned against him.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. For nothing could separate the good creature of God, from the
most good and gracious Creator, but the wicked disobedience and unfaithful
departure of the creature from him. And is it not very equal and meet, that
when the creature will not retain his liberty: that God should leave him to
himself, and so to find the inconvenience and evil of his own loss? Verily
it is wonder (save that many have lost all true light of reason) that any
should be found so foolish, and void of understanding; that they should not
perceive, that the most wise and just God, knows well how to permit, yea to
give over his creature to the own sin, and not to stay him, when he sees
that he will wilfully run into it: and yet to keep his own most holy
Majesty, most perfectly free, from the least just and deserved blame.

Yea, be it further granted (as the truth it self requires) that God should
purpose and decree in himself, before the world was; that both many of the
Angels, and also whole mankind, should through their own default, depart from
him, and sin against him, and so justly deprive themselves of his grace and
favor, and therwithall procure his wrath and heavy punishments to fall upon
themselves it is wonder, that any (specially of those who have the instructions
of the wor^ of God before the^) should show themselves more wicked in this
behalf, the^ the Apostatate Angels, and Adam and Eve themselves. Who knowing
best, in what condition and manner God had created the^: durst not, neither
could find any just ground in their own knowledge, or conscience, wherefore
they should lay any the least blame upon the Lord. Adam indeed pretends, The
ground and meaning of it.
as if he had some color of defense for himself, in that he says to God: The
woman which thou gave me she gave me of the tree, and I did eat. Wherein he
lays blame upon his wife; but he durst not lay any blame upon the Lord,
neither had he any cause. And no doubt, the Angels that fell, were, and are
^ill, and so shall remain for ever, no less convicted in themselves, but
rather much more: according to the greater excellency and dignity of their
creation.

Wherefore, whosoever (not content with this) shall proceed malapertly to
expostulate with God, why he would not give his creatures an absolute power to
abide firm and sure, in that happy estate and condition wherein he had set
them: let the^ all justly fear some singular punishment to approach against
them, for so bold and notorious a presumption; unless they shall speedily
repent, and so prevent the same, through the tender mercy of our God. For shall
God be subject to man's inquisition, controulement, and censure? Shall he be
urged to give a reason of all his secret counsels, and to satisfy every man's
malignant cauilling and clamorus interrogatories? Far be it from any of the
children of God to think so: but much further, that they should at any time
presume to do so. What answer might we then rather look for, then such a one
as King Solomon gave to his mother Bath-sheba, concerning the unlawful desire
of his brother Ado^ijah, that he mig^t have Abishag to wife? Do thou ask
this? (says King Solomon) Ask the Kingdom also. Adonijah has spoken this
word against his own life.

Verily to inquire of God any other reason of his secret counsels, then he
himself pleases to render, and not to rest in the good pleasure of his divine
and most holy and sovereign will, rather then to feed the humerous conceit of
our own corrupt and presumptuous brain: it is most traitorously to aspire and
to go about to take the Crown, as it were from the head of the Lord.
Whereupon, what may justly follow: every one, not blinded and perverted in
himself, may easily deem.

Let this therefore suffice, to show that the whole blame of the fall of Adam
and Eve, (and therewithal of the Angels also) lies altogether upon
themselves, and nothing at all upon the Lord: who is in all things, most worthy
to be blessed and praised for ever. Amen.

Adam and Eve their fall, does justly extend it self to their posterity, as
well as to themselves: that it should justly be cast off as well as they?

The strength of the reasons, does indeed reach so far. For even as through
the goodness of God, the blessing of righteousness and life, was not only
bestowed upon Adam and Eve themselves; but so as it should descend upon their
posterity, under this most equal condition; That they should faithfully and
constantly, serve and obey the Lord their God, as was answered before: So now,
by reason of their fall, not only they, but also all their posterity, are
through the justice of God, deprived of the glory of God, and made subject to
his most heavy displeasure and curse.

The reason indeed is very good. For (as has elsewhere been observed)
seeing, even among men, in course of humane justice; the traitor against his
earthly Prince, Explication and proof.
tainteth his blood for ever, if the Prince do not of his clemency restore
it: much rather is it just with God, to account all Adams posterity attainted,
and utterly debased in him. And so much the rather, because we are naturally
borne, not only guilty of his offense, but also in our selves traitorously
inclined against the Lord; as experience shows plainly and commonly, so
soon, and so often, as the time of trial does come: unless God himself do
give us better hearts, then we bring with us from the womb. Thus much of the
holy providence of God, touching the fall.

It follows now, that we do consider of the providence of God after the fall.

In which respect, first of all, what ground and testimony have you in the holy
Scriptures: for the more general providence of God over all his creatures,
since the fall of Adam.

In the fourth verse of the 16. chap: of the holy Proverbs, King Solomon
sets down this notable wise sentence. The Lord has made all things for his
own sake: yea even the wicked for the day of evil.

And Amos chap: 3.6. Shall there be evil in a city (that is, any punishment
for the sin of the people) and the Lord has not done it?

My Father (says our Savior Christ) works hitherto, and I work. John. ch:
5.17.

Likewise Act. 1.7. The Father has put the times and seasons in his own
power. And chap: 15.18. God (says the Apostle James) knows all his works,
from the beginning of the world.

Explication and proof.
These indeed, are fit proofs and testimonies, that the providence of God, is
generally over all, and in all things: whether it be for mercy, or for
punishment: what way soever, or at what time soever, mercy is showed, or
punishment is executed, etc. And there are many other such like testimonies to
be found. As Psalm. 115.3. Our God is in heaven: he does whatsoever he will. And
Psalm: 135.6. Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in heaven and in earth,
in the Sea, and in all the depthes. And Exodus: 4.11. Who has given the mouth to
man? or who has made the dumb, or the deaf, or him that sees, or the
blind? have not I the Lord? Likewise Deuteronomy: 32.39. Behold now, for I, even I am
he, and there is no Gods with me: I kill, and give life: I wound, and I make
whole: neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand, etc. Read also,
Eccles. 3.11. God has made every thing beautiful in his time, etc. Yet can no
man find out the work, which God has wrought from the beginning even to the
end. And ch: 7.15. Behold the work of God: for who can make straight that
which he has made crooked? And in the next ver. In the day of wealth, be of
good comfort, and in the day of affliction consider: God also has made this
contrary to that, (or as one may say such overthwart neighbors, as it is an
easy thing for the one to cross over the way qickly to the other) to the
intent, that man should know nothing of that which should for afterward betide
him.

Moreover, the general providence of God over all his creatures, does lively
appear, and show forth it self in this; that although for the sins of men,
he drowned the world, in the days of Noah: yet he preserved Noah himself, and
his family. Yea, and of all kinds of other creatures of the earth also, some
from perishing in the waters: to the end they might increase, and replenish the
earth again, according to their kinds, Gen: ch: 7. v. 1.2.3.7.8.15.16.17.18.19.

And does not our own daily experience teach us, that God does, even to this
day, ordinarily govern all his creatures, according to the natural law (as
one may say) of their first creation: though not so comfortably, and
constantly, for the use of mankind: because of our own daily and continual
sins? Wherefore, worthily does the Apostle Paul conclud, Rom: 11.36. Of him and
through him, and for him are all things, to him be glory for ever, Amen.

Thus much for the proofs of the providence of God more generally.

LEt us come now to the proofs of the more particular, or more special
providence of God. Concerning the which, we promised to inquire, according to
the order of the works of Gods creation, in the several days thereof. First
therefore,

The third petition, of that holy prayer, which our Lord Jesus Christ taught
his Disciples, is a plain proof of it: in that according to his warrant, we
pray, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Explication and proof.
This verily is one evident proof. And the same, is confirmed again, by the
Lords own most holy and divine prayer, which is recorded in the 17. ch: of the
Evangelist, John, v. 24. Father I will (that is, it is my earnest desire) that
they which thou have given me, be with me, even where I am, that they may
behold my glory, etc. Read also. Act: 26.18. and 1. Cor: 6.9. Ephesians: 5.5. and
Luk: ch: 13. v. 23. etc. where it is manifest, that the inheritance of heaven,
is the gift of God: and that none shall be partakers of it, but they to whom
God will give it.

Now secondly: what proof have you, concerning the providence and holy
government of God, over the Angels: The which, because they are either good (to
wit, such as retain still the purity and honor of their first creation,
through the goodness of God) or evil, in that, of themselves, they most
wickedly lost their vprightnes and dignity.



In the 4 verse of the 104. Psalm: and Heb: 1.7. thus we read He makes the
spirits his messengers, and his ministers a flame of fire. And ver. 14. Are
they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister, for their sakes that
shall be heiers of salvation?

These indeed are plain proofs, concerning the good and holy Angels. Show
likewise, some proof of the providence and government of God, over the wicked
Angels, which (as was said) are of themselves, become unclean s^irits and
Devils.



It is evident from hence, in that notwithstanding they be exceeding subtle
and crafty, yet they cannot deceive: and though they be of great power, and
either way most willing and ready to do all mischief, yet they cannot do the
least hurt, or anoiance, without the permission and leave of God. According to
that which we read in the Story concerning King Ahab: 1 King, 22. v. 21.22.23.
And in the first and second chapters of the book of Job. And in the Gospel of
Mat: chap: 8.31.

Explication and proof.
These places are also evident and plain, to the end you have alleged them.
And it is as easy with the Lord, to hinder the Devil (yea all the Devils as
well as one) from working the greater mischiefs, as the smaller. The which
also, if he should not of his infinite mercy work for us: how possibly should
we be so graciously preserved, against their extreme craft and malice, as we
are eueryone of us every day? And otherwise, how might the holy Apostle, so
co^fortably assure the Church of God, as he does, Rom: 16.20. That the God of
peace shall tread Satan under our feet shortly?

But leaving this point, let us now descend to the visible world, and the
creatures thereof. In the government whereof, insomuch as God does so order all
things (as was generally observed) that by some disorder, and failing of the
creatures, he might, from time to time, admonish mankind of their wicked
disorders, and of their most unworthy failings in all good duty to God, ever
since th^^me of our first woeful fall: and yet so, as it pleases him, always
in judgment to remember mercy, concerning all that repent and turn unto him,
as we shall hereafter more fully declare: therefore in these respects, let us
consider of the providence of God, in the more particular government of these
his visible creatures.



Touching the earth: the Lord accursed it, immediately, after the fall and
defection of mankind from him: so that the good fruitfulnes of it, is ever
since greatly diminished and impaired. Yea ever since that time, it has bin
inclined, to bring forth thorns and thisties, and all kind of weeds in great
abundance: as we read, Gen: chap: verses 17, 18.

Explication and proof.
I^ is true. And so again, Ps. 10^.34. The Lord turns a fruitful land into
barrennes for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. But of this, more in the
providence of the third days work. Moreover, howsoever the Lord has so laid
the founda^ion of the earth, that it cannot be moved by any creature: yet he
himself has, for the declaration of his power and justice, shaken it by many
earthquakes, and thereby executed many of his judgments. Whereof some are
recorded in the holy Scriptures: as Amos ch: 1.1. and Zech: 14.5. Exodus: 19.18,
and Mat: 27.^1, 54, And of other, we our selves have had experience not many
years since (would God to the furthering of our fear, and repentance before
God) and now very lately again, even in the end of the year 1601. the 24.
of December, if happily yet at the last, it might awaken us out of our gross
and general security. The Lord has also diverse times heretofore, and likewise
very lately, darkened the heavens upon us, covering and hiding the beauty of
them from us, as it were with a haire-cloth, by many black tempests and dark
eclipses, etc. But of this also, more in the providence of God, concerning the
instruments of light, which were the work of the 4. day.

IN the mean while, we come to the works of the second day.



This is evident, from the vehement tempests of winds, and rain, with very
grievous thunders, and lightenings: in that, notwithstanding (as experience it
self confirms oftentimes, that they might easily grow so forcible and
strong, that they should blow down our housen over our heads, or drown, or
burn us up, as the old world was drowned in the days of Noah when he only and
his family were saved, and as Sodom and other cities, were burnt with fire from
heaven when Lot was delivered, and as the housen of Iobes children were
suddenly blown down upon them) Yet the Lord partly performing his special
promise, that he would not again drown the world; and generally, even of his
accustomed goodness and mercy, he does so moderate and restrain those his
creatures, that seldom (in comparison) do they greatly hurt and annoy us.

Explication and proof.
These indeed, are familiar confirmations of Gods holy gracious and fatherly
providence. For without such his favorable moderation and restrain^; we may
learn further, of what exceeding great force tempests might be usually, as
sometimes they have been and still are: according to that which we read, Psalm:
29.3, etc. And Josh. ch: 10. v. 11. At what time, the Lord destroyed more of
the enemies of his people, with hailestones from heaven, then they themselves
slew with the sword. Read also, Exodus: 9.22.23.24.25.26. where it is recorded,
that the Lord did exceedingly punish the Egiptians by hail, with lightenings
and thunder. And is it not a plain demonstration, that God rules the heavens;
seeing it is in his power to make them as it were brass over our heads: as he
did in the days of the wicked K: Ahab, so that it rained not for the space of
three years and six months together? 1. King: 17, 1.2. and ch: 18.1.41. etc.
James 5.17.18. And seeing he can cause it (of his mercy) to rain in one
city, and (because of his displeasure) not to rain in the city next unto it?
yea seeing he can and does at his pleasure send rain upon one field, and not
upon the next? as Amos. ch: 4.7. And is it not plain in that it is written,
Ps. 65.9.10. that it is God, who visits the earth, and waters it at his
pleasure? And Psalm: 68.9. He sends his gracious rain to refresh the earth;
he refreshes it when it is weary. etc. And Mat: 5.45. It is God that sends
rain. And moreover, is not the same manifest in that (as touching the winds)
he is said to draw them out of his treasures? Psalm: 135.7. And in that he
uses them to singular mercy, when so it seems good unto him? as Gen: ch:
8.1. and Exodus: 14, 21. and 1. King. 18.45. And also for great judgment and
punishment against the wicked? as in the former place of Exodus: and chap.
15.8.10. Read also Jonah: ch: 1.4. and ch: 4.8. Are not al these (I pray you)
evident proofs, and demonstrations of Gods holy providence, in the ruling and
governing of these his creatures? No doubt they are. And therefore worthily is
the providence of God, celebrated in the Church of God, in this behalf. Psalm:
147. v. 15.16.17.18. Finally, to this purpose read that notable Scripture in
the book of Job: chap: 37, from the beginning of the chapter to the 19. verse.
Thus much concerning the works of the second day.



The drowning of the world before mentioned, in that all the fountains of the
great deep did then break up at the commandment of God: as we read Gen:
chap: 7.11. And likewise, the clearing or emptying of the earth again, within
a few days after: they are very plain, sinsible, and famous demonstrations of
it for ever. The breaches also, which the Seas do sundry times attempt and
make: do easily show, what they would do, if they were not restrained and
held in, by the almighty, and most gracious ouer-ruling power of God.

Explication and proof.
These are so plain proofs indeed, as all but they that will not see; must
needs acknowledge the evidence of them.

We may read the same also testified, Psalm. 89.9. Thou rulest the raging of the
Sea: when the waves thereof arise, thou stillest them. And Ps. 93.3.4. and
107.23.24.25.26.27.28.29. Thus therefore, the providence of our God, euide^ty
appears in the ordering of the Seas, and of the dry land: so far as
concerns the first part of the works of the third days creation.

Show likewise, some proof of the same provident government of God,
concerning the fruits of the earth, the which also God created the same day.



In this respect, thus we read, Psalm: 74.17. The Lord has made Summer and
winter. And Psalm: 104. verses 13, 14, 15. God waters the mountains from his
chambers, and the earth is filled with the fruit of his works. He causes
grass to grow for cattle and herbs for the use of man, that he may bring
forth bread out of the earth. And wine that makes glad the heart of man, and
oil to make the face to shine, and bread that strengthens man's heart.

This one testimony, is so plain and plentiful, that it may well stand in
stead of many: Explication and proof.
to testify the fatherly goodness and bounty of God, in this behalf. Read
also, 2. King: 19.29. And on the contrary, it is as clear, that God, for the
punishment of the sins of the people, makes the earth barren and unfruitful,
sends dearth and famine, etc. as we read, Joel: ch: first and second.
Likewise, Amos. 4.6.7.8.9. Yea so, that God does even turn abundance into
want, and curses the very plenty of those, that do abuse it: according to
the threatening of God. Deuteronomy: 28.17.22, 23.38.39.40.41.42. Let this suffice
concerning the providence of God, in governing the creatures, created in the
third day.

This also may be made manifest, from record of ancient experience, in that at
the prayer of Joshua, God stayed the ordinary course of the Sun and the
Moon by the space of a whole day: yea so, that the day of this staying of the
Sun was as long as two days ordinarily.

Explication and proof.
This did the Lord, to the end his people might avenge themselves: or rather
that they might execute the vengeance of the Lord upon his enemies, the more
effectually. So we read Josh: chap 10. verse 12.13.14.

F^ue hours in go ng back, and ti^e in going forward again: the choice ^f th
sig^e being offered to the King about the ^^d time of the day.
And in the days of the reign of good K. Hezekiah, the Lord caused the Sun to
go back ten degrees: 2. King: chap: 20, 11. and Isai: 38, 8. So that the
day of this going back of the Sun, was lengthened the space of ten hours, so
that it was two and twenty hours long as some do probably esteem the
degrees of the dyall to be every half hour, four and twenty in all.

The same providence of God, is manifested also, by a like unwonted course,
concerning the darkness, the which God continued upon the land of Egypt, by the
space of three days together: and that also in so palpable a manner, that the
Egiptians saw no glimse of light, either from Sun, or Moon, or any Star,
for all that while. Exodus: 10, 22.23.

The like is to be said concerning the darkness which was at the crucifying of
our Savior Christ: as we read, Mat: chap: 27, 45.

So that, it cannot be denied, b^t must needs be granted, that the Lord has
openly avouched his providence and government, over his heavenly creatures: as
well as over the heavens themselves, and as over the earth, and the waters, as
we saw before.

And in this respect, does the Lord by his holy Prophet, animate and imbolden
his people, against all superstitious fear of the signs of heaven after the
manner of the heathen: Ierem: chap: 10, 1.2.

This therefore shall suffice for this present, to prove the government and
providence of God, concerning the works of his creation in the fourth day.

THe works of the fifte days Creation, are now to be considered.



Touching the fishes of the Sea, we have an evident instance, or example, to
show the provident hand of God; in that he prepared the great Whale-fishe, to
receive the Prophet Jonah, at the same instant, when he was thrown out of the
ship into the Sea: and in that according to the time appointed of God, the
same fish cast up Jonah, upon the dry land again. Jonah: chapter 1.17. and
chapt: 2.10.

Likewise, we have other notable instances: namely, in that when our Savior
Christ was to pay tribute money: a fish came to Peter's angle, that had a piece
of twenty pence in the mouth of it, for the discharge of the tribute:
according as our Savior Christ told Peter that it should so come to pass.
Matthew: 17.27. And again, in that at another time, at the commandment and
direction of our Saui: Christ his disciples had forthwith, an extraordinary
draught of fishes, after they had wearied themselves with fishing, and could
take no fish, all the night before. Luke Chapter 5. verse 4. etc. And again
John: 21.3.4.5.6.

Explication and proof
These indeed are very evident instances, concerning the fishes of the Seas.
For these things came not thus to pass, according to a bare foreknowledge,
that such a fish, or such and such a company, or skole of fishes, should at
that time be in such or such places. But our Savior Christ knew, that God had
by his Divine providence appointed, that these fishes, must for such purposes,
come to those very places, and there to attend the pleasure of God, to do his
will, in the appointed times and seasons thereof, even at his sovereign
commandment.

But you have not yet showed any ground, for the proof of Gods providence and
government, over the Fowls of the aier, which were a part of the fifte days
creation.



In the 9. verse of the 147. Psalm, the holy Psalmist says thus. Our God
gives food to the young ravens that cry. The same does the Lord himself
affirm also, in the book of Job: chap: 39 verse 3. Who (says God) prepares
for the ravens his meat, when his birds cry unto God, wandering for lack of
meat? As though he should say. It is I the Lord only, that by my providence
do make provision for them. And 1. Kings, 17.45.6. We read it testified, that
God used the ravens for his instruments, to feed Elijah his Prophet. And
Matthew: chapt: 6.26. Our Savior Christ affirms, that it is our heavenly
Father, that feeds the fowls of heaven. And again, chapter 10. 29. A
sparrowe, (says he) falls not to the ground, without your heavenly Father.

Explication and proof.
That is to say, it does not miscarie, or come to the death of it, by falling
into the net of the fowler, neither is killed by him that shoteth with the
stone-bow, or is taken of the ravenous foul, or any other way: but even as it
pleases God by his divine providence to dispose thereof. For such is the
signification of the phrase, to fall to the earth; according to that 2. King:
ch: 10. verse. 10. There shall fall unto the earth, nothing of the word which the
Lord at any time speaks.

Moreover Job: chapt: 39.20. God is said to watch over the eggs of the
Estrich, so that they are hatched in due time: though this foul, laying them
in the sand, be negligent in looking to the hatching of them.

And in the same chapter, God denying unto man, the government of other wild
fowls, he does justly challenge it as proper to himself: and gives the
instance in the wild hawke, and the Eagle, which without the help of man,
provide for themselves, but not without the gift of God: who makes them (as
the Scriptures speak) Lord of the wing; and directs them also, whether they
shall fly to find their food. These shall suffice, to show the providence
of God, over the works of the fifte day.

Let us now go forward, to the works of the sixth day. And first of all,
concerning the cattle, which are more tame: even such as God created and made
by nature more gentle and serviceable, for the special and common use of man;
such as are the horse, the ox, and the ass, etc.



In the 104. Psalm, verse 14. The Lord our God (says the Prophet) causes
grass to grow for the cattle. And Psalm 147.9. He gives to beasts their
food. And Psalm. 36.6. The Lord preserves both man and beast.

Explication and proof.
These are plain testimonies. And it may yet further appear, by that
commandment, which God gives to man: that he deal well with his ox, which
treads out: that is, which by treading thresheth out his corn, etc. And in
that he puts into the heart of every man, that has regard of just and
equal dealing, to regard the life of his beast. Prouer: chapt: 12.10. and
Deuteron: 25.4.

Furthermore, that the providence of God rules such brute beasts, we have a
very special instance. 1. Sam: chapt: 6. verse. 12. where we read, that the
milch kine, new taken away from their sucking calves, and never acquainted to
the yoke: yet by the appointement of God, they do of their willing accord,
dr^w the Ark of the Lord, out of the country of the Philistimes, home to the
Israelites, to whom it did by right belong, and not unto them.

But leaving these, let us come to the wild beasts.



In the ^1. verse of the 104. Psalm before alleged. The Lions (says the
Psalmist) roar after their pray, and seek their meat at God.

Explication and proof.
The same is likewise given to understand, in the two first verses of the 39,
book of Job: Will thou hunt the pray for the Lion (says the spirit of God?) ^r
fill the appetite of the Lions whe^pes, when they couch in their places, and
remain in the covert, to lie in wait. As though the Lord should say: this
were too hard and dangerous a province (as we may say) for man to undertake.
And again, in the same chapter, from the 4. verse, the same is given to be
considered of us, concerning the wild goat, the wild ass, the hind, and
the unicorn.

In the first book of the Kings chapter 13.26. God delivered a certain
Prophet, to be slain of a Lion, which met him by the appointment of God to the
same end: because he had disobeyed his commandment.

Nevertheless, God so limited and restrained the Lion, that he did not
devour any part of him: verses 24.25. And Dan: chapt: 6.22. it is recorded
that God did, by the ministry of his holy Angel, so shut the hungry Lions
mouths, to whom the Prophet Daniel was thrown, that they could do him no
hurt at all, because he believed in God, that he was able to deliver him.

But 2. King: ch: 2. verse 24. God sent two Bears out of a wood, and gave them
power, to destroy and tare in pieces, two and forty of those wicked
children, that mocked the holy Prophet of God Elisha. And thus the Providence
of God reaches to the government of every wild beast.



We read in the 21. Chapter of the book of Numbers, verse 6. that God sent
fiery Serpents, among the people of Israel which stong them so that many of
them dyed of the inflammation of the poison, because of their murmuring against
God, and his faithful servant Moses.

Explication and proof.
The providence of God, and his government over this kind of creatures, even to
the least of them: may evidently be argued from hence, that it pleased him to
preserve a remnant of them, that they should not be drowned in the general
deluge or floode: as we read Gen: 7. verses 8.14.17.

We may likewise perceive it evidently, from those punishments which God
laid upon the Egiptians, by sending frogs, and lice, and grasshoppers, which
we may well enough reckon among the creeping things, as being near of kind
unto them. Moreover, we may understand it to be so, by this: that as he
threatens, so he sends many times, the caterpillars, and other worms, for
the punishment of the sins of his people, Joel. chapter 1, 4. As also in that
upon their repentance, he takes them away again: as chapt: 2.25. and Malac:
chapt: 3.11. This part of Gods providence, is not to be neglected of us. For
it is so far from derogating from the honor of it, as we shall have
occasion hereafter to observe further: that it does on the contrary, most
lively set out the absolute perfection of it; in so much as it extends it
self, even to the most wise, just, and exact ordering of the least and basest
worm, thar creeps upon the face of the earth.

ANd now we come to the last, and greatest work, of the creation of the
sixth day: to wit? the making of mankind. Whom, as God created by his special
wisdom: so he governs them with their whole posterity, with a principal,
and most provident care and regard, above all other of the earthly creatures,
from time to time. Not only before the fall (as we have already seen) but
also ever since the fall, as we are henceforth to inquire.

The which, that we may do in some commodious course: we must necessarily
proceed by some division, or distribution of parts, or members, such as are to
be distinguished in this argument. For by reason of the fall of mankind, some
(as reprobates) are justly left in their sins: wherein also they do
willingly continue, yea and harden their hearts, against all holy means
tending to the contrary. Other (being elected according to the free grace and
mercy of God) they hearken to God, repent of their sins, and dutifullie
embrace all means and helps, which God vouchsafes them for their furtherance
to everlasting happiness and salvation.

Wherefore, let us accordingly, inquire of these parts of Gods most provident
government: as well concerning the one, as the other.

And herein also, not only concerning the bodies, and outward estate: but
principally, concerning the government of the souls and spirits of men.
Neither yet let us inquire of particular persons alone: but also of Families,
and whole States, Cities, Nations, and Kingdoms. For all are most wisely, and
exactly, ruled and governed: not by a general and confused providence, but
even by a particular and vigilant care, every way.

FIrst therefore, concerning the wicked; what Ground have you, that God by his
divine providence, governs and rules, or rather ouer-ruleth and bridleth
them? Wherein also, seeing we are to begin with particular persons, concerning
their outward and private estate.



Wicked Caine, the first man after the fall, may be a notable example hereof,
in that the Lord God minding to make him to be in the fight of all men, a
visible, (and as it were a branded) example of his temporal punishment, here
in this world, for his unnatural and cruel fratricide, or murdering of his
godly Brother: he granted him therefore, the protection of his life, so that
none should take it away from him. Though indeed, God did this in such sort,
that his life had in the bosom of it, the continual discomfort, and fear of
death; yea and therewithal, through the guiltenes of a most evil conscience:
an expectation of a most woeful judgment, to fall upon him afterward.

Explication and proof^.
So indeed, the holy history it self, gives plainly to every advised and
attentive Reader to understand: Genes: chapter 4.11.12. etc. From the which
decree of God, concerning the safegarde of this wicked man's life; so long as it
was his pleasure, for examples sake to continue the same: we may justly
affirm, that the lives of all the wicked, are so in the hand of God, that none
can take life away from them, till the time appointed of God be come. But when
that time is once come; God himself will root them out, according to their
desert: and prosper every means, which he himself has prepared to that
end.

Moreover, as God maintains the life of every wicked man, so long as he
thinks good to let them live; so he allows unto them, the outward means,
and natural comfortes of this natural life: Matthew. 5.45. and Psalm: 17.14. The
which their allowance from God, the godly are warned, that they do not envy
or repine against them for it: as we read, Psalm: 37.1. and in diverse other
places.

The wicked are partakers also of bodily health, which is a good gift of God:
yet so, as when they have abused this gift, to the full measure of their
sin, God takes away both health and life, as Job: 21.7. etc. and Ps: 73.3.4.
etc. Read also, 1. Sam: 5.6. and 2. Chron: 21.12.14.15. Acts 12.23. Isai:
chapt: 37. verses 36.37.38.

Nevertheless, let us herewithall observe, that the Lord does not seldom give
unto the wicked (whose portion is in this life only) more speedy, and also
longer continued outward prosperity, then he does to his own children: as in
this point even Caine, and his posterity, may from the beginning be examples
or instances, in that they flourished and ruffled in the world, while Adam and
Eve, were without posterity, from any other child: and no doubt grieved to
behold the wickedness of Caine, unto the hundred and thirtith year of their
age, before God gave them Sheth, to succeed in stead of godly Abell. And the
same is evident from the examples of Ishmael and Esau, who had either of them,
a long starte before Iaakob, as touching the wealth and glory of this present
evil world. Gen: chapt: 36.31.

And herewithall also, for expeditions sake, let us take the same for examples,
how God gives this outward prosperity and advancement, not only to
particular persons in their private estate, but also to whole public states
and kingdoms, though they be wicked and ungodly: as it is further evident, by
the rising of all the chiefest Monarchies of the world, among the Assyrians,
Babilonians, Medes, and Persians, and among the Romans. Yet so as their falling
and dissolution, is likewise determined, and ordered by the Sacred providence
of God, as well as their rising: according as the holy Prophesies given forth
thereof, by holy inspiration from God, do plainly euict. Of the which, read a
special instance, Dan: chap: 5.25. God has numbered thy kingdom, and has
finished it: says the Prophet to king Belshazzar. And generally, it is most
certainly determined by the Lord: that not only particular persons, but also
that whole Families, States, and Kingdoms, that will not serve the Lord, shall
perish at the last, through the just displeasure and judgment of God; when
once their day is come, and the measure of their sin is at the full. As Prou:
2.22. And 3.33. and 14.11. Isai: 54.15 etc. Ier: 25.15. Zech: 14.17. etc.
Psalm 75.4.5.6. etc.

God manifests his providence, by his judgments upon the wicked from day to
day, in all places, as we might see, if we would diligently mark them. He
brings secret sins, many times to light, very strangely, even before
men: and how much more then, may we justly persuade our selves, that all
things are naked and manifest before himself?

Thus the providence of God rules all the wicked of the earth, as touching
their persons and outward estate: both particularly and generally, and also
privately, and publikelie.



Yea, there is no doubt, but it may be truly affirmed: and accordingly, The
ground and meaning of it.
it ought to be so acknowledged and believed, of every true believer.



Whereas the wicked, through self-love and pride in themselves, and of wilful
malice and despite against others, (they following therein the suggestion of
the devil) do endeavor by all means, to abuse that wit and strength which
they have naturally: howsoever God does not usually take away from them their
wit and strength, neither does bereave them of all means, in such sort that
they cannot neither devise nor practice, great and mischievous enterprises:
yet, by his ouer-reaching wisdom, together with his most holy and
euer-ruling power, he turns their deepest devises, and mightiest designements
whatsoever, to serve his own most sovereign counsel and purpose, to the
glory of his own name, and the final benefit and comfort of his Church and
people.

Explication and proof.
This is notably to be seen, in the violent practice of the Sabeans and
Caldeans against Job, if we compare the first and the last chapters of that
book together. Likewise, in the subtle practice of the wicked Jews, against
our Savior Christ, according to that. Act 2.23. And in the practice of the
brethren of Joseph against him. Gene. 37.27. etc. For (as Joseph says, upon
comfortable experience: chap: 45.5.) God sent me before ye, for your
preservation. And chapter 50.21. When ye thought evil against me, God
disposed it to good, etc. Read also Isai: chap: 10 5, 6, 7, etc. O Ashur, the
rod of my wrath, etc. But he thinks not so, neither does his heart esteem
it so: but he imagines to destroy and cut off not a few nations. etc. But when
the Lord has accomplished all his work upon Mount Sion and Jerusalem, I will
visit the fruit of the proud heart of the King of Ashur, and his glorious and
proud looks. And chap. 37.^8, 29. Because thou ragest against me (says the
Lord) and thy tumult is come up into mine ears; therefore will I put my hook
into thy nostrills, and my bridle in thy lips, etc. And verses 36, 37, 38.
The Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the Camp of Ashur, an hundred
fourscore, and five thousand, etc.

Yea, so does the Lord overrule the counsels, purposes, and enterprises of
the wicked; that whereas they in their wilfulness, say in themselves, and of
themselves, that they will do this, or that evil and mischief: God also
says in his justice (even so often as he sees it meet to permit and leave
them to their own will) that they shall do it. Yea, God himself does it by
them; we mean the action or thing that is done, as it is a just punishment any
way, either upon themselves, or upon any other by them: but not in respect of
the evil quality, nor according to the evil ends, which the wicked propound
to themselves, in their ungodly enterprises. And thus God, above that which the
wicked intend (serving his one holy counsel by them) he does nevertheless, by
that light of nature which is in them, and by the rebukes of his own spirit,
in such sort convince their consciences of their wickedness, even before they
do commit it: that they stand justly condemned in themselves, for every wicked
thing, which at any time they either mind or do. This is manifest by the
examples before alleged, as also by that which the Lord says, concerning the
hardening of Pharaohs heart, Ex. 7.3. and chapter 9.12, 16. and chapter 10.1, 20. and
chapter 14.4. And likewise, concerning the open defiling of King David's wives. 2.
Sa. 12.10, 11, 12. And according to that which the same King says of railing
Shimei; that the Lord had bidden him curse David. chapter 16.10. According also, as
the Lord is said, to put a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs false Prophets,
to the end he might, by their evil counsel, bring evil upon the wicked King,
as the Prophet Michaiah told him: as we read 1. King. 22.23.

Nevertheless, GOD does many times, as pleases him, take the wise, and snarle
them so in their own crafts, that he does not only overthrow their
enterprises, when they have made some entrance into the execution of them, but
also otherwhile, he does even frustrate and defeat them so, that they cannot
find the opportunity, or any means, to their liking and desire, once to set
them on foot: as we read, Job: 5.12.13. 1. Corinthians: 3.19.20. Luke chapt: 1.51.
Whereof also we have a notable example, in the overthrow of Ahitophels counsel:
2. Sam: 17.14. And in the overthrow of Hamans intended cruelty, as we read in
the book of Ester.

Finally, God does often times alter and change, the purposes and resolutions
of the wicked, by altering and changing their own affections. As the memorable
example of Esau plainly shows, in that, albeeit he came against his brother
Iaakob with an hostile mind: yet before he came at him, his heart was so
changed, that he deals kindly and brotherly; above all that might be
expected, from such a profane ruffian, as he was. Genes: chap: 33. And before
this, in the 31. chapt: of the same book of holy Scripture, we read of some
thing a like change, in the heart and purpose of Laban: in his wrathful
pursuit after the same good servant of God. And after this, Exodus: chapt: 12.35.
etc. we read, that at the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, God gave
them such favor in the eyes of their most hateful adversaries: that they gave
them their jewels of Gold, and jewels of silver, and raiment.

Thus then, whereas the preparations of the heart are in man: we may see
(according to the holy Proverb,) the answer of the tongue is of the Lord.
Prou: 16.1. And again in the 9. verse of the same chapter. The heart of man
purposes his way: but the Lord does direct his steps. And verse 7. When the
ways of a man please the Lord, he will make even his enemies at peace with
him. And chapt: 21:1. Even the Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the
rivers of waters: he turns it whether so ever it pleases him. According to
that we read Psalm: 106.46. God gave his people favor, in the sight of all
them that led them captives. And Ier: 10.23. O Lord (says the Prophet) I know
that the way of man is not in him self, neither is it in man to walk, and to
direct his steps.

Such doubtless, is the effectual providence and government of God, over the
most wicked and ungodly, their thoughts, purposes, and actions; he himself
abiding perfectly righteous, without any the least participating with them in
their sin: no more then the Sun is defiled by the carrion, or is the proper
cause of the stinche and putrefaction of it, by casting the pure beams thereof
upon it. For this the carrion has properly of it self, etc.

But leaving the wicked: let us now come to the most choice and Fatherly
Providence of God, in the government of his own dear children. The which part
(as one may say) of his divine Providence, is of all other most gracious and
admirable: specially concerning their souls, which are most dear, and
precious before him.



In the 34, Psalm, verses 18.19. Many (yea and the same also great) are the
troubles of the righteous man (says the holy Psalmist) but the Lord
delivers him out of them all. He keeps all his bones, not one of them is
broken. And in this holy confidence, he says further. Thou art my God My
times are in thy hand, etc. Psalm: 31.14.15. And Psalm: 71. verses 5.6. Thou art
my hope o Lord God, even my trust from my youth. Upon thee have I been stayed
from the womb: thou art he that took me out of my mothers bowels, etc. And
Psalm 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.
Finally, Psalm: 16.9. My flesh also does rest in hope.

Explication and proof.
Here we may see plainly, that the providence of God, is very gracious toward
the outward estate and persons of his children; in so much as he will
prosecute them with his favor, even to the death, to the grave, and afterward:
until he shall raise them out of the dust again.

And concerning his tender care over us, in this life: read more Psalm 3. He
will preserve his servants against thousands that rise up against them. And
Psalm 91. He does defend them from many contagious diseases, even from the
noisome plague and pestilence. Or if he do afflict them this way, for their
trial, he does nevertheless tender them with a fatherly pity and compassion:
wherein he never fails such as put their trust in him. As Heb: 12.5. etc.
And as the example of king Hezekiah Isai: chapter 38. whom the Lord God did
most graciously cure of his grievous disease, confirms the same.

And yet further, touching the special care of God, over the outward estate of
his children: let us consider of the reason which our Savior Christ uses,
Math: 6.26. God your heavenly Father provides for the fowls of heaven. Are
not ye much better then they? To wit, better in Gods gracious account, and
estimation for Christ's sake: howsoever in our selves, we are most unworthy,
by reason of our sins. Whereunto accords that which we read chap: 10.31.
where our Savior Christ says thus, Fear ye not, ye are of more value then
many sparrowes. Yea and all the hairs of your head are numbered. This also God
has of old most famouslie testified, by his feeding of the Israelites with
Manna from heaven: and by giving them water out of the rock, by the space of
forty years together.

And likewise, by many other gracious effects of his fatherly providence, in
feeding many, in the times of dearth and famine: as the Prophet Elijah, and
the widdowe of Zarephath, etc. Read also Psalm 34.10. Isai: 65.13. and Psalm:
113.7.8.9. And Gen: 24.1. It was the Lord who blessed Abraham with all outward
blessings.

It is evident therefore, that the Lord our God, has a special care, and
Fatherly providence, even over the bodies, and outward estate of his faithful
servants, and dear children.

NOw what ground and proof have you, concerning his like gracious providence
and government,

All the care, which the Lord has over the bodies, and outward estate of every
faithful servant, and dutiful child of his: it proceeds altogether of that
love, which he chiefly bears toward their souls.

In the which respect, in the place to the Hebr: lately alleged, God
intituleth himself to be in a special manner, the Father of their souls and
spirits.

Explication and proof.
It is so indeed. For in all afflictions of the body, as well as by all outward
comfortes of this life; God has a most fatherly care to turn all to the
benefit of the soul: according to that of the Apostle Paul, Romans 8.28. We
know that all things work together for the best, unto them that are called of
his purpose, etc.

But more particularly.



VVheras we are all of us by nature, vain, foolish, proud, and rebellious,
against God, and his word; he does by the gracious power of his holy Spirit,
through his word, so alter and change the hearts, minds, and wills, of all
those that be his: that he makes them fools in themselves, and shows them
to be in themselves weak also, miserable, and every way forlorn; that so he
may make them careful, to seek to be truly wise, holy, and blessed in him.
Yea he leads them down, as it were, to the lowest pit of Hell: that he
may make them fit at the last, to inhabit the highest, and most glorious
Heavens.

And all this, of his mere grace and favor, in his beloved Son our Lord
Jesus Christ: even according to his own counsel and purpose in him, before
the world was, as was said before.

It is very true. For even hereunto, does the Lord subordinate the course of
his government, over all his other creatures, and works. To this purpose, has
he sanctified all his holy ordinances, word, prayer, Sacraments, etc. To
this purpose does he specially guide the thoughts, words, and works of his
children; censuring, rebuking, and chastising them, so far as they do err
and go astray from him: but comforting, encouraging, and rejoicing them in all
things, wherein they do well obeying his word, and the holy motions of his
good Spirit, which frames their hearts, of conscience, to will and desire,
that only which God wills, etc.

This your last answer, contains both the effects, and also the cause of
this excellent providence of God concerning his children. For the which I
desire that you should show some proof, out of the holy Scriptures.

And first concerning the effects of Gods most holy government, in the
altering and changing of the hearts of his chldren: of fools making them
wise, of weak strong, etc.



To this purpose, the Apostle Paul teaches us, that we are not of our selves
sufficient (no not fit) so much as to think a good thought. 2. Cor. 3.5.
Much rather therefore, must the will and the deed be of God. Philipp: 2.13.
For it is God (says the same Apostle) who works in you the will, and the
deed, even of his good pleasure.

And 1. Corinthians: 12.3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy
Ghost. And Romans 8.14. They that are the Sons of God, are led by the
Spirit of God.

Finally. Galatians 5.22. etc. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meeknes, temperance: against such
there is no law. For they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lu^^es. If we live in the Spirit, let us walk in the
Spirit.

Explication and proof. See the last Answer, in the former page.
These holy Scriptures, do show in deed, the most excellent and admirable
work, and government of God, concerning the souls of his children.

To the which purpose also, the Apostle says further. Let every one that
seems to be wise in this world, be a fool that he may be wise. For the
wisdom of this world is foolishnes with God, etc. 1. Corinthians: 3.18.19.

Read also Rom: 7.9. etc. to the end. And Galat: 5.17. Read likewise Revel:
3.17.18.19. Thou say, I am rich, etc. and know not that thou art
wretched, etc. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried by the fire, that thou
may be made rich, etc. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous
therefore, and amend.

And that the Lord leads his children down, as it were, to the lowest pit,
and raises them up again, from all their fears and sorrows, etc. it is
evident. Psalm: 86.13. and Psalm: 130.1. And likewise, Acts 14.22. The beaten
way to the kingdom of God, is by manifold affliction and tribulation. But in
all troubles and afflictions, the Lord stands by his children, as a tender
supporter, and comforter. 2. Corinthians: 4 8 9.

Moreover, how exact a watch, and how provident a government, the Lord
exercises over his children: read it notably described, Psalm: 139.1. etc. O
Lord (says the Psalmist) thou have tried me, and known me. Thou know my
sitting and my rising: thou understand my thought a far off: etc.

Thou boldest me strait behind and before, etc. Whether shall I go from thy
Spirit, etc. But all this, to the singular benefit of every true servant of
God: whom God nourtereth, as a Father his child whom he dearly loves.

And as he deals thus watchfullie, for every one a part, so does he for
the whole body of the Church conioyntlie: against the which, the very gates
and power of Hell, shall never be able to prevail, as our Savior Christ
h^mselfe assures us.

Finally, the government of God over the souls of his children, (whether of
every one apart, or of many, or of all together) it is to be considered, not
only in his long sufferance before their conversion, but also in their
conversion it self, and for ever after. So that if they wax at any time
forgetful, he causes their own hearts to smite them, as he did the heart
of king David, after that he had sinned in numbering the people: he gives
them troubled consciences: he chastises them sharply in their bodies, because
of the sin of their souls: he takes away all comfort of his Spirit for the
time, though he minds to restore them to their former joys again. But who
can express the manifold wisdom of Gods most holy providence, in the
government of his children?

Hitherto of the effects, of Gods most gracious providence toward his
Church, and every member thereof.

LEt us now come now to the chief cause of all. The which (as was said) is
the mere grace and favor of God.



Because thou wast precious in my sight (says the Lord by his holy Prophet,)
and thou were honorable, and I loved thee, therefore will I give man for thee,
and people for thy sake. Isai: chapt: 43.4. etc.

Explication and proof.
The same we may see likewise testified Deuteronomy: chapt: 7. verses 6.7.8. etc. and
Ezekiel: chapt: 16.1.2.3. etc. The which testimonies, though they respected more
particularly the Church of the Jews; yet by them it is evident, what manner
of affection, the Lord bears toward his whole church, both of Jews and
Gentiles: and also what is the true cause of all the dignity and happiness of
the Church; even the free love and adoption or acceptance of God, as he
himself expresslie professes, and as the Church dutifullie acknowledges.
Psalm 44.3.

Nevertheless let us see some proofs out of the new Testament.



In the first chapter of the epistle to the Ephesians, verse 3. etc. thus we
read. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with all spiritual blessing, in heavenly things in Christ. As he
has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy, and without blame, before him in love. Who has predestined us, to be
adopted, through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of
his will, To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he has made us
accepted in his Beloved, etc.

Explication and proof.
This one place, duly considered, makes all, fully open and plain,
concerning the chief and most high cause of all, together with the effects and
fruits thereof. For the which, the Apostle teaches us by his example and
practice, to be most thankful to God: and to give him the highest glory and
praise that may be. For this does equally appertain to all believers, whether
Jew or Gentile, that they are elected of God, etc. Gal: 3.28. Coloss: 3.11.
This one place therefore, might suffice alone to this purpose.

Nevertheless, it shall not be amiss, to add some other testimony, to this
out of the Ephesians: to the end this so principal a point, may be made more
familiar unto us.

To this end therefore, read Rom: 8.29.30. Those whom he knew before, he also
predestined, to be made like to the image of his Son, that he might be the
first borne among many brethren. Moreover, whom he predestined, them also he
called, etc. And 1. Corinthians: 1.27.28. God has chosen the foolish things of the
world, to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the
world, to confound the mighty things, etc. And Tit: 3. verse 4. etc. We our
selves also were in times past unwise, disobedient, deceived, etc. But when the
bountifulness and love of GOD our Savior, toward man appeared. Not by the
works of righteousness, which we had done, but according to his mercy he
saved us. etc.

There are many other such like places: but these shall for the present
suffice. From the which, we may easily conceive, The Promise.
that as the mystery it self is very great and admirable: so also is that
providence and government, whereby it is ordered and disposed, most admirable
and glorious, as the Sun when it is at the highest, and shines in the full
strength and brightness thereof.

Hitherto therefore, concerning the grounds of the whole providence and
all-seeing government of the Lord God, over all his works both visible, and
invisible, smaller and greater, and greatest of all; even so far forth, as
the Creation of the same our most wise and Almighty God, has extended it
self.

Now henceforth, let us in the next place, inquire of the Promises, concerning
the gracious and Fatherly providence of God, and that in the same order, as
near as we can: wherein we have searched out the grounds, or proofs, and
meaning of this Article.

Nevertheless, in so much as all other promises, concerning the Fatherly
providence of God, toward us, and all true believers, rests upon that first
promise; which it pleased God our heavenly Father, to make our first, and most
ancient parents, or progenitors, touching both their and our own recovery,
out of their most woeful fall: let us begin with that first of all.



In the third chapter of Genesis verse 15. This most gracious promise of God is
contained. It is a part of that speech, wherein the Lord our God denounced
his heavy curse against the Serpent, which was the instrument of the Devil,
wherewith he deceived Eve: or rather against the Devil himself, who was the
author of the evil. I will also (says the Lord) put enmity between thee, and
the woman, and between thy seed, and her seed. It shall break thine head,
and thou shall bruise the heel of it.

Explication and proof.
This being the first promise of God after the fall, it is also the most
gracious promise that ever he made; and in deed the very ground of every
promise, whatsoever he has at any time for ever after uttered to mankind.

The meaning of it is this; that God of his most Fatherly goodness and
mercy, will not suffer any one of his elect children, seruilelie to abide
under the slavery and tyranny of the Devil: but that in and by his Son our
Lord Jesus Christ, he will give them power and grace, not only to resist, but
also finally to vanquish and overcome him; howsoever in the mean while, he
shall trouble and annoye them.

This is lively expressed, by an unequal comparison betwixt the head of the
Serpent, and the heel of the seed of the woman: the crushing of the one, and
the bruising or biting of the other. For notwithstanding one and the same
Hebrewe verb, is referred both to the head and to the heel, yet according as
it admits a diverse signification, so is it justly to be translated, for
the best commodity of the sense.

Wherefore the Serpents annoiance may fitly be called a bruising, or rather a
biting or stinging (though not deadly) following upon the Serpents hyssing,
as the Hebrew word Shuph, referred to the Serpent, properly signifies. And
likewise the victory of the woman's seed, may well be expressed by our English
word crushing, or beating to pieces, or as one would say, stamping to
pummisse, to the utter confusion of the Devil: according as the same word is
used, Job chapter 9.17. He destroys me with a tempest.

Moreover, as the crushing of the head, is more grievous then the bruising of
the heel: so is the speech apt to express, that the Devil shall go by the
worse in this conflicte. And so does the Apostle interpret the same word, as
it is referred to the seed of the woman. Rom: 16.20. The God of peace shall
tread down Satan under your feet shortly. Suntripsei. For Suntribo,
signifying to break, shukke, or crushe a thing to pieces: being applied to the
feet, notes that breaking or crushing, which is by stamping upon a thing.

And so we may see, that the Apostles Greek words, are a most fit
interpretation of the Hebrew word (Shuph,) which the Prophet Moses uses in the
3. chapter of Genesis, to express the victory of the seed of the woman,
against the Serpent, and his seed. It is like in signification to the word
Ramas, Psalm. 91.13. Thou shall walk upon the Lion and Aspe: the young Lion and
the Dragon shall thou tread under feet. But this victory is not obtained by
our own valor and strength; but only in and by the divine power and grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ: according as the Apostle Paul, even in the place now
alleged shows, in that so soon as he had made mention of the victory, by
and by, (as it were pointing to the Author and atchieuer therereof) The grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you: says the Apostle to the Romans. As
though he should tell them in plain words, that it is by his grace alone: that
they and all Christians obtain victory against the devil.



The covenant of God, wherein he promises to be our God, it is an assurance of
either of these blessings unto us, and to all true believers: according to that
comfortable interpretation and testimony, which our Savior Christ gives
hereof, against the heresy of the Sadduces, who denied the resurrection, in
that he answered them, as we read Mat. 22. verses 29, 30, 31, 32. Ye err
(says he) not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. For in the
resurrection, they neither marry wives, neither are wives bestowed in
marriage, but they are as the Angels of God in heaven. And concerning the
resurrection of the dead, (he says further) have ye not read what is spoken to
you of God saying: I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaak, and the God
of Iaakob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.

And 1 Thessalonians. chap. 4.17. The Apostle Paul testifies, that we shall be caught
up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and that so we shall be for
ever with the Lord.

Explication and proof.
Yea: and to this end also, it is further assured unto us by the Apostle John,
Revel. 20.13. That the Sea shall then give up her dead: that is to say, all the
bodies of men that have been drowned and consumed therein. Yea, that death
shall deliver up the servants of God, with what manner of death soever they
have been bereaved of this life: and howsoever their bodies have been
destroyed by their murderers and persecutors; whether with fire, or by wild
beasts, (to whom they have been cast to be devoured) or any other way, for the
testimony of the truth and Gospel of our Savior Christ. Whereof also, our
Savior himself does further assure us: in that he promises, That the holy
Angels shall gather together the bodies of his elect, from the four winds,
and from the one end of heaven to the other. Mat. 24.31.

And touching the souls of the faithful, that they are received into heaven,
so soon as they leave their bodies, and depart this natural and transitory
life: we may perceive by the gracious promise of our Savior Christ, to that
thief, unto whom God gave the grace, even upon the Cross to believe in
Christ, and to repent of his sins. For thus says our Savior unto him: This
day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Now there is no doubt, that he will be
less gracious, to these that shall be careful to yield a more speedy, and a
longer continued faithful service unto him.

Likewise, in so much as the same our Savior shows, that the Angels of God
carried the soul of Lazarus into Abraham's bosom: that is, into the place of
the heavenly rest and happiness of the faithful and elect children of God: he
gives therewithal to understand, what the state and condition is of the
souls of all the rest, so soon as they depart out of this life. Finally, to
put all out of question, the spirit of Christ testifies generally, of all that
die in the Lord, That they are even thenceforth (for ever) blessed, in that
they rest from their labors, and in that their works follow them. Revel. 14.
verse 13. But of this more afterward in the Article of the resurrection of the
body.



In the 91. Psalm. verses 11, 12. it is written. God will give his Angels
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee in
their hands, lest thou should hurt thy foot against astone.

Explication and proof.
This is a very gracious promise of God. To the which end, mark I pray you, how
the tenderness of the love and care of the holy Angels over us, is expressed
as a fruit of the most gracious good will of God himself. They would not
willingly have us take the least hurt in the world, while we walk faithfully
in the ways and commandments of God. For this does the holy Ghost give to
understand, in that it is said, that they would not willingly suffer us to
stumble at a stone. And Matthew. 18.10. the like is affirmed by our Savior
Christ saying, See that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say
unto you, that in heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my father
which is in heaven.

But why then (may some say) do the children of God sometimes not only
stumble, but fall down right and take great hurt? The answer is easy and
ready at hand, because none of us do walk so uprightly and entirely with our
God, as we ought to do. For verily if we did not fail our selves, God would
never fail us: neither would or should his holy Angels fail us at any time.
The experience and proof of this most ready willingness of the holy Angels,
is plentifully confirmed by many testimonies of the holy Scriptures, as we
shall have further occasion to note by some particulars, when we come to the
comforts.

Touching the wicked Angels, otherwise called devils: we have seen
already, how God has promised that he will strengthen us to prevail against
them, in that he will give us power to break the Serpents head: so that we
will stand here no longer about them.

Nevertheless, in so much as the devil has now more dangerous, and greater
plenty of evil instruments: both to deceive by, and also by the same to
execute more cruel violence, then the Serpent, which he used at the beginning,
could or now can do, howsoever the kind of them be multiplied every where:
that is to say, seeing instead of one Eve, he has thousands, both subtle and
wicked women, and men also, all of our own sex and kind, most apt and
mighty to deceive and hurt by: let us consider in this behalf, what promise
we have, that our good God, in his fatherly providence, will preserve all his
faithful and obedient children, from their violence and craft, while they
walk dutifully before him.



We have one notable proof hereof Psalm. 37. verses 12, 13, 14, 15. The wicked
(says the holy Prophet of God) practices against the just, and gnasheth his
teeth against him. But the Lord will laugh him to scorn for he sees that his
day, (that is, the day of his calamity or destruction) is coming. The wicked
have drawn their sword, and bent their bow to cast down the poor and needy,
and to slay such as be of upright conversation. But their sword shall enter
into their own heart, and their bows shall be broken.

Likewise verse 28. The Lord loves judgment and forsakes not his Saints:
they shall be preserved for evermore: but the seed of the wicked shall be
cut off. And yet again in the same Psalm, verses 32, 33. The wicked watches
the righteous, and seeks to slay him. But the Lord will not leave him in his
hand, nor condemn him when he is judged. Finally, verses 39, 4^. The salvation
of righteous men shall be of the Lord, he will be their strength in time of
trouble. For the Lord will help them and deliver them: he will deliver them
from the wicked, and he will save them because they trust in him.

Here it is plain, that the faithful have the most gracious promise of God,
for their defense against the outward violence of the wicked instruments of the
devil: yea and against their crafty endeavors also, so far as it shall be
good for them.

Show likewise some promise, for preservation against the more spiritual craft
of the wicked.



In the 24. verse of the 24. chapter of Saint Matthew, our Savior Christ
assures us, that so gracious will the Lord be, in guiding and preserving the
souls of his elect: that it is impossible that they should be deceived by any
false Prophets, how deceiueablie soever they go to work, yea though they
seek to confirm their false doctrines by never so strange signs and wonders.

Explication and proof.
It is certainly true. They shall not be totally, or finally deceived, in the
fundamental points or Articles of the true Christian faith and religion.

But what is the reason and ground hereof? Verily not their own wisdom and
wariness, or strength and constancy: but because God of his mercy has so
decreed and promised, and therefore will by the wisdom and power of his
grace, working in them, accordingly effect and accomplish the same. God has in
former times graciously performed this his promise: and there is no doubt to
be made, but he will show the same grace and favor still, to those that
shall seek it at his hands, even at this day, and to the end of the world.
Read 2. Thessalonians 2.11, 12, 13.

LEt us now come to the promises, concerning the providence of God our heavenly
father, in his government over other of his creatures, for the benefit of his
children.

And first concerning the visible heavens, with the hosts and furniture of
them.

In the 121. Psalm, verses 5, 6, 7, 8. The Lord is thy keeper (says the holy
Psalmist) the Lord is thy shadow at thy right hand. The sun shall not smite
thee by day, nor the moon by night. The Lord will preserve thee from all
evil, he will keep thy soul. The Lord will preserve thy going out, and thy
coming in from henceforth and for ever.

Likewise Hosea chap. 2.21. God will cause the heavens to hear the earth: that
is, he will make it fruitful for man's commodity and use, if he will
faithfully serve and obey God.

Explication and proof.
The grace of this promise of God, may be discerned from the contrary: in that
God threatens against us, that the heavens shall be as it were iron and
brass over our heads, and otherwise hurtful also, if we refuse to walk in
good duty and obedience before him: as Leuiticus 26.9. and Deuteronomy. 28. verses
22, 23, 24. Whereof also, we have examples recorded touching the performance
of this judgment in former times, for our further admonition and warning, as
it has been observed before: Josh. chap. 10. verse 11. And Judge. chap. 5.20.
The heavens, even the stars of the heavens, are said to have fought against
Sisera in their courses. And 1. King. chap. 17.1. and chap. 18.1. James 5.17,
18.

But beside former warnings: are there not examples among our selves from time
to time, of some stricken with lightnings, or killed with thunder, destroyed by
tempests, etc? Gracious therefore is the promise of God to be justly
acknowledged: in that through his gracious government, the heavens shall be
favorable unto us, if we will truly believe and obey him. Hitherto of the
heavenly creatures: the earthly are next.



In the same 2. chapter of Hosea, mentioned even now, in the 18. verse thereof,
thus we read: In that day (says the Lord by his Prophet) I will make a
covenant for them with the wild beasts, and with the fowls of heaven, and
with that which creeps upon the earth: and I will break the bow, and the
sword, and batte^ out of the earth, and I will make them sleep safely.

And then also in the 22. verse, immediately after that the Lord had promised
to bear the heavens, and that the heavens should hear the earth (as was
answered before) it follows thus in the next words. And the earth shall bear
the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Izreel.

Explication and proof.
That is to say, even so many as God (alluding to that word Izreel, which is by
interpretation, God will sow) promises in the next verse, to sow unto him
self: that is, will in special manner bless and prosper. For so it follows
in the 23. verse. And in the Hebrew language the allusion is plain. They shall
hear I^zregnel (says the Lord) and I will sow her, Vezrangtiah, etc. Mark
well therefore, how the Lord most graciously promises to his people, that if
they would faithfully cleave unto him, and purely worship and serve him: he
would (and no doubt still is willing) to cause a most sweet concent, and
harmony as it were, betwixt all other creatures, for man's benefit and comfort.

This promise was mentioned, when the doctrine of the creation was by us
inquired into. So was also that which we read Genesis 8.21.22. and chap. 9.1,
2, 3. and Job chapter 5.23. But in so much as they do more directly belong to
the providence of GOD, as was there observed: therefore they are upon this
occasion, to be called to mind, and diligently perused again.

Read also, as belonging to the Lords covenant concerning the wild beasts on
our behalf, upon condition that we would faithfully believe and obey him.
Psalm. 91.13. alleged not long before. And Isai. chap. 11.6, 7, 8, 9. though
from hence a further blessing is signified by that allusion. The wolf also
shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie with the kid, and the
calfe, and the lion and the fat beast together, and a little child shall lead
them. And the kow and the bear shall feed: their young ones shall lie
together: and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock. And the sucking
child shall play upon the hole of the aspe, and the weaned child shall put
his hand upon the cockatrice hole. Then shall none hurt nor destroy in the
Mountain of my holiness: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the
Lord as the waters that cover the Sea. Read also Mark cha. 16.18. the like
promise of our Savior Christ, and the same confirmed in part by an example of
Gods gracious providence. Act. 28.3, 4, 5, 6. The Viper was restrained from
stingng of Paul's hand.

Surely, it is our own wickedness, and not want of vigilancie or mercy in
the Lord: which does as it were arm and inrage the wild beasts against us.
For otherwise by the virtue and grace of this promise of God: they should be at
peace, yea willingly subject unto us. But in so much, as we rebel against God,
and break our covenant with him: it is just with God, that they should rebel
against us, and break that covenant, which he upon condition of our obedience
to God, had by the Law of his creation, made with them for us. And so God
himself has threatened. Leuit: 26.21.22. and Deuteronomy: 28. verse 26. An example
whereof also, we have seen before, concerning those 42. children, which two
bears did tear in pieces, because they mocked the Prophet Elisha. Yea this
judgment does not only fall upon those that are very wicked, but sometime
also even upon those that have some desire to serve the Lord, in the times of
some common calamity: according to that we read, Psalm. 79.2. The dead bodies
of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the souls of the heaven: and
the flesh of thy Saints to the beasts of the earth. Nevertheless in such cases
the Lord knows how eternally to save his own, when he rejects the ungodly,
for ever.

And for the full clearing of the Lords gracious promise this way, if we would
and could faithfully keep covenant with him: we may plentifully inform our
minds, from that which he has by his holy Prophet Moses recorded at large, as
well Deuteronomy: chap: 28. from the beginning of the chapter to the end of the 14.
verse, as Leuit: chap: 26. from the 3. verse to the 14. of the same.

Let us therefore for our instruction in this point, read these notable texts
of holy Scripture; and consider diligently of them. And first of that in Leuit:



In the 26. chap: of Leuiticus thus we read. If ye wa^ke in my ordinances and
keep my commandments and ^^e them (says the Lord) I will then send you rain
in due season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the
field shall give their fruit, etc.

Explication and proof.
This is a notable place, containing (as we see in the through reading of it in
our Bibles) promises of all sorts, spiritual and temporal, for soul and
body, public and private, etc. And like to this, is that other of
Deuteronomie, Let it not seem unnecessary, or a lost labor, for us to
rehearse and consider of that excellent Scripture likewise. For it shall be to
our further benefit, as we may well trust, through the goodness of our God. I
pray you therefore let us read this also, yea and if it may be, commit it so to
memory, that we do never forget it.



It is thus written Deuteronomy: ch: 28. from the beginning of the chapter.

If thou will obey diligently the voice of the Lord thy God, and observe and
do all his commandments which I command thee this day, then the Lord thy God
will set thee on high above all the nations of the earth.

And all these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee if thou will
obey the voice of the Lord thy God. Blessed shall thou be in the city, and
blessed also in the field. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, etc.

Explication and proof.
This place is as a second notable witness of Gods gracious promise, and of his
very true purpose, to exercise a most fatherly and favorable providence,
toward all his faithful servants and children, touching all kind of
prosperity and blessing, while they walk faithfully and dutifully before him.

And although peradventure, some will object and say, that these promises are
legal promises, and so not of faith or belonging to the faith of the Gospel:
and we also do grant it to be so, according to the first use of the Law,
which is to discover sin and to convict those of extreme vanity, whosoever
seek to be justified in the sight of God, by the works of the Law.
Nevertheless, this we add therewithal, and constantly affirm, that to such as
have learned to humble themselves before God in the sight of their sins, and
have received the gift of faith, to rely upon the fatherly providence of God,
through our Lord Ie: Christ; they are, according to an other use of the Law of
God (which is to guide and encourage all true believers in the right way of
obedience to God our heavenly Father) they are I say, the same with the
promises of the Gospel. And accordingly, they are justly to be apprehended and
believed by faith, as no vain encouragements to godliness of life: like as the
Apostle Paul affirms. 1. Tim: 4.8. Godliness has the promise of the life
present, and of that which is to come. And according to that, 2. Cor: 1.20. All the promises of God are in Christ, yea and Amen.

Likewise according to that, Psalm: 34.9.10. Fear the Lord ye his Saints: The
Comfortes.
for nothing wants to them that fear him. The Lions lack and suffer hunger,
but they who seek the Lord, shall want nothing that is good. Read also, Psalm:
91.14.15.16. Because he has loved me, therefore will I deliver him: I will
exalt him, because he has known my name etc. And Psalm: 121.1, 2, 3, 4. and
so forth as was alleged before.

It cannot be denied indeed, but insomuch as the best of all, fail in
obedience to God, according to that of the Apostle James, In many things we
sin all: and they that are strongest in faith, have their weakness, so as
they have need to pray, Lord increase our faith: and further also, insomuch as
it is the pleasure of God, upon holy and just considerations, to try the faith,
and to exercise the patience of his servants; and therefore do they meet with
many afflictions, yet even in these respects also, God has most graciously
promised, that all shall work together for their best: Rom: 8:28. as by the
grace of God we shall more fully declare upon some further occasion afterward.

In the mean season, from these manifold promises of Gods most gracious and
fatherly providence toward us: we cannot but see and acknowledge that the
comforts are manifold, to all those that do truly and firmly believe the
same.

Yea so plainly may we discern it; that it may seem needeles, to employ any
further labor to the laying of them forth, any other way.

Nevertheless, for some overplus (if so be there may be any overplus of true
spiritual comfort from faith in the fatherly providence of God) we will of
purpose use some further diligence, that through the good blessing of God, we
may seek out, and as it were suck forth a more full draught of consolation,
from this former ground of the promises thereof.



First, by considering the faithfulness of Gods promises, in all former times,
by the accomplishing of them in their due and proper seasons: whether for mercy
to his people: or punishment upon the wicked, for his peoples sake and benefit:
that from thence we may confirm our faith, concerning the present goodness of
God, and in the certain expectation of the like fulfilling of his promises for
all time to come.

Secondly, by looking to the general testimonies of the word of God,
concerning Gods continual providence: answereable to those particular
examples, wherein he has most rarely and miraculously illustrated and
manifested the same.

Thirdly, by hearkening to that experience, which any of the faithful servants
of God have either proved in themselves: or observed concerning any other of
their fellow-brethren.

Fourthly, by our own recordation and calling to our mind what God has done
for our selves, or for any other of his children, in our own age and
knowledge.

Fifthly, by our earnest and speedy reproving and rebuking of our selves, for
that discomfort, which in time of temptation, we find to be assalting and
inuading our souls. And therewithal also, by a contrary heartening and
encouraging of our selves to be of good cheer in the Lord. But most of all by
hearkening to those holy encouragements, which God himself has from time to
time given unto his servants.

Sixthly, by a watchful taking of heed, that we never lie securely in any
sin, to the hindering or delaying of that comfort, which God for his part,
has ready and prepared in his hand for us: and likewise that we do not by
any perverse and froward dealing, provoke the Lord to deal crossely with us.

Seauenthly, by a serious defense of Gods fatherly providence, against all such
objections, as the Devil and carnal reason, or infidelity and atheism, do
suggest against the same.

Finally, by a diligent meditation of those manifold fruits and benefits,
which all afflictions do bring to the children of God, even from the least of
them, unto death it self, which is the greatest and last, and as we may say,
the death of them all, for ever and ever.

The consideration and observation of these things, will, no doubt, enlarge our
comfort: if we can wisely weigh them, and lay them diligently to heart.

Explication and proof
Let us therefore, stay a while, as it were a seed time upon them: that so we
may afterward, in due season, reap the harvest of them.

And first of all, concerning the faithfulness of Gods promises, and for the
singular comfort thereof: the Lord himself does not say in vain, I have
spoken, and I will do it. Isay: 46.11. And chapt: 55.11. My word shall not
return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I will, and it shall
prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. Read also Ezekiel: ch: 12, v. 22, 23, 24,
25, etc. and Numb: chap: 23.19.

This is planely to be seen, both in mercies promised as was answered: and
also in judgments threatened.

Touching the merciful performance of the promise of Gods good providence, in
the ordering of the whole course of his creatures, for our comfort: we have
general and long beaten experience, according to that which we read, Gen:
8.22. Hereafter seede-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and
winter, and day and night shall not cease so long as the earth remains. And
according to that which we read again in the same book: chap: 9. verse 8.
etc. God spoke also to Noah, and to his Sons with him, saying, As touching
me, behold I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you.
And with every living creature, that is with you etc. that from henceforth all
flesh shall not be rooted out by the waters of the flood, neither shall there
be a flood to destroy the earth any more, etc. The like faithfulness has God
used concerning all the prophesies, which he has given forth at any time, for
the comfort of the Church: such as are the fulfilling of the prophecy and
promise of their deliverance out of Egypt, Gen: ch: 15. verses 13, 14. And of
their return out of the captivity of Babel: Ier: 25, 11, 12. etc. and ch: 33,
7. Ezra, ch: 1. etc. But most graciously, concerning our spiritual redemption,
by the sending of our Savior Christ, according to all the prophesies (which
were given forth of him, even from the beginning of the world: Luk: ch: 1.70.
Act. 3, 24. and ch: 10, 43.) which spoke long before, of the time of his
coming, of the singular manner of his conception, of his birth, of the place
of his birth, of his carrying, and recarrying out of Egypt, etc. as we shall
have further occasion to consider more fully hereafter.

And touching the faithfulness of God, in his threatenings: it may be evident by
a good taste; if we compare that which we read, Josh: 6, 26. with 1. King:
16.34. Likewise, if we compare 1. King, 21.19. with ch: 22.38. Again, 1. King:
21. verses 23.24. with 2. King: 9.6, 7, 8, 9.10, 25, 26, 34, 35, 36, 37, and
ch: 10. v. 10.11. Moreover, 2. King: 10.30. with ch: 15.12. And if we compare
the 2. verse. of the 7. ch: of the same book, with the 19. and 20. verses of
the same chapter.

Great therefore, may be our comfort: and reverend ought our fear to be toward
our God, in either respect; according to that we read Exodus: 15.11. Who is like
unto thee o Lord among the Gods! Who is like thee so glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises, doing wonders! And Ps. 92.4.5. Thou Lord have made me
glad by thy works, and I will rejoice in the works of thy hands. O Lord how
glorious are thy works? and thy thoughts very deep. And Psalm: 119.52. I
remember thy judgments of old o Lord and have been comforted. Read also,
Psalm: 77.5.10.11, 12. etc. And Psalm: 143.4.^. My spirit was in perplexity,
etc. yet do I remember the time past: I meditate in all thy works, yea, I do
meditate in the works of thy hands. And aga^ne, Psalm: 119.27. Make me to
understand the way of thy precepts, and I will mediate in thy wondrous
works. And in this comfort, justly may we reason for the certainty of all
the promises of God, yet to be performed: and therein to comfort our selves
according to that, 1. These. 4.18. Comfort ye one and other with these words.

And according to that of the same Apostle, 2. Cor: 1.10. God has delivered us
from a great death, and he does deliver us: in whom we trust that yet
hereafter, he will deliver us.

Secondly, the comfort of Gods fatherly providence in his usual and ordinary
course, cannot but be the more comfortable: if we consider, that it is nothing
inferior, but many degrees more bounteous, and of longer continuance by great
odds, then have been the particular extraordinary actions and works
thereof, though for the present, never so wonderful and strange: as we may
perceive by comparing the one with the other, in their several kinds.

As for examples sake. It must needs be acknowledged, that God has used his
holy Angels, in most worthy and weighty services, and that at sundry times:
according as he has recorded them, and made the memorial of them famous in
his Church; both for the bodily preservation and safety of his servants, and
also for their spiritual instruction and comfort. For their bodily saftie and
preservation: as we read, Gen: 19.15. concerning the deliverance of Lot from
the destruction of Sodom. And chap: 32.1.2. of Iaakob from the rage of his
brother Esau. Of Elisha from the Host of the Aramites: 2. King: 6.16.17. Of
Hezekiah and his people from that fierce siege of the King of Ashur, chap:
19.35. in the same book. Likewise Dan: chap: 3.28. God delivered the three men
of Israel from burning in the hot fiery furnace by the ministry of an
Angel. And chap: 6.22. Daniel himself, was by an Angel of God delivered from
the mouths of the hungry and ravenous lions. An Angel also, was the holy
instrument, which God of his goodness, used to make the poole of Bethesda
healthful to the diseased: even to any one whosoever should from time to time,
after the stirring of the water by the Angel, be first put into it: John,
chap: 5, 2.3.4. And Act: 5.19. The Angel of the Lord delivered the Apostles
out of prison, And chap: 12.7. An Angel delivered Peter. And chap: 27.23. An
Angel of God comforted Paul against the fear and danger of ship-wracke.

And as the Lord has thus used his holy Angels, for their bodily deliverance
and preservation: so has he used them in extraordinary services, to the
spiritual instruction and comfort of his people. As Gal: 3.19. The Law was
ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator. And Dan: ch: 9.21, etc. Daniel
was informed concerning the seventy weeks of years: that is, what should be
the space of time from the return of the people of Israel out of their
captivity; til the time of the deliverance and redemption of the whole Church
of God, both of Jew and Gentile by the death of our Lord Jesus Christ. He was
also instructed by the same Angel in many other things. chap: 10, etc.
Likewise, an Angel, (even the same Angel Gabriel, as it seems) certified
Zacharias of the conception and birth of John B^ptist, the forerunner of our
Savior Christ. And the virgin Marie of Christ's conceptio^ and birth. And
Joseph of the cruelty of Herod against him, from his birth, etc. Thus the
ministry of the holy Angels, in extraordinary course, was from God,
exceeding gracious to his Church. But their ordinary and continual service,
to our Savior Christ, and his Church, is yet greater then in these few
particulars if it be apprehended by faith, and duly weighed and considered,
according to the testimonies thereof, Psalm: 34.7. Mat: 18, 10. John, 1.51. and
Heb: 1.6.14. though their service is not externally so apparent; but in a more
secret and invisible course.

It may not be denied, but God wrought a great and gracious work by the
winds, when remembering Noah that was in the Arc, he cleared the earth from
the waters, Gen: 8.1. But is not his providence as great, and as gracious, in
his continual bringing forth of the winds out of his treasures: for the daily
clearing of the aier, lest it should grow contagious? etc. Psalm: 133, 7.

God wrought a wondrous work (as it must be confessed) when he fed the
people of Israel forty years together, with manna from heaven: Deuteronomy: 8, 3, 4,
and chap: 29.5.6. and Josh: 5, 12. But is the providence of God less worthy to
be celebrated of us, for feeding all the world, with bread out of the earth
more then forty hundredth years: yea by the space of six and fifty hundreds
of years? according to that, Psalm: 104.14.15.

It was indeed a rare miracle of God, that the ravens at his appointment, fed
Elijah the Prophet, 1. King: 17.4. but the work of Gods perpetual providence,
is greater, in that he orders the continual flying, and the life and death
of every foul, even to the falling of a little sparrowe.

Moreover, we cannot but acknowledge, that it was a notable work of God, in
that he caused the gourd or whatsoever plant it was, to grow up to his full
stature in one night, to shadow the Prophet Jonah, from the heat of the Sun.
But why should we not wonder more at the constant work of the same our God,
in the continual grouth of all plants, and trees, and grass, over the face of
the whole earth? For it is the most provident, and admirable hand of God, which
works all this, Psalm: 104.14.15. etc. as we have seen before.

And that we may see it, yet further, to be so: let us consider it in some
other matters.

The same God, who once took the kingdom of Israel from Saul, and gave it to
David, 1. Sam: 14.28: he does from time to time, order and dispose of all the
kingdoms in the world. According to that, Psalm: 75.6.7. Dan: 4.22. The most
high bears rule over the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will.

The deliverance of Job out of his affliction, was exceeding gracious,
according to the greatness of his affliction; and accordingly does the Apostle
James make him an example, for the common comfort of the faithful: insomuch as
it is an usual thing with the Lord, to take pity upon his servants in their
greatest adversities, and to deliver them out of them in his due time, Ps. 107.
Likewise, as God delivered David out of all his adversity, so he is near to
save every one that is afflicted in Spirit, Psalm: 34.17.18.

God that destroyed the counsel of Ahitophel: 2. Sam; 17. v. 14.23. he does
usually break the counsel of the heathen, and bring to naught the devises of
the people, Ps. 33.10. And v. 11. The counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever,
and the thoughts of his heart throughout all ages.

As Balaam said, that he could not speak, but as the Lord would have him,
Numb: 24.13. so it is generally affirmed, that the answer of the tongue is of
the Lord, Prou: chap: 16.1.

The ordinary cures which the Lord works concerning all sorts of diseases,
they are in effect the same, and in number infinitely more, then his miraculous
cures have been. All proceed from one and the same mercy of God, toward his
people: whether he work by means, or without means, in some process and
tract of time: or more speedily in a moment, Psalm. 103. verses, 3, 4.

As God directed the lot, to find out Achan, Jonathan, Jonah, Matthias: so by
the same providence of God the whole disposition of every lot, is of the Lord;
though to our thinking, it is cast into the lap, as it were by hap hazard.
Prou: 16.33.

Finally, as our Savior Christ could not be apprehended and put to death,
until the time came, appointed of the Lord: so the times of all the faithful
servants of God, are in his hands, to dispose of them as it pleases him; all the contrary endeavors of the wicked notwithstanding. As 2. Chron: 16 9. The
eyes of the Lord behold all the earth, to show himself strong with them that
are of perfect heart toward him.

Great therefore is the comfort of faith in Gods fatherly providence, to every
one that truly believes in him, according to this second consideration. And
the rather will this consideration be comfortable; if we observe that God does
not at this day so tie himself to ordinary courses, but so often as he
thinks meet, he sends extraordinary succors to his distressed servants.
According as it is credibly reported, that God has in these our days
strangely directed his servants, sometimes to prevent the apprehension of their
persecutors, and sometime to escape, after they have been apprehended, though
they have been narrowly watched. According also as at the siege of Rochel, it
is reported, that when the poorer sort wanted bread and victual; God did send
the^ in the river, a kind of fish called Surdones, every day so long as the
siege lasted, in great abundance: and that they ceased the same day that the
siege brake up. Act: and Monum: at the very end of the book. Thus much
concerning the second help, to farther and enlarge our comfort in the fatherly
providence of God.

Thirdly, to the same end serves the experience and testimony of other
concerning the same. Such as is the testimony and experience of Joshua,
concerning himself and the people in his time: ch: 21.45. There has nothing
failed (says he) of all the good things, which the Lord has said to the house
of Israel, but all came to pass. And again, ch: 23.14.15. as it were upon his
deathbed. Behold (says he) this day do I enter into the way of all the
world, and ye know in all your hearts, and in all your souls, that nothing
has failed of all the good things, which the lord your God promised you, but
al are come to pass unto you: nothing has failed thereof. Likewise King
Solomon, 1. King. 8.15. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel (says he) who spoke
with his mouth unto David my Father, and has with his hand fulfilled it, etc.
And so K. David before him, Psa: 18.4. etc. The sorrow of death compassed me,
etc. But in my trouble I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God, he heard
my voice out of his Temple, and my cry did come before him into his ears, etc.
And Ps. 34.2. etc. My soul shall glory in the Lord the humble shall hear it,
and be glad, etc. I sought the Lord, and he heard me: yea he delivered me out
of all my fear. They shall therefore look unto him, and run to him, and
their faces shall not be ashamed, saying: This poor man cried, and the Lord
heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. And Ps. 37.25. I have been
young and am old, yet I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging
bread. But on the contrary touching the wicked, verses 35.36. I have seen the
wicked (says he) strong and spreading himself like a green bay tree, (or as
the word Hezrach arbor indigena signifies) a tree in his native soil. Yet he
passed away, and lo he was gone, and I sought him, but he could not be found.
But that we may return again, to the testimonies of the P^ophet; concerning
his own experience: read, Psalm: 66, 16, etc. Come (says he) and hearken all
ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he has done to my soul. etc. And
again, Ps. 116.5.6, etc. To the furthering of this comfort, it is to singular
purpose, that we do thoroughly acquaint ourselves, with those holy histories of
the Bible: wherein God himself, has of special purpose, most lively
manifested the most gracious virtue of his providence. As is notably in the
histories recorded concerning Iaakob, Joseph, David, Job, and such like. Whose
end and issue, out of their manifold and great troubles, we are willed to
consider, to the comforting of our selves, against our own afflictions and
trialls, James. chap: 5. 10. 11.

Fourthly, our own experience from times past, faithfully recorded in our
hearts: will be very helpefull, to the increase of our comfort, for all times
to come. And therefore we are exhorted, diligently to mark the Lords gracious
dealing with his servants. As Psalm: 37. verse 37. Mark the upright man, and
behold the just: for the end of that man is peace. Thus every one of us, should
keep a diligent register, of all Gods merciful dealing toward our godly
friends, and acquaintance: both concerning their life, and their death. All
which ought to be so many encouragements, to confirm us, to walk in the like
godly course, that they have walked in, and so to hope for the like good end,
which they have made: according to that, Heb: 13, 7.

The sewnes of such kind of obseruers of Gods providence, is noted to their
reproof: Ps. 107.23. But as touching those that are diligent obseruers of it,
the fruit is noted to be singular, even in the same verse, insomuch as they
shall understand; to wit, to their comfort, how great the kindness of the
Lord is. Contrariwise, all profane neglect, whether of the mercies, or of the
judgments of the Lord; it is subject to the just displeasure and vengeance of
God, Ps. 28.5.

Verily, if we would diligently call to mind; we should easily remember, that
God has showed us much mercy in our life time, in saving us from many hurtes
and mischiefs, sometimes from breaking a leg, or an arm; sometimes from
drowning, or burning: sometimes from the loss of the eye of our body, or from
the loss of the spiritual eye of our understanding, whereby we should have
fallen into this or that herisie of soul. Yea if we would carefully call
things to mind: we should easily remember, that God has not seldom times
preserved us, even from the imminent danger of death it self. The which, if we
would duly weigh, and ponder with thankful and dutiful hearts, nothing could
more confirm us, that there is a divine providence. If we were but once, or
seldom delivered: we might peradventure imagine, that it came by chance: but
when the experience is very often, yea an usual thing with God, to preserve us
from daily perils; this does clearly argue, that God of his infinite mercy,
keeps a vigilant watch over us.

And concerning other, we may easily observe the like, to the stirring up of
our hearts, to be continually thankful to God, and to gather still more and
more comfort, to our own souls thereby. We may easily call to mind, that God
preserved such a man's house most mercifully and strangly from burning by
diuerting of the wind from it on a sudden, or some other way: such a man's
body from being crushed to pieces by a cart, etc. such an other, that the house
did not fall down upon his head, it falling down presently after he came
out of it: such a man from the infection of the plague, though at unawares, he
had eat and drunk, and companied with the infected. etc. such an other from
the hands of murdering thieues etc. this ma^s child from scalding, or burning,
or from being trodden under the horse feet, etc. But who can reckon up all the
ways, whereby God does daily, and every where, infinitely manifest the tender
effects of his fatherly providence?

Fifthly, our reproving of our own discomfort (as was answered in the fifth
place) and on the contrary, our own encouraging of our selves, from those so
many good grounds, as God has given us for our encouragement: these will,
through the blessing of God, revive and cheer up, yea confirm and augment our
comfort, in the faith of Gods fatherly providence. We have herein, the notable
example of the Prophet David, 1. Sam: 30.6. He comfort himself in the Lord
his God. Likewise, Ps. 42. and Ps. 43. O my soul, why art thou so disquieted
within me? Trust in God, etc. But most notably, Ps. 77.6.7, etc. I called to
remembrance my song in the night: I co^muned with my own heart, and my spirit
searched diligently. Will the Lord abse^t himself for ever? does his promise
fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be merciful? has he shut up his
tender mercy in displeasure? Selah. Thus the Prophet reasons against his
present discomfort, and concludes, that it was only from his own infirmity,
and from no failing of mercy in the Lord, that his soul refused comfort, etc.
But among all other encouragements, those which the Lord himself does more
immediately hearten us with; they ought most effectually weigh with us, to our
most singular comfort; and for the same cause, we are most diligently to attend
unto them. Such as are those which we read, Deuteronomy: 31, 6, 7, 8, 9. and Josh: ch:
1.6.7, 8, 9. compared with Heb: 13.5, 6, where the Apostle applies that
encouragement, which God gave more particularly to Moses and Joshua; to the
special comfort of every faithful Christian. For even for their sakes also,
the Lord has said, as the Apostle testifies: I will not leave thee, nor
forsake thee, etc. Read also like unto this, the gracious encouragement of our
Savior Christ, Mat: 6.25. etc. concerning Gods fatherly providence, in respect
of outward things. And for comfort in regard of spiritual blessings, to be
reached forth by the same gracious and provident hand of his; even by his holy
spirit: read John: chap: 16.6.7. etc.

The greatness of this comfort of Gods fatherly encouragement, may be some thing
familiarly discerned of us, from the similitude of a loving natural father;
whose speech must needs be comfortable to his dutiful child, when he shall
bid him be careful for nothing, but to follow his book, insomuch as he is
minded to bring him up in learning, and therefore promises him to provide for
him all things that are meet, so as he shall not need to take any care for
them. Nevertheless, this comfort of the natural child: is infinitely inferior,
to that comfort, which the child of God may take, from the encouragement of his
heavenly Father.

To the which end, I pray you, let us mark the infinite wisdom, and
sufficie^cie of the providence of God, to be above all that man can possibly
perform. For if he denies us one benefit, because he sees it not meet for
us, he will make a supply some other way: if not by outward helps, yet by
spiritual grace: if not at the very instant, yet within a while after, yet
even in the best season that may be: if not in this place, yet some other
where: if not by the favor and succor of this man, yet by the help of
another: if not by a man's acquaintance, yet by some mere stranger: if not by a
friend, yet sometimes by a very enemy: according to the holy Proverb, ch:
16.7. which was alleged not long before.

No doubt, God will make an issue for his children, so far as he shall see it
to be best for them; above that the wisest man in the world, can conceive:
according to that most ancient holy Prou: In the mount will the Lord provide.
Gen: 22. v. 8. compared with v. 14. For though Abraham knew of no other
sacrifice, which he should offer up, but only his son Isaak: yet the Lord,
had an other sacrifice in store, which should be brought to Abraham's hand
instead of his son. Whereupon, the former holy Prou: arose, and grew into
common use, in the church of God, to the co^forting of such, as should be
exercised with great difficulties and straits, above that they themselves could
see how they might escape.

We have likewise, a notable example in the deliverance of David out of the
hand of King Saul: as we read, 1. S^m: 23. v. 26. 27. 28. Saul and his
soldiers were on the one side of the mountain, and David on the other,
hasting himself, all that he could, away from him: but Saul and his company,
had compassed David round about, so as it was very likely, that he must needs
take him. How therefore should poor David now escape? Behold the excellent
providence of God. There came a messenger to King Saul, even at that very
instant (as the text reports) saying, Have thee and come: for the Philistims
have invaded the land. So by this occasion, Saul was hindered from his pursuit
after David; and went against the Philistims, to perform a more necessary and
commendable service. Whereupon, that place took the name Selahammalekoth; that
is, a place of this happy parting of the armies of Saul and David. Yea, and if
we consider from time to time the whole history of David: we shall see the
manifold rescues of Gods providence, laid plainly before our eyes; to our
singular instruction and comfort.

This gracious providence of God, is to be understood of us, as not only
reaching to private persons; but also to families, cities, and nations, of such
as truly fear, worship, and serve him: neither for one age alone, or a short
time, but even from the beginning to the end of the world.

Yea, so God mainteineth not only his children, but also all sorts of his
works, as none are able to overthrow them. For though all the world should
consent, utterly to destroy, but even the least and frailest kind of creature
that is; they should not be able to bring it to pass. And therefore we may
justly assure our hearts, that much less shall the wicked, though they band
and associate themselves, never so firmly; be ever able to suppress, and
root out the people of God, from the face of the earth: no nor yet do them
the least annoiance, but as God himself, shall for just causes, permit. He will
surely uphold his Church, against the very gates and power of Hell. This
therefore may justly be to our singular comfort against many temptations. And
namely against this, that we are ready to think, that by professing the true
faith, fear, and love of God; we take the most ready way to overthrow our
selves: insomuch as the true worshippers of God, are most of all maligned and
maliced of the world. No, no, it is not so. We do thereby make our choice of
the most sure and safe state and condition that can be, both for the
establishing of our selves, and also of our posterity. Not that we may look
to be free from troubles, but because (as has been showed) we walking in the
ways of our God, are under the special protection and defense, of the
Almighty, and most wise, and gracious God.

Wherefore (according to that which was answered in the sixth place) to the end
we be not the hinderers and abridgers of our own comfort; we must take
diligent heed, that we lie not securely in any sin: and that we do not, in
any thing, deal crookedly and frowardly with our good and gracious God. For
then indeed, we might justly fear, that God in his just pleasure, should
deal croslely; that we say not crookedly and frowardly with us. Not with any
such frowardness as is in us; but with a holy and just punishment, such as is
most meet, and answerable to the quality and degree of our sins: even such
as should be least to our own liking, and furthest from our expectation. And
thus we read, that God himself, borrowing his speech figuratively, and in
way of imitation: does from the practice of our wayward dealing with him,
threaten us accordingly. As Leuit. chap. 26. verses 23, 24. If ye will not be
reformed by me, but walk stubburnly against me. Then will I also wa^ke
stubburnely against you, and I will smite ye yet seven times for your sins.
And again, verse 28. the which some translate thus: If ye walk reatchleslie,
(and as it were at adventure, and ye care not how) toward me: then will I deal
likewise toward you. That is, not in any favorable and settled course, to your
comfort, as you would desire: but so confusedly and troub^esomelie, that ye
shall not know (as one would say) where to have me. So Ezekiel chap. 20. 24,
25. Because they executed not my judgments, etc (says the Lord) therefore I
gave the^ also statutes that were not good, and judgments wherein they should
not live. That is, he sent upon them his punishments, to their evil and smart:
the which, it pleases God figuratively and improperly to call Statutes. Read
the like 2. Sam. 22.27. And again Psalm. 18.26. With the froward (says David)
God will show himself froward: not with such a kind of frowardness, as is in
the perverse hearts of the wicked, as was said before: God forbid we should
once think so: but in such sort, as he will make them weary of their parts.
Like as the Father or Master will say to his child, or servant, whom he sees
murmuring; do ye murmr? I will murmr with you by and by, etc.

Now, that sin (wherein either we our selves do securely he, or any of
those that belong to our government, through our defalt and negligence) does
hinder the comfortable course of Gods provident and fatherly dealing toward us:
see Josh. chap. 7. verses 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. The Lord said to Joshua, Get
thee up, wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned, etc. Thus
much concerning the sixth branch of the Answer.

Moreover (as was answered in the seventh place) the serious bending of our
minds to answer the objections, which the devil, and fleshly reason do suggest
to the weakening, yea to the utter taking away of our comfort in the fatherly
providence of God, if it might be: it will no doubt be an excellent means, of
the establishing; yea of the enlarging of our comfort therein. For that which
is won by a just conflict, and conquest: it is of all other things, most
comfortably and effectually achieved and gotten.

Finally (as was answered in the last place) a wise and careful meditation of
the manifold commodities, which belong to the afflictions of Gods children,
which may most of all seem to be against the comfort of faith in Gods fatherly
regard of us: it cannot but be very comfortable, to those, that by faith have
learned, to judge of things, not according to outward appearance, and bodily
sense, but by a right judgment: according to that precept of our Savior
Christ John chap. 7. 24.

Of these two last points therefore, the which do require at our hands some
further examination and inquiry: let us dispose our selves, earnestly to
consider of them, according as God shall give us grace, and as the matter it
self does worthily give us just cause.

ANd first how we may answer the objections. In which respect, let us the
rather, well and thoroughly arm our selves against them; because o^herwise, not
only by the colorable contradiction of the adversaries, but also by reason of
many hard and uncomfortable accidents, which fall out in the world from the
hand of God, (yea and as it may seem, even as well against the children of God
many times, as against the wicked and ungodly, as it is most wisely observed by
King Solomon: Eccles: chap. 9.1, 2.) we should not only, not be able so
comfortably to discern the truth of this doctrine, concerning the gracious and
fatherly p^ouidence of God, as were to be wished: but we might be in further
danger, to fall to deny the Article altogether, as many have done. According as
it is recorded against the wicked. Psalm. 1^. versese 11. and Psalm. ^4 ^. and
Zeph. 1.12. Mal. 3.14, 15. and Job. 21.1^. and chap. 2^.15, 16. Yea without
good caution, so dangerous is the temptation; that the Prophet David, willingly
confesses against him self for the admonition of all other: that his feet
were almost gone, and that his steps had well ne^re st pped. For (says he) I
fretted at the foolish when I saw the prosperity of the wicked, etc. Psalm.
^3.2. etc. The same temptation troubled the Prophet Jeremy also, as appears
in the beginning of the 12. of his prophecy.

Wherefore, seeing we are so apt to receive some evil impression, this way:
let us as thoroughly as we may, fortify our selves against every stumbling
block, which either the devil, or our own blind reason, and unfaithful
heart, may cast in our way.

And because (as was mentioned even now concerning the Prophet David) this will
likely be objected for one of the first doubts; how it should come to pass,
that if God do rule and govern all things with a fatherly providence, for the
benefit and comfort of his children; tha^ the riches, pleasures, and honors of
the world, should be so plentifully bestowed upon the wicked and ungodly, as we
see them to be: even upon such, as do nothing at all regard, either to know,
believe, love, of obey God, as their Father; but contrariwise, do cont^nu^lly
rebel against him, in treading under their fee^e, all his holy laws and
command^ments.



God does this to declare his unmeasurable and incomprehensible goodness and
bounty, in the sight of all the world in that the extreme wickedness of the
wicked, can not restrain him from doing good unto them, even because the^ are
his creatures: though never so much degenerated from him, and the obedience of
his holy will.

Explication and proof.
For the proof of this, read Matthew. 5.45. He makes his sun to arise on the
evil and the good, and sends rain on the just and the unjust. Likewise Act.
14.15, 16, 17. God is he who made heaven and earth, and the Sea, and all things
that in them are. Who in time past suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their
own ways. Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did
good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons filling our hearts
with food and gladness. And again, chap. 17.27, 28 Read also Psa. 17.14 He
fills the bellies even of the men of the world, (that is, of those whom we by
a fit name call worldlings) with his hid treasure: whose children also have
enough, and they leave the rest of their substa^^e for their children

But therein, it is meet that we do consider, that the Lord ^^aleth not thus
with the wicked, because they are wicked, and to maintain them in their sin:
but only, because they are his creatures, and therefore thus far respects
them, for his own cr^ations s^ke. To the which purpose, well s^i^h a very godly
le^rned man D^us fine exceptione creaturas o^nes amore pro^e q^a^tur. Sed no^
n^^fi^os ^ao^ q^^^ S^^^^^ (...) o^t pa^^^^^ amore ^^^p^^cutu^. Ca^. H^^^. Ma^c.
1^.21.
God shows forth his love to all his crea^ures, none excepted: yet so, as he
imbraceth none with a fatherly affection, but those his children, whom he has
regenerated by his Spirit of adoption. And furthermore, as touching those of
the wicked, who harden their hearts in their despising of the bountifulness of
Gods mercies: it cannot otherwise be, but he must in his justice, call them to
an account, so as they must one day smart for all. Read Psalm 4^. and Prou.
10.^. Luke chap 12.16, 20, 21. and chapter 16.25. And Romans 2.1. etc. 4. Thus as it
is Psalm 69.22. Their table becomes at the last a snare to them, and their
prosperity is their ruin. when once the measure of their wickedness is full. As
Leuit. 10.24. etc. and Ezekiel. chap. 16.49.50.

Well, let this be so. Yet there is a further doubt concerning Gods fatherly
providence, in so much as he does not always bestow these outward blessings
upon his own children, as well as upon the wicked: albeit they do truly
believe in him,

God gives hereby plain^ly to understand that he has more excellent, both
riches and pleasures, and honor, in store for them in his heavenly kingdom of
glory: yea and even in that he does now presently in his kingdom of grace as
we cal^^, give us his holy and heavenly knowledge faith, fear and love, with
many other most pretiou^ and swee^ spiritual grace^; and therewith the most
comfortable hope of everlasting ^^fe and glory it self it is a portion m^st
worthy to be preferred before all the vain riches pleasures, and honors of this
transitory world.

Explication and proof.
So in deed we read Ps. 4.6, 7. Many say, who will show us any good? Lord life
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. S^ shall thou give me more joy of
heart, then they have when their wheat^ and their w^^e do aboun^ And Ps 17.1^.
(...) shall ^ehold thy face in righteousness and when I awake, I shall be
satisfied with thine image. That is, when at the resurrection, I shall see and
know thee as thou art, in the fu^ and perfect riches of thy eternal goodness
and mercy. Read also Ps. 31.19. O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid
up for them that fear thee I yea done to them that trust in thee, even before
the sons of men? Thou do hide them privily in thy presence from the pride
of men, etc. Likewise Ps. ^4.8, 9, 10 Moreover ^s. 19.7. etc. The law of the
Lord is perfect converting the soul, etc. More to be desired then gold, yea
then fine go d sweeter also then honey, yea then the honey fresh out of the honey
comb. And P^. 119 verses 14, 57, 72, 93, 103, 111, 12^, 162, 165. Likewise
Pro. 3.13. etc. Blessed is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that
gotteth understanding. For the merchandise thereof, is better then the
merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof is better then gold. It is more
precious then pearls and all things that thou can desire, are not to be
compared unto her, etc. Whereunto add that which we read chapter 1^. verse 16.
Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure, and trouble
therewith And chapter 16. 8. Better is a little with righteousness, then great
revenues without equity. And chap. 17 1. Better is a dry morsell^ peace be
with it then a house full of slain things, (to wit, prepared to make a feast)
where there is strife.

And touching this point, let it be well observed of us, that the eternal love
and favor of God, touching everlasting happiness; ^^^n no wise to be
meas^red, according to our enjoying of the riches of this world: nor the hatred
and displeasure of God, by our wanting of ^h^ abundance thereof. For as we
read Eccl. 9 2. No man knows either love or hatred by th^s rule. ^or many
notoriously wicked, are externally very prosperous in the world: and
contrariwise, many of singular godliness, are for a time, in great adversity,
so as they might seem to be of all other most miserable. Outward prosperity,
is then only a testimony of Gods love, when (as King Solomon says) God gives
wisdom with an inheritance: that is, when he gives grace to use it soberly,
and in the right godly manner Neither is ad^ersity a token of hatred, but of
love, toward all such as b^are it patiently. For un o such, God offers
himself as unto child en: as the Apostle t^acheth us Heb. 12.7. etc.

Finally, for the answer of th s ob^ection; it is evident in the sight of all
the world, that (according as it seems good in the eyes of God) he gives
some of his servants, even the riche^ and lawful and honest ple^sures of this
lif^: as well as the comfort and possession of the graces of his heavenly
kingdom^.

But that we may come to answer some other objections: what should be the
reason, that even touching some of those which we speak of, though it be but a
small sum: yet God does take away from some of them, even that which he had
before given, or rather only lent unto them for a time. For of rich, he does
within a shorttime make them poor: and from honor, he brings them by and
by down to a low state and degree again. And this may seem to be more
grievous to such, then if they had never been so enriched and advanced: but
had remained always, in a mean, and poor condition of life. How, therefore,
may Gods tender and fatherly care, be discerned of us,

God in his fatherly providence, most wisely fore-seeth; that the continuance
of the worldly prosperity of such, would in time, prove hurtful unto them:
and therefore he does or while remove worldly riches and honor from his
dearest children, lest their minds should be lifted up and corrupted by them;
and so carried away, and withdrawn from him, and from the due care of seeking
after their own true heavenly treasure and honor.

Explication and proof.
So it is indeed. For as our Savior Christ teaches us, Matthew. 13.23. the
thornie cares of this world, and the deceitfulnes of riches do choke the word^
and make many unfruitful touching the kingdom of God. Read also Psa. 30.6.
In my prosperity (says the Princely Prophet David) I said I shall never be
moved. His meaning is, that he grew shortly to vain confidence, by reason of
his riches and power, etc. Wherefore God (as he says further) did hide his
face, so that he was troubled, and learned thereby, that it was continually
necessary for him, to seek unto God by prayer, and to make him his only stay.
And therefore also, Psalm. 119.71. it is worthily said: It is good for me that
I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes For as we read before,
verse 67. Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now I keep thy word.

God verily, has very many notable and worthy lessons, to teach his scholars
by afflictions; the which they neither would, nor could, ever learn so well, in
continual prosperity: namely to be meek and patient, to deny themselves, to
contemn the vanity of this present evil world, to long earnestly after the
kingdom of heaven, etc.

He does it also, to manifest the faith, and sundry other graces, wherewith he
has already endued, and furnished his servants: the trial whereof, brings
unto them more excellent advantage, then all corruptible gold, never so
perfectly fined, could aforde. 1. Pet. 1.7. Romans 5.3, 4, 5. and James chap. 1.
verses 3, 4. and verse 12.

Moreover, by the constancy of the stronger, in their trialls; God does
prepare, and strengthen the faith of the weaker, against the time of their like
precious trialls: while they do behold the constant faith, and patience of
those that have gone before them.

Finally, as our Savior Christ assures us, Whosoever shall loose house or
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for
the sake of Christ and his Gospel: he shall receive a hundredth fold now at
this present (to wit, inward peace of conscience, with joy in the holy Ghost,
etc.) and in the world to come, eternal life. Mark chap. 10.^8 etc.



What may we answer to this demand?

This makes the holy providence of God our heavenly father, so much the more
clear and manifest, and the excellency of his divine wisdom to shine forth;
so much the more brightly: by how much he does more particularly dispose both
of all things, and also of all persons as may be best for every one. And as
touching our own selves, we must take diligent heed; that howsoever it
pleases God to dear more bounteously, in the constant upholding of the
prosperous estate of any other, in respect of this world, then with us: that
our eye be not evil, and envious, because our God is good and merciful.

So any other, in respect of this world, then with us: that our eye be not
evil, and envious, because our God is good and merciful.

Explication and proof
So in deed, does our Savior Christ teach us, Matthew: 20.15. Yea the holy
Scriptures do often renew this lesson unto us, that we should not envy or
grudge at the prosperity of any; no not of the wicked. As Psalm 37.1. P^ou:
chapt: 23. 17. and chapt: 24. 1. and verse 19. Of the which instruction, there
is certes every way very great reason.

First, in respect of the wickedness, and utter unlawfulness, of envy it
self; the which proceeds from the Devil, and makes those who give
themselves over unto it, very like unto him: according to that Matthew: 13.28.
where our Savior Christ notes out the Devil, by the name of the envious man.

Secondly, there is great reason, in respect of the state and condition of the
wicked, even in the midst of their wealth; the which being duly considered,
is rather to be pitied: yea even in this, that their portion of pleasures, is
only in this life, and then follow most woeful pains and torments for ever.
Psalm: 17.14. and Psalm: 49, 12, 13, 14. and 73.18.19.20. And Luke ch: 16. 25.

Now therefore, if we may not envy the prosperity of the wicked: much less may
we envy at the prosperity of the godly. B^t contrariwise, it is our duty to
rejoice, and to bless and praise our most good and gracious God for it.
Thirdly, the reason against envy, is great, even in regard of our selves;
whose estate is infinitely more happy and blessed, yea in our greatest
affliction that may be: then theirs is or can be, in their greatest worldly
pomp and felicity. As is evident from the testimony of the Spirit of God:
Matthew: 5.11.12. Luke 26.24, 25, 26. James 1. verses 2.12.

Fourthlie, the reason against this sin, is most weighty, in respect of God;
to whom alone does justly belong, the sovereign and free bestowing, and
disposing, of all his creatures and blessings, both spiritual, and also
belonging to this life: above all demand of every why, or wherefore he should
do so, or so. It is proper, and pertaining to God alone, to say: May I not
do with my own as I will?

Let us therefore, cast away all envying at the prosperity of other; specially
of other our fellow brethren; and convert all murmuring into a thankful
admiration at the goodness of God, which he exercises continually, toward the
poorest and basest of those that do truly believe in him. Whose outward
afflictions, he does recompense always, with inward and spiritual comforts
and blessings: as was said a little before.

GOD our heavenly Father, in this his unequal and uneven course (as flesh
and blood is ready to think of it) may (as one says well) be likened to a
most skillful Physician, in that he orders his Physic, according to the
differing estate and condi ion of his Patients. For he knows that one dram
will do as much with some, as a greater quantity of the same Drugge, in
another man's body, etc. So likewise, the Lord he knows, that a little
headache, will prevail as much, to humble one whom he has already broken:
as an extreme collicke, or gowte, with an other that is yet of a sturdie and
stout stomach. The diverse dealing of the Lord therefore, shows plainly,
that he does not rule as a Father ouercarried with an inordinate, or partial
pity: but as a most wise, holy, and righteous Father.

But admit this, (it may be, some will say) that God, as a most wise, holy,
and discrete Father, uses the afflictions and humiliations of his children;
like as a Physician uses his bitter potions, to cure the evils and sins,
which they are subject unto here in this life: Yet how can death, which to the
view of the ca^nall eye, does not seldom fall cruelly upon them, be counted
for good physic, and to be a healing medicine? For this destroys even
nature it se fe. And death (as we may say) is after a sort, the shame of all
physic.



Most of all, seeing he has in his most gracious providence, appointed, and
preordained, death to be unto all his children, a counter-poison against death;
and the most speedy and immediate passage unto everlasting life; and therein,
to the possession and fruition of all perfect health, wealth, and honor, for
ever and ever.

Explication and proof.
A notable proof hereof we read, Philip: 1, 21, 22, 23, 24. Likewise 2. Timot:
4.8. and 1. Pet: 1.3.4. etc.

Moreover Psalm: 116.15. Precious (says the holy Prophet) in the sight of the
Lord is the death of his Saints. And the same again, Psalm: 72.14. Dear shall
their blood be in his sight.

And beside this, it is to be further considered, that it is the good pleasure
of God, to take away his righteous servants, from greater evils, that are after
to fall upon the wicked that remain. Isai: chap: 57 1. And that, to this
gracious end and purpose; that they should not be perverted in their minds,
to fall into errors of judgment, ouerswaied by the corruptions of the time:
nor carried away after common sins, and disorders, increasing ouer-strongly
in the days wherein they live.

Nevertheless, it is not seldom seen, that the Lord makes his servants,
even herein this world, glorious by his wonderful deliverances: and that he
crowns them with age, as with a crown of glory, in that they are found
constant in the righteous ways of God, even as it pleases him: though death
had seemed, sundry times, to have grappeled upon them. Yea, and even
generally, if we shall wisely consider; we shall find, that in common
calamities, God shows himself, oftentimes more favorable to his people,
then to their adversaries: though many and great be their sins, whereby they
do daily provoke him. According to that we read, Isai: chapt: 27.7. Has he
smitten him as he smote those that did smite him? Or is he slain, according
to the slaughter of them, that were slain by him? Thou contendest with him
(that is, with thy people, as says the holy Prophet) in measure, etc. But he
takes their enemies away, as with a rough Spirit (or blast) in the day of the
Eastwinde.

But for all this it will peradventure, be further objected, and urged in way
of amplification: that not only particular persons, but also even whole
Cities, Countries, and Nations, professing the true religion of God, do
sometimes fall before their enemies, who are wicked and professed idolaters,
etc.



They that have the better cause; may nevertheless be guilty of some grievous
sins, wherein they lie without repentance: for the which God in his justice,
sees meet to punish them.

Yea, and by circumstance: the sins of the professors of the Gospel, may
easily be greater, then the sins of some ignorant idolaters: who have not
the light of the word of God, shining among them.

Explication and proof.
It is true: according to that manner of aggrieuing the sins of Bethsaida, and
Capernaum, above the sins of the Sodomites, etc: the which our Savior Christ
uses Matthew: 11.20. etc. And again, he affirms generally, that whosoever he
be, that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with the
more stripes.

But be it, that their sins be not more heinous; yet what lets, why God
may not correct them, in that measure whereunto they are grown: that so he may
prevent the extremity whereunto they would shortly come.

And besides, it may be that in the present action of defense, or revenge upon
the enemies of Gods truth, or violaters of common honesty and justice: they
who have the better cause, do not prepare themselves to deal in it, with
holy minds. Or it may be, they do trust in their own strength, and do not
stay themselves uprightly upon the Lord. The which seems to be the sin, of
the other tribes of Israel, against the tribe of Benjamin: before whom they
fell twice, Judges, chapt: 20. For this, verily we are very apt unto, even
to presume overmuch in a good cause: as if our own sins could not hinder
the success of it in our hands. But therein, we may easily deceive our selves;
and therefore it stands us in hand, to walk humbly before the Lord our God,
and to seek peace with him: that so he may be entreated to prosper us, even in
the best service which we may possibly be employed in.

But the cauilling wits of men, will be yet still maligning, and oppugning
the Fatherly providence of our God. For by an irreverent prying into it, they
snatch at this, among the rest of their quarrels, that many notoriously
wicked (both particular persons, and also whole Cities and Nations) have been
spared very long: when as in the mean while, God has more speedily judged his
own people; he causing judgment to begin at his own house, as the Apostle
Peter teaches. The Lord uses long-suffering toward the wicked, for the
salvation of those among them, which do belong unto him; and to leave the rest
the more inexcusable.

But as touching those, whom he has allreadie called home to the knowledge
and faith of his truth: he does chastise them betimes, when be sees them to
begin to go astray; least they should return to their former wickedness
again.

Finally hence it is manifest, that God the righteous Judge of all the world
judges his own children, as well as any other: and that without al partial
respect of any, either cause or person

Explication and proof.
So in deed we read, Job: 34.10. etc. Hearken unto me ye men of wisdom (says
Elihu) far be it from us to think, that wickedness should be in God, and
iniquity in the Almighty. For he will render to man according to his work, and
cause every one to find according to his way. Certainly, God will not do
wickedite, neither will the Almighty pervert judgment etc. and To: 2.6. God
will reward every man according to his works. and v: 11. For there is no respect
of persons with God. It is often affirmed, elsewhere.

Moreover, touching the long-suffering of God toward the wicked: we have a
notable place in the beginning of the same chapt. And 2. Pet: 3.9. The Lord is
patient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but would all men to come
to repentance. And verse 15. The long-suffering of the Lord is salvation.

Nevertheless, that he will chastise his own children when they go astray:
read Psalm: 89.30.31.32. etc.

But it is yet further instanced, and alleged, that not only old sinners,
but also, that sometime young infants: yea even the seed of the faithful, are
taken away by death, yea by the sword of merciless Tyrants: as namely by
Herod, in that his most savage and cruel infanticide or murdering of many young
children in Bethlehem and in the borders there abouts.



Only original corruption and attainder, is of it self a sufficient cause,
why God in his justice, may not only give young infants over, to a temporal
judgment: but also even to eternal death, in the severity of his justice.

But no death, never so sodeine, or as it may seem untimely: can at any time
frustrate the eternal salvation of the youngest of those, which do belong to
Gods most holy and eternal election.

Explication and proof.
It is so no doubt. For, in so much as they belong to our San: Christ, and to
the kingdom of God, Mark: 10.14. it cannot be that they should perish. God
also, in taking them to his mercy by one calamity (the bitterness whereof they
had not the reason to discern) he ends most speedily, and at once, all
their miseries: which would have multiplied upon them, in a long continuance
and course of life.

And further, as touching the wicked seed of the wicked, the Lord oftentimes
cutteth them off, as it were in the shell, because, according to the proverb,
they are as the evil egg of an evil bird: and for that (as the Lord
knows) the young cu^be, would in time prove as crafty, and by craft as
hurtful to the Church, as the old foxes have been. And that the whelpe of
the woolfe, would grow to be as ravenous as ever was his damme, etc.

Well then, we acknowledging all these things to be true: yet in so much as
God hates sin, power, cause sin to cease? Yea as they fear not to
expostulate, and quarrel with God: why did he at all suffer sin to have any
entrance into the world? What shall we say to these?

This is most venterous and desperate boldenes in deed: in all such as fear
not thus to object. To whom we may, both more justly, and also more boldly,
say with the holy Apostle Paul, even to the stopping of their presumptuous
mouths whosoever they be: O man who art thou, which pleadest against God?
Shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?
Has not the Potter power of the claye? And so forth, as it follows in the 9.
chapter of the Epistle to the Romans from the 21. verse of the chapter.

And further also, seeing sin is come into the world, only through man's
defalt, as has been declared before; it is for ever just with God to punish
sin, yea to punish sin by sin, in the continuing and multiplying course
thereof; and one wicked man by another, from generation to generation: yea and
his own children also, so far as they shall communicate with the wicked
world in sin, until he have humbled, and brought down the pride and
contumacie of all the world, before his most high and glorious Majesty; even
to the perfect glorifying both of his justice and also of his mercy, both
here and in the world to come.

Explication and proof.
For the further confirmation of the former part of this Answer, read Isaiah:
chapt: 45.9.10. Woe be unto him that strives with his maker, the potsheard
with the potsheards of the earth: shall the clay say to him that facioneth it,
what make thou? etc.

In the which reproof, we are not so to understand the Lord, as if he should
peremptorily forbid all reasoning in this case; as though the objection could
not be answered, and therefore must rest answerelesse: but that herein he does
admonish the frail creature, of his duty toward the most high and sovereign
Majesty of his Almighty and most reverend Creator. That is to say, that he
do conceive reuerendlie both of all the wo^kes of his Creation, and also of
his providence, without any contradiction against either of them.

And beside this, there is in this the Lords most just prohibition, and staying
of all captious reasoning: a perfect and familiar reason, for the staying and
suppressing of all such presumptuous reasonings for ever.

For when as in all matters, both of nature, and also of art, here below;
there are bounds of modesty acknowledged, for the limiting of questioning:
which would otherwise prove endless and undutiful, yea very contentious and
hurtful. For no man would allow, that the child should quarrel with his
Father, because he is of no taller stature, or of no better complexion, or of
no more noble birth, etc. And in matters of Art we will silence the scholar
with this common rule, Vnicuiq, in sua art credendum: Every man must be of
some credit in his art. No Artificer will like to be urged, to give a reason
of all his doings.

Wherefore, much rather ought there to be a holy limitation, and a severe
censuring of all bold reasonings with God: concerning his most high and
heavenly matters? Verily, there is no such disparagement betwixt the Father
and the child, the master and the servant; no nor between the clay and the
potter: as there is betwixt God, and the greatest Prince; or the most skillful
Artizan, or professor of the liberal Arts and sciences in all the world.

And touching the latter part of the answer, how God in his most holy
justice, punishes sin by sin; and one sinner by another: read Isai: 31.3.
Woe to thee that spoilest, etc. when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be
spoiled, etc.

And Psalm: 58.11. Doubtless there is a God who judges in the earth.

The history of Gods holy Providence recorded in the holy Scriptures; and
experience also from time to time, do confirm the same, to all wise obseruers
of the government of God. He raises up great Tyrants, to punish little
Tyrants. For every man is a Tyrant to his neighbor, till by his word and
corrections; and many times by public calamities: he makes all weary of
oppressing, and glad to live quietly, and peaceably, one by another.

Finally, God suffers sin to continue in the world, that from the evil
fruits, which do justly accompany the same (such as are manifold
sicknesses, war, famine, etc.) to the humbling of all flesh before him: he
having (according to the good pleasure of his own blessed will,) reserved the
time of the full ceasing of it, until he shall perfitlie establish his own
righteousness, in his heavenly Kingdom of glory and eternal blessedness.
According to that which he has promised, and described most comfortablie unto
us. Revel: chapt: 21.1. etc. And chapt: 22.3.4.5.

Thus then, we acknowledging, that all captious cauilling, yea even all
curious questioning about the high counsels and works of God, are justly to
be ceased among us, and among all the people of God: let us with all humblenes
of mind, and in the reverend fear of God, propound only one question or two
more, to be answered on the behalf of the Fatherly Providence of our most
gracious good God.

The one is this, that seeing God is a most loving and tender Father over his
children, and specially over their souls: how comes it to pass, that
ere-while, his poor children, are suffered to err, as it were in the wide and
dangerous wilderness of this world, as sheep without their Shepeheards, as out
Savior Christ himself lamented their case, in the days, wherein he (the
chief pastor of all) was bodily present among the Jews? Yea, how comes it
to pass, (may some say) that when at the last, it has pleased God to give
them Pastors and Teachers, to instruct and comfort them, in his holy ways;
that he should (as it does not seldom fall out in the world, yea in the
Church) even after a while, take them away again? But most of all, it will be
demanded of us, how it may stand well with the Fatherly providence of God;
that he should permit the cruel wolf, and false Prophet, to have any
entrance into his Church: and there to set up a mystery of iniquity, even an
Antichristian doctrine and government, opposite to the truth, both of the
doctrine, and also of the Ecclesiastical discipline of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to the dishonor of his own name, (as it may seem) and to the indangering of
the whole flock. How therefore may this agree with the gracious and Fatherly
providence of our God?

The most gracious and Father he providence of God does herein most notably
appear; in that (notwithstanding all whatsoever is here objected) he does
nevertheless, both effectualtie convert and call home, and also constantly
preserve unto himself, all his elect children. And that also, even against all
external defectes, and against all the power and craft of Antichrist, and his
devilish illusions, against all their lying signs and wonders, and against all
the hypocritical and counterfeit appearance, or mask of holiness, which is
held forth, and boasted of among them.

And further also, well may we likewise admire, and wonder at the most
gracious goodness of God; for that he does at any time send any true and
faithful Preachers of his holy word and Gospel to his people, and that they
continue any while at all with them: rather then vnthankefullie, and
mutteringlie, to complain of any either restainte or delay; seeing we are
altogether unworthy of the least grace and mercy this way.

And the rather also, because when we do (through the goodness of God) enjoy
the blessed and ordinary means of our salvation: we do no more thankefullie
accept, and entertain the same.

Explication and proof.
We may justly do so indeed. For we have all, and every one of us,
deserved a thousand times to perish for ever, in our infidelity, and in our
manifold sins, and unthankfulness: seeing we continue therein, notwithstanding
the mercies of God are renewed daily and howerly upon us. And because we do
not yet to this day, duly regard, those precious means and instruments, which
God does send to further us in the way of eternal life and salvation.

Verily, this sinful world is always unworthy, of the least of the
servants of God: Heb: 11.38. Much more unworthy of Christ himself, his
Gospel, and Sacraments, etc. Wherefore, justly may we, yea ought we to
acknowledge, and confess; that God does not for any want of love in himself
toward his people, with-holde or skant his principal blessings from them: but
for their want and failing in love toward him, and toward his holy ordinances,
which he has vouchsafed to bestow upon them.

And herein also is the goodness of God to be acknowledged of us, in that all
his withdrawing or skanting of his blessings, is only to this end (as touching
his elect children) that by the want of them for a while, he might provoke
them, to a more earnest desire, and longing after them again: and to a more
careful and religious using of them, when-soeuer it shall please him to
return and send them again. According to that Hosh: 5.15. I will go and
return to my place (says the Lord) till they acknowledge their falte, and
seek me: in their affliction they will seek me diligently. And chapt:
6.1.2.3. Come (say the faithful one to another) let us return to the Lord:
for he has spoiled, and he will heal us: he has wounded us, and he will
build us up. After two days he will revive us, and in the third day, he will
raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. Then shall we have knowledge, and
endeavor our selves to know the Lord: his going forth is prepared as the
morning, and he will come unto us as the rain, and as the latter rain upon
the earth. Read also, Song of Songs, chapter third. And chapter 5.3. etc.

But as touching the wicked and ungodly hypocrites, who do altogether profane
and abuse the blessed and glorious word and Gospel of God, and our Savior
Christ; it is most just, that God should take severe vengeance upon them, by
giving them over to strong delusion, that they should believe lies, etc:
according to the holy menace of the Apostle Paul: 2. Thessalon: 2.10.11.12.

For seeing it cannot be denied, but that it was just with God; severely to
punish the heathen, for their smothering of the dim light of natural
understanding, which was remaining in them: as we read Rom: 1. verse. 18, etc.
Much more must it be acknowledged, to be most agreeable to the most pure
justice of God; to double his wrath against those, that despise the perfect
light of his Gospel: and do rebel against his most holy Spirit, which
shines forth most graciously, and admirablie toward them, in the same.

Now therefore, for the conclusion of all objections, against the Fatherly
providence of our good God: let us come to the last question, which is this.
How it should come to pass, that the Lord of his infinite mercy, granting his
children, the means of their salvation, and most vigilantlie watching over
their salvation; yet some of the most dear and best beloved of them, should be
so left to themselves, that they should at any time fall into some grievous
sin or other: as king David, and king Solomon did, Peter also, and many
more: when as God could by the gracious power of his Spirit, have preserved
them from such grievous falls.

The Lord does hereby justly, and yet also in exceeding great mercy, chastise
some former f^^e; either of negligence, or it may be of some degree of
presumption: to make the humane corruption, and infirmity of all men without
exception, every way more fully known, for the common instruction and
admonition of all.

And also, to this gracious end among the rest, that the rejoicing of the
children of God, may neither rest in themselves, nor upon any other creature:
but only in and upon the Lord himself, who alone, is the only constant and
neuer-failing direction, strength and salvation of his people.

Moreover, even in this, wonderful is the Fatherly goodness of God; who never
suffers any of his children finally to perish in their falls: but he raises
them up again by repentance, and renews the joy of their salvation unto
them.

We are to wonder at it in deed: and with admiration to bless and praise his
most holy, gracious, and blessed name, for ever and ever. Amen.

The whole answer is evident from the examples even now alleged. To the which
purpose also, let us hearken to the Prophet Jeremiah, chap: 9. 23. 24. Let not
the wise man glory in his wisdom, etc. But let him that glories, glory in
this, that he knows me (says the Lord) for I am the Lord which do show
mercy, judgment, and righteousness, in the earth: for in these things I do
delight, says the Lord. Likewise the Apostle Paul. 2. Cor: 1.30.31. Let him
that rejoices, rejoice in the Lord.

Thus therefore (for the conclusion of this discourse) let us resolve our
selves, upon the undoubted acknowledgement of the Fatherly Providence of our
most gracious and merciful God, against all the cauils that may by any, be
objected against it. For by the grounds of the Answers already alleged: we
may with like facility, answer every other, whatsoever they may be.

But what though we should not be able, thoroughly to discern the reason of
some of Gods divine proceedings, and judgments toward any other of his
child^en, or toward our own selves? Should it be a sufficient reason, for us
to call into question the Providence of God? God forbid. Excellently well
(says M. Calvin,) that it is one of the chief exercise; of our faith, to be
humbled under the mighty hand of God, and with silence to rest quietly in his
judgments. Sciamus (inquit) vnum esse expraecipuis exercitijs fidei nostrae,
humiliari sub forti Dei manu, and cum silentio acquiescere eius indicijs. In
Psalm: 39. verse: 1^.

Alas, we poor wretches, through our negligence, do not know many of those
things, which we both might and ought to know. How then may we presume, or
once imagine, that we may attain to know the reason, of every secret work
and judgment of God? The mercy of the Lord (says the holy Prophet)
reaches to the heavens, and his faithfulness to the clouds. His righteousness
is like the mighty (or huge) mountains: his judgments are like the great
deep. Ps^. ^6. verse: 5.6. Read also Job: ch: 33. ve s: 1^.1^.14. Behold (says
Elihu to Job) in this thou have not done right: I will answer thee, that God
is gre^ter then man. Why do thou strive against him? for he does not give
account of all his matters. For God speaks once or twice, and one sees it
not, etc. to wit, until he open the ears of men, even by their corrections,
which he had sealed: as it follows in the 16. verse. And again, chapt^^ 36.
22. etc. Behold, God exalts by his power: What teacher is like unto him? Who
has appointed to him his way? Or who can say^, Thou have done wickedly?
Remember that thou magnify his work which men behold. All men see it, and
behold it a far off. Behold, God is excellent above that we can know, etc.

It is meet therefore, that every one of us, do reverence, and with holy
admiration, glorify and adore that in the Divine counselles, and works of the
Lord God: whereof we in our shallow conceits, can apprehend no reason that may
satisfy our curious and carnal minds to our liking.

It ought abundantly to suffice all that be godly, and dutifullie minded
toward God: that it has pleased him to reveal unto us in his holy
Scriptures, so much as it is meet for us for to desire to know.

And the rather also, for that he does therwithall, vouchsafe accordingly, to
give us good experience, if we will open our eyes to see it: that he guide^^
and disposes of all things, both mercies, and judgments; as they do most ex
^^isitelie serve in the end, to the manifold profit and comfort of all his
elect children and people.

Unto these manifold profits and comfortes therefore, let us now henceforth,
settle our minds: and call them altogether away from such hautie speculations,
as be too high and unseemly for us to climb unto.

For this is the second of those two latter points, mentioned among the
observations set down before: the which (as you answered) do serve to the more
full opening of the comforts which are furthermore to be found in the faith of
Gods Fatherly providence. And that to very good purpose.

For if we can find out this, that all judgments of God upon the wicked; and
likewise that all his afflictions and most sharp chasticements upon his own
children, do tend to their singular profit and comfort: how then may they be
thought any way to impeach his Fatherly pouidence?

Let us therefore to so good a purpose, make our diligent inquiry into this
point also.



First, because they daunte them for a time, yea those of them that are of the
most wicked and reprobate, or desperate mind: so that by the terror of the
judgments of God upon them, they are discouraged, and driven from the pursuit
of many their most dangerous and mischievous enterprises against the Church of
God

Secondly, they are hereby humbled, though not of any hearty good will, but
rather of a servile mind, and dissemblinglie; to do some good to the
faithful servants of God: yea sometime, to become vassalls and servants unto
them.

Thirdly, God does by his fearful judgments, executed upon the wicked, make
his divine Providence and sovereign justice to be, for the time, famouslie
known, and after a sort acknowledged in all the world: but specially of the
faithful in the church of God, to the more setteled confirmation of their
faith.

Finally, by the fearful judgments of God, cast down upon the heads of the
wicked, they are convicted in their own hearts, to acknowledge against
themselves: that the children of God (notwithstanding all their outward
afflictions) are in better estate, then themselves.

Explication and proof
These, (and if there be any such like) they are indeed the notable effects of
Gods fearful judgments against the wicked, even to the benefit of the
children of God: according to the thanksgiving of the Church of God, Psalm
136. Which celebrateth the praise of the judgments of God against the wicked,
as a fruit of his everlasting and constant mercy, toward his own Church and
people.

The first branch of the Answer, may be exemplified, from the Egiptians; who
by the plagues, wherewith God visited them, were not only stated from their
unreasonable proceedings against the Israelites: but they were also overcome at
the last, to do all the good they could unto them, even to the enriching and
adorning of them with their jewels, so far forth, that they did leave
themselves as it were naked, and bare. And which I pray you of all those that
were ouer-whelmed in the red Sea, while they pursued the Israelites, after they
had let them go out of their captivity: would not likewise have wished
themselves to have been rather in their estate, then in their own; when they
saw the Seas violently returning upon them?

And have not we our selves, had a notable experience in our own age, of our
singular benefit, by that famous judgment which Almighty God cast upon the
invincible and proud navy of our late chief enemies, and their confederates.
Anno. 1^88.

No doubt, but the heavy hand of God, being then as it were palpablie
perceived, and lest, even in their own judgments upon themselves: it made
them the less bold to renew the like attempt against us, nay contrariwise the
more willing to be at a kind of peace with us.

And doubtless, it shall be as a plentiful stream of water, still to quench
that fiery malice and ambition, (at the least, as touching that high degree of
scorching heat, wherewith they were at that time inflamed) unless which God
of his infinite mercy, stay and forbid,) the extremity of our sins, and
intolerable unthankfulness for so glorious a deliverance: do (as it were with
much wood and brimstone, through the judgment of God against us) set on fire,
and altogether inflame their rage, and give them power to burn us up as
stubble.

Secondly, as touching the servile submission of the wicked, caused by the
judgments of God: consider it from the 44, and 45. verses of the 18. Psalm.
Where, after that King David has reported, how his sword (which was the sword
of the Lords battles) had prevailed against his enemies, who were also the
enemies of all the Lords people: As soon (says he) as they hear, they shall
obey me: strangers shall be in subjection unto me (though lyingly as the Hebrew
verb Iechahhashu there used signifies) strangers shall shrink away and fear
in their privy chambers. Yea already they had done thus. For the King shows
what the Lord had formerly done for him in that behalf. And it may well be
also, a prophecy of the continuance of the same hand of God still, for the
benefit of his Church, from time to time: even so often as he in his wisdom
shall see it so meet. There is also a notable history to this purpose,
concerning the Gibeonites in the 9. chap. of the book of Judges. Read also 1.
Kin. 20.31. etc. The servants of the King of Aram, submit themselves with
halters about their necks, to the King of Israel. Yea, though Ahab was a wicked
King, yet thus wrought the Lord for his own names sake, and for the remnant of
the people. And 2. Chron. 32.22, 23. After that God had executed that his
memorable judgment against the King of Ashur, and his proud Army: Many are
said to bring offerings to Jerusalem, and presents to Hezekiah King of Judah,
so that he was magnified of all the Nations from thence-forth. And Act. chapter 12.
By the fearful judgment of God against Herod, the Lord made way for his word
to grow and multiply. There are many such like examples to be observed.

Thirdly, concerning the manifestation of Gods most holy justice, and
sovereign providence, by his judgments against the wicked, to the euicting of
them, and to the strengthening of the faith of his people: read Psalm. 58.10,
11. The righteous man shall rejoice, when he sees the vengance: he shall wash
his feet in the blood of the wicked. And men shall say, verily there is a
fruit for the righteous: doubtless there is a God that judges the earth. Read
also Psalm. 83.17.18. Let them (says the Psalmist) that is, let thine enemies
be confounded O God, etc. That they may know that thou who art called Jehovah
art alone, even the most high over all the earth. And Psalm. 9.16. The Lord is
known by executing judgment. And Psalm. 126.2.3. When the Lord brought again
the captivity of Sion: to wit, after the Babilonians were subdued, etc. then
said they among the heathen, The Lord has done great things for them. And
therefore much rather does the Church it self in the same place acknowledge it
saying, The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we do rejoice. Read
also Ps. 33.1^, 11, 12. and 119.52. I remembered thy judgments of old, and have
been comforted. Thus, the judgments of God being to the terror of the wicked:
they are contrariwise, a joy and comfort to the godly.

Finally, concerning the last branch, let it be considered, that as Balaam the
foolish Prophet, saw even in his prosperity, the blessed estate of the people
of God, to be so great; that he wished that he himself might die their
death: Number. 23.10. so, yea much more no doubt, when the revenging hand of God
fell upon him, would he have wished to have been as the least among the people
of God: to wit, when the sword came against him, in the slaughter of the
Midianites. Number. 31.8. And thus questionless would all the wicked desire, when
they are terrified by the vengeance of God breaking forth against them: like as
was noted before, concerning the Egiptians, at that time when the water began
to return forcibly upon them. Thus the judgments of God upon the wicked, are
many ways profitable and comfortable to the godly.

NOw let us come to those fruits and benefits, which the children of GOD, do
in time, reap to their comfort, from the judgments of God upon themselves,
while they did live in their sin: and after that also, by his chastisements,
from the time that they began to repent, and to turn unto him.



While the children of God are in this estate, God uses his judgments or
punishments, as effectual helps:

First, to humble them in the sight of their sins, by a taste of that
horrible wrath and misery, which is in the justice of God due unto them.

Secondly to stir them up to seek for mercy and forgiveness.

Thirdly, to make their deliverance and salvation, the more sweet and precious
unto them.

Finally, that by the recordation, and calling to mind of the same their
former punishments, they (being once turned to God) might thenceforth, take
warning, that they do never return to their former wickedness again.
Explication and proof.


You say well, that the judgments of God are effectual helps, to the ends
you have rehearsed. For it pleases God, for the better expedition, and more
speedy effecting of his work; to add unto the threatenings of his word, the
execution of his curse in some measure, even upon his own elect children: whom
he finds to be by nature children of wrath, and knows that they have need
of such vehement awaking, and rowsing up, out of their dead sleep of sin.

To this purpose, read in the book of Job. cha. 33. verse 17, etc. Where,
after that he has spoken of the sundry afflictions, wherewith God does humble
his children; preparing them first by his bodily chastisements, and then
sending the instruction of his word unto them: then says Elihu to Job, verses
2^, 30. Lo all these things will God work twice or thrice with a man, That he
may turn back his soul from the pit, to be illuminated with the light of the
living. That is, that he having his life prolonged, may learn the way to the
kingdom of heaven. And hereof, we have the most wicked King Manasses for a
notable example. 2. Chron. 33.12, 13. Of whom it is written, that howsoever he
exceeded in wickedness, and despised the ministry of the Prophets, which were
sent unto him: yet when God cast him into tribulation, (that is, gave him into
the hands of the King of Ashur, who put him in fetters, and bound him in
chains, and carried him to Babel) then he prayed to the Lord his God, and
humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers. And he praying to God;
God of his infinite mercy was entreated of him: and heard his prayer, and
brought him again to Jerusalem, into his kingdom. And then (as the text
says) Manasses knew (that is, he acknowledged) the Lord to be God.

To this purpose also, it is well observed by a godly learned man; that by
affliction, as by a special help: God uses commonly to call them whom he
will save, and make instruments of his salvation to others. To the which end,
he alleges the example of Paul, from the testimony of the holy Scriptures:
and from Ecclesiastical story, the example of Constantine the first Christian
Emperor, and of Edwine the first Christian King of Northumberland. Of the
which Edwine thus he writes; that notwithstanding he had married a Christian
woman, the daughter of Ethelbert a christened King of Kent: who persuaded with
him all that she could, and Paulinus also a preacher of the Gospel; yet could
he not be won, till God had bumbled him by sundry afflictions. No not till at
the last, he was sore wounded by a wicked and desperate ^^t throat, who was
suborned to kill him. This is the observation of Mr. Fox in the history of
King Edwine, about the year of our Lord 630. Where also he alleges to the
same end, the late example of Martin Luther: whose spiritual conflicts, and
agonies were many; before he could be made fit to preach the doctrine of
justification by Christ, openly. And so (says he) bo all they most commonly,
which come to any lively feeling, or sensible working of Christ the Lord in
them.

Hence it is, that this confession is heard often in the mouths of the
servants of God, after that they are once truly and effectually humbled unto
him. Blessed be God for such a sharp check that I had: for such a loss: for
such a disgrace: for such an imprisonment: for such or such a danger: for such
a languishing sickness: for such a paineful or loathsome disease: for such a
wound: for such a terrible fear in a grievous thunder and lightening, etc. For
if I had not bin thus or thus afflicted, and humbled; I had not known my
self: I had not regarded Gods word: I had never come to the fear of God: I
had perished in my sins, etc. If I had not lost such or such a friend, or
worldly stay; I should not have depended upon Gods providence as now (by the
grace of God) I see that I ought to do. Thus much therefore, for the two
former uses of afflictions, or punishments, or judgments; howsoever we do
think good to call them.

Now thirdly; how the bitterness of such judgments, or afflictions sent of God,
do make the salvation of God, and his tender mercies, the more sweet and
comfortable: I need not to speak, seeing no man can truly discern what
sweetness means, unless he have tasted before what the sower is.

Finally, touching the last point, it cannot be doubted: but that special
judgments of God, are sent to the end they might leave behind them, a
memorable impression of his reverend fear, in the hearts of his children; and
so to nourish in them, a continual care of duty, answerable to the first
entrance of their calling: remembering always, that the anger of God against
sin, is as great as any fear that is ever apprehended of us. Psalm. 90.11.
Who knows the power of thy wrath? For according to thy fear is thine anger.
The practice of this memorial is commended unto us, Lament: chapter 3. verses
19, 20, 21. in these words of the Prophet. Remembering mine affliction and my
mourning, the worme-wood and the gall. My soul has them in remembrance and is
humbled in me. I consider this in my heart, therefore have I hope. But this
place, respects not only such as have been at the first prepared to
repentance: but such rather, as are by afflictions solicited to better their
repentance.

Let us therefore, by this occasion, proceed now to the fruits of
afflictions, which follow after the calling of the children of God. For so God
sees it good, and profitable: that the afflictions of those that be his,
should be often renewed,

First and foremost, the Lord does thereby further, and more and more perfect
the repentance of his children.

Secondly, he preuenteth (and as it were defeateth) many dangerous
prouocations, and enticing occasions of s^nne.

Thirdly, GOD does teach his children, from their experience of the bitter
fruits of sin now and then renewed upon them: more and more to hate and
abhor sin.

Fourthly, he tries, fineth or purges our faith, that upon the often renewed
experience of his mercy: we may more purely, and vndoubtingly, settle our
comfortable trust and confidence in him.

Fifthly, he does by afflictions quicken and provoke us, to often and earnest
supplication and prayer.

Sixtlie, he does thereby also, inure us to patience and meekenes: yea so,
that Patience, an excellent Christian virtue, may have the more perfect work
in us.

Hereby also, God does teach us by our own experience of afflictions, to judge
more wisely, and charitably of all others, upon whom he lays his fatherly
corrections: and accordingly, to be more tenderly and pitifully affected
toward them.

Moreover, by former afflictions, he prepares, and makes us the more fit, to
bear those more sharp ones that are to come: even those, through which, we
must necessarily pass, before we can attain to the kingdom of heaven. Yea
sometimes it pleases God to lay upon us a greater affliction for a little
while: to the end he may humble us to bear some lesser, which he shall think
good more ordinarily to exercise us withal.

Beside all these, God does by the want of health, or any other of his
blessings, either spiritual, or bodily: teach us a more holy, sober, and
thankful use of them, then we had learned before; after that, of his mercy
he vouchsafes to restore them to us again.

But who can reckon up, and thoroughly understand, all the commodious and
profitable uses, whereunto God of his infinite mercy, has sanctified the
sundry afflictions of his dear children?

Exp^ication and proof.
It is very true. No one can thoroughly understand all. Neither any the least
f^uit of any one; but only such, to whom God himself vouchsafes to give the
secret experience thereof, as it were into his bosom. The fruit of affliction,
may be resembled to the Manna which was hidden, and kept close in the Arc: and
to the written name, which no man knows, save he that receives it. Revel.
2.17.

But for some further explication and proof of the fruits now mentioned: let
us call to mind first of all, that which was not very long since alleged out
of the 119. Psalm. verse 67. Before I was afflicted (says the Prophet) I went
astray, but now I keep thy word. And verse 71. It is good for me that I was
afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes. Read also Hebr. 12.10. God does
chastise us for our profit, that we might be partakers of of his holiness.
And again. Though no chastising for the present seems joyous but grievous:
yet afterward, it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness, to them which are
exercised thereby.

Verily, this is an excellent fruit of afflictions, that the Lord does thereby
renew our repentance, by putting us in mind of our old sins, as well as of
our new: and therewithal, that he does revive our prayers for the forgiveness
thereof, to the further assurance of the comfort of our faith, that they are
pardoned and forgiven unto us.

Secondly, that afflictions, do (through the blessing of God) prevent sin;
we may learn from the Apostle Paul: who tells us, that God gave unto him a
prick in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him, to the end he
might not be exalted above measure. 2. Cor. 12.7. This prick in the flesh, was
some not^ble inward affliction, whereby he could not walk so expeditely as he
desired in good duty: like as he that has a thorn or the stub of a bush in
his foot, he walks more slowly and with greater pain. Nevertheless,
howsoever the Apostle could not satisfy himself: yet he was abundant in
labors, and in comparison of others, very expedite and quick. Whatsoever it
was, this (as he says plainly) was the use of it, that by this means, he
was humbled: and so it was a preservative against spiritual pride. And that in
this respect, affliction is a benefit: our own mouths do willingly testify,
when we wish that we had been sick in our bed, when we did (at unawares, or
willingly) that which afterward it repents us of. No doubt but sickness, and
other afflictions, do keep us from many evils, that otherwise we should fall
into.

Touching the third point, it is of it self so plain, that it may be palpably
felt, of all that have any spiritual sense in them: according to the common
saying, which may well have use here, The burnt child dreades the fire.
Nevertheless, for examples sake, we may confirm it from that we read Joshua,
chapter: ^2. verses 16, 17, etc. Thus says the whole congregation of the Lord,
what transgression is this that ye have transgressed against the God of
Israel, etc. Have we too little for the wickedness of Peor, whereof we are not
cleansed to this day, though a plague came upon the congregation of the Lord?
ye also are turned away this day from the Lord: and seeing ye rebel to day
against the Lord, even to morrow he will be wroth with all the congregation
of Israel.

And verse 20. Did not Achan, the son of Zerah trespass grievously in the
execrable thing, and wrath fell on all the congregation of Israel? And this man
alone perished not in his wickedness.

Fourthly, touching the trial, or fining and purging of faith by afflictions:
read, 1. Pet: 1.6.7. Wherein (that is, in the which salvation) ye rejoice
(says the Apostle, writing to the Christian Jews) though now for a season (if
need require) ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations. That the
trial of your faith, being much more precious then gold which perishes,
(though it be tried with fire) might be found unto your praise, and honor, and
glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ, etc.

This trial of faith, causes it more purely and firmly to rest it self in
God; because it gives us experience of our own weakness, and how vain all
other means of help are: and therewithal, how all-sufficient the arm of the
Lord is of it self alone, when all other helps or means of help, that we
know of, do fail. According to that. 2. Cor. 1.8.9. Brethren (says the
Apostle Paul) we would not have you ignorant of our affliction which came unto
us in Asia, how we were pressed out of measure passing strength, so that we
altogether doubted even of life. Yea, we received the sentence of death in our
selves, because we should not trust in our selves, but in God who raises up
the dead. So then, as the tempest tries the mariner, and the battle the
soldier: so does affliction the faithful Christian. And that experience of
Gods assistance in trouble; and of his deliverance out of trouble, confirms
and strengthens faith: it may appear by that which follows in the 10.
verse of the same first Chapter of the 2. Epistle to the Corint: Wherein the
Apostle writes further concerning himself and Timotheus, that they trusted
that God who had delivered them from so great a death, and did deliver them:
would also yet thereafter deliver them still. Read also, 2. Tim: 4.17.18. The
Lord assisted me (says the Apostle) and strengthened me, that by me the
preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles should hear: and I
was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. And the Lord will deliver me from
every evil work, and will preserve me to his heavenly kingdom: to whom be
praise for ever and ever, Amen. And in the holy story, David being
strengthened by the Lord to prevail against the Bear, feared not to encounter
against the Lion: and having overcome the Lion, he feared not to try the
combat with the armed giant, Goliath. Read also, Psalm: 23. Thus it is true,
that faith grows, and is heartened and made bold by experience of Gods former
assistance and deliverance.

Fifthly, that affliction quickens and provoke the faithful to prayer, it
is also so certain, that he who has no care to pray to God in his affliction:
may be truly said to have no faith, or at the least, that it is for the time,
violently smothered and concealed in him. The time of affliction, is a special
time of Prayer. James, chap: ^.13. And Psalm: 50.15. Call upon me (says the
Lord) in the day of thy trouble. And Rom: 8.15. The Apostle Paul teaches, that
it is a principal effect of the holy spirit of adoption, to teach, encourage,
and strengthen the children of God, in all their necessities to cry Abba,
Father. And verses 26.27. The spirit helps our infirmities, etc. And whether,
I pray you, should children go, but to their Father, when they be in any
distress? He is a foolish, or proud child, whosoever he be: that will not
seem to be beholding to his Father, for his relief and succor. It is
doubtless, and ought to be, the kindly affection of the children of God: to
let no affliction pass, without the sanctification of Prayer, that so it might
be sanctified and blessed to their benefit.

Sixthly, that God blesses affliction to work patience and meeknes: yea the
increase of so excellent a grace: it is expressly affirmed, Rom: 5.3.
Tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope, and hope makes not ashamed. And it may further appear by that which we
read, James, chap: ^.4. For if patience have the perfect work (as the Apostle
teaches) it makes those that do so continue, and cherish it, that they be
entire, lacking nothing. For to such, it is abundantly sufficient unto them,
that they are sure, they have the Lord for their portion.

They know, that he that shall come, will even come shortly, and that he will
not t^^ie: and that he will bring his reward with him. Behold therefore how
bene^iciall, a^fliction is; even by the causing, or rather occasioning of this
excellent grace of patience and meekenes. Whence it is also, that both the
afflicted, and the m^eke, are called in the holy Scriptures by one and the s^^e
n^me as it were. For Hhanauim not^th the one as well as the other: Psalm. 76.9.
Zech. 2.3. Amos, 8.4. and in diverse other places.

And hence also it is, that we learn to moderate our judgment, concerning the
afflicted: and to be far^e from rash condemning of them, as if God had cast
them off, etc. For that good fruit, which (through the blessing of God) we
find in our selves, by our own afflictions: causes us the rather to hope well
of Gods mercy, toward those that are likewise afflicted. And the rather also,
because we understand, that God likes we^l of such, and pronounces them
blessed. So we read, Psalm. 41. from the beg^nning of the Psalm. The same
likewise frames our hearts, to commiseration, and merciful dealing toward
them: a^ in the same Psalm, we are not obscurely admonished. Which also is
according to the express commandment of God: Exodus 22.21. and Leuit. 19
3^.34, Thou shall love the stranger as thy self: for ye were stranger in the
lan^ of Egypt.

Moreover, that former trialls, and those more gentle; do hearten against
great r: it may be evident, by that which was observed, concerning the fifth
branch of this An^^^re We are indeed, of o^r s^lues, altogether unapt to
bear (...) ^itly, and m^^kely, the least affliction which God l^i^^h upon us.
Behold theref^re, the excellent wisdom and mercy of our GOD; in that
sometimes for a s^as^n (as was said) he lays a greater upon us: that so he
may wi^^e v^ t^ be the more willing, to submit our selves ^o some lesser, the
which he sees meet, mo^e ordinarily to exerc^se and humble us withal. We
make much of a little a king of our finger, or of some t^^fling loss, etc. But
when God begins to call into question, our whole welfare touching either
bodily health, o^ ou^^ and estate: then we see the vanity of our former
niceness in our usual compl^^ning for every little, or nothing.

Finally tha^ God teaches us by want of health for a time, to use it better;
and to be more tha^kfull for it, when it pleases him to restore it unto us
again: (and so in the rest of his benefits) it stands with good reason: in
so much as ^hereby we understand much better, of what price and value they are.
Likewise, we learn thereby from whom we receive them: and in whose power it
is, to take them away again, at his own pleasure. And therefore, that we
ought to be mo e and more careful to glorify him in the inioying of them, and
not to serve our own wicked lusts by them. It is a common saying, and c^mmon
ex^erience pro^eth ^t ^o be true: that by wanting, rather then by en^ ying
(Caren^o magis quam fruendo) we discern the greatness of a benefit.

Much mo e mi^ht be said, concerning the manifold fruit and benefit, when
comme h to the children o^ God b^ the fatherly afflictions, corrections, and
(...) God ou^ he^uenly Father, as was answ^red. F^r God (no doubt) dot ^y ^h^m
teach us many things, as was also observed once before: the (...) not
otherwise learn so well. Such as are, the denial of our s^^^^, the contempt
of this world, an earnest longing after the Kingdom of heaven, etc. Verily, we
could neither know God so well in his mercy, nor in his righteousness, nor in
his power, nor in his wisdom, nor in his faithfulness, nor in any of his
divine virtues: neither yet our selves so well, either in our frailty and
misery, or in our peace and prosperity, as by experience of afflictions
(through the grace of our gracious good God and merciful Father) we learn to
do.

Thus abundant (that we do not say infinite) is the commodity of the
fatherly afflictions of God, laid upon his own dear children. But that which
has been delivered, shall for the present suffice: until it may please God
to enrich us with a more full supply.

Hitherto therefore, of the commodities and fruits of afflictions.

LEt us now henceforth, proceed (for a while) to inquire after the comfortes,
which are to be found in them: at the least, after the chief and principal of
them.

It is true indeed, that the former uses being profitable; they are also to all
those that feel the fruit of them, even in the same respect, very comfortable
also: as we may evidently perceive by the testimony of the holy Ghost, Heb:
12.5. etc. Where both the comfort, and also the profit of afflictions, are
lincked together. Of the which place, more is to be said afterward.

And beside, insomuch as touching earthly profit, it is found true that the
sent of gain is pleasant, (Suauis odor lucri): infinitely much more ought that
heavenly and spiritual gain, which grows from the fatherly corrections of
God, duly pondered and weighed, to be delightful, pleasant, and comfortable
unto us.

But seeing there are some uses of afflictions, which do more properly and
entirely belong to comfort: let us come to them, as coming yet something more
properly under the name of comfort.



First, it is very comfortable, to consider that no affliction comes without
the most wise, loving, and fatherly providence of God.

Secondly, in that God is never nearer nor more tenderly affected (yea even as
it were with bowelicke compassion toward his children): then when they are in
greatest distress and trouble.

Thirdly, if we do willingly suffer affliction for well-doing, and while we
walk in the holy ways of God: we have our communion with our Savior Christ,
in whose afflictions, all ours are sanctified, and made both comfortable and
profitable unto us. For they are so many witnesses of our adoption to be the
children of God, and that we are lively members of the mystical body of
Christ.

Fourthly, the holy Ghost, our most inward and sweet comforter (even the
spirit of the highest glory, proceeding from God the Father and the Son)
rests vp^n us: and does most immediately communicate, the perfect comfort of
the whole blessed Trinity unto us.

Sixthly, we have in our afflictions, a holy communion and fellowship with all
the faithful as brethren and fellow members with them in Christ: insomuch as
it is the very common and beaten high way, which God himself has laid out for
all his children to travel through the same, unto his heavenly kingdom.

Moreover, the holy afflictions wherewith God does exercise us, do privilege
and respite us from infinite worldly cares and troubles, the which no doubt,
would for our sins have fallen upon us if we had continued in them: and if we
had not been taken up, and had as it were received our press money, to be
otherwise employed in the special service, and as it were warfare of the Lord.

And yet further, the more sharp, and fiery hot, our afflictions are; so
much the more spe^dy and swift forerunners (or as it were harbengers) are they:
to make way for special comfortes, so much the more shortly to follow after.

But be it, that most hot and vehement afflictions (for the Lords cause and
his Gospel) are continue a long while, as we count length of time: yet the
longest, and the same also the sharpest that may be; if they be truly measured
and weighed, they are but momentanie, and light in comparison of that, which
otherwise, and in more terrible and fearful manner our sins have deserved.
Or much rather, in respect of that most excellent and eternal weight of glory,
whereunto (through the infinite mercy of God our heavenly Father) they do, as
secondarie and helping causes, prefer and advance us.

Finally, infinite almost in number and variety, as well as endless in
continuance; are the manifold comforts, belonging to the sundry and manifold
afflictions and trials of the dear children of God for righteousness and the
Gospels sake: above that any, not thoroughly exercised therewith, shall ever know
or feel what they do mean.

Explication and proof.
So great and so many, yea even almost about number indeed, are the sundry and
often renewed comforts, of the afflicted servants of God: the which, the
children of this world, cannot possibly be acquainted withal. For they do not
belong unto them, neither can they receive them: because they cannot rereiue
him, who is the only immediate giver and worker of al comfort. According to
that of our Savior Christ: John: 14. ver. 16.17.18. I will pray the Father,
and he will give you an other comforter, that he may abide with you for ever.
Even the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him
not, neither knows him: but ye know him: for he dwells with you, and shall
be in you. I will not leave you as orphans (or comfortles) but I will come unto
you. And again, verse, 27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you:
not as the world gives do I give unto you. Let not your heart be troubled. Or
timorous and fearful, etc.

It is the part, or rather the blot and just reproach of an unfaithful friend,
to fail his friend in time of need. Our Savior Christ therefore, being a
most faithful friend, yea even the fountain, as it were, of all true
friendship and fidelity: he promises assuredly, and will most certainly
perform himself to be a most trusty and infallible friend: yea more then a
friend, unto all that do approve their faithfulness to him, in the holy
profession and obedience of his Gospel.

And verily, if our Savior Christ had not always hitherto performed his
promise of sending his holy spirit, that perfect Comforter, to his servants,
with his abundant and manifold consolation, according to the manifold and
exquisite molestations and torments of their persecutors: they could never have
endured, those sharp and cruel (though more speedy) torments executed by the
heathen. Much less, the late more lingering cruelties, of the false-beleeuing
and heretical brood of Antichrist: by their long, tedious, and most
uncomfortable imprisoning, and dungeoning of the true servants of God. And
therewithal, by their famishing of them: by their often railing examinations
and siftings: by their base and crafty false glozings and flatteries to seduce
them: by their bitter scoffings not only at themselves, which they could more
easily endure, but also at the most holy truth of our Savior Christ, which was
more bitter then either imprisonment or death unto them. The which also at the
last, they inflicted with fire and faggot upon them: that is to say, at the last
after they had taken their fill in wourrying of them.

But let us (as briefly as we can) furnish our selves, with some proofs,
touching the particulars of this answer: to the end we may thereby store our
own hearts, with some good furniture and grounds of true comfort, against the
times of our own afflictions; whatsoever may in the fatherly counsel and
providence of God, hereafter betide us.

First of all therefore (as was answered in the first place) this is, as the
opening of a most lively and plentiful spring of all holy consolation add
comfort: that no affliction comes without the most wise, vigilant, loving,
and tender foresight of Gods fatherly providence: the which no doubt, extends
it self, to the assigning both of the fittest time for the beginning, and of
the fittest measure for continuance, and also of the most blessed issue and
ending that may be. For the which, read Mat. 10.28.29. etc. Fear ye not them
which kill the bea^, etc. All the hairs of year head be numbered, etc. Fear
ye not therefore etc.

Likewise, Philip: 1.28. In nothing fear your adversaries. And 1. Pet: 3.14.
Read also, 2. King: 19.25. etc. And Psalm: 105.12.13.14.15. God will not suffer
Tyrants to have their own will, neither when, nor after such manner, as they
themselves will. He has his hook in their nostrills, like as they lead
bears: and his bit in their mouths, as men restrain and hold in unruly
horses, etc. And yet further, 1. Cor: 10.13. God is faithful (says the holy
Apostle) who will not suffer any of his to be tempted above that they be able,
but he will even give the issue with the temptation, that they may be able to
bear it.

So then, this may justly be as a Sea of comfort unto us, in that we know
that God in his afflicting of us (whether by his own hand or by the wicked)
deals like a most loving Father, in correcting and nourtering his Son: like
a tender mother, in chastising her daughter: like a wise and merciful
Physician, in the curing of his diseased Patient: like a most skillful
husbandman, in tilling and manuring of his barren ground, or in pruning and
cutting off the superfluous branches of his vine: like the cunning Goldsmiths,
in trying and fining of his drossie gold, that he may make thereof a precious
and shining vessel: like the artificial mason, who most triely heweth and
fitteth the rude and rough stones, to be laid upon the foundation of his
building: finally, he deals like the watchful and painful shepherd, who
never leaves seeking up of his straied sheep, until he has found it, and
hu^ted it home to the found, that so it may be out of the danger of the wolf,
etc. In all which dealing of God, thus wear always to judge: that he does not
change his affection, as our estate and condition changes here in this world:
but he continues constant in his love, even in the midst of the most
vncomfo^table afflictions, that may at any time befall any of his children. Yea
verily, so long as the Lord our God and merciful Father, preserves us from
Hell, and eternal damnation: we are to acknowledge him to be very gracious
and merciful, yea infinitely merciful unto us. And by how much the more
manifold, and the more often our afflictions be renewed, and that also in
raging manner like the billows of the Sea: the more they do argue the most
vigilant and al-seeing providence of God, after that we are by his goodness
delivered out of them. Thus great is the comfort, contained in the first branch
of the answer.

Touching the second branch, read Psalm: 46. The whole Psalm is notable to
this purpose, both for doctrine and encouragement: and also for
exemplification. Read also, Psalm: 50.15. And Psalm: 86.14.15, etc. O God the
proud are risen against me. etc. But thou o Lord art a pitiful God and
merciful, etc. Turn thou unto me, and have mercy upon me, etc. And Psalm:
94.18.19. When I said my foot slideth, thy mercy o Lord stayed me. In the
multitude of my thoughts in my heart (he means troublesome thoughts) thy
comforts (says the Prophet) have rejoiced my soul. To this purpose, many of
the Psalms are notable: namely, 34.19.20.21. and 37, 24, 28. and 119. verses
149.150.151. and Ps. 145.14, and verse 18. And Prou: 24.15, 16. The which,
because they have been alleged heretofore, I do not stand now to rehearse
them again.

Let us come to the third branch. For the proof whereof, read Heb: chap:
2.10.11. where the Apostle shows, that it is well beseeming the excellent
wisdom and righteousness of God: that he being minded to bring many
children to glory, should consecrate the Prince of their salvation through of
affliction: to the end, that both the same his children, and also their
afflictions, might be sanctified in him, and by his afflictions. In which
respect our Savior himself said John 17.19. For their sakes sanctify I my
self, that they also may be sanctified through the truth.

And the Apostle Paul, 2. Timo: 2.11.12. It is a true saying, For if we he dead
with him, we shall also live with him. If we suffer, we shall also reign with
him. And Philip: 1.28. It is a token of salvation, and that even from God.

Wherefore let it not seem strange unto us, nor any way discourage us; that we
are subject to manifould afflictions and trialls: but rather, according to the
often exhortation of the holy Scriptures, let us rejoice in that hereby, God
our heavenly father fashioneth us to be like unto his own Son, Rom: 8.29.
Who though he were the Son, yet learned he obedience by those things which
he suffered. And being consecrated, was made the author of eternal salvation
to all that obey him. Heb: chap: 5.8.9. Now in nothing can we be here in this
world, more like unto the Son of God, while he was in it; then by putting
our faithful trust in God, and by yielding dutiful obedience unto him, in the
midst of our manifould afflictions and trialls for his sake. Wherefore, as a
godly learned Preacher well observes: insomuch a^ Christ is herein the
pattern, whose similitude we bear: who (duly considering it) can be
discouraged under the cross? To the which purpose, let us h^re also consider
that which we read, Heb: 12.5. etc. In the which words (as was touched
before) both the profit, and also the comfort of affliction, are lincked
together. And now let us further observe, that the Apostle shows, that it was
a matter worthy special reproof, in some among the Christan Jews: for that
they did not encourage themselves, to the cheerful enduring of the cross, as
they ought to have done: considering that it is so notable an argument, that
God has adopted us, and taken us to be his children.

You have forgotten (says he) the consolation (or as we may read it
exhortation, yet so as we must still understand it to be a most sweet and
comfortable exhortation of the Spirit of God) which speaks unto you as unto
children. My son despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when
thou art rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and he
scourges every Son whom he receives. If ye endure chastening, God
offers himself unto you as unto Sons, etc. Let us I pray you, diligently
read, and for ever remember this, and the rest of the same Scripture, as it
follows in the text: and so through the blessing of God, we shall at every
need, find it to be a singular comfort unto us. Yea not only in such
afflictions as we endure for godliness sake, but also even in such, as God at
any time, lays upon us more directly for our sins: provided that by them we
shall learn amendment of life, and be sorry that we have offended God our
most merciful Father thereby. For then, as the Apostle, 1. Cor: 11.32.
certifieth us, God corrects us in the world, to the end we should not be
condemned with the world. And this may justly, be no small comfort unto us.

For the fourth branch read, 1. Pet: 4.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. where the Apostle
Peter teaches as much, as is contained therein: yea notwithstanding the
afflictions be at the sharpest, and though the fire thereof do burn most
hotly upon us. Dearly beloved, think it not strange (says he) touching the
fiery trial, etc. But rejoice in so much as ye are partakers of Christ's
sufferings, that when his glory shall appear, ye may be glad and rejoice. If
ye be railed upon for the name of Christ, blessed are ye: for the spirit of
glory and of God rests upon you, etc.

Fifthly, touching the ready ministry of the holy Angels to comfort the
children of God, even then especially, when they are in greatest distress: we
may consid^r it first, from their service offered to our Savior Christ in his
first special temptations. Matthew: 4.11. And again, in his last special
temptation, Luk: 22.^^. And then we may see it generally, concerning all that
be in Christ. Psalm. 34 7. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them
that fear him, and he delivers them. Read also, Psalm: 91.11. Matthew:
18.10. and Heb: 1.14. This might easily be exemplified by many particulars.
But because this point has been handeled more at large before: we have unto
that which remains.

Now therefore touching the 6. branch, read, 1. Cor: 10, 13. There has no
temptation taken you, but such as appertain to man. And 1. Pet. 5.9, Resist ye
(the Devil) steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are
accomplished in your brethren, which are in the world. And Revel: ch: 1.9. I
John (says the holy Apostle of himself) even your brother and companion in
tribulation and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ. In which respect,
the Apo: Paul says also, I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fulfill the
rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which it
the Church, whereof I am a minister, etc. For verily, there is great use of
such afflictions of the servants of God: both for encouragement and
confirmation of faith, and also for mutual comfort: according to that of the
same Apofile, 2. Cor: 1.3. etc. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, who comfort
us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in
any affliction, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.
For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation abounds,
through Christ. And whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and
salvation, which is wrought in the enduring of the same sufferings which we
also suffer: or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and
salvation. And our hope is steadfast concerning you, in so much as we know,
that as ye are partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye be also of the
consolation. This place as we see, is as a full Commentary, concerning this
point of the comfortable communion of the children of God, in their
afflictions. Whereunto also, that place is answerable which we read, Heb:
10.32.33, 34.35.

This communion is so necessary: that none can withdraw themselves from it,
and yet be true Christians. Nay it cannot be so done, without danger of
perdition: according to that which we read, verses 38, 39. of that 10. chap: to
the Heb: To the which purpose, consider the speech of Mordecai to Queen Ester,
ch: 4.13.14. And the threatening of God, Amos ch: 6. verses 6, 7, 8. And that
saying of our Savior Christ, Mat: 10:33. wherein he professes that he will
be ashamed of such, as be ashamed to profess his name, for fear of
persecution, etc. Wherefore let the example of Moses be always our blessed
imitation; in that he made choice, rather to suffer adversity with the people
of God: then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Esteeming the rebuke
of Christ to be greater richer, then the treasures of Egypt: and in that
respect, when he came to age, refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs
daughter.

And finally, let this comfort, animate us against that conceit which every one
is apt to discourage himself withal, in the time of his affliction: as if
none were ever so afflicted, as we be. For it is not so; we have our
companions, whatsoever our affliction or trial is: or possibly can be. Let us
therefore in all our temptations, quiet and comfort our hearts in the Lord: and
rejoice that we have our portion in Christ with the rest of his servants, in
every affliction, wherein we suffer as Christians: as the Apostle Peter
speaks, 1. Epistle 4.16.

Moreover, as it follows in the seventh branch of the answer: it is not an
idle or vain comfort, that the holy afflictions of the children of God, do by
his fatherly providence, privilege them from worldly and profane cares and
troubles: according to that similitude which the Apostle Paul uses, 2. Tim:
chap: 2. verses 3.4, Thou therefore (says he to Timotheus) suffer affliction
as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth, entangleth himself
with the affairs of this life, because he would please him that has chosen
him to be a soldier. Much more therefore (as the Apostle gives thereby to
understand) does the true servant and child of God, free his mind from all
other cares. Yea, he has it freed (through the grace and mercy of God) to the
end he may attend his service with comfort: and with good courage follow the
fight of his spiritual warrefare. It is reported, that some of the Martyrs,
had their bodily health, more comfortably, through the almighty goodness of
God, in prison: then they had before, when they were at liberty. And
generally, the goodness of God is so bounteous, that for one or a few troubles,
and discour^gements, he gives many comforts. Neither is any of his faithful
children, at any time, so destitute and miserable: but even in their outward
misery, they have been spiritually very blessed and happy.

Now, that according to the 8. branch, special troubles may put us in hope of
special comforts at hand. We may consider it from that speech of King David,
whereby he comforted himself against the extreme and raging railings of
Shimei, 2. Sam: 16.12. It may be (says the King) that the Lord will look on
my affliction, and do me good for his cursing this day. Yea, we may consider
and behold it, as it were with our eyes, in that effect which shortly ensued.
Read also, Psalm: 109, 28. Though they curse, yet thou will bless: they shall
arise and be confounded, but thy servant shall rejoice, etc. And verse 31. For
he (that is, God) will stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from
them that would condemn his soul. Read likewise, Psalm: 102.13.14. Thou will
arise and have mercy upon Sion: for the time to have mercy thereon, for the
appointed time is come. And Isay, 40.1.2. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my people,
will your God say. Speak comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her
warre-fare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she has
received of the Lords hand, double for all her sins. Compare it with Luke.
1.^1, etc. Read also Heb: 10.37. Yet a very little while, and he that shall
come will come, and will not tarry. The Devil rages most, and accordingly he
inflameth the rage of his instruments, when their time is but short, and their
destruction draws near. In which respect it is said, Psalm: 76.10. Surely
the rage of man shall turn to the praise of God. It is a Psalm of
thanksgiving, for the destruction which God sent upon the raging and railing
Assirians, 2. King, 19.28. etc. 35, 36, 37. Read also Mark: 1.26. and Luk: 4,
35. and Revel: 12.12. The Devil has great wrath, knowing that he has but a
short time.

There is none of us, that use any diligence in the observation of Gods works,
but we may of our own knowledge, within the space of few years remember,
that God has cast his heavy burden and judgment, upon such as have been
fierce against his servants. So then, upon our own experience, we may justly
say, as we read in the book of Job: chap: 9.4. Who has bin fierce against
God, and has prospered?

It is a worthy saying of learned Beza, that we may take it for a shewe-token,
that God is about to work some strange and unwonted work: when he lays the
raines loose as it were upon the necks of the wicked, so that all things are
hasting to confusion, through their wicked and outrageous dealing: as (says
he) experience in all ages does confirm. This is the effect of that learned
man's sentence. His words are these. Quando animaduertimus Deum suis hostibus,
laxas, vt ita dicam, habenas permittere, omniaque in peius ruentia, susque
deque ferri, etc. tum norimus a Domino nouum aliquod and extraordinarium opus
expectandum vt seculorum omnium experientia satis id testatur. Homil: 9. in
Hist: Passionis.

Finally, if there were nothing else to comfort in time of extremity, yet this
may suffice, that death ends all. And so have the holy Martyrs comforted
themselves, when they were going to the stake: yea so have they one comforted
another, that though they were to take a sharp breakfast, yet they should
have a joyful supper. For as the Apostle writes, 2. These. 1.6. etc. God
accounts it a righteous thing, to give his servants rest, the one with the
other, in due time for ever: as also to recompense tribulation, to them that
trouble his servants.

Wherefore, that we may conclude according to the 9. branch of the Answer:
this may justly be as the sealing up, and ratifying of all comfort: that all
afflictions of longest continuance, and the same also the greatest that may be;
are but short and light in comparison of that heavenly glory whereunto they
guide us.

For so the Apostle Pau^ expressly affirms, 2. Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction
(says he) which is but for a moment, causes to us a far most excellent and
an eternal weight of glory. It is, as was answered, the only beaten way to
the kingdom of God. Act. 14.22. and 2. Tim. 3.11, 12. Wherefore they are not
without cause pronounced blessed, even by the sacred mouth of our Savior
Christ, whosoever walk in this way. Matthew. 5.10.11, 12. Neither is it in
vain, that in the same respect, he does encourage all such to rejoice, and to
be glad: yea, even as it were to skip for joy, seeing their reward in heaven is
exceeding great. Luke 6.23.

And thus we may clearly, and certainly perceive, that the comforts belonging
to all the afflictions of Gods children, (to speak generally of them) yea even
of those for sin, when they cause repentance to salvation; but chiefly for
those that are endured for Christ and his Gospels sake: that they are, and
accordingly ought justly to be accounted many ways, of exceeding, good and
comfortable use.

But there are some comforts, which may seem more proper and peculiar to
death; the which is an affliction naturally more fearful then any other:
though by the grace of God, it is to the faithful; not only a final end of all
affliction, but also a speedy entrance into eternal blessedness and glory. I
desire therefore, so much the more gladly; to hear you rehearse some of those
special comfortes, which are as the most specificall and proper medecin to
the godly, to help against all fear of death: whether natural fear, or
fear (as we may say) supernatural, and above nature; through the guiltiness
of our sin, in our wounded consciences.



As all afflictions and sufferings for the Lords cause, and in the way of
righteousness: so death especially, is to all those which in that respect do
endure it, a most comfortable warrantize; and as it were a sealing up, of the
truth of their faith and obedience to God for ever.

Death is also to the godly, the ending and abolishing of all evil: not only
of the evil of punishment or chastisement, but also of the evil of sin; the
ceasing whereof is to the godly, most comfortable to think upon.

Furthermore, death bailing our souls for ever out of the prison house of this
our corruptible, vile, and sinful body; it does lay wide open the way and
passage into the kingdom of heaven: to the most comfortable presence of God
the Father, to whom we die; and to the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has died for us, that he might be our resurrection and life; and to the holy
Ghost, by whom we are sealed up against the day of our full redemption, even
the redemption of our bodies, to live again reunited to our souls, and to be
made incorruptible and glorious, so to abide for ever and ever.

Fourthly, death ought to be comfortable unto us, at the time which God our
heavenly Father has appointed, (what kind of bodily death soever it may be)
because it sets our souls at liberty, to enjoy the most sweet and
comfortable society of the blessed souls and spirits of all our reverend
fathers, dear brethren, and faithful friends, whosoever have died in the
Lord before us: considering also, that all true believers and faithful
servants of God whom we shall leave behind us, and are now dear unto us in
the Lord; whether Magistrate, or Minister of the Word, wife or child,
husband or friend, father or mother, shall shortly in their season, follow
after us, and be gathered to the rest of the Saints.

Finally, it may justly be no small comfort unto us; that GOD has appointed
his holy Angels, immediately upon our death, to take and convey our souls
honorably, into the heavenly place of our most blessed and glorious rest.

Seeing the death of the godly is thus comfortable; no marvel though the
Spirit of God does pronounce all those, forthwith blessed, who die in the
Lord: even because (as the same Spirit assures us) they rest from their
labors, and their works follow them. Revel. chap. 14. verse 13. Well also
says a godly learned man, according to this testimony of the holy Ghost, Death
is good because it brings rest: better because it renews us: best because
it puts us out of all danger of any fall or misery, for ever after. The
comfort of death therefore to the godly, may well be accounted a special
comfort: seeing it contains (as we may say) all the degrees of comparison,
good, better, and best of all.

But let us consider more particularly of the proofs, which belong to the
several branches of the Answer.

And first, that all sufferings, (specially unto death for godliness sake) does
warrantize the truth of our faith and obedience to God: it may be confirmed
from that which is said concerning the perfection of our Savior Christ, his
faith and obedience, argued by his death and sufferings, Philip. 2.8 and Heb.
5.8. Read also 1. Ioh. 3.16, 17, 18, 19. And in the Gospel according to John
chap. 15. verse 13.

This doubtless, is an essential difference, betwixt the true servants of
God, and hypocrites or hirelings. The one sort abide faithful to the end: the
other fall away, when affliction and trial comes. Matthew chapter 13. verses
2^, 21, 22, etc. And John chapter 10. verses 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. It
is a small matter (as one truly says) to court the Gospel, in the time of
peace and prosperity. Verily, we can have no comfort concerning the truth of
our faith, if it hold not out in the time of affliction and trial. It is
faith of no value, that is of no valor.

Secondly, that to the godly, death is an abolishing of all evil, so as it can
never comber them any more: it is plain, because the death of the body is
compared to a sleep, till the day of the resurrection. Isai. 26.19. and chap.
57.2. and 1. Thessalonians 4.15.

And touching the life of the soul, it is a most blessed life, so soon as it
is parted from the body, as we saw before: and as it is further evident in
that the soul of Lazarus, was carried by the Angels, into Abraham's bosom.
And from the promise of our Savior Christ, to the thief repenting on the
Cross: saying, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Also, because it
is written, that all troubles from thence-forth be forgotten, and r^membred no
more: and that every tear shall be wiped from the eye, etc. Revel. ^1 4. The
reason is, because then all sin, the cause of all evil, shall for ever
cease. Heb. 12.23.

Thirdly, that death baileth us for ever, out of the prison, or to speak the
best, out of a base cottage of the body: read 2. Cor. 5.1, etc. 9. Call to
mind also John. 14.1, 2, 3.

And that we die unto God, and so to our own benefit: read Romans chapter
14. verses 7, 8, 9. Whether we live or die, we are the Lords. And that it is
best for us to die, that so we may go to Christ, with whom our life is hidden
in God, etc. Read Philippians cha. 2. verse 23. Colossians chap. 3. verse 3.
and John chapter 11. verse 25. And that we are sealed up against the day of
our full redemption, by the holy Ghost: read Ephesians 4.30. and Romans 8.23.
Wherefore, there is no doubt, but we shall then have so much the greater
comfort of his divine presence: by how much we shall less (that is) not at
all, grieve him by our sin. For the souls of the faithful, are all just and
perfitted in the heavens. Hebr. 12.23. as was even now alleged. And as
nothing, can separate us from the love of God; neither ^ribulation, nor
anguish, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword,
neither death it self, etc. so shall nothing be able to separate us, from the
most comfortable fruits and effects of his love. Romans 8.35, etc.

Fourthly, touching the comfort of death, in that it sets us at liberty, to
have our communion with the faithful departed: read again Hebrews chapter
12. verses 23, 24. Ye are come to the congregation of the first borne, which
are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just
and perfect men. And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Testament, and to the
blood of sprinkling, which speaks better things then that of Abel. So that
great is the excellency of the condition and estate of true believing
Christians, even here in this life: but as touching that perfection, which the
souls of the righteous have in the kingdom of heaven, we cannot attain unto
it here in this worlde^* And therefore, as we read in the ninth chapter of
the same Epistle, verses 27, 28. God has appointed unto men, that they shall
once die, and after that, comes the judgment. So Christ was once offered to
take away the sins of many, and unto them that look for him, he shall
appear the second time without sin, unto salvation. Without sin: that is,
he shall appear without any more sacrifice for sin, and even quite and
clean to abolish sin out of our nature, by his glorious and perfect saving
grace, and power. This comfort therefore: to wit, that by death we shall have
our sweet society, with all the faithful departed, both former and latter,
and with all that were dear to us in the days that they lived here with us in
this world: it is very sensible to those that have and spiritual sense, and
affection in them, to mind heavenly things. The which also, we have ne^de to
think often upon, to draw our minds away from the inordinate love of this
life: and that we may by faith encourage our selves, against the fear of
death; the which is naturally exceeding sensible, and full of discomfort. It is
true indeed, that both King David, and also King Hezekiah, and so the rest of
the faithful, died comfortably when the time was come, and that they had
served the counsel of God in doing his holy will. Nevertheless, until they
were thus prepared, and were by faith and the comforts thereof, made ripe as it
were unto death; the thought and fear of death, was very uncomfortable unto
them: as we may see Psalm. 6. and Isaiah chapter ^8. verses 2, 3. and from the
tenth to the end of the eighteenth verse.

The diligence of those, is very commendable, who have earnestly bent their
minds, to meditate and find out comforts, against all natural fear of
death: from that ground of comfort, which we have in our Lord Jesus Christ
and his Gospel. Let us here call such meditations to mind. Namely, that death
is to the true Christian, but as a Serpent which has lost both poison and
sting: yea or rather a^ a dead Serpent, or bare sign of a Serpent, hanged up
before the gate of a goodly Inn. That death is as a safe arriving, or landing
at the haven, after a long tedious, and dangerous voyage: yea like to that safe
landing, which sets a man in his own long desired and native Country.

That it is as the Lords Midwife, to remove us out of the strains of this
world, to the large possession of his heavenly kingdom: or as the mothers
taking home of her child, from an unkind and chu^lish nource. That it is as
the new casting of a precious vessel of gold, to make it pure from all dross,
that it may be beautiful to the finer. That it is to the soul, as the
breaking of the egge-shell when the chicken is ready to be hatched. That it is
to the body, as the sowing of the corn, as it were in the Lords field: that
so it might take root, and spring up, against the time of the resurrection;
which shall be as the Lords most joyful harvest. Finally, that death (as the
Scriptures teach us) is a sweet sleep, till the morning of our a waking and
refreshing to eternal life. And thus our encounter against death, under the
b^nner of o^r Savior Christ, here in this frail life of o^rs, it is a
comfortable fight: seeing we know before hand, that our enemy is very weak,
what brags soever he makes. He therefore that is not willing to die, when God
calls for him out of this world, to come to his heavenly kingdom: he deals
as foolishly as one being dangerously tossed in the Seas, The Duties.
should refuse to take the benefit of a most commodious and comfortable
landing: or as one that being shut up in prison, should not accept of liberty
and enlargement offered unto him, etc.

Now, touching the last branch of the answer: to wit, the honorable conueiance
of your souls to heaven, by the ministry of the holy Angels, immediately
after that they be loosened from the body: it may be proved, from that which
was a while since alleged, concerning the soul of Lazarus, which was so
conveyed. For there is the same reason, why the souls of all other the
servants of God, should be so conveyed, as well as the soul of Lazarus: seeing
the one is as precious unto God as the other, and none is of it self more able
to ascend and break the heavens that it may go to God, then any other, or
then the soul of Lazarus was.

And beside, in so much as it is manifest, that God commits the gathering
together of the bodies of his servants at the last day, to the ministry of
the holy Angels Matthew. 24.31: it need not be doubted, but that he uses their
ministry for the gathering of their souls before hand, seeing they are the
more excellent and precious part of the persons of his servants. And further
also, seeing (as has been already declared) the Angels are Gods ministers
for the comfort of his children in this life: how can we doubt, but that they
are likewise employed for the furthering of their happiness and felicity, at
the time of their death?

And thus, by the gracious goodness and assistance of our good God, and most
gracious heavenly Father: we have gathered together, the chief profits and
comforts of all afflictions in general, and of death it self more specially.
And all this, principally indeed; that it might be manifest unto us, how the
fatherly providence of God, may be justified, toward all his children: against
all malignant objections, that are made to the obscuring and darkening of the
same. But not only to this end; but that therewith also, we might be animated
and encouraged, to the willing enduring, and joyful passing through all
affliction and trial: whatsoever it shall please the same our good God and
heavenly Father, to try us withal; yea even to death it self, according to
his own most holy and blessed will. Remembering always, what he by his own
good Spirit assures unto us, by the ministry of his Apostle James: chap.
1.12. in that he pronounces the man blessed, that indureth tentation: and
that when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, the which (as the
Apostle writes) the Lord has promised to them that love him.

Nevertheless, this we must understand; that though the comforts arising from
faith in Gods fatherly providence, be many, and the same also very great: yet
they cannot be obtained without earnest and victorious strife against all
contrary discomforts, whatsoever bids battle against the same our faith.

ANd now let us (according to the course and order of our inquiry) from the
comfortes, proceed to consider what the duties be: such as follow upon that
manifold and most beneficial comfort, which arises to the faithful, from
this Article of belief in God the Father: in respect of his fatherly
providence toward us, and toward all things else for our benefit and comfort.

But to prevent all questioning, this will we first say; that as all our
comfort lies grounded, and as it were lapped up in the fatherly providence of
GOD: so the opening and enlarging of our hearts to all good duty whatsoever,
(to the glorifying of the most gracious and glorious name of GOD our heavenly
Father) does most boundenly belong thereunto.

This observed; we will for the present, stand only to inquire of those
duties (some of them at the least) which do most properly, and principally
belong to this Article: so near as it shall please God to give us grace to
discern. Which are they that do so?

First, and fore-most, it is our duty, from the comfort of faith in the
Fatherly Providence of God our heavenly Father; even at once, utterly to
renounce and cast away, as well wandering opinion and conceit of blind Fortune
and chance, as all scrupulous and servile fear, of heathenish and fatal
Destiny.

Secondly, it is likewise our bounden duty, to abandon all inordinate, or
distrusting, and distracting cares and desires: with all wicked, and unjust
practices, concerning earthly things.

Yea, it is our duty, from faith in the Fatherly providence of God, to
moderate all lawful and honest studies, or labors about them: and that we
do enterprise nothing, in confidence of our own wit or strength, but only by
the leave, or permission; and as we may well say, under the correction of the
Divine providence of the Lord our God.

Thirdly, (as was said before) concerning the works of Gods creation, so must
we likewise say, and acknowledge concerning all the works of his continual
Providence: that it is our bounden duty, to think, and speak always, most
reuerendlie of them, and for the defense and justifying of them; against all
who-soeuer shall presume to deprave the least, yea (if we may so speak) those
that do seem the vilest and basest of them.

Fourthlie, from all former experience of the fatherly providence of our God,
watching over us for our benefit: it is our duty to encourage our selves, to
wait comfortablie upon him, for all time to come; without all servile fear of
our enemies, or distrust in his most gracious and Fatherly good will.

In prosperity, it is our duty to be soberlie minded, and to prepare for
adversity: that is, in health how to bear sickness, in wealth how to endure
poverty, in honor how to suffer reproach: and finally, in all our life how
to die, and to be willing to lie down in the dust, (a lesson very hard to be
learned) that we may at the last enjoy a more sure foundation and building
from the Lord.

And moreover, when adversity comes; we knowing well, that it is from the
most wise and gracious good hand of our heavenly Father: it is our duty, as
obedient children, patiently and meekely to submit our selves unto it, as to
his Fatherly correction and trial, laboring to make all good uses thereof, to
our bettering.

Likewise, we believing all adversity to proceed of the fatherly and
provident hand of God: it is our duty, chearefullie and comfortablie to hope
and expect a good and blessed issue.

Furthermore also; from all former succoures and deliverances, the which it
pleases God from day to day to renew unto us: it is our parts to grow and
increase in love to God; and thereby to hearten our selves to endure greater
affliction (if God will so have it) for the time to come.

Finally, it is our duty, both in prosperity and also in adversity, in
life, and even in death it self; and for all the judgments of God against the
wicked, to be thankeful to his divine Majesty: in so much as by all means,
he does most wisely fit and prepare us, yea guide and bring us home, to his
heavenly Kingdom and glory.

Explication and proof.
These in deed, are all of them, most bounden duties, belonging to the comfort
of our faith, in the most gracious and Fatherly providence of God. And more
also in the particulars; above that could here for this time, be conveniently
expressed, as was said before.

For manifold and great comfortes, do justly call for many and great duties
at our hands.

But for the ground oF those that have been mentioned; let us first of all
consider, that even among the wiser sort of the heathen, the providence of
God, has been always, after a sort, acknowledged: yea so far forth, that
some of them have called God by the name of Pronoia, even providence, or
foresight it self.

Whereupon also, a learned writer observes very well; that they easily saw,
that it should be as unreasonable a thing, to acknowledge a God, and yet to
deny his providence: as it should be, to ascribe an eye unto him without
sight, a hand without power, and a mind without understanding, etc. Though
herewithall it must be considered, that the wisest of the heathen, not in
lightened from the holy word of God: did never know rightly, this Fatherly
Providence of God, whereof we speak.

Nevertheless, thus far the wiser sort of them saw; that the providence of
God, wadeth most skilfullie between blind Fortune, and that which is called
the Fatal or Stoical destiny. Yea, and even touching that which is called
Fortune or chance here among men on earth, (as being altogether uncertain and
accidental to them) yet vulgarly, they placed it as a Goddess in heaven: as
though they should acknowledge, that with God all things, (yea these that come
by the greatest happe-hazard as men deem) are certainly known and foreseen:
according to that saying of the Poet, Nullum Numen abest, si sit prudentia: sed
te,
Nos facimus, Fortuna Deam: coeloque locamus.
That is No power Divine does want on earth, if wisely men would deem:
It Is we like fools, who Fortune place, Far off, Shee-god in heaven.
Or thus There wants no God at all, where wisdom does advise:
We fools do Fortune Deifie, and place above the Skies.


Much rather then, ought all the children of God, who are taught and instructed
from the holy word of God; to banishe, both from their mouths, and also from
their hearts: all false ascription, or imputation of any thing, to Fortune or
luck, etc. And likewise it is our duty, to put away all blasphemous and
desperate thoughts and speeches, such as are found in the mouths of those that
neither shame nor fear, rudely and barbarously to say: If I be ordained to
this or that destiny, I cannot possibly avoid it, I must of necessity, be
hanged or drowned. I think I was borne under an ill Planet, etc. These, and
all such like speeches and thoughts, are most carefully to be avoided: yea, to
be utterly abhorred, and rejected of all the children of God. For most
certain it is, that God has not by his most holy Providence, excluded that
gracious privilege, which he has granted to faithful Prayer. Neither is it
his holy will and pleasure, to frustrate that godly circumspection and wise
foresight, which it pleases him from time to time, to give unto his servants,
for the preventing and avoiding of imminent dangers: yea even for the avoiding
of sin it self, the very cause of all evil and danger whatsoever. Much
less has he tied and snared, the most free liberty of his own Divine
counsel; to any necessary, or fatal connection and knitting together of
natural causes, and their effects: as it is manifest, in that he has
oftentimes wrought against the usual and ordinary course of natural things,
for the benefit of his people. As in the leading of his people out of Egypt
toward the land of Canaan, through the red Sea on dry land: when there was no
natural cause sufficient, for the dividing of the waters. And by his feeding
of them in the barren wilderness, with Manna from heaven, by the space of forty
years together, etc. And as touching the spiritual work of our redemption,
and salvation, by our Lord Jesus Christ: it is altogether above nature. So that
the Lord may worthily say by his holy Propet Isaiah ch: 55.8. against all
such Judges of evil thoughts: (that is, such evil thinking Judges as the
Apostle James terms them.) My thoughts are not your thoughts, nor your ways
my ways. For as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher
then your ways, and my thoughts, then your thoughts, etc.

And furthermore, it is not in any wise to be doubted, but that insomuch as God
vouch-safeth by his holy word and Spirit, to teach and warn, to command and
exhort, to promise and encourage his children, to walk in his blessed ways; to
the end they may not only escape everlasting death, but also be partakers of
his blessings, to their endless life: it is not to be doubted, I say, but that
he will give them the fruit and benefit of every part of his holy ordinance,
according to those good ends, whereunto he has appointed the same.

Finally, it is even as certainly true, concerning the reprobates, that they
do not go on in their sins, and so fall into the curse and condemnation, by
any compulsion or temptation, and provocation from God: but of their own
voluntary disposition, contrary to the express will and commandementes of
the Lord. And in this respect it is, that the Lord, with whom there is in truth,
no repentance, or change, such as is in us: does yet ascribe repentance, and
changing of mind to himself, upon the obstinacy of the wicked, according to
that Gen: 6. ver: 6. It repents me that I made man. And again Ier: 8.18. If
the nation against whom I have pronounced a plague, do turn from their
wickedness, I will repent of the plague, etc. An example whereof, we have in
the Prophecy of Jonah: ch: 3. verse: 10.

The first duty therefore, of faith in the Fatherly providence of God is this;
that we trusting in his mercy, and goodness: do renounce all blind fortune, and
all fatal necessity of Stoical destiny, acccording to the first branch of
the answer.

Touching the second branche: to wit, that it is our duty to abandon all
inordinate, and distrusting, or distracting cares about earthly things: read a
pla^^e proof hereof. Matthew: ch: 6.25. etc: and verses, 32.33.34. Be ye not
careful, (says our Savior Christ) for your life, what ye shall eat, etc.
For your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these things. But
seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things
shall be cast unto you. For in so much (as els-where he assures us) that it is
the Fathers pleasure is to give us a kingdom, yea such a kingdom as is only
worthy to be in request. Luke 12.32. how can we think, that he will fail any
of his children, touching the necessaries of this life, so far forth as may
be good for them. Touching the moderat on of our lawful studies and labors:
we have a flat command^ment, Pro: 23.4.5. Travel not too much to be rich: but
cease from thy wisdom. Will thou let thine eyes fly upon that which will
shortly fly away, etc?

And that it is our duty to submit all our enterprises to the holy providence
and will of God: Read Exodus: 18.23. If thou do this thing (says Iethro) and
God command the, etc. And 2. Sam: 12. Be strong (says Ioab) and let us be
valiant for our people and for the cities of our God, and let the Lord do that
which is good in his eyes. And 1. Chro: 13.^. If it seem good to you (says
king David) and that it proceeds of the Lord your God, we will send etc. And
Heb: 6.3. And this will we do, if God permit. And 1. Pet: 3.1^. It is better,
(if the will of God be so) that we suffer for well doing, then for evil doing.
And James 4.13. etc: the holy Apostle does earnestly reprove the contrary
presumption. Go to now (says S. James) ^e that say to day or to morrow, we
will go into such a city, and continue there a year, and buy and sell* and
get gain. (And yet ye cannot tell what shall be to morrow, For what is your
life? It is even a vapor, which appears for a little time, and afterward
vanishes away) for that ye Note. We ought to speak it often for the open
profession of our faith be^o^e ^en: but to think it always for the truth of
our faith in the fight of G d. Note also,
ought to say, If the Lord will, and if we live we will do this or that. But
now ye rejoice in your boastings, all such reioicing is evil. Therefore to him
that knows how to do well, and does it not, to him it is sin. To this
purpose also, serves well the holy Prou: chapt: 15.3. The eyes of the Lord in
every place, behold the evil and the good. Read also Psalm: 139. God sees in
the night as-well as in the day, he gives sleep, and be holds our eyes
waking, etc. Read also Ester, chap: 6.11. etc.

Thirdly, that it is our duty (as a fruit of the comfort of faith in the
Fatherly providence of God) T^^th^ end it is o^r duty to have the w^rks of
Gods providence and government, in a holy admiration: upon a d ligent view and
reverend considerat on of them. Read Job 36, 22.23 etc and in the chapters o^
lowing. Read also Psalm 8. and Psalm. ^6.8, etc. and 66.5.
to think and speak most reverently of the same, and of all the works
thereof: it is evident even of it self, unless we should willingly take his
name in vain. For it is certain, that as God by his word of Creation created
all, so does he continually, by his word of Providence and government,
(whereof we read, Psalm: 147.15, 16, 17, 18.) he does I say by this word and
wisdom of his, rule, govern, and dispose of all things in the world, from
the greatest and most honorable, to the least and basest: and from the best and
most virtuous, to the worst and most wicked thing that is done under heaven.

Yet so, as we must take heed, that we impute not the least error or evil, or
the least defect of goodness that may be, to him. Far be this from us. Read
James. 1. verse 1^. It is one thing to be author or cause of an evil: and
far another thing, to be the orderer and disposer of the evil, to a good and
holy end, contrary to the intent and mind of the evil worker. It must be
confessed indeed, that God himself does sometime take upon himself, the doing
of that, which is of the own nature sinful: as the hardening of the heart of
Pharaoh against the Lord, and the abusing of the concubines of David, etc. But
before we can say so, without blasphemy against God: we must see, or rather
by faith above our reach, acknowledge first, that it is just and holy in God
so to do, though it be wicked and unjust in men.

And secondly, we must duly consider the manner of Gods working, which is not
by impulsion, but by leaving the wicked to themselves, and by giving them over
to the power of the Devil: and all to this end, that he may take just
vengeance for former sins. And thus it is just with God, to punish one sin
by another. But as touching all other things, God does not only order and
dispose them: but he does likewise effectually and originallie work them all.
He works great and strange things, that all flesh might learn to fear
bebefore him. He sends hard things, to try our faith and patience. He
works small things, to show us the infinitenes of his power, and wisdom:
and that thereby we might the rather discern, the greatness of the greater of
his works. He causes many defects in nature; that we might by the defect, the
rather acknowledge his fullness and sufficiency in those that be perfecter. He
makes many monstrous things, to admonish us of the benefit of a right and
orderly shape. He makes some fools and blind, etc: that we may know from
whence we have our sight and wisdom, etc: He makes some men light and
ridiculous, to try our gravity: and that we might learn to avoid the
scurrilitie that is in our nature, etc. Thus, from the greatest thing, to the
least of all, that is not in the own nature simply sin; God has not only
his ruling, but also his active and working hand: even from the Elephant, to
the little fly, as well in providence and government, as in Creation; as was
observed before in the doctrine thereof.

This, while some have not advisedly thought of: they are justly reproved of
the more sound defenders of Gods holy providence. Not only that heathenishe
and ouer-wise Pliny, Nature: hist: lib: 2. chapter 7.
who thought that if an universal providence should be acknowledged in God; it
must needs breed him overmuch trouble, and put him to many base services:
but also they have reproved, and not without cause Jerome a learned and
renoumed Christian, for that he has negligently let fall some thing,
Hieronim: in cap: 1. Hab:
sauouring of the same vain and erroneous conceit: as if God were to be
thought of, as one not regarding small matters, or base creatures. But alas,
this is the baseness of their own conceit, and (at the best) an ouer-curious
fear of a causeless dishonor to be put upon the Lord. For (I beseech you)
shall we suppose, that either the Prince of a country, is employed in base
business, because he orders not only the greater matters, at the Counsel
table: but also, all mechanical and hospital business, for the well usage of
the poorest creatures under his government?

Or shall we say, that the chief Magistrate or Mayor in a city, is baselie
employed: when he takes order for the cleansing, and keeping sweet of the
channelles of the city, and for the carrying out of the draught, at the fittest
times, with the least annoyance that may be? Nothing-lesse. It is so much the
more to their honor, by how much they shall stoop down more low: and for
the common benefit of the nation, or city; shall after a sort, forget their
honor, etc. So then, yea infinitely much more is it to the honor and glory
of God, in that notwitstanding he is the most high and excellent; yet he
abaseth himself to behold the things both in the heaven, and in the earth:
according to the excellent observation of the holy Prophet, Psalm: 113.5.6.
Yea, even to the mustering of the Flies, etc: against Pharaoh king of Egypt,
Psalm: 105.31. etc.

Thus then, glorifying the name of the Lord in all things: we must not exclude
the holy providence, no not from the least thing. Yea, and even touching the
most wicked, outrageous, and strangest confusions, that at any time break out
in the world, through the practice of the wicked: they do so much the more
illustrate the most wise and Almighty providence of God, in that he turns
all to a quiet calm, and sets things in better order again, then they were
before.

Say therefore unto God, as we are exhorted, Psalm: 66.3. etc. How reverend art
thou in thy works! through the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies be in
subjection unto thee, etc.

Read also Ierem: 5.23.24. and chapt: 10.6.7. etc.

Fourthly, that former experience, and the present sense of Gods mercy, ought
to encourage us to be in comfortable expectation of a good issue: it may
appear from the nature of faith, in regard whereof the Prophet Isaiah says,
He that believes shall not make have. Isai: 28.16. And ch: 30.15. Thus says
the Lord God the holy one of Israel, In rest and quietness shall ye be saved: in
quietness and in confidence shall be your strength, but ye would not. But Psalm:
112.7. It is said of the righteous man (that is, of the true beleeeuer, loving
and following righteousness) that he will not be afraid of evil tidings: for
his heart is fixed, and believes in the Lord.

Let us here remember again the gracious issue, which God has usually given
to his servants, in bringing them out of their troubles: to Joseph, David, Job,
etc. And that comfortable Proverb, upon so comfortable an occasion. In the
mount will the Lord provide. And 1. Corin: 10.13. God will not suffer us to be
tempted above that we are able, but he will give the issue with the temptation
that we^ may be able to bear it. Read also Isaiah, 51.12.13. I even I am he
that comfort you. What a one art thou, that thou should fear a mortal man,
etc. And Matthew: 10.28. and Luke 12.4.5. I say to you my friends, be not
afraied of them that kill the body, etc: says our Savior Christ.

That in prosperity it is our duty to prepare for adversity: Read Eccles:
7.16. and Hebr: 13.3. Remember them that are in bonds, as if ye were bound
with them, etc. Note. Two extremities are to be avoided: acco^ding to that Pro:
3.11. and Heb. 12.5. My son despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither
faint when thou art rebuked of him. Read also, all sottish neglect of Gods
corrections condemned. isai. 42.25. and Hosea. 7.9. Read also Eccl: 7.16.


That in adversity, we ought patiently and meekely to submit our selves unto
it, whatsoever it be, as knowing it to be the hand of God: it is according to
that, Amos, 3.6. Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done
it? And Lament: 3.38. But for our duty of patience and meekenes, in the
bearing of our adversity, call here again to mind, the comfortable
exhortation of the Apostle, Hebr: 12.5.

Read also Leuit: 10.1.2.3. Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, were devoured
by the fire: but Aaron held his peace.

And 1. Sam: 3.18. It is the Lord (says Eli) Let him do what seems him
good. And 2. Sam: 15.26. If the Lord say thus, I have no delight in thee,
Behold (says king David) here am I, let him do to me, what seems good in
his eyes.

And Psalm: 39.9. I should have been dombe, and not have opened my mouth,
because thou did it.

And Psalm 119.75. And Isaiah 39.8. The word of the Lord is good, which thou
have spoken, says Ezekiah to the Prophet Isaiah.

Read also, Dan: 9.7.8.13.14. and Nehem: 9.33. And not to wait for the
counsel of God, is noted to be a fruit of unbelief, Psalm 106.13.

For the hope of a good issue, we have seen sufficient ground in the fourth
branch.

That it is our duty to increase in love toward God, according to the increase
of our deliverances, Read Psalm: 116.1. I love the Lord, because he has heard
my voice, and my prayers, etc.

And Psalm 18. I love thee dearly, O Lord my strength. It is the beginning of
the Psalm, which David writ after that God had delivered him out of the hands
of all his enemies.

The fruit whereof was this, that he was the more established in Gods goodness.
See Psalm: 3. and 23. And in the holy Story, 1. Sam. 17.34.35.36.37. And 2. Corinthians: 1.10. and 2. Timot: chapt: 4.17.18.

That it is our duty, both in prosperity and adversity, to be thankful to
God: take Job for a notable example, chapt: 1.21. The Lord has given, and the
Lord has taken: blessed be the name of the Lord. And chapt: 2.10. Shall we
receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? In all things
(says the Apostle) give thanks: for this is the will of God, in Christ Jesus
toward you. 1 Thessalonians: 5.18.

Verily, there is no bit of bread that we eat in prosperity, nor any garment
which we put on, etc. Neither in adversity, is there the least mitigation of
pain or renewing of comfort: but it is from the provident and Fatherly hand
of God, who houldeth our souls in life. And therefore, just cause why we should
be thankful to him, for all his goodness. Both in the one estate, and also in
the other, we ought to resolve our selves with Job: to put our trust in the
Lord, though he should kill us. ch: 13.15.

It is our duty aso, to rejoice in the execution of the judgments of God,
against the wicked. Read Psalm: 58.10.11. and 64.10. and 92.1.2.3.4. And Psalm.
136. And Psalm. 119.62. At midnight (says the Prophet) will I rise to give
thanks unto thee, because of thy righteous judgments. And verse 104. Seven
times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgments.

And Isaiah 49.13. Rejoice O heavens, and be joyful O earth: brust forth into
praise O mountains: for God has comforted his people, and will have mercy
upon his afflicted, etc.

Finally, whereas we have seen before, that there are special comfortes
appertaining to death, as touching those that die in the Lord: so let it not be
forgotten here; that in so much as it is in it self a special fruit or
punishment of sin, there are special good uses to be made of the due
meditation of it, in this respect.

For first, it is very effectual to beat down all hautines and pride of
heart in us: whilst that we remember (as the truth is) that we are but
dust; and that to dust, we must return. Genes: 3.19. And Psalm 90.3. Genes:
18.27.

Secondly, it may justly prevail with us, to withdraw our hearts from all
inordinate care of delicious pampering of the flesh: which is but a fatting of
it, for the worms, Isaiah. chap. 14.11. Job. 17.13.14.

Thirdly, it may iustl^e provoke us to the speedy embracing of the fear of
God, and to the diligent practice of every good and Christian duty: seeing we
have but a short tine of abiding here, and because God will call us to an
account, how we have spent our life: Psalm. 119.17.18.19. Ecclesiast. 11.9.
and chapt. 12.14.

Fourthlie, it may well be used as a special remedy against hypocrisy, in
matters of Gods holy and immediate worship: and against all dissembling and
deceitful dealing toward men: because nothing will give sound comfort against
death, but that which is sincere and unfeigned. An evil conscience will betraye
it self, Matthew. 7.21.22.23. And chapt: 22.12.13.

Last of all, it is mighty to admonish us, to hold fast the faith and love
of Christ, who is the only root and fountain of all comfort: both in life
and in death; in this world, and in that which is to come. Philippians,
chapter 1.21.

These then, and all other like to these; are the duties belonging to the
comfort of faith in Gods fatherly providence.

But here a doubt may seem profitablie to be answered: though something has
been already said (concerning that point) for the answering of it before. The
Danger of not believing.


For seeing that all things are so ruled and ordered by Gods Almighty
providence, that without his blessing, it is altogether in vain, to go about
to bu^ld the house,

No, it is far otherwise. God expreslie requires, and commands our best
diligence, withal holy and discret circumspection, and foresight, to serve
his divine Providence, in very many things, for his glory and our own
benefit: and he has also promised, and does daily yield blessing, and good
success thereunto.

Only we must take heed, that we trust not in our own wit and diligence, or
in any lawful means whatsoever we use: but in the blessing of the living God
alone. As touching wicked and unlawful means, we must in no wise use any of
them.

And seeing the wisdom and government of God our heavenly Father, is high
above all our understanding and endeavors: therefore also it is our part, to be
content, though things take not that effect always, which we intend and
desire; insomuch as we may be sure, that God will bring all to a more excellent
pass, then we could once conceive in our mind.

Explication and proof.
It is very true, and we have seen sufficient ground of it before.
Nevertheless, God allows of all those endeavors which his children make,
according to the rules of his revealed will: and within the compass of their
callings. He will also turn their endeavors to their blessing and reward:
howsoever, for secret causes known to himself, he does not give them their
desired and expected effect: but rather the contrary, as it may seem.

And that God requires our diligence, and wisdom, in serving his providence,
it is evident every where: both by precept, and also from the notable examples
of the servants of God. Read Pro: 6.6. Go to the pismire o thou sluggarde,
etc: and Eccl: 9.10. All that thy hand shall find to do, do it with all thy
power, etc: and Ier: 48.10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
negligentlie, etc.

We have also notable examples, such as is that of Ioab, mentioned a little
before. 2. Sam: 10.12. It is a right noble speech, of a wise and valiant
captain of the Lords host. Read also. Ps: 118.7. The Lord is with me (says
the Princely Prophet) among them that help me: therefore shall I see my desire
upon mine enemies. See, he does not neglect, or lightly esteem of the helps
which God gave him. Nay, God himself does not despise the help of his poor
servants: as Judges 5.23. etc: Where, the spirit of God commends those that
came forth, to help the Lord: but accurseth the rest. Read also Act. 27 31.
etc. v: 43.44. Verily God has so wisely disposed of all things, that though he
rules all things (as it is most meet he should, or else they would be rawlie
ordered) yet he has left enough for every servant of his, to busy themselves
about, and that to very good and blessed purposes, in the service of his holy
providence. Thus the divine and Fatherly providence of God, does not frustrate
the outward, either civil or household endeavors of his children, touching the
affairs of this life.



No neither. Nevertheless, this we must always remember, and acknowledge,
that all our freedom to mind or effect any thing that is good, and godly,
and perteyning to the kingdom of heaven: it stands in this, that God
himself does first make us free, and then also, that he confirms our
liberty and freedom, by his holy Spirit; and all through the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, working in us, that which is pleasing in his own sight. So
indeed we read Heb: Explication and proof.
13.21. And in many other places, familiarly known to those, that are
acquainted with the holy Scriptures. As on the contrary, it is as plentifully
testified, that without the grace of God making us free: we and all other, are
of our selves, willingly at liberty, only to serve sin and the devil: and
that also through our own defalt. Yea, so are we in the voluntary bonds of
sin, and Satan; that howsoever there may be some appearance of goodness, in some
actions, before we be renewed, and set free by the holy Ghost: yet all is but
in hypocrisy, or in some outward respect, for vainglory, or worldly
profit, etc. So that it is but liberty in show, and mere bondage in truth.

THese things thus observed: let us now conclude this Article of our faith in
the Fatherly providence of God.



Without faith in Gods Fatherly providence, no man can be either truly
patient in adversity, or truly thankful to God in prosperity: no not in
harvest time for the outward fruits of the earth; or in any other harvest, or
greatest plenty that may be, of any of Gods blessings.

God can have no glory yielded unto him of such, in any of his works: nor be
acknowledged any where, with any reverend regard of his divine presence. No
such can hope for any good thing from him.

Nay, it cannot be, but all such as believe not in the Fatherly providence of
God; must needs, without repentance, prove very Atheists, and to be as the
Apostle says, without God in the world: nothing regarding his commandementes,
but walking after their own lusts, using the worst means, and courses that
may be, howsoever they may possibly make any shifte for themselves.

Explication and proof.
So great is the danger indeed, for not only are they Atheists, who utterly
deny God, (whereof there are but few to speak of, that do so far harden
their hearts) but such also as deny him to be such a one as he has revealed
himself: to w t, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: and also the Son to be
God, manifested in the flesh, etc. And consequently, such are likewise Atheists
in part, whosoever deny him to rule and govern any of his creatures,
specially mankind: and among them, chiefly his holy Church; rejecting in his
behalf, the Testimony and declaration of his own most sacred and holy word.

Herein therefore, we are to condemn, not only those diverse sorts of
Philosophers, who either denied, or doubted of the divine providence altogether
(in that some of them called into question, whether there be a God or no; such
as Protagoras, and Melius, are reported to have been: likewise Democritus, and
Epicurus, who leave all to chance and fortune) Or else do, as it were, pinion
and straighten the providence of God (as they that make it nothing else but a
bare prescience and foreknowledge of all things, as they are to come to pass:
and they that do bind the Providence of God, to a necessity of natural
causes, by a perpetual and in-euitable connection and progression of them, as
the Stoikes, Seneca lib: de Prouidentia. Cicero 2. de Diuinatione. Plin^natur:
hist: lib: 2. cap. ^ vt sup. Hieron. in cap. 1. Abac. vt sup. Damasc: lib: 2.
orthodox: fi: ^a. 19. Quest. 8.
and they that do except those things from Gods Fatherly providence, which
are commonly taken to be in man's own free power and will, and that according
to a certain souereigntie of his own reason and disposition: as Cicero and
Pliny, etc.) We are not only, (I say) to condemn their opinions, but also
all the erroneous doctrine of such as professing themselves Christians, do
any way abridge the holy and universal providence and government of God, as
if it did not extend it self to small and vile creatures: or to man's
ordinary and common affairs.

But chiefly, we are to condemn the blaspemie of all Atheists, and Epicures,
which in these days of the clear light of the Gospel, do most
sacrilegiouslie, and impudentlie deny both God and all Divine providence,
either for punishment of vice, or reward of virtue. etc.

For if we should consent to so great wickedness and impiety: how can any
think, but that it must needs be to the everlasting destruction both of our
bodies and souls, from the presence and favor of God?

And no doubt also, the cause why God does so oftentimes forget (as it were)
and withholde his Fatherly goodness and bounty, and send scarcity or
sickness, or war, etc: in stead of health, and wealth, peace, and plenty,
etc: it is for that his good and fatherly providence is not so thankfully
acknowledged in the ordinary course of his mercies, as it ought to be.

Certainly, if we would glorify God, as we ought to do for his gracious
governing of his creatures to our benefit and comfort, by the sending of the
good word of his providence, according to that, Psalm: 147.15. etc. We should
not have had such dearths of victuals, or such plenty of sicknesses of bodies,
or troubles in commonwealth, or any other calamity, either spiritual or
temporal, such as we have often met withal. God therefore our heavenly
Father, give all of us, and all his people every where, grace to acknowledge
him better, in his most gracious and Fatherly providence: that so it may go
better with us, and with his whole Church, for Jesus Christ's sake Amen.

Thus far of the Article of our faith in the fatherly providence of God our
heavenly father: yea of our faith in God the Father the first person of the
holy Trinity, as well concerning the Creation, as the Providence, and all
their particulars, appertaining to this part of the profession of our true
Christian belief.

The end of the first Book.
In Thesaurum hunc vere pretiosum, Carmen Paraeneticum.
Heu perijt Pietas, perijt Doctrina, Fidesque
Sensim deficiens, finibus orbis abit.
Foelicem idcirco dicamus, terque beatum,
Exilio pulsas qui revocare queat.
Ob quam difficile est! Nec quenquam credere posse,
Fas est humanis viribus, istud opus.
Irritus esto labor, tamen est laudanda voluntas,
Divini prompta Numinis acta manu.
En fide: tandem pia fundamenta locasti,
(Allene O foelix): nobile principium.
Hinc Doctrina viget caelectis: denique sa^ro
Font educta venit Relligio, and Pietas.
Doctrinae omnimodum Doctissime pandis and vsum:
Instruis ignaros, morigerosque facis.
Errorum implicitos laqueis, tu lumine Very
Solvis, and baereticos extrahis e latebris.
Tu Domini leges animos servantibus addis:
Flectentes alio tu trahis inque viam.
Pondere peccati quoque consolaris onustos:
Contrita and dulci nectare corda potas.
Quum been coepisti, (Divino Numine dante)
Vrgeto faustis hoc opus auspicijs.
Dimidium, qui coepit, habet: mora nulla moretur:
Qui dedit incipere, is perficere, ipse dabit.
R. B. Valde exoptans, petensque a Domino, foelicem operis progressum.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE GOSPEL.

SECOND BOOK. WHICH IS, A PROCEEDING IN the orderly handling of the several
points or Articles thereof: as in the first Book.

AND NAMELY, CONCERNING OUR Belief in God the Son, the second Person of the
most holy, glorious, and undivided Trinity: one only true and eternal God,
to be blessed and praised for ever.

ACCORDING TO THE FVLL History of all the four Evangelists: and out of the
rest of the holy Scriptures.

Matthew: 11, 27. No man knows the Son, but the Father: neither knows any
man the Father, but the Son: and he to whom the Son will reveal him.

1. Epist. of John. 3.23. It is the commandment of the Father, that we believe
in the name of his Son Jesus Christ.

And Gospel of John. chap. 6.47.48. Verily, verily (says the Son) I say unto
you, He that believes in me, has everlasting life.

And chap. 16.9. The holy Ghost reproves the world of sin, because they do
not believe in the Son.

T C
VERITAS (...) VVLNERA

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creed. 1606.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS SEcond Book, briefly set down in the Table following.
THe sum and order of the Articles of our belief, which do concern God the
Son explaned. pages 1.^.
Belief in God the Son, both God and Man, in one divine Person of a
Mediator betwixt God and man.
The ground and warrant of it page 1. and so forth to the 19. More particularly
that he is God. pages, 4 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. That he is man. page, 11. And the
reason why both God and man in one divine Person page, 19. Read also pages 17.
18.
Belief in God the Son, the same divine Person both God and man, that he is
Jesus a perfect Savior.
The ground and warrant of it. page, 12. The sense and meaning of it. page, 14.
The promise belonging to it, page, 20. The comforts arising from it page. 21.
The duties more generally. page, 25, 26, 27. And more particularly. pages, 29.
30. The danger of not believing. pages, 33. 34.
Belief in God the Son, that he is the Christ or anointed of God, to be the
same our perfect Savior.
The ground and warrant of it. page, 12. The sense and meaning. pages, 14. 15.
The promise that he should be so. pages, 20. 21. The comforts pages 22. 23, 24.
The duties more generally. pages, 25. 26. 27. And more particularly. pages, 30.
31. 32. 33. The danger of not believing. pages, 33. 34.
Belief in God the Son, that he is the only natural Son of God.
The ground and warrant of it. pages, 12. 13. The sense and meaning of it.
pages, 15. 16. The promise that he should be our Savior. page, 20. The
comforts thereof. page, 21. The duties in general. pages, 25. 26. 27. And more
particularly. page, 28. The danger of not believing. pages, 33. 34.
Belief in God the Son, that he is our Lord.
The Ground and warrant of it. page, 14. The sense and meaning of it. page, 16.
The promise that he should be so. page, 21. The comforts arising from thence.
page, 25. The duties in general. pages, 26. 27. And more particularly. page,
28. 29. The danger of not believing. pages, 33. 34.
Belief in God the Son, who was conceived by the holy Ghost.
The Ground of the Article. page 36. The meaning of the words. page 37, 38,
39. The Promise thereof. page 39 40. 41. The Comforts of it. page 42. The
Duties in respect of the same. page 43. The Danger of not believing this
Article. page 44, 45, 46.
Belief in God the Son, who was borne of the Virgin Marie.
The Ground of the Article. page 46. 47, 48, 49. Where also, of the
Circumcision of our Savior: and of his presentation in the Temple. The sense
and meaning of it. page 50. The Promise that he should be so. page 51. The
Comforts thereof. page 51, 52, ^3 The Duties. Which beginning in the same page:
they are continued to the 58. The danger of not believing this. pa: 58. An
appendix. Why the name of the Virgin Mary is here mentioned. In the latter part
of this 58. page, and page 59. and ^0. the former part thereof.
Belief in God the Son, who led a most holy and righteous life, full of
tentations and sufferings.
The Ground and whole history of it, page 60. and so forth to the 87. page
More particularly. First, from the time of his presentation in the Temple, till
about the fourth year of his age. pa. 60, 61, 62, 63, 64. Secondly from the 4.
year of his age, to the 12. of the same. pa. 64, 65. Thirdly concerning the
most memorable things of the 12. year. pa. 65, 66, 67. Fourthly, from the 12.
year to the time that he was 30. years old, pa: 68, Where the title of the
page is wrong. Fifthly, from the ^0. year to the time of his Passion: which was
about the space of three years and a^a^e, from the time of his baptism. To be
discerned from the computation of four P^^e^^^^rs succeeding the same: as they
are mentioned in the Gospel, pa 6^. 70 and ^o f^r^h to the 7. But of his
Passion, so principally named: the whole history followe^^ ^fterward by it
self, beginning at the 114. p. and thenceforth to 249. The meaning and intent
o^ the history of the life of our Savior, is set forth in the general pa: 87.
88. The Promise and Comfort ther^f. pa. 88. The Duties in respect the same: in
the latter part of the same page, and page 89. The Danger of not believing in
God the Son, leading so holy and righteous a life, and the same also ^of^^
of tentations and sufferings. pa. 89.
Belief in God the Son, who led a most holy and righteous life, full of
tentations and sufferings.
This chief manifestation, going immediately before his entrance into his
public estate and condition of life: was first, by the testimony and
preaching of John the Baptist: both before, and also after the baptism of our
Savior. The history whereof, and also of the conception, birth, and life of
John Baptist himself, being a most singular forerunner, and witness of the
coming of our Savior: it is set down, pages. 69. 70 71. 72. 73. 74. 75. 76.
77. Secondly, the manifestation of the Son of God in man's nature, was by the
testimony of God the Father, and of God the holy Ghost, at his baptism. pa.
78. Thirdly, by himself in the most powerful execution of his Office: as it
is described, page 90. etc. But first, the difficulty of his entrance upon
the execution of his Office, is laid forth. pages 79. 80. 81. 82. 83.
Belief in God the Son, who taught a most holy and perfect doctrine.
The Ground and history of it. First, touching the beginning. page 83, 84, 85.
Secondly touching the proceeding, pa. 90, 91. and so forth to the 102. The
Promise that he should do so. pa. 99. The Comforts in the same page. The
Duties in regard thereof. pa. 100. The danger of not believing it. pa. 101.
Belief in God the Son, who wrought most miraculous and divine works.
The Ground and history of them. First, touching the beginnings, pa. 85. 86.
And then touching the further proceedings. pa. 102, 103. and so forth to pa.
111. The Promise that he should work such miracles. In the same page.
Likewise, the Comforts in the same page, and pa. 112. in the former part
thereof. The Duties in respect of the same comforts, p. 112. in the latter part
of it. The danger of not believing that he did so. pa. 113.
Belief in God the Son, who suffered under Pontius Pilate.
The Ground and history of these his chief sufferings, is more generally set
down and comprised. pa. 114. 115. But more particularly, as it follows. Of
his preparing of himself to the enduring of his sufferings. pa. 116. 117.
Where, of the trouble of his soul in the chamber. Of his agony in the garden.
pa. 118, 119. 120. Of his betraying by Judas. 121. 122. Of his apprehension by
the band of men and of the Officers sent by the high Priests and Pharisees. pa.
123, 124, 125. Of his examination and indictment before Caiaphas. pa. 126, 127,
128, 129. Of his condemnation by Caiaphas. 130, 131. Where also, of many most
injurious indignities offered unto him. Of his leading before Pilate. In the
same page. Of his first examination and arraignment before Pilate. pa. 132,
133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 1 8, 139. Where the titles of some of these pages are
to be amended, second examination for first. ana pa. 140. where Caiaphas is for
Pilate. Of his examination and accusation before Herod. pa. 141, 142, 143. Of
his second examination and arraignment before Pilate. pa. 144, 145, 146, 147,
148, 149. Where, in four of the pages, the titles are misprinted, third for
second. And pa. 14^. Herod is for Pilate. Of his last examination and
arraignement before Pilate. page 150, 151, 152, 153, 154. Of his condemnation
by Pilate. In the same page, and p. 155, 156, 257, 158, 159, 16^. Of his
leading away to execution, p. 161. and so forth to the 170. In the which pages,
many things incident to the leading away of our Savior are contained. Such as
are his carrying of his own Cro^e. p. 164. That excellent speech which he used
to the women that lamented for him. p. 166. Likewise, when he was come to the
place of execution: his refusing of the potion which was offered him. p. 167.
And the inscription or title set over his head. p. 168, 169. Of his crucifying
or fastening to the Cross. p. 170, 171, 172, 173 In the which, is comprehend
the stripping of him from his clothes. p. 171, 172. In which two pages, the
tit^es of them are to be amended. Crucifying for leading to be crucified The
placing of our Savior between two thieves, follows page 173. And in the
same page, and p. 174 Where also, the title of the page is to be amended. Of
the time of the continuance of our Savior upon the Cross: read page 175. and
so forth to the 24^. The which time being divided into three spaces: the first,
is from the 3. hour of the day to the 6: the second, from the 6. to the 9: the
third from the 9. to the taking down of the body of our Savior from the
Cross. In the first of these spaces, come to be considered the parting of the
garments of our Savior, p. 175. in the end, and p. 176. Likewise, the careful
remembrance which our Savior had of his mother. p. 177. The railings and
skornefull reproaches of all sorts of the beholders. p. 178, 179. where, the
titles of the pages are to be amended. For this part of the Story touching the
first space of the crucifying, is continued to the 185. page. Whence follows
also as belonging hereunto, the conversion of one of the thieues which were
crucified with our Savior. p. 186, 187, 188, 189, 190. But the title of the
186. page, is wrong printed. In the second space of the time wherein our
Savior continued hanging on the Cross: read of the darkness, and of the
rending of the veil. p. 191, 192. Where the title should be, of his
crucifying. In the third space of the time, come to be considered the agony of
our Savior upon the Cross, and those four most memorable speeches which be
uttered in the same: pages 19^, ^94. and so forth to page 219. Of the which
pages, the titles of some are to be amended: to wit, 193, 19^, 19^, 199. and
203. Of the death of our Savior, read page 219 in the end of the page, and p.
220, 221, 222. Where also, read further of such things which either
accompanied, or else immediately fol^^wed upon his death. Such as were the
rending of the veil. p. 224. 225. The earthquake p 226, 227. The cleaving of
the rocks. p. 2^8. The diverse speeches, testimonies, and affl^ctions of the
sundry sorts of the beholders of these things. p. 229, 230, 2^^ 2^^, ^^3 234.
An^the^ fo^^weth the usage of the body of our Savior, immediately before the
^^ing of it down from the Cr^sse. pages. 235, 2^6, 237, 238, 239. And the
taking of it down from the cross, pages 240. 241 242. The burial of it,
pages 243. 244 245. The continuance of it in the grave, pages ^46 ^^7, 248.
Whence, of the descension into hell, pages 249. 250. and so forth to the 2^^.
page. The meaning of the Articles of our belief, concerning the sufferings of
our Savior does follow, pages 263. 264. 265. 266. Where also, the perfection
of his sufferings is argued from the admirable virtues of our Savior shining
forth most evidently through the whole time of his enduring of them, pages,
267. 268, 269, 270. 271, 272. 273. The Promise that our Savior should endure
such grievous sufferings for us, is laid forth. page. 274. Likewise the
Comforts more generally, p. 275, 276, 277, 278, 279. But the title of p. 277 is
misprinted: particular for general. More particularly, First, such as arise
from the consideration of his agony and apprehension in the garden p. 280 and
in the former part of 281. Secondly such as arise from the due weighing of his
examination before the high Priest, and likewise before Pilate and Herod. p.
261, 282. Thirdly, from his scourging, condemnation, and crucifying pages 283,
284, 285. 286. 287. Fourthly from his agony upon the cross. p. 288. 289.
Fifthly, from his death, pages 290. 291. 292, 293, 294. 295. 296. 297, 298 299.
300, 301. Sixthly from the consideration of his burial and continuance in the
grave, p. 3^2, 303, 3^^. The Comforts concluded. p. 305. The Duties to be
performed of us in the same respect. More generally, pages 306. 307, 308. More
particularly. First, in respect of our Savior his preparing of himself to
suffer, and of his betraying and apprehension. p. 309. Secondly, in respect of
his examination, and false accusation brought against him, and of the manifold
reprochis and reuilings cast upon him: and therewithal, of his scourging.
pages 310. 311. 312. 313. 314. 315. 316. Thirdly, in respect of his
condemnation. p. 317. Fourthly, in respect of his crucifying; that is of his
fastening to the cross, and the things accompanying the same: such as were
their stripping of him from his clothes, placing of him between the thieves,
and in regard of the long time of his continuance in the dolours and reproaches
of the cross p. 318. 319, 320. 321. 322. 323. 324. 325. Fifthly, in respect of
his chief agony upon the cross. pages 326. 327. Sixthly in respect of his
death. pages 328. 329. 330. 331. 332. 333. 334. 335. Seventhly, in respect of
his burial, and continuance in the grave. pages 336, 337. The Danger of not
believing in the Son of God so suffering for us, and for all the elect of God,
as has been laid forth out of the holy Scriptures, page 338. and in the
beginning of the 339.
Belief in God the Son, who the third day rose again from the dead.
The Ground and meaning of his glorifying in a more general consideration:
with the Comforts and duties belonging to us, and from us, in respect of the
same. pages 339. 340 341. The particular degrees of his glorifying. p. 342. The
order of the handeling of this Article of the resurrection. p. 343. The meaning
of the word Resurrection, in the latter part of the same page, and in the
former part of the next. The time of the resurrection, p. 344. the latter part,
and p. 345. The p^^ce from whence it was. p. 346. in the former part. The
manner how it was, in the latter part of the same page, and page 347, 348, 349.
The causes why our Savior must rise again. p. 350. The proof of his
resurrection by witnesses, both Angels, women, men, and Saints raised from the
dead to the same end. p 351. 352, 353. The proof of his resurrection by his
own appearances, after that he was risen again. p. 354, etc. to 490. The
proof of his resurrection from his first appearance, which was to Mary
Magdalen at the sepulcher. p. 355, 356, 357, 358, 359, 360, 161. The proof of
it from his second appearance, which was to other religious and godly women as
they were going from the sepulcher. p. 361, 392, 363, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368.
Where, in p. 363. the title is first appearance, for second. The proof of it
from his third appearance: which was to the Apostle Peter. 369. The proof of
it from his fourth appearance: which was to Cleopas and another Disciple of our
Savior, as they went from Jerusalem to Emmaus. In the latter part of page 369,
and page 370 and so forth to the latter part of the 389, page. Among which,
page 381. the title is first appearance for fourth. The proof of it from his
fifth appearance: which was to the Eleven being together at Jerusalem, only
Thomas being absent, page, 386. the latter part: and so forth to the 422. page.
The proof of it from his sixth appearance: which was to the Eleven being
together in a chamber, Thomas being with them. p. 422, 423, 424, 425, 426. in
the former part. The proof of it from his seventh appearance: which was to
seven of his Disciples, being together at the Sea of Tiberias p. 426. the
latter part of the page, and so forth to the 461. The proof of it from his
eight appearance: which was to the Eleven, being together on a mountain in
Galue. p. 461. and thence to the 480. The proof of it by his n nth appearance:
which was to more then 500. brethren being together. p. 4 0. the latter part,
and p. 481. the former part. The proof of it by his tenth appearance: which
was to James the Apostle. p. 481. the latter part. The proof of it by his
eleventh appearance: which was to all the Apostles, being together in the town
of Bethania first, and in their going with him to the mountain of Olives:
whence our Savior ascended from them up into heaven. p. 482. and so forth to
p. 490. the former part. The meaning of this Article of our Saviors
resurrection. page 490. the latter part of the page, and p. 491, 49^. the
former part. The Promise that he should thus rise again: and the same to our
benefit. p. 49^. the middle of the page. The Comforts arising unto us from the
same. p. 492. in the end, and p. 493, 494, 495, 4^6. to the end of the page.
The duties to be performed of us in respect thereof. p. 496. in the end, and p.
497, and 4^^. the beginning. The Danger of not believing this Article. p. 498.
and p. 499. to the end well near.
Belief in God the Son, who ascended up into heaven.
The Ground of the Article. page 499, 500, 501, 502. The meaning of it. page
503, 504. The Promise. page 505. The Comforts in the same page. And 506. 507.
508. The Duties. page 509. 510. The Danger of not believing. In the same page.
And page 311.
Belief in God the Son, who in our humane nature, is advanced to sit at the
right hand of God the Father almighty.
The Ground of the Article. page 512. The meaning of it. pages 513, 514 515.
516. The Promise, that he should thus fit at the right band of God to our
benefit: in the same. 516. page The Comforts arising to us from this most high
advancement of our Savior, pages 517. 518. and thence forth to the 532 page.
The Duties to be performed of us, in respect of our comforts from the same.
pages 532. 533, 534, 535, 536, 537. 538. The danger of not believing this
Article of our Saviors sitting at the right hand of God the Father a^mightie.
page 539
Belief in God the Son, who even in that he is man, shall come from heaven,
to judge both the quick and the dead.
The Ground and warrant of this Article, pages, 540, 541. and so forth to the
608. page. The time of our Saviors coming to judgment: the which is very
uncertain as he gives plain^y to understand First by doctrine and admonition
without Parable, pages 543, 545, 546, 546 547. etc. to page 569. And then by
many apt and lightsome Parables. And namely by the parable of the Master of
the family keeping watch at home. pa. 5^0. By the Parable of the Master of
the family going from home, pa. 171. 572. By the Parable of the ten Virgins,
pa. 573, 574. And by the Parable of the Ta^ents. pa. 575 576, 578, 579. The
signs which shall go before his coming: within the compass of the same
pages. And namely 555, 556, 557. The p^ace from whence, and whither, he shall
come to give his last sentence and judgment pages ^e^ore mentione ^spec^^ly
557, 558. The manner of his coming. pa. 558. and 582. And of (...) disposing
of himself to give sentence. 583. The Persons whom he shall judge at this his
coming. pa 584. 585. The order of his proceeding to judgment. pa. 579, 580.
etc. The sentence and judgment it self, what it shall be: and according to
what rule or law it ^^all be given. pa. ^85. 586 587. 588 etc. 602. The present
execution, so soon as judgment shall be pronounced. pa. 605. The (...) and
meaning of the words of the Article, pa 6^8. in the former part of the page.
The Promise of this coming of our Savior to judgment: and that, to the
everlasting ben^fite of all the faithful pa. ^08 in the middle part of it. The
comforts which it yields to us, page 608. in the latter part. And pages, 609.
61^. The duties which the same comforts do challenge at our hands. pages, 611.
612. 613. 614. 615. 616. Read^ al o before these, page, 56^. and so forth to
page, 579. The danger of not beleeuinge this Article. pages, 617. 618. 619.
And thus an end of the Contents of this second book.
The English of certain Latin sentences omitted in the same Book.
Page, ^1^. line, 48. Power is the keep^ and maintainer of honor.

Page 530. line, 29, etc. The Son shall in such wise deliver the kingdom to
the Father, as he shall nevertheless subdue all things to himself. And
therefore, not by abrogating the kingdom from himself, but from others; shall
he deliver the kingdom to the Father, etc.

And the next sentence is thus to be englished.

When he (that is, the Son) shall deliver the kingdom to God. That is to
say, When he shall cease to reign, as he reigns now; to wit, by ruling in
the midst of his enemies: the which power he received of the Father, etc. For
otherwise then thus, the Father reigns now by the Son, and the Son shall
reign eternally with the Father, only after another manner: that is, all
enemies being then subdued.

And page, 531. the English of the Latin sentence out of Vrsinus in the
margin is this. Christ is inferior to the Father as well in office as by
nature, in that he is man: but not in nature, but by office only, in that he
is God.

And the other sentence out of Augustine, may be englished thus. Christ in that
he is God together with the Father, he has us in subjection to him: but in
that he is our Priest, he together with us, is subject to the Father.

Note also, that page, 420. a Latin sentence of Master Calvin, is printed in
the margin: which should have been placed in the page before the english of
it, which is there set down after these words, That is, etc.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE GOSPEL. I.I. BOOK.
Belief in God the Son.
NOw it is high time, that we proceed to the doctrine of the same our
Christian belief in the second person of the most holy Trinity, God the
Son. And yet this must we do, so as we bear in mind, that all which
follows (both concerning the Son manifested in our nature, and the holy
Ghost, and also concerning the Church) it is principally, and in effect nothing
else, but a continued, and more full and plain declaration of the most holy
providence of God, for the recovery of mankind out of his fall: and to restore
all that do belong unto God, to the interest and comfort of his fatherly love,
and of all the inestimable fruits and benefits thereof, for ever again.

So that (to speak all in a word) it is the unfolding of the covenant of the
Gospel and free grace of God. The which being mentioned immediately after the
fall of mankind, has been from time to time more clearly revealed, until
the appearance and manifestation of the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ
himself: by whom, it has now long since, been most fully and plainly made
known.

To this more full and plain declaration of the covenant of God his free
grace, and of the fruit thereof, even life and salvation by the Son of God:
Let us now proceed.

Person of the most holy and blessed Trinity?

After the profession of our belief in God the Father almighty, maker of
heaven and earth: they teach every one of us to profess likewise, that we
believe in the second Person God the Son, in manner as follows in these
words. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by
the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, etc.
From thence shall be come to judge both the quick and the dead.

God and man in one divine person of a mediator betwixt God and man.
They do so indeed. For these words I believe, The order of the Articls which
do concern him.
are here to be understood again, as though we should repeat them, and say
thus: And I believe in Jesus Christ, etc.

These articles do teach us, first more generally and coniointly, to believe
in the second Person of the most holy and glorious Trinity, as well concerning
his most high and divine Person, God manifested in the nature of man, as his
most high and holy office executed by the same: as the titles here attributed
unto him do declare; Jesus Christ, the only Son of GOD, our Lord. And then
they do teach us more particularly, and by piecemeale as we may say.

First, after what manner, this second Person of the holy Trinity, God the
Son, took man's nature, and therein did manifest himself: namely, in that we
profess, that we do believe, that in respect of his humane nature, he was
conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary.

Secondly, they do teach us in what order, he did, in the same his humane
nature, execute his Office here upon earth; specially his high Priesthood,
which is one chief and principal part thereof: in that, (as it follows in
the Articles of our faith) we profess further, that we believe in him, as
having suffered under Pontius Pilate, and as being crucified, dead, buried, and
descended into Hell.

Thirdly, they teach us concerning the same second Person, the Son of God,
our Lord Jesus Christ: how he has by his exaltation declared himself, to have
obtained of the Father, all whatsoever he had humbled himself and suffered for
before: even our perfect redemption, justification, and salvation, in that it
follows, He rose again the third day, and ascended up into heaven.

Fourthly, they do teach us what our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, does
for us still, to the perpetual confirming and upholding, of all that he has
once obtained: in that we profess yet further, that we believe, He sits at
the right hand of God the Father almighty: to wit, as a continual Mediator
and Intercessour, by virtue of his former sufferinges and obedience on our
behalf.

Finally, the Articles of our faith do teach us, what the same our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, will do at the last, for the perfecting of all
things; to the end that we and all the elect of God, may have the full fruition
of all the benefits of our redemption for ever: in so much as he is, in this
respect, ordained of God, to be the Judge of the world; and therefore shall
come again from heaven, to give a final sentence upon all people, at the end
of the world; according to the words of our Belief, From thence shall he come
to judge both the quick and the dead.

So then, we cannot but easily perceive, that there are many things, of the
greatest weight and importance, that which we are to inquire, and consider off,
in this part of our belief.

And first and foremost, we have this singular great mystery, yea even a
double mystery laid before us; in that the Articles of our faith do give us
to understand, that we are (...) believe, not only in the Son of God, the
second Person of the most holy and glorious Trinity, considered simply in his
Godhead, by relation to the Father, in a distinction of the second Person from
the first: but also, as he has now, by reason of his incarnation, a
distinction of nature, in the same his divine Person, in that he is both God
and man.

Great is this Mystery of godliness, as the Apostle Paul does worthily call it:
that God is manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, etc. And it is
most worthily, with all diligence, and in most holy and humble reverence, to be
inquired into of all Christians.

NOw therefore, let us henceforth very diligently and with all holy reverence
(as we have promised) inquire of these most weighty points of our Christian
faith: according to our former course, from the ground and warrant of the holy
Scriptures of God.

Belief in God the Son both God and man in one divine Person of a Mediator
betwixt God and man.
Quest. And first of all, what ground have you, The Ground and warrant of it.
that we are to believe in the second Person of the most holy Trinity, not
only as he is God, simply considered in his Deity: but also as he is both God
and man, in the union of either nature, in one and the same most holy and
divine Person?

Ans. In the beginning of the 14. chap. of the Evangelist John, we have an
assured ground, from the testimony of the same most holy and divine Person
himself: who is the very truth, and cannot but give a most faithful and true
testimony in all things, whereof he speaks.

Re^earse the words of the text. Which are they?

He said to his Disciples: Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in
God, believe also in me.

Explica io^ and proof.
This place does plainly confirm it unto us indeed. For who was he that spoke
thus to his Disciples, but he that was in the very true nature of man, daily
and familiarly conversant among men: even one in all things like to those unto
whom he spoke, as touching his humane nature, sin only excepted?

And these words of our Savior, they were a part of his last Sermon to hi^
Disciples Wherein he does before hand, most lovingly and sweetly comfort his
Disciples, against the trouble and offense of his reproachful death, and of his
bodily departure from them: the which our Savior know right well, would shake
his Disciples says.

He is therefore very earnest in exhorting and encouraging of them, to be
constant both in faith toward him, and also in love among themselves, etc: as
we shall have occasion in the particulars, to declare more fully hereafter.

In the mean season, let us well observe to our present purpose, that these
words of our Saui: to his Disciples, did not only teach them: but they are
also of singula^ use to teach us, and all Christians, even to the end of the
world: how we are to believe in the Son of God our Lord and Savior. That is
to say, even a we do believe in God the Father himself. For so does the spe^ch
of ou S^uiour give plainly to understand, in that ^e says, Ye believe in
God; believe also in me. Or as some read the sentence interrogatiuely, Do ye
be^eeue in God? Believe also in me As though ^ee should say, Howsoever you
shall see indeed, that I am in respect of my humanity, mortal, and must
shortly dye: yet be ye not discouraged; wait a while: and ye shall see my
divine power more eff ctua^ly manifested, and confirmed t^ereby unto you. In
the mean while als^, s^e hat ye do not forget that I am very God, equal to
the Father in Godhead, as I have taught ye heretofore: as well as I have every
way showed my self to be very man, like to your selves in the common frailty
of m^ns nature And therefore, see that ye cease not to put your trust in me,
as in your Savior and redeemer. Such is the plain testimony of our Savior
CHRIST concerning his Godhead. And as we read also, 1, John. 3.23. It is the
commandment of the Father (says our Savior) that we do believe in the
Son. And therefore it must needs follow, that he is God. For we must
believe in no creature, concerning salvation; seeing there is no other Savior
but God: as GOD himself does very often affirm by his holy Prophet Isaiah.
And likewise, in many other places of the holy Scriptures.

But that we may see into the ground of this mystery more clearly, let us
more particula^ly inquire after some proofs: first that our Lord Jesus Christ
the Son of God, the second Person in the blessed Trinity, i^ GOD. Secondly,
that he is man. And th^rdly, that he is, in the union of the humane nature to
the divine, one divine Person, both God and man, and so a meet Me^i^tor betwixt
God and man.



Ans. The proofs, as I have learned, are diverse.

First, those testimonies of holy Scripture, which do attribute the very name
of God, as of right belonging unto him.

Secondly, those that ascribe the essential attributes or proprieties of the
divine nature unto him: such as are eternity, omnipotency, infinitenes of
wisdom, perfection of Justice and mercy, and such like.

Thirdly, such as ascribe the works of the Deity unto him: to wit, the works
of creation, the works of government generally over the whole world, and more
specially concerning the Church of God.

Fourthly, such as show that the same duties of spiritual worship and honor,
are due to him, which are only belonging to God: namely, faith, hope, prayer,
thanksgiving, etc.

These proofs do evidently declare, and very sufficiently warrant unto us,
the Deity and Godhead of our Savior Christ.

And first, that the holy Scriptures do attribute the name of God, as of right
and not in way of resemblance belonging unto him: it is manifest, by many
places of holy Scripture.



In the beginning of the holy Gospel written by Saint John, it is expressy
affirmed, that our Savior Christ (there called the essential and eternal
word) is very God.

And in the end of the first Epistle of the same Evangelist, that he is very
God and eternal life.

Likewise, the Apostle Paul, Rom: 9. verse 5. Christ is God over all, to be
blessed for ever. Amen.

Explication and proof.
These are very manifest testimonies indeed^. And there are many other like to
these, both in the old Testament, and also in the new. Namely, Isai: 9.6. The
mighty God, as God the Father call^th him. And Psalm; 45.6. conferred with
Heb: 2.8. O God thy throne is for ^^er and ever. And Psalm: 97. verses 1.7.
conf^rred with Heb: 1.6. The Lord (^he word is Jehovah) reigns, etc. And let
all the Angels worship him. Likewise, Psalm: 102.25, conferred with Heb: 1.10.
Thou Lord in the beginning have established the earth, etc. And Psalm: 104.4.
conferred with Heb: 1.7. where, that which is said of the Lord God, in respect
of his creation, and government of the Angels, is attributed to our Lord Jesus
Christ, But of this sort of testimonies, we shall have occasion to collect
them, when we come to the works of the Deity, attributed to our Savior
Christ.

In the mean season, this is plain, both from the one sort of testimonies, as
well as from the other: that the name of God, is properly and essentially
ascribed to our Savior Christ.

Now let us come to see some proofs, that the essential attributes of the
divine nature, be likewise ascribed unto him.

And first of all, concerning eternity:



We have a manifest testimony of it, in the 8. chap: of the holy Proverbs of
King Solomon, from the 22. verse of the chapter, to the 27. Where he does in a
holy figurative speech describe the Son of God, under the name of the
wisdom of God, speaking thus.

The Lord has possessed me in the beginning of his way: I was before his
works of old.

I was set up from everlasting from the beginning, and before the earth.

When there were no depthes was I begotten: when there were no fountains
abounding with waters.

Before the mountains were setteled, and before the hills was I begotten.

He had not yet made the earth and the open places, nor the height of the dust
in the world.

The wisdom here spoken of by Solomon, or rather he which spoke and uttered
these holy words by the tongue and pen of King Solomon; must needs be the
eternal wisdom of God, a Person distinct from the Father: like as Paul the
holy Apostle, calls our Savior Christ the Son of God, the wisdom of God.
1. Cor. 1.24. And in the same place also, the power of God, according to the
further description of King Solomon in the place before alleged, as we shall
have occasion to repeat afterward.

But for the present, let us here call to mind, that there are many like
testimonies, for proof of the eternal Godhead of our Savior. As Isaiah.
chap. 9.6. The father of eternity: that is to say, he that being eternal in
himself, and without beginning, together with the Father, is the author of
eternity to the Church: insomuch as, though it have a beginning yet it shall
never have end. For unless he were eternal, and without beginning, he could not
establish any thing, to have an eternal continuance. And therefore it is further
said Col. 1.17. He is before all things, and in him all things consist. And
Hebr. 7.3. that he has neither beginning of his days; nor end of his life.
And Reu. 1.8 that he is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending: who is,
and who was, and who is to come, even the almighty. The which almighty power
of his, is further argued, from the works of the Deity attributed to him: as
we shall have occasion to observe anon.



This may be perceived by his own words, John 3.13, No man ascends up to
heaven, but he that has descended from heaven, the Son of man which is in
heaven. And again, Behold I am with ye always, until the end of the world.
Matthew. 28.20. And by that which the Apostle says Ephesians. 3.17. Christ dwells
in the hearts of the faithful by faith

Explication and proof
These and such like speeches, may well warrant unto us the vbiquitarie, or
euery-where-presence of the Deity of our Savior: howsoever his humanity, was,
and is limited, and circumscribed in his proper place. For otherwise, he would
not have said, that he was in heaven, while he was here on earth, etc.

But seeing our Savior is not only infinite in divine Majesty and greatness,
but also in all divine perfection: let us see some proofs of it. And first
more generally, and then in some particulars.



In the sixteenth chapter of the Evangelist John, verse 14. our Savior
himself says thus, speaking there of the holy Ghost, He shall glorify me:
for he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you.

And in the next verse, All things that the Father has, are mine: therefore
said I, that he shall take of mine, and show it unto you.

The Apostle Paul says likewise, that it pleased the Father that in him should
all fulness dwell. Colos. 1.19. And chap. 2.9. In him dwells all the fulness of
the Godhead bodily.

Explication and proof.
These places, do indeed show the divine perfection of our Savior, generally.
And l ke to these, are many other. Such as we read John 3.31. He that is come
from on high, is above all: says Saint John the Baptist. And before that,
chap. 1.27. Whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to unloose.

Neither did our Savior himself reprove the Jews, for understanding his
words in such sense: as that thereby he did make himself equal with God.
John chap. 5. verse 18. And accordingly, the Apostle Paul says plainly, that
our Savior being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God. Phil. 26. Whence also it is, that he is described to be the image of the
invisible God. Colos. 1.15. And the brightness of the glory of God, and the in
graven form of his person. Heb. 1.3. Read also Isaiah chap. 6.1, 2, 3,
conferred with John 12.41. Where the Evangelist speaking of that glorious
vision of Isaiah, wherein was represented the divine glory and majesty of
GOD: says that the holy Prophet saw therein, the glory of our Savior Christ.

But let us come to our more particular inquiry. Wherein first; What proof
have you that there was divine perfection of wisdom, in the Son of God our
Lord and Savior?

All the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, are hidden in Christ, says the
Apostle Paul Colos. 2. verse 3.

Explication and proof.
Thus also testified the holy Prophets of former times. As in that eight
chapter of the holy Proverbs, verse twelfe, I wisdom dwell with prudence, and
I find forth knowledge and counsels. Or rather as Tremellius and Iunius have
translated it, Ego sum sapie^ tia co^aereo astutia, and scientiam summa
solertiae praesentem habeo. I am wisdom, I cleave unto prudence, and I have
the knowledge of most exact (or expert) skill present with me. Even the
reverend fear of the Lord, etc. And verse 14. Counsel and every thing else is
mine, prudence is mine, strength is mine, By me Kings reign, etc. But of this
divine government of our Savior, we shall speak afterward. Concerning the
divine perfection of his wisdom, we may understand it further, by the
prophecy of Isaiah chap. 9 6. Wherein he foretells that he should be called
Wonderful, Counselor, etc. And more-ouer, by the saying of our Savior
himself, Matthew. 11.27. No man knows the Son but the Father neither knows
any man the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him.
And John chap. 10. verse 15. As the Father knows me, so know I the Father.
And therefore no marvel, though the same Evangelist says, chapter 2. verses
24, 25. that he kn^w what was in the hearts of men. According also, as the
Disciples jointly professed, chapter 16. verse 30. We know that thou know
all things. And as Peter professes apart by himself, (though in the hearing
of the res^) Lord thou know that I love thee. Yea as he adds further,
Lord thou know all things. Whereunto finally, accords that of our Savior
himself, Revel. 2.23. All the Churches shall know that I am he who searches
the reins and hearts, etc.



All that the Father gives me, (says our Savior) shall come unto me: and he
that comes unto me, I cast not away John 6.37.

And chap. 10. verse 27. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they
follow me.

And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any pluck them out of my hand. And chap. 13.1. Those whom he loves, he
loves to the end.

Explication and proof.
It is true. For that which he performed toward his Disciples, in the
continuance of his love to them: he performs the same to all, whomsoever he
begins once to manifest his love unto. Read also Proverbs 8.17. I love them
that love me, etc. And verses 20, 21. I will fill their treasures. And verse
31, etc. My delight is with the children of men, etc. Likewise John 1.9. And
every where we may see plainly, that he is of the same mind with the Father,
whose gifts and calling are without repentance. Heaven and earth (says he,
Matthew. 24.35.) shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.

The perfection of the divine truth, and righteousness of our Savior, may well
follow in the next place. Qeustion.
What proof of holy Scripture have you to this purpose?

In the first chap. of the Epistle to the Hebrews, verse 8. Where the Apostle
shows, that these words of the 45. Psalm (O God thy throne is for ever and
ever, the scepter of thy kingdom is a scepter of righteousness) were spoken
concerning the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ: and so are a plain proof
of his most perfect and divine justice.

They are so indeed. Hereof also, is that a like proof, which we read Prou.
8.15 By me Princes decree justice. And verse 18. With me is righteousness And
verse 2^. I cause to walk in the way of righteousness, and in the midst of
the paths of judgment. No doubt, he that prescribes, guides, and
incourageth others to walk in righteous ways, is righteous himself. The same
is also faithful and true. And therefore is worthily calle^ the true light.
John 1.9. And chap. 7.18. He that ^eeketh his glory that sent him, the same is
true, and there is no unrighteousness in him. This very same, was our faithful
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And therefore most worthily does he bear the
name of Amen: and of him that is in a matchless degree, the faithful and true
witness. Revel. 3.14.



He is holy in the same perfection of holiness, with the Father and the holy
Ghost: according to that holy acclamation of the holy Angelis. Isai. 6.3. Holy,
holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

Explication and proof
I^ is true, (as the Evangelist John testifies chap. 12.41.) that the holy
Prophet both saw Christ, and spoke of him at that time. And the same Evangelist
in his first Epistle 2.20. calls our Savior, the holy one. And Revel. 3.7.
Thus says he that is holy and true. And Act. 3.14. The holy and just one. Yea
he is so holy, that he sanctifies himself. John 17.19.

Thus far, for the proof of the Deity of our Savior Christ, by reason that
the attributes, proper to the Godhead, are equally ascribed to him, as well as
to God the Father.

In the next place, we are likewise to inquire, how the same may be warranted,
by s ch proof, as ascribe the works proper to the Deity unto him, as being
his workmanship.

Yea, both for the works of creation, and also of providence and government.
In either of them (as I have been taught) the holy Scriptures are very
plentiful.

Explication and proof.
They are so indeed. Let us therefore call some of those proofs to mind, for
the confirming of our faith in this so excellent a point.

Creation: What proof have you, that these are ascribed to our Savior Christ,
in that he both is, and was before all beginnings, very true, eternal, and
almighty, the most wise, righteous, and holy God?

Proverbs 8 271 and so forth, When God prepared the heavens (says he) I was
there, when he set the compass upon the deep.

When he established the crowdes above, when he confirmed the fountains of
the deep.

When he gave his decree to the Se^, that the waters should not pass his
commandment: when he appointed the foundations of the earth.

Then was I with him as a nourisher, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing
always before him.

Explication and proof.
Unto this place of the holy Proverbs, out of the old Testament: agree many
other both of the new, and also of the old. Namely, Psalm. 102, 25. as we
read those words to be applied, Heb. 1. verse 10. Likewise Psalm. 104. verse 4,
etc. as they are interpreted, Heb. 1.7. And in the same chap. verse 2. God has
made the worlds by his Son.

Moreover John chap. 1. verse 3. All things were made by him, and without him,
was made nothing that was made. And verse 10. The world was made by him.

Likewise 1. Cor. 8.6. There is but one God, which is the Father, of whom are
all things and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things and
we by him. And Ephesians. 3.9. God has created all things by Jesus Christ. And
Coloss: 1.16. By him were all things created which are in heaven, and which are
in earth, things visible, and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or
Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers: all things were created by him, and
for him.

Thus we see, that our Savior is entitled to the works of Creation: whereby
also, his almighty power is manifestly argued, as was touched before.

Now likewise (for a further declaration of his infinite wisdom) let us
inquire whether we have like warrant, that the divine government of the
creatures, does likewise belong unto him. And first more generally, Question
What proof have you for it?

Answer.
Hitherto (says our Savior himself) my Father workeh and I work. John 5.17.

And verse 19. Whatsoever things the Father does, the same things does the
Son also.

Explication and proof.
Of this sort of proofs, are these that follow. Prou. 8.31. I take my solace
(says the Son of God, the wisdom of the Father) in the compass of his
earth. And Colos. 1.17. In him all things do consist. And Heb. 1.3. He
bears up all things by his mighty word. Thus much for the government of our
Savior, generally.

Now let us come to the particulars. And first concerning the holy Angels.
What proof have you that our Savior Christ the Son of God our Lord,

The place before alleged Heb. 1.7. does plainly prove it to be so. For, of
the Angels he says, (that is, God says by his holy prophet Psalm. 104.4.) He
makes the Spirits his messengers, and his ministers a flame of fire.

That is, God the Son, together with the Father, has created the Angels,
and given them a kind of commodious kind of nature, Explication and proof.
subtle and piercing quick and mighty, most like of all creatures, to the
nature of the winds, and flaming fire: and accordingly uses them, as his
ministers, to diverse great and worthy services. According to this right, which
our Savior has to command them: it is said further, Psalm. 67.7. (and so it
is repeated again, Heb. 1. verse 6.) Let all the Angels of God worship him.
And in the last verse of this chapter. Are they not all ministering Spirits
(says the holy Apostle) sent forth (to wit, by the Son of God) for their
sakes, which shall be heirs of salvation? As though the Apostle should say. It
is out of doubt, both that they are such, and also that our Savior uses them,
in that their holy service. Yea, not only does he govern the holy Angels,
which are willing to obey him: but he also rules, yea ouer-ruleth the wicked
Angels: we mean, the Devil, and all unclean Spirits According to that which
we read Zech. 3.1, 2. The Lord said to Satan, (that is, the Son of God said)
The Lord, (he means God the Father) reprove thee O Satan; even the Lord
that has chosen Jerusalem, reprove thee, etc. Read also Matthew. 8.29, ^0, 31.
Mark. 1.27 and Luke 4.41,

Likewise, he rules, yea ouer-ruleth all wicked men; restraining the
extreamitie of their wickedness at his pleasure: and judges their rebellions in
due season. According to that, John. 5.22. The Father has committed all
judgment to the Son.

And for the execution of this judgment, in time to come: see the prophecy of
it, Psalm. 2.9. And Psalm. 110.1, 2. and verses 5, 6, 7. And Isai. chap. 11.4.
and chap 4^.3. He shall bring forth judgment in truth: Or unto victory, as
Mat. 12.20. Thus also has he governed in former times: according to that we
read in the holy story, Exodus 23.21 Read also 1. Cor. 10.9. Let us not tempt
Christ as some of them also tempted him, and were destroyed of Serpents.

The continuance of the same his government to this day, is to be seen in his
restraining and punishing of the wicked.

It shall be most fully accomplished, at the end of the world. Act. chap. 10.
verse 4^. and chap. 17. verse 31. And Revel. ^.18. I have the keys of hell and
of death.

But let us come to his gracious government over his Church, to the benefit of
all such as do submit themselves under the same: Question
What proofs have you for this?

Answer
The proofs are many and diverse, according to the manifold and sondrie
benefits of his most gracious and Divine government.

They are so indeed. For as he does (together with the Father, and the holy
Ghost) call, gather together, and sanctify his church, institute a holy
ministry, deliver a divine Doctrine, work mighty and miraculous works,
ordain Sacraments, send forth ministers of the Gospel, give spiritual gifts,
and graces, make them effectual to inlighten, to regenerate, to guide, to
comfort, and to strengthen: and as he does reveal things to come, hear
prayers, give good Kings and Princes, Explicatio and proof.
forgive sins, give everlasting life (all which are works of divine
government) so there are several and express proofs in the holy Scriptures,
for them also.

Let us therefore come to these several proofs, that we may call to mind
some of them.



In the 49. chapter of Isaiah, verse 6. He is in this respect, called the
light of the Gentiles, and the salvation of God, unto the end of the world.

Explication and proof.
That is, over the face of the whole earth, and from the one end thereof to the
other. Read also, Psalm: 110.2.3. And chapt: 3. verse 3. And John. 10.16. Other
sheep have I also, which are not of this foulde, them also must I bring, and
they shall hear my voice: and there shall be one sheep fold, and one
Sheep-heard.

Hereunto also tends that prophecy of Caiphas, chapt: 11.51.52. And Ephesians:
5.25.26. Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, that he might
sanctify it. etc.



In the 15. chapter of John, verse 16. Ye have not chosen me (says our Savior
to his Disciples) but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye go and
bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain.

Explication and proof.
This fruit, is the fruit of that ministry, which our Savior has ordained,
to that end: and whereunto, he made especial choice of those his Disciples.

The ordination is more plainly autorized, and that not only for the Apostles
times, but also, to all posterity: Matthew: cha: 28.18.19.20. And Ephesians: 4:8.
etc.



Math: 7. the last verse of the chapter. He taught (says the Evangelist) as
one having authority and not as the Scribes.

Explication and proof.
And not only so, but with greater authority, then ever any other did: whether
Moses, or any of the Prophets: person compared with person, or calling with
calling: so that well might the officers say, and profess, John: 7.46. Never
man spoke like this man. For the which, read further, Heb: chap: 1. verse: 2.
etc. And chapt: 3. verses. 6.11. etc. and chapt: 12, 25.26. etc.

It would be too long for you, to answer to all the points, and to bring forth
proofs for them. I will therefore more briefly recite them.

That our Savior did, by divine power, work his miracles, read Matthew: 12.28.
and Luke 11.20. And therefore are these works of our Savior, called the
works of the Father. John: 5.36. and chapt: 10. verse 25. and verses, 37.38.
And chap: 14.10. The Father that dwells in me, he does the works. And Luke:
6.19. Virtue went out of him, and he healed all. And chapt. 8.8.24.25. He
rebuked the winds, and the water, and they obey him.

But of the miracles more afterward.

That he ordained Sacraments, not as Moses by faith and as a servant only, Heb:
11.28. but by divine authority: it is evident, in that he commanded baptism,
in his own name: and appointed the holy Supper in a memorial of himself.

That he sends forth Ministers of the Gospel, by his own autorite: it is
evident in the place before alleged, Matthew: 28.19. etc. Read also before that,
chapt: 10.5. etc: and verse 16. etc. And chapt: 23.24.

That he furnishes the same his ministers of the Gospel, with spiritual
gifts and graces: we may see it in the first institution, Matthew: 10.1 and
verses 7.8.

And Luke 21.15. I will give you a mouth and wisdom, wher-against all your
adversaries shall not be able to speak, nor resist. And John: 20. verses
22.23. Receive the holy Ghost, etc. Experience also, shows it to be so, even
to this day: though not in so extraordinary, and miraculous a manner:
according to that, Ephesians: 4.11.12. etc.

That our Savior Christ does, by the ministry and preaching of his Gospel,
effectually inlighten, regenerate, guide, comfort, and strengthen the hearers
of it: the same place last alleged, may be a notable proof of it. Read also
Acts 26.18. And the place before alleged. John. 15. ver. 16. Daily experience
confirms it, from the beginning of the institution of the Ministry of the
Gospel, to this day. Mark, 16.20. And 1. Corinthians: 14.3. He that
prophesies, speaks unto men, to edifying, and to exhortation, and to
comfort. And 2. Tim: 3.16.17.

That our Savior had a divine knowledge of things to come: the things that he
foretold, while he was here on earth, do sufficiently testify. Matthew: 24.
and chapt: 25. And after his Ascension, Acts: 9. verses 15.16. And Reuelat: 1.
verse 1. And chapt: 22.16. I Jesus have sent my Angel, to testify unto you,
these things in the Churches, etc.

That the same our Savior hears prayers; it is evident, not only in that
God hears us, praying in his name, like as we are also baptized in his name:
but also, because faithful Christians are described to be such, as make their
prayers unto him. 1. Corinthians: 1. verse 2.

That he gives good Kings and Princes, for the defense and comfort of his
Church: Read Prou: 8.15.16. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. By
me Princes rule, and the Nobles, and all Judges of the earth.

That he forgiueth sins, it is likewise evident, in that Baptism (the seal
and assurance of forgiveness) is ministered in his name. For so it is expreslie
sa^d, that Baptism is appointed of God, to that end. Mark: 1.4. Act: 2.38. and
ch: 22.16. It is likewise evident, Matthew: 9.6. The Son of man has authority
to forgive sins in earth. Now having had that power on earth, no doubt but
he has it in heaven. Moreover, John 1.12. He gives power to such as believe
in him, to be the Sons of God. And cha: 8.34. etc. Whosoever commits
sin, is the servant of sin. etc. But if the Son make you free, ye shall be
free in deed. And Act: 7.6^. Stephen prays to the Lord Jesus, that he would
not lay the sin of his persecutors to their charge.

Finally, that our Savior has power to give everlasting life, he himself
assures us, John 5.21. saying: As the Father raises up the dead, and
quickens them, so the Son quickens whom he will. And chapt: 6.40 I will
raise him up at the last day. And chapt: 10.27.28. My sheep hear my voice,
etc. And I give them eternal life. Read also, Philipp: 3.20.21.

Now therefore, seeing all these works, both of creation, and also of
government, generally of the whole world, and more specially over the church:
with all the gracious prerogatives, and gratuities thereof (which belong only
to the power and bounty of the Godhead) are ascribed to our Sa: Christ, the
Son of God, as well as to the Father: and seeing also, (as was declared
before this) that both the essential name of God, and all the attributes of
the Godhead, are likewise ascribed unto him: it is out of all question, that
he is (together with the Father, and the holy Ghost) very true and eternal
God.

The same may be furthermore confirmed, because (as was answered) the same
duties of divine worship, and honor, belong to the Son, which are due to the
Father.

But we will defer to speak of this proof, until we come to speak of the
Duties, according to the appointed course, and order of our inquiry.

IT follows therefore, here in the next place, that (according to your
answer, in our entrance into this discourse) you show some proofs, that our
Savior Christ, being thus very true God, is likewise very true Man. And
also, that he being both God and Man, in one divine Person, is a mediator
betwixt God and Man.

He is in respect of his humanity oftentimes called the Son of man: yea he
so speaks of himself, as it is usually recorded in the holy Gospel. The
same also is plainly testified John 1.14. Galat: 4.4.5. Philip: 2.6.7. 1.
Timoth: 3.16. and. 2.8. and 1. John. 11.2.3.

And furthermore, the Apostle Paul, in his first epistle to Tim: chapter 2.
verse 5. writes thus, There is one God and one Mediator between God and man,
which is the man, Christ Jesus.

Explication and proof.
These are very plain proofs: so that we need not at this time, make any
longer stay upon these points. And the rather, because much of that which
has been said already has proved them; and all that follows to be
spoken, concerning the articles of this part of our beliefe^; touching the
Son of God, the second Person of the holy Trinity: will be in effect
nothing else, but a further, and more full clearing of them.

And first, the titles expreslie attributed to our Savior Christ, in the
articles of our belief: will bring great light unto them.



They are these four. First, Jesus. Secondly, Christ. Thirdly the Son of
the Father. Fourthlie, our Lord.

Explication and proof.
So in deed, do the words of the Creed follow, And in Jesus Christ, his
only Son our Lord. That is to say, As I believe in God the Father Almighty,
etc. So do I likewise, believe in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.

In the which titles, there are two principal things to be considered.

First, the most divine Person, consisting both of the divine and humane
nature: secondly, the most holy office of the same person.

These first two, Jesus, and Christ, may be understood more specially to
concern his office. The former, from the effect, which is salvation: the
latter, from the cause, in that he is called Christ, or the appointed of God:
as will further appear, when we come to the interpretation, and meaning of the
titles. Of the which, the other two may be understood, as more specially to
concern his Person. The which, in regard of the most high and Divine
excellency of it, considered by a relation, to the first person of the holy
Trinity) is called, The only Son of God: and in a relation to his Church,
is called our Lord: as one having the soueraignetie over it, in special
manner, and of most due right, belonging unto him.

It is most true, that there are many other Titles used in the holy
Scriptures, to describe unto us, what manner of one our Savior is. And namely
Isai: ch: 9.6. there are five more set down then are here mentioned: of the
which also, we have partly considered. Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty
God, the everlasting Father (not in person, nor naturally, but in a
metaphorical, or borrowed phrase of speech, to note his tender and constant
care of his Church) and the Prince of peace. The perpetuity, and eternity, of
whose Kingdom, is likewise laid forth, very notably, in the next verse. In
which respect also, in the 19. chapter of the Revel: verse 16. He is called.
The King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords. And in the same chapter, verse 13.
The word of God.

Belief in God the Son, who is Jesus.
And there are diverse other, in the three first chapters of the same book, as
we have partly seen before. The which titles also, have been spoken of at
large, in a Sermon, to that purpose. The use of which doctrine, that we may
learn to apply to our selves, let us diligently consider what M. Calvin
writes very notably to this end. So often (sath he) as any doubt arises,
and we can see no issue, etc. Let it be a sufficient relief, that he is
Wonderful, and has both ways and power to help, above all that we can
conceive or believe. When counsel shall fail us: let us call to mind that he
is the counseler. When strength fails, that he is mighty, and strong.
Whenever we are assalted with renewed fears, and shall see many deaths at
hand, let us stay our selves upon his Eternity, whereof he is not without
cause called the Father, and hereby let us learn to alaye all the miseries of
this life. And against all inward tempests and troubles of conscience, let us
remember that Christ is the Prince of Peace, who ca^ easily calm all troubles,
and defend us against Satan and hell itself. But let us now make our special
inquiry, concerning these four, which are mentioned in the articles of our
belief, and that according to our appointed order. First therefore,

In the first chapter of the Evangelist Luke, verse 31. the Angel Gabriel sent
from God, to the virgin Marie, says thus unto her. Thou shall conceive in thy
womb, and bear a Son, and thou shall call his name JESUS.

Explication and proof.
The reason why this name was thus appointed by God, to be given to our Savior:
was because he should in the most powerful effect, answer to his name. Yea,
because he had already been such a one to his church, from the beginning. For
all salvation was always through him alone. And therefore also, the Angel was
sent likewise, to Joseph afterward, with the same message: saying, Thou shall
call his name Jesus. Matthew: 1.21. This title is most usual in all the writings
of the new Testament: specially in those of the Evangelists.



In the 41. v: of the 1. ch: of the Evangelist John, We have found the Messiah
(says Andrew) w^i h is (as the Evangelist says) the Christ. And in his 1.
epi: ch: 2.22. Who is a liar (says the same Evangelist) but he that denies
that Jesus is Christ?

Explication and proof.
Messiah is in deed, by interpretation out of the Hebrew language into Greek,
Christ. What it is in ours, we shall se^ a none.

This title also, is very frequentlie, and often, joined with Jesus, and with
the fourth title Lord. As Luk: 2.11. A Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And
Act: 2.36. Let all the house of Israel know for a surety, that God has made
him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus I say whom ye have crucified. And every
where, in the Epistles of the holy Apostles. Sometime with Jesus alone, as in
the two former epistles of John. And sometime singled alone by it self, as 2.
Cor: ch: 5. And 1. epi: of Peter, diverse times. But in his 2. epist: conioined
after this sort, Our Savior Jesus Christ. And our Lord Jesus Christ.

Son of God?

We have two sorts of Testimonies.

The one, of such as do entitle him to be the Son of God, without any
further addition; though in a singular manner: so as no other beside him, is
the Son of God.

The other sort, is of such as do call him, more fully and expreslie, the
only begotten Son of the Father: and his own Son, and his Son
singularly beloved.

Explication and proof.
There are two sorts of them indeed. And these latter, may well be accounted an
interpretation of the former.



Which are they of the first sort?

In the first ch: of S. Luke, the Angel tells the Virgin Marie, that the
child which she should conceive in her womb, and bear should be great: and
that he should be called the Son of the most high: verse 32. And again.
verse: 35. That holy thing which shall be bor^e of thee, shall be called the Son
of God, says the holy Angel.

Belief in God the Son, who is the only Son of the Father.
The reason why he must be so called, was no doubt, because he answers to his
name, and is so in most perfect truth. And thus Acts: 9.20. the Apostle Paul,
immediately after his miraculous conversion from his sin, after his calling to
the office of Apostleship, preached in the Synagogues of the Jews, that Christ
was the Son of God. And the Apostle John: 1. epi: 3.8. For this purpose
appeared the Son of God, that he might loose the works of the Diue^l. And ch:
4 verse. 14.15. We have seen, and do testify, that the Father sent the Son,
to be the Savior of the world. Whosoever confesses that Jesus is the Son
of God in him dwells God, and he in God. And chapt: 5. verse 5. Who is it
that overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of
God? yea, in the some chapter by an often repetition, about eight or nine times.

And namely verse 13. These things have I written to you, that believe in the
name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and
that ye may believe in the name of the Son of God. And in the Gospel,
according to the same Eua^g^list, chapter 1.14. John the Baptist saw and bare
record, that Christ whom ^ee b^pt zed, was the Son of God. And verse: ^9.
Thou art the Son of God, says Nathanaell. And chapter 3.17. God sent not his
Son into the world, that he should condemn the world; but that the world
through him might be saved.

And again, verses 35.36. And chap: 5. from the 19. verse, to the 28. about
ten several times. And chap: 8.16. and chap: 9.35.36.37. and chapt: 20 31.
These things are written (says the Evangelist) that ye might believe that
Jesus is that Christ, the Son of God: and that in believing, ye might have
life, through his name. Yea, this is the end of all Preaching also, and of
Baptizing. etc. Mat^h: 28.19. And Ephesians: 4.11.12.13. Till we all meet
together, in the unity of Faith and knowledge of the Son of God. And no
marvel, seeing Christ the Son of the living God, (as Peter professed, being
so taught of the Father,) ^s the rock and foundation of the Church. Matthew: 16.
verses 16.17.18.

In these, and in many other places, our Savior is called the Son of God,
without any further addition.



In the first chapter of the Evangelist John, verse 14. The word (says he)
was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the glory thereof, as the
glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth.

And verse 18. No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten Son, who
is in the bosom of the Father, he has ^eclared him.

Explication and proof.
Here indeed is a further addition, which shows more plainly, that our
Savior, is so the Son of God, as no other is: that is to say, his natural
Son, and therefore very God, of the substance of the Father. So that this
Filiation, as we may say, or coming to be a Son, is not by creation, nor by
begetting, or adoption in time, but by an eternal, and beginningles generation.

And there are other testimonies, of this sort: as John 3.16. and verse. 18.
and 1 epist: chap: 4.9. and Hebr: 1.5.6.

The same thing is lihewise confirmed by this, that our Savior is called, Gods
own Son, as Rom: 8.32. He spared not his own Son, says the Ap^stle. And
our Savior him self, John: 5.17.18. affirms in like manner, that God is his
own Father, or properly and singularly his Father, Patera idion.

Finally, it is evident by this other addition, that he is the beloved Son
of God as Matthew: 3. verse 17. God the Father says at the baptism of our
Savior, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And again ch:
17. at the tra^sfiguration, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased:
hear ye him.



Bel^efe in God the Son, who is our Lord.
Answer.
King David, long before the appearing of the Son of God in the flesh, called
him by the Spirit of Prophecy, his Lord: Psalm. 110. in the beginning of the
Psalm: The Lord (says he) said to my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, etc.

Explication and proof.
That king David spoke these words, of the Son of God: our Savior himself
declares, Matthew: 22.41. etc: as though he should have said, The Lord, Jehovah,
God the Father, said to my Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, etc. Whom David
knew before to be appointed of God, to appear in the nature of man. Read also
John 20.28. the profession of Thomas, Thou art my Lord, and my God. And Acts
10.36. Christ is Lord of all. And 1. Corint: 1.1.2.3. and chapt: 2.8. and
Philip: 2.19. But the places are above repetition. For he is called the Lord,
or our Lord, as often almost, as mention is made of him: specially in the
Epistles of the holy Apostles.

Thus much therefore, in the first place, concerning the grounds of this part
of the profession of our belief in JESUS CHRIST, the only SON OF GOD, OUR
LORD.

Now in the second place, according to our order of inquiry, let us come to
the meaning of these Ti^les.

JESUS?

JESUS, is a word of the Hebrewe language, all one in signification, with our
english word Savior.

Explication and proof.
This title therefore, as was touched before: describes the office of the Son
of God, both God and Man, in the person of a Mediator between God and man,
from the most gracious effect and benefit thereof: which is, that he delivers
and saves us. As Ephesians: 5.23. Christ is the head of the Church, and the
Savior of his body. This is the very end, wherefore he came into the
world, as we read, John 3, 17. God sent not his Son into the world, that he
should condemn the world, but that the world might be saved through him. And
1. epi: 4.14. We have seen and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to
be the Savior of the world. Likewise Acts 16.31. Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ (say Paul and S^las, to the keeper of the prison) and thou shall be
saved, and thine household. And 2. Pet: 1.1. And in other places of that
epistle, the Greek word, signifying a Savior, is joined with the Hebrewe word
Jesus, for interpretations sake, as we say in our tongue, Jesus our Savior.
See chapter, 1. verse 11. and chap: 2.20. and chapt: 3.18. The excellency of
which benefit of salvation, has been heretofore, more at large described unto
us, in the beginning of this second part of our Treasury.

Now therefore, only for a word of remembrance, and for reference sake, upon
this so just an occasion.



He saves us from our sins: as well touching the offense thereof against
God, as the guiltiness of our own consciences: and also concerning the most
woeful and everlasting punishment, both of soul and body, due unto them

Finally, our Savior saves and delivers us, from the power and dominion,
both of them, and also of the Devil.

So in deed does the Angel of the Lord, interpret this name or Title Jesus,
Matthew. 1.21. Explication and proof.
Thou shall (says he to Joseph) call his name JESUS: for he shall save his
people from their sins.

The signification of the word, is yet of a more large extent, as has been
declared heretofore: from whence, let us call to mind, that which is
furthermore to be considered, for the morefull understanding of this point.

CHRIST. What is the meaning hereof?

The word Christ, being a Greek word, of the same signification with the
Hebrew word Messiah: it signifies in our language, the anointed: and notes
unto us, the divine ordination and calling of our Savior Christ: to the
performance of the office of Mediatourship in the nature of Man, for the
effecting of the salvation of us, and of his whole Church-

Belief in God the Sone who is the Christ.
That this is so: it may be remembered, The meaning of it.
from that which was alleged a while since, out of John: chapt: 1.41. And we
may see it likewise, Isai: 6.1. etc. and Luke 4.18. Explication and proof.
etc. Where our Savior speaks of his calling, to the office or function of
his most holy Prophecy.

The like is testified, concerning his calling, to his most holy Priesthood,
and kingly dignity: Hebr: chapt: 5. verses 4.5.6. No man takes this honor
unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.

So likewise Christ took not to himself this honor, to be made the high
Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my son, this day begat I thee,
he gave it him. As he also in other place speaks, (as the same Apostle
adds) Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech: that is,
in a kingly order.

So then, in our Savior Christ, by this his three-folde office, and dignity,
of Prophetship, Priesthood, and Royal principality: is the full
accomplishment, of all that was figured under the law, by the material
anointing of some of the holy Prophets, and more usually, of the high
Priests, and Kings of Judah. And therefore it is written, that though our
Savior was not anointed with outward oil, as they were: yet he was
spirituallie, and by a divine consecration, sanctified of God, to a more
singular work, then would be performed of any one, or of all the most holy
Prophets, Priests, and Kings, that ever were: and accordingly, is said to have
been anointed with the oil of gladness, above all his fellows. Psalm: 45.7.
and Hebr: 1.9. Of the which, more, when we shall come to speak of the
comfortes of faith, concerning this point.

In the mean season, it shall be good, to our present purpose, to consider the
reason, why our Savior Christ was thus anointed, to this three-folde office.



He was ordained of God, to be a Prophet: to teach and instruct us in the
perfect knowledge, of the good will of his heavenly Father toward us, whereof
we are naturally, and of our selves, altogether ignorant.

He was ordained an high Priest, to make satisfaction for our sin, by his
death, and by prayer to obtain pardon for us miserable sinners.

He was ordained a spiritual King, and the Prince of our salvation: to
maintain and vp-holde the same, against the power of the Devil, and
what-soeuer else would hinder it: seeing we poor frail and feeble creatures,
have of our selves, no power at all, to resist them.

Explication and proof.
Thus then, that most high and holy office of our Savior Christ, being an
office of wisdom, holiness, and strength: it is most graciously fitted, and
disposed of God, for the relief of all our necessities.

The principal whereof (as you have truly answered) are ignorance, wickedness,
and weakness, in our selves. Yea, not only before we are called, to the
knowledge and faith of the truth, which is in Christ: but even when we are
come to the highest measure of that grace, which God bestows upon us; further
then it pleases him, in, and through our Lord Jesus Christ, to strengthen and
vp-holde us. According to that which we read. 1. Pet: 1.2.5. and chapt:
2.24.25. And 2. Cor: 12.8.9. And John: 15.5. Where our Savior Chr: himself
affirms as much, saying: Without me, ye can do nothing. Where note that he
speaks of his most choice Disciples.

Thus much for the interpretation of the Title of Christ.



This shows plainly, the most high excellency of his Person, in that
being the natural Son of God: he cannot but be very God, of the same
substance and Godhead with the Father.

Belief in God the Sunn^ who is the only Son of God, our Lord
It shows also, the excellency of his humane nature, by reason of the
personal union thereof, with his Divine nature: not only infinitely above any
the most excellent men, but also even above all the holy Angels of heaven.

Finally, it does most clearly show us the reason, why the obedience and
sufferings of our Savior, are of most infinite merit before God for us, and the
whole Church?

Explication and proof.
It is very true: and even of it self most clear, to such as have in them any
light of the Spirit of God, to discern of spiritual and heavenly things,
spiritually. For what excellency may be compared to the excellency of the
Son of God? Yea of him that is the natural Son of God: according to the
excellent declaration in the first ch: of the Epistle to the Hebrews, even from
the beginning to the end. And again ch: 2.5. etc. And ch: 3.6. and ch: 12.34
25. etc.

But this has been sufficiently confirmed, in the proofs of the Deity of
the Son of God, collected and set down before.



This notes the absolute soueraignety of his divine authority over all
creatures, in so much as all were created ^y him: but in special manner over
his Church, by the right of that redemption, whereby he has recovered, and
purchased it to himself, to the eternal salvation thereof.

Explication and proof.
I is true, according to that 2. Pet: 2.1. where the Apostle calls him, the
Lord that has bought us. And that not with silver and gold, but with his most
precious blood, as the same Apostle has taught before. 1. epi: 1. verses,
18.19. Read also. Cor: 6.20. and ch: ^.23. Acts: ^0.28. Read also John: 3.35.
and chapt: 17.2. Matthew: 28 18. Romans 14.9. And Mal: 3.1.

Now therefore, from that which has been said, for the interpretation of the
particular titles, we may the more easily perceive, what our meaning must be
in the whole: when we profess, that we do believe in Jesus Christ, the only
Son of God our Lord?

What is the sum of all laid together?

The meaning of all, is briefly thus much: that we are to believe in the
second Person of the most holy and glorious Trinity, the only begotten and
natural Son of God; that he being very true God and eternal life,
coessentiall and coequall with the Father, touching his divine nature: has
taken our humane nature, (and in this respect, inferior to the ^ather) was
from all eternity, appointed of God, to be in one, and the same Person, very
God, and very Man, the perfect Mediator, Redeemer, and Savior, of the whole
Church. Of the which, every faithful Christian is to be^eeue himself to be a
member, and that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is particularly, his
Redeemer and Savior, as well as any other.

It is true. Every true Christian must so believe, as he may say in some
measure of truth, Explication and proof.
with Job, I believe that my Redeemer lives. And with the Apostle Paul, I am
persuaded, that neither death, nor life, etc: shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Rom: 8.38.29.

The reason why every Christian must in some measure believe this, is, for
that every one must live by his own faith: according to that Hab: 2. Rom:
1.17.

The particulars of this answer, have been already proved: and therefore it
is not necessary, that we should set down the proofs again at this time.

Only, let us here summarilie call to mind, and consider thus much in this
place: that beside the mystery of the second Person of the holy Trinity,
distinct from the Persons, both of the Father, and also of the holy Ghost, and
yet remaining nevertheless one in nature and substance with them: we have this
other great mystery, to know: and to believe, concerning the same, the Son
of God, our blessed Lord and Savior; that there is a Personal union of the
humane nature to the Divine: according to that holy acclamation of the Apostle
Paul, Great is the mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, etc.

Belief in God the Son both God and man in one divine person of a me^i^tor
betwixt God and man.
Concerning the which mystery, we have seen also, The ground and warrant of it.
that it is religiously to be observed: that like as the distinction of the
Persons in the holy Trinity, hinders not the unity of the blessed Godhead,
(though every one do entirely and constantly retain their incommunicable
properties) so neither does the distinction of the two natures in our Savior
Christ the Son of God, (in that he is both God and man) hinder the unity of
the Person of the Mediator: albeit either nature remain entier in it self,
and do hold their several properties, incommunicably agreeing to either
nature, without all commixtion or confusion, or any other inconvenience. For
the divine nature of our Savior, abides always infinite, incomprehensible,
almighty, knowing all things, every where present, etc. But the humane nature
(how highly soever it be dignified and advanced by the Personal union with the
divine) yet it is still both finit in substance, and also in every quality or
virtue: yea even since it has been glorified in heaven; in that it is not,
neither can be every where present, neither almighty, etc. as the divine
nature is.

Nevertheless, we are yet again to keep in mind; that although either nature
do abide for ever, thus distinct: yet the Person is, never but one and the
same, neither dis-ioyned in nature, nor separate in the least distance of
place, since the very first moment, that the Personal union was made in the
womb of the Virgin. For wheresoever the humanity is, has been, or shall be:
there the divine nature is, has been, and will be always present: though the
humane nature never could, nor can be present in all places at once, as the
Godhead is, as our Savior himself gives to understand: Matthew. 26.11.
conferred with chap. 28.20. And Revel. 2. verse 1.

And furthermore, let us in no wise forget, that (without any contradiction to
distinction of the natures; and only to note the most near and inseparable
conjunction of them, in the union of one and the same Person) diverse speeches
are used in the holy Scriptures, which though as they may seem, somewhat
co^fusedly; yet in truth they do very elegantly attribute the same things to
either nature, by an improper, or tropicall communicating of the proprieties:
Tropus, Veteribus idiomatoon coinonia, dictus.
as learned Divines have of ancient times heretofore, and even to this day
taught and observed. Such as are, John 8.58. Where our Savior himself says
thus, Before Abraham was, I am. And chap. 17.5. I had glory with the Father,
before the world was. And Colos. 1.15. Where the Apostle affirms, that our
Savior was before all things, and that all things do consist by him. And such
like. The which, though they were spoken concerning our Savior, since the time
that he had taken the humane nature; yet they did properly belong to him, in
respect of his eternal and divine nature.

On the other side, where it is said, that our Savior (though very true God,
and equal with the Father) is notwithstanding, his Fathers servant, and his
inferior, (and therefore not to speak of himself, nor to do his own will,
to have increased in wisdom, and stature, and to have been seen, and
handled, etc.) these things do properly belong to his humanity. For his
Godhead is invisible, neither can be handled, nor admits any increase,
either in substance, or quality, or any way else.

And yet, both these attributes, and also the former, do truly agree to one
and the same Person of a Mediator: as it is yet more plain, from those actions
and effects, which are jointly ascribed to either nature, though more proper to
the one of them. As John 3.13. Where, our Savior being here on the earth,
speaks nevertheless as if he had been then bodily in heaven: though he was at
that time, only in respect of his Godhead, there. No man (says he) ascends
up to heaven, but he that has descended from heaven, the Son of man which is
in heaven. Like to this, is that of the Apostle Paul: Ephesians. 4.10. He that
descended is the same that ascended far above all heavens, that he might fill
all things. For to speak properly, neither did the humanity descend from
heaven, but only ascended up thither: neither did the Deity either descend or
ascend. How then? The Godhead is said to descend, Belief in God the Son, even
in Jesus Christ, the only Son of God our Lord.
in that it manifested it self here on earth, The meaning of it.
in the Personal union, with the humane nature: according to that, John, chap.
1. verse 14. The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us: and we saw the
glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full
of grace and truth. And again, 1. John, chap. 1. verse 1. We have heard, we
have seen, we have handled the word of life. Neither can the Godhead be said
to ascend, otherwise, then by a special declaration of the presence of the
Deity, in the same Personal union with the body being ascended, and in the
ascension of it, and before it did ascend. And yet (as we see) the same action
is jointly attributed, (as one would think) to either nature of the some
Person. So is also one and the same effect: as Act. chap. 20. verse 28. God
has purchased his Church with his own blood. And 1. Cor. chap. 2. verse 8.
The Lord of glory was crucified. Though we know, that (to speak properly)
only the body of our Savior was crucified, (that is, was fastened to the
cross) and that thereupon, it shed the blood out of it. And yet the virtue and
efficacy thereof (to wit, redemption) came by reason of the merit and
worthiness of the Person that suffered, who was not only man, but also very
true God.

This observation (as says Master Calvin notably well) shall be to no small
use, Institut. lib. 2. cap. 14. Sect. 4.
for the cutting off of many doubts: if the Readers do wisely apply it. For it
is strange (says he) how much, such kind of speeches, do trouble the
vn^kilfull, yea some not utterly unlearned, which they see to be attributed to
Christ, and yet be not very fitly agreeing either to his Godhead, or to the
manhood: because they do not consider his Person, wherein he is manifested to
be God and man: nor his office of Mediatorship, to the which they do agree.
But it may easily be perceived, how all things agree very well, each with
other, if so be they meet with a sober interpreter: such a one, as does
examine so great mysteries, in such religious manner, as they ought to do. As
for those that have distempered and brainesicke Spirits, there is nothing,
which they do not make troublesome. They snatch at those things, which are
attributed to his manhood; to take away his Godhead. And again, they snatch at
the things attributed to his Godhead: to take away his manhood. And as
touching those things which are spoken concerning either nature, so jointly,
that they do agree to neither of them apart: they snatch at them, to take away
both of them. Now, what is this else, but as much as to contend, that Christ is
not man, because he is God: and that is not God, because he is man: and that he
is neither man nor God, because he is both God and man? Wherefore we determine
thus, that Christ, as he is both God and man, consisting of both natures
(though only united and not confounded) is our Lord, and the true Son of
God, even in respect of his humanity, though not for his humanities sake. Thus
far Master Calvin.

And thus (beloved in the Lord) we see (as was said) that we have in this
part of our belief, a very great mystery to consider of, concerning the
union of the divine nature of the Son of God, and of the nature of man, in
one person: beside the former mystery of the second Person of the holy
Trinity, in a singular respect of the unity of the Godhead thereof, with the
Father and the holy Ghost, from all beginninglesse eternity. The which, though
it be a very high secret, and exceeding the understanding of the most wise, in
the perfection of it: yet no christian is of so small understanding, but it is
his duty, never to cease prayer to God, nor attention to the holy doctrine
thereof; until he have attained to some measure of the sound knowledge and
faith of it: so far forth as he may be able, to give a reason of his hope, in
this behalf. According to that of the Apostle Peter, 1. Epist. chap. 3. verses
15, 16. Be ye ready always to give an answer to every one that asks you a
reason of the hot that is in you. Yea, and we are so much the more earnestly
to strive, not only to the attaining of this knowledge and faith, but also for
the perpetual maintenance of it: because the Devil and his instruments, both
have, and do still labor in nothing more, then to subvert this ground and
foundation of our faith, and the only true means of our redemption and
salvation.

To this evil end and purpose, the Arian denies the eternal Godhead of our
Savior: the Marcionite his manhood: the Eutichian the distinction of the
natures: the Nestorian the unity of the Person, etc.

But let us (beloved) firmly, and constantly believe, against all
contradiction; that our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, is both God and
man, in one only Person of a mediator betwixt God and man. For so it is
necessary for our salvation, as may be evidently perceived, by that which has
been said already.

Person?

The reason, (as I have been taught) is, for that, if he had not been man, he
could not by his sufferings, have satisfied the justice of God, who in his
justice, was to punish that nature, which had offended him.

And if he had not been God, he could not for one moment, have endured that
intolerable burden of the wrath of God, which he must of necessity endure,
that was to make satisfaction for our sins. Neither could he in so short a
time as he suffered, have made a full and perfect satisfaction for us. Neither
could he have vanquished our so mighty adversaries, as Sin, Death, Hell,
and the Devil are.

Finally, he could not have purchased and achieved the crown of everlasting
happiness and glory for us, most unworthy and miserable sinners: if he had not
been in our nature Immanuel, that is, God with us, and for us: even very true
God, and eternal life it self.

Explication and proof
It must needs have been so indeed. For insomuch as there is no Savior, that
can save with an eternal salvation, but the Lord God, the eternal Iehoua: as
God himself often affirms, and namely Isai. 43.11. Neither is there any
other name in heaven, or in earth, whereby we can be saved, but by our Sauiuor
Christ: Act. 4.12. It must therefore follow, that our Savior and Mediator
betwixt God and us, must needs be God. And that, even because (as was touched
before) the most high and infinite merit of the sufferings of our Savior, and
consequently, all the most worthy and mighty effects thereof do depend upon
it: as may easily be perceived, by calling to mind that which is written,
Act. 20.28. Likewise Colos. 1.12, 13, 14, etc. and chap. 2.8, 9, 10. and Heb.
7. the whole chapter, and Revel. 5.2, 3, 4, 5, etc. 9, 10, etc. None was found
worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof, but only our
Savior, who alone was killed, and who alone has redeemed us to God by his
blood, etc.

And for the same cause, it was, that the Son of God, did not take the nature
of the Angels: but the nature of man, as it is expressly observed, Heb. chap.
2. verses 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Read also Matthew. chap. 1. verse 23. The Angel
sent from God to Joseph, says, They shall call his name (that is, the name of
the man child to be borne of the Virgin Marie) Immanuel; the which (as the
Evangelist observes) is by interpretation, GOD WITH US. Thus therefore it
behooued, that only the Almighty God, in the frail nature of man, should be a
meet and sufficient Mediator and Savior for us.

And thus, I trust, that by the grace of God, we have had a sufficient
declaration of the meaning of these words of our belief, In Jesus Christ, the
only Son of God, our Lord.

NOW that we may go forward, let us come to the promise, whereunto our
faith is to look, for the support and stay of it in this so necessary a
point. The Promise.


Que. What promise therefore have we, in the holy Scriptures, that the Son of
God, both God and man, being anointed of God to be the Christ, and a Savior,
and the Lord over his Church: shall be our Lord and Savior, a Prophet, high
Priest, and King unto us: to save us, and so many as shall truly believe in him?

We have the promise hereof, even from the beginning of the world, immediately
after the fall of mankind: a^ has, by another occasion, been answered before,
out of the third chapter of Genesis. Where God himself says, The seed of the
woman shall break the Serpents head. Explication and proof.


This seed here spoken of, in way of prophetical promise, is no doubt, Christ
the Son of God, whom now we speak of: according to that of the Apostle Paul,
Gal. chapter 4. verse 4. When the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his
Son, made of a woman, and made under the law, that he might redeem them
which were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of Sons. So that
here we have both the most ancient, and (as we may) say the primitive promise
of the Gospel: and there-withall also, the performance of it, in the due and
proper season, appointed thereunto by God himself, who only is the undoubted
and most faithful Author of it.

Moreover, the Angels interpretation of the name Jesus, given to the Son of
God, by the commandment of God himself, as we have seen before: contains a
promise of salvation, to the whole Church by him. Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall call
his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins. Read also
Isai. 49.6. It is a small thing (says the Lord) that thou should be my
servant, to raise up the tribes of Iaakob, and to restore the desolations of
Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be
my salvation unto the end of the world. That is, over the whole earth, both to
Jew and Gentile. There are many such testimonies.

And yet further, all the anointed and consecrated high Priests, Prophets, and
Kings of Judah and Israel, before the coming of our Savior Christ: they were
so many visible or typical promises, (as one may say) of spiritual redemption
and salvation by him.

But let us inquire more particularly, for the gracious promises of God, in
this behalf.



We have the promise hereof, expressly recorded in the 18. verse of the 18.
chapter of the fifth book of the Prophet Moses called Deuteronomie.

Rehearse the words.

I will raise thee up a Prophet (says the Lord to Moses) from among thy
brethren, like unto thee: and I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall
speak unto them all that I shall command him.

Explication and proof.
That this promise is made concerning our Savior Christ. Read Acts. 3.22, 23,
24, 25, 26. Read also Isaiah chap. 61. verse 1, etc. and Luke 4.1^, etc.

This was, upon these grounds and testimonies of the holy Prophets, so vulgarly
expected in Israel: that even the profane woman of Samaria, professes her
self to be assured, that the Messiah should come, and show himself a most
perfect Prophet, and Teacher. I know well (says she) that the Messiah shall
come, who is called Christ. When he is come, he will tell us all things. And
hereunto accords our Savior himself. For he says by and by unto her, I am
he that speaks to thee. John, cha. 4. verse 19. and 25, 26.

Thus then it is plain, that our Savior Christ was promised to come to be a
Prophet: and thereupon, was of singular expectation in the Church of God.

Question
What promise have you likewise, that he should be an high Priest, and a King
unto his Church?

Answe.
In the 110. Psalm, there is contained a prophetical promise of both: and
that also, with the confirmation of a divine oath, jointly together, in these
words.

I have sworn (says the Lord) and will not repent. Thou art a Priest for
ever, after the order of Melchizedek.

This one proof is so evident, that it may stand in stead of many. For the
order of Melchizedeks priesthood, does plainly express, Kingly order: seeing
he was both a King, Explication and proof.
and a Priest, Genesis 14.18. and Heb. 7.1, 2, 3. and verses 1^, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21. Read also Zech. chap. 6. verses 12, 13. He shall rule upon his throne,
and he shall be a Priest upon his throne.

The like prophetical promise upon oath, is recorded concerning his Kingly
dignity, and power, Psalm. 89.3.4. and verses 27, 33, 36, 37. Read also Ier.
23.5, 6. and chap. 30.9. and chap. 33.15.16.17. And Ezekiel. chap. 21. verses 25,
26, 27. and chap. 34.23, 24, etc. And Luke, 1.32, 33. Acts. 5.31.

Of like nature to this, is the dignity and sovereignty of Lordship, which
belongs to our Savior Christ.

The Lord whom ye seek, (says the holy Prophet Malachie, chap. 3. verse 1.)
shall come speedily to his Temple, etc. He shall sit down to try and fine
the silver: he shall even fine the Sons of Levy, and purify them as gold
and silver, that they may bring offerings to the Lord in righteousness.

Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem, be acceptable to the Lord,
etc.

Explication and proof.
That this prophecy, containing a promise of the Lords coming to his Temple,
is concerning our Savior Christ: the words of the text do make it plain, in
that they make mention of John Baptist, that was to be his Messenger, to
prepare the way before him. And accordingly the promised fruit and benefit
thereof, does concern the Church of Christ generally, under the names of Judah
and Jerusalem.

And like to this, is that of Micah. chap. 5. verse 2. Out of Bethlehem shall
he come forth unto thee, that shall be ruler in Israel, whose goings forth,
(that is, the effects and declaration of his Godhead) have been from the
beginning, and of ancient time. To wit, even as clearly manifested, as the
Sun makes it self manifest, by the daily risings thereof.

The word of God, is stored most plentifully, with all sorts of most sweet and
gracious promises, touching forgiveness of sins, resurrection of the body,
and everlasting life and salvation, through our Lord Jesus Christ: as we shall,
(by the grace of God) see more fully, when we come to those Articles of our
faith. Generally, all the promises of God, are yea and Amen, in our Lord Jesus
Christ the Son of God. 2. Cor. 1.19, 20. And they are worthily called by the
Apostle Peter, most great and precious promises. 2. Epist. 1.4.

Hitherto of the promises. The Comforts contained, and as it were lapped up in
the promises, are now to be inquired after, and to be as it were unfolded of us.



The comfort is this, that hereby we are assured, that we have a most perfect
and alsufficient Savior: in so much as this title, Son of God, assures us,
that he is not only man, but also very true, and most gracious, and almighty
God.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. For from this ground, it is most comfortably affirmed, that
Whoseuer believes in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life: John,
3.16, etc. And ch^. 8.36. If the Son make ye free, ye shall be free indeed.
Read also Romans 8.3.4, and verses 38, 39. And Gal. ch 2.26. and cha. 4.4, 5, 6,
7. And John, 1. Ep. 4.9, 10. We live through him. He is the reconciliation for
our sins. And verse 13. Whosoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, in
him dwells God, and he in God. And chap. 5. verse 5. The meaning of it.
Who else is he that ouer-commeth the world (says the Apostle) but be who
believes that Jesus is the Son of God? As though he should say, Certainly
none but such, can have so great a victory. And verse 20. He is very God and
eternal life. Wherefore as it is in the 2. Psalm: Blessed are all that trust
in him.

The comfort of this, that the Son of God is thus our Savior, is infinitely
above that comfort, which the Judges of Israel, could possibly bring to the
people: though they did not in vain, bear the name of Saviors among them.
For they delivered them only, from the oppressions of their external enemies
and Tyrants. And therein, they were but only certain obscure types and
figures, of this our Savior: who delivers and saves us, out of the hands of
all our enemies, both the Devil, and all sorts of his destroying instruments.

The excellency of the Comfort therefore, is according to the excellency of
the Person, above every other Savior: whether Gideon, Iphtah, or Sampson,
David, or Solomon, or any other. And that by very good reason. For great and
excellent Persons, give no small gifts; they are not sent to work small
exploits. When they take upon them to be mediators, they procure no small
favor. They will not be denied their requests, that they make for their
favorites, etc. But herein, the favor is most admirable, that our Savior,
working from God, and by his divine grace and power, the greatest salvation of
all other: is so desirous, that we should be partakers of it; that whereas we,
through our rudenes and ignorance, do not esteem of it, as we ought: he is,
as it were, a most earnest Suter, that we would accept of it: 2. Cor. 5.19, 20.

The exceeding greatness of this salvation, may be the better discerned, if we
shall seriously bend our minds, on the one side, to consider the greatness of
the evils, specially of sin, and that hor^^ble damnation and torment, which
is for ever due unto it, from which we are delivered: and on the other side, if
we will truly ponder, and weigh in our minds, the greatness of the contrary
happiness, and eternal glory, which our Savior has advanced all true
believers unto. Verily the more those things shall be duly thought of: the
more wonderful will they appear to be. So justly may we, in the comfort
hereof, rejoice in our Savior, with the Virgin Marie: and with joy
unspeakable and glorious, as the christian Jews did, to whom the Apostle
Peter wrote, 1. Epist. cha. 1. verse 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

In deed, it is true, that to infidel's and unbelievers, these things are no
more comfortable, then there is taste in the white of an egg without salt, as
Job speaks. For it is faith only, which makes them relish: and therefore to
the believers only, they are thus sweet and comfortable, as has been
described. Whereof we may see a contrary example, in either sort; that is, both
of believers, and unbelievers, Act. 28. verses 23, 24. and so forth to the end
of the chapter.

But let us now proceed.

What is the comfort of this, that the Son of God, our most blessed and
comfortable Savior,

This also must needs be exceedingly comfortable, to every believing
Christian; in that, according as he is a person of incomparable dignity; so he
is called of God to a most holy office, above all other, (both Prophets, and
also high Priests, and Kings) even to such an office, as brings the greatest
joy that may be, to the Church of God: as has already been in a good part
declared.

Explication and proof.
It is so indeed. For in this respect (as was alleged before) he is said to be
anointed with the oil of gladness, above all others. Heb. 1.9. For the which
cause also, he is most worthily celebrated, to be both the light of the
Gentiles, and also the glory of Israel: and so the only rejoicing of all the
people of God. Luke. chap. 2. verses 29, 30, 31, 32. and 1. Cor. 31. The
Comforts.


And it stands with very good reason: in so much as hereby we know him, to be
one lawfully called to thi^ high honor: and not to have intruded himself, as
was likewise observed before. Heb. 5.4. These things with the rest, m ntioned
in the interpretation, are here necessarily to be called to mind again.
Generally, the comfort hereof, may evidently appear in this, that by the grace
and virtue of this most holy anointing of our Savior Christ: all true
believers are called to the dignity of christianity: according to that which is
recorded, Acts. 11.16. Where we see the original of this honorable name. And
in the 1. Ep of John, chapter 2. verses 20. and 17. Where we have the comfortable
signification of it in part, as noting that spiritual knowledge, wisdom, and
discretion which christians receive from Christ. But let us search out the
comfort of the ^^^^nting of our Savior, more particularly.



It is very comfortable, in that we are hereby put out of all doubt, whom we
are to hear, and in whose doctrine, we may safely rest and stay our selves.

Explication and proof.
It is a very great comfort indeed, as we may perceive by the consideration of
the contrary. For it breeds a very uncomfortable distraction, and confusion,
^n the mind of a man d^sirous to know the truth: when through the diversity
of Sects, and Teachers, he knows not whom to believe nor to whom he should
join himself.

To this end therefore, it may justly be to the singular comfort of every
christian, to consider, even to the certifying and quieting of his mind in
this behalf: that our Savior Christ^s undoubtedly appointed of God, to be the
only, chief, and universal Doctor and Teacher, of his whole Catholic and
vniuersal^ Church. For so ^ur Savior himself says, Matthew. 23.8.10. One is
your Doctor Christ. And to the end, we might the rather be co^fortably
established in thi^ point: our Savior does most earnestly and usually affirm
his doctrine, in a manner of asseueration proper to himself, saying, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, etc Whereupon also, he has this title given unto him,
that he is Amen, faithful and true yea the very truth it self: as we have
seen before.

To this purpose also, it is testified, that he has taught us the will of God,
from the bosom of the Father John. 1.18. And that ^n him, are hidden all the
treasures of wisdom, and knowledge Colos. 2.3. Read also verse 4, etc. This I
say (says the Apostle) lest any man should beguile you with entising words,
etc. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him,
rooted and built in him, established in the faith, as ye have bin taught,
abou^ding therein with thanksgiving, etc

This comfort, may well be furthermore observed, from the speech of the same
Apostle, borrowed from the Prophet Moses, Romans 10.6 etc. Say not in thine
heart, who shall ascend into heaven. etc. or who shall descend into the deep,
etc. The word is near thee, even in thy mouth, and in thine heart, etc. And
herewithall, did Peter comfo^t himself, and hi^ fellow Disciples. John 6.60.
For to whom shall we go (says he to our Savior Christ) Thou have the words
of eternal life.

Let us therefore conclude this point, with the words of our Savior, the very
true wisdom of God, Pro. 8.33.34 Blessed is the man that hears me, watching
daily at my gates and giving attendance at the posts of my doors. For he that
finds me, finds life, and he shall obtain favor of the Lord.

Thus then, it is very comfortable to our faith, that our Savior Christ is
anointed of God, to be our Prophet. We shall see it yet more fully, when we
come to his doctrine.

It follows now, that you are to show, what the comfort of the same our faith
is,

The comfort thereof, is so much the greater, by how much his most holy and
high Priesthood, is infinitely more beneficial, and profitable to the Church,
then ever was the Priesthood of Aaron: in so much as he is a most merciful
high Priest, and able to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he lives
for ever, to make most effectual intercession for them.

That it may be so much the more comfortable, we may evidently perceive, by
that testimony and comparison, which the Apostle makes in this behalf. Heb.
cha. 2. Explication and proof.
verse 17. And cha. 7. the whole chapter, etc.

But is there no other comfort?

In so much as our ^auiour Christ is not only a high Priest, but also of a
royal and Princely order; this does further more warrant unto us not only his
high estimation with God, but also that he shall prevail against all the
adversaries of our salvation.

It warranteth us also, that he has power and authority, to make laws for
the government of his kingdom, as also to appoint offices and officers for
the administration of his government, under his authority and name and
finally to execute by his Ministers, all the censures and judgments,
belonging to the government of hi^ Church here in this world both for
spiritual rebuke, and also for comfort.

Explication and proof.
That these things are so, we may evidently perceive from the latter part of the
110. Psalm. Read also Heb. 3.6. Matthew. 28.18. Luke. 1.32, 33. Act. 1. verses 2,
3. 1. Tim. 5.21. and cha. 6 13.14.



He has by the virtue and efficacy thereof, made us, and all true Christians,
Priests, and Kings, yea a royal Priesthood unto God: Whereunto also, he has
appointed and sealed us, by the earnest of his holy Spirit, which he has given
unto us.

Explication and proof.
This is expressly affirmed, Revel. chap. 1. verses ^, 6. And again chap. 4.10.
and 1. Pet. 2.9. and 2. Cor. 1.20, 21, 22. And whence should this double
dignity be derived unto us, but from this his own anointing, whereof he
makes us partakers: To wit, in such sort, as it may be meet for us, to have
communion with him herein, as we shall consider further hereafter.

But now for a further help to the clearing of this matter. What means this,

Whereas we are in our selves profane God has sanctified us to himself, in
our Savior Christ and taken us all as it were into holy orders with him: and
herefore does not any longer, account any of us for profane and vn^oly but
admits us as holy Persons, to perform the holy duties of his diu ne wors^^p
and service before him.

Lik wise, thoug^ we are in our selves very v^ssalls to sin and Satan, who
is the Prince, and after asort the God of the chi dren of this sinful wo^^d:
by our Lord Jesus Christ, we are ^et free, and made more then conquerours over
them: so that by his power and virtue, we are enabled to command them, and as
it were, even to tread and trample them under our feet.

Explication and proof.
These verily, are most great and comfortable aduancements; and could in no wise
agree to such base and sinful wretches, as we are: were it not by mere and
high favor, through the mediation and intercession of the Son of God, our
most worthy and royal hig^ Priest.

Now therefore, seeing our Savior Christ has purchased them for us, and God
has for the same our Saviors sake, fre^ly bestowed them upon us: let us not
profanely cast away, so great an honor and dignity from our selves. Neither
let us any longer, suffer the Popish hierarchy, falsely to appropriate it to
them, taking and making themselves an odious kind of Priesthood, of their own
devising: whereby they have unjustly made the honorable name of Priest,
unpleasant to christian ears: in so much as they have notoriously abused it,
to a most sacrilegious usurpation, highly derogatorie to the only
propitiatory sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ; in that they challenge to
themselves, a power to offer Christ every day to God, in an unbloody
propitiatory, and meritorious sacrifice, for the quick and the dead.

But we, rejecting their wicked abuse, and ouerstriding the stumbling block,
The Duties.
which they have laid in our way. Let us (according to the holy ordinance, and
meaning of the Lord) rejoice, and bless his holy name, for this our christian
prerogative: in that the veil being rent, and the Priesthood of the law
abolished, we are now all of us made a holy and kingly priesthood to God. Yet
so, as two cautions are herein, necessarily to be observed. First, that we do
not in th^s respect, fancy any confusion in the Church of Christ: as if there
were no difference now, betwixt Minister and people, in regard of public
ministry. And secondly, that we must always remember, that this is a
spiritual, and no earthly advancement, wherein we should pride our selves,
with contempt of Princes and Magistrates, in the civil estate: but that the
truth and perfection of this our glory and advancement in Christ, is to humble
our selves most low, in giving glory to God, and in seeking the benefit of
his Church, lifting up our minds only against sin, and the Devil, over
whom our Savior Christ has given us power to reign. But of this, more in the
Duties.



Seeing he has the only sovereign right and Lordship over us; we have this
comfort to our consciences, that we are spiritually free from the bondage of
all other, whether profane Tyrants, or superstitious, and proud popish
Prelates: in that they have no lawful power and authority granted them of
God, to command and bind our consciences, to any thing contrary to his laws,
and to the doctrine of the Gospel of our Savior Christ.

This in deed may also be justly a great comfort, considering we have but one
Master and Lord, over our souls and consciences:, whom we are to serve and to
whom we stand bound, to seek to approve our selves. So that if we shall please
him, in the way of our salvation, and in the spiritual affairs of his
kingdom: we may (touching those matters) be out of care, to please any other
Master or Lord, whosoever shall show himself to be of a contrary or
disagreeable mind.

The comfort of this, is the same in effect, with the comfort of Christ's kingly
authority: but it is, under this word Lord, more familiarly and distinctly
expressed, in the words of our Creed.

And finally, let us mark, and we shall perceive, that all the comforts, have
their original ground, from every of the titles, as well as from any of them:
and from all of them jointly, though we have for the more plainnes of
instruction, thus distinguished them. Happy therefore, yea thrice happy, are
all true christians, who have such a Savior, as is both the Son of God, and
also Jesus, and Christ, and Lord: that no consolation, might at any time, or in
any estate, and condition of life, be wanting unto them.

Hitherto of the comforts.

NOw let us come to the Duties, belonging to these notable Comforts, of our
christian faith.



In our judgment, we are to esteem him, to be most high and excellent, above
all other: not only earthly men, but also heavenly Angels.

In our affection, we are accordingly to love and reverence him, above all
creatures: and most earnestly, to seek after the true knowledge of him.

In outward profession, and practice of divine worship; it is our duty, even
from our very souls and spirits, to honor and serve him with the same honor
and service, which belongs to the divine Majesty of God: in faith, and fear,
with prayer, etc.

Finally, we are to be so far off from being ashamed of him or of his Gospel:
that we must esteem it to be the greatest honor unto us, Explication and
proof.
that may be, to profess his name.

Thus it ought to be indeed.

For first, touching most high estimation in judgment, the Apostle teaches it
plentifully, in the whole first chapter of the Epist. to the Heb. that it ought
to be so: in so much as he is the Son of God.

And further also, in so much as he is incomparably, a far more excellent
Savior, then any of the Judges of Israel ever were, as was observed before.
Yea, more excellent then was Joshua, that mighty Captain, otherwise called
Jesus, Act. 7.45. and Heb. 4.8. who before the time of the Judges, brought the
people of Israel, into the land of Canaan, by a mighty conquest.

Likewise, in so much as he is a more excellent high Priest, then Aaron, or any
of his race and succession. Heb. 7. And a more excellent Prophet, then Moses.
Heb. 3. verses 3. etc. or then Eliah. John. 1.21.25.30. or then Jonas, or any
other: For as our Savior says, Matthew. 12.41. A greater then Jonas is here.
Finally, seeing he is more a excellent King, then Solomon, as in the same 12.
chap. of Matthew. verse 42. A greater then Solomon is here. Yea, seeing he is the
King of all Kings, and Lord of all Lords: therefore ought we more highly to
esteem our Savior, by infinite degrees, above any, or all of them. Yea above
the holy Angels also, (as was well answered) according to the 1. chap. of the
Epist. to the Hebrews.

Secondly, in so much as affection ought to follow a right judgment:
therefore, seeing our Savior is most high and excellent above all, it is our
duty, accordingly to love and reverence him, above all: as the Song of Songs
does notably teach us chap. 1. verses 1, 2. and chap. 3.1, 2, etc. and chap.
3.8, 9, etc. Read also 2. Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ constrains us. And
1. Epist. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be had in
execration, etc. Read also Philip. 3.7, 8, etc. All things are to be accounted
loss, and dongue, in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus our
Lord, after the example of the holy and zealous Apostle. He that loves father
or mother, or son, or daughter, more then me, he is not worthy of me: says
our Savior, Matthew. 10.37. And Luke. 14.26. He that hates them not, in
comparison of his love to our Savior Christ, (if need so require) he cannot
be his Disciple.

Thirdly, that in all outward obedience, we stand bound to yield our Savior
Christ, (yea and that from our inward souls and spirits) all divine worship,
and service, due to the Majesty of God: it is evident, from sundry testimonies
of the holy Scriptures. And namely, Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son of God, lest he
be angry. And John 5.22, 23. The Father has committed all judgment to the
Son, because that ad men should honor the Son, as they honor the Father.
He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father, which has sent him.
And Philip. 2.9, 10, 11. conferred with Isai. 45.23. God has highly exalted
him, and given him a name above every name: that at the name of Jesus, every
knee should bow, etc. And that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ
is the Lord, unto the glory of God the Father. But of this external worship,
we shall see the practice, in the duty of Prayer.

We must also believe in our Savior Christ, Psalm. 2.12. Blessed are all they
that trust in him. Read also John 3.36. He that believes in the Son, has
everlasting life. And chap. 9.35. our Savior himself instructs and
prompteth the man, whom he had healed of his native blindness, to believe in
him. And so he teaches his Disciples, chap. 14.1. as we have considered more
at large heretofore. Read also Matthew. 9.22. and chap. 15.28. and Luke 7.9. he
commended those that believed in him. And Romans 15.12. In him shall the Gentiles
trust. And 1. John 3.23. It is the commandment of God, that we do believe in
the name of his Son Jesus Christ.

It is our duty likewise, not only to pray to the Father, in the name of our
Savior, in that he is our Mediator: but even to pray to him, as being one God
with the Father, and the holy Ghost: as our baptizing into his name, together
with theirs, may plainly teach us. Read Act. 22.16. Yea, hereof we have many
approved examples, even such as be allowed by our Savior himself, concerning
those that were guided by the spirit of God, to make their prayers unto him.
Namely, Mat. 8.2. A leper worshipped him saying, Master if thou will, thou
can make me clean. And chap. 9.18. A certain Ruler worshipped him saying,
My daughter is now deceased, but come and lay thine hand upon her, and she
shall live. And chap. 15.22. A woman of Canaan cried unto him, Have mercy on
me, O Lord thou Son of David my daughter is miserably vexed with a Devil,
etc. And chap. 1 verses 14, 15. A man kneeling down to him, said, Master have
pity on my son, for he is lunatike, etc. And Mark. chap. 9.24. The same man
professes himself to believe, Explication and proof.
and prays our Savior to help his unbelief. Lord (says he) I believe,
help my unbelief. And Luke. 17.5. The Apostles make the like prayer, Lord
increase our faith. Or as the words, in the original, and circumstance of the
place, both here, and Matt. 17.20.) incline to this sense: Lord give us the
gift of faith. The words themselves are Prosthes hemin pestin, add faith unto
us. And the Lord said, If ye had says as much as is a grain of mustard
seed, etc. In the 7. chap. of the Act. verse 9. Stephen being at the point of
death, prays thus, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. And 2. Cor. 12.8, 9. Paul
says, that he prayed often to the Lord Jesus for himself. And so he did for
many other. Romans 1.7. and in the beginning of his other Epistles: Grace be with
you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. And again
in the conclusion, chapt. 16. verses 20 and 24. Read also 2. Cor. 13. verse
13. The grace of our Lord Jesus, etc. be with you all, Amen. Moreover 1. These.
3.11. Now God our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, guide our journey unto
you. And 2. Epist. chap. 2.16.17. Now the same Jesus Christ our Lord, and our
God even the Father, who has loved us, and given us everlasting consolation,
and good hope through grace: Comfort your hearts, and stablish you, in every
word and good work.

Yea, generally, all christians are described by this note, or mar^^, that they
are such as do call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ: as Act. 9. verse
14. and again verse 21. And 1. Cor. 1. verse 2.

Thus then, Invocation and Prayer, is a duty to be performed to Jesus Christ
the Son of God our Lord.

The same is to be affirmed, concerning thanksgiving. Read Psalm 47. And
^8.18, 19. compared with Ephesians. 4.7, 8. And when we praise God the Father in
him, and through him: it is as much as to praise and thank him with the
Father. Romans 7.25. and 1. Cor. 15.57. Ephesians. 5.20. and 1. These. 5.18.

It is our duty likewise, to reverence and fear our Lord Jesus Christ: as 1.
Cor. 10. verse 9. Let us not tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted him,
and were destroyed of Serpents. Read also Exodus chap. 23. verses 20, 21.
Consider also, that he is appointed the Judge of the world: and that he has
the keys of hell, and of death, etc. Act. 17.30, 31. Revel. 1.18. and chap.
6.15, 16, 17. and in sundry other places. Read also Psalm. 2.9, etc.

We stand bound, by the express commandment of the Father, to obey our
Savior in all things, Matthew. chap. 17. verse 5. And Luke chap. 6. verse 46.
Why call ye me Master (says our Savior himself) and do not the things that
I speak.

And thus we may perceive, (according to that which was before touched, and
promised to be in this place further declared) that, in so much as all duties
of divine worship, proper to the Godhead, are due to our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Son of God, as well as to the Father, and to the holy Ghost: this contains
one very evident, and invincible proof among the rest, that he is very true
God, coequall, and coeternall with them.

Where^pon also, justly may it be concluded, (according to the last part of the
answer) without any further proof: that every christian, ought to be, so far
from being ashamed of Christ, and his Gospel: that we ought to esteem it, the
greatest honor that may be, to profess his most holy and glorious name: yea,
though it should be with the greatest reproach, that might fall upon us here
in this wicked world, for the same: according to the encouragement of our
Savior himself. Matthew. 5.11.12. Luke. 6.22.23. And of the Apostle Peter. 1.
Ep. 4.13.14.16. Read also Romans 1.16. and 2. Tim. 1.7.8. and verses 1^ 16.

These are the duties of faith, in a more general consideration of the titles,
jointly together. Now, that we may, for our further instruction, consider the
duties belonging more particularly, to the same.

First, What are the duties of faith in this respect, that our Lord Jesus
Christ, is the Son of God?

In so much as the Son of God, has abased himself, to the lowest degree of
a servant for us: we must needs acknowledge, that it is our bounden duty, to
humble our selves, in the lowest degree of humiliation that we can, unto him:
and in the greatest measure of love, that we may attain unto, to perform all
good duty unto him. Yea, and one of us to another also, for his sake:
according as he himself does in this respect, require it of us.

Explication and proof.
He does so indeed, Matthew. 11.29. Take my yoke on you, and learn of me, that I
am meek, and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest to your souls, etc.
Read also cha. 18.1, 2, 3, etc. And cha. 20. verses 25, 26, 27, 28. And again
Luke. 22. verses 24, 25, etc. And John, cha. 13. verses 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

We have also the instruction of the Apostle, to the same end: Romans chap. 15.
verses 12, 13. We which are strong, etc. For Christ also would not please
himself, etc. And verses 5, 6, 7. And Philip. chap. 2. verses 5, 6, 7, 8. Let
the same mind be in you that was even in Christ Jesus, who being in the form
of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God: But he made himself of
no reputation, etc. Likewise Heb. 5. verses 8, 9. And though he were the Son,
yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered. And being
consecrated, was made the author of eternal salvation to all that obey him.
Mark, that it is our duty, to obey him: who being the Son of God, was more
obedient to God, in our nature, and for us, then any other Son of man, could
possibly be.

Now likewise, What duty belongs to the comfort of faith in this, that
though he so humbled himself for us, yet is our Lord: yea, that even by
humbling of himself for us, he has obtained a most just sovereignty over us,
above any other: as it follows in the 2. cha. of the Epist. to the Philip.
mentioned before.



We stand bound to obey him absolutely, and for himself but no other Lord,
otherwise then in him, and for him.

We do likewise stand bound, from the comfortable consideration hereof, to
employ our selves, and all our gifts: and also his creatures, and all his
ordinances, as they that must give an account unto him of the same.

None must be ouer-masterly, in judging and censuring of his fellow servants,
and christian brethren: but contrariwise, it is the part of every one, to be
very tender, and charie, that he do not willingly, and lightly offend, or
discourage any of the least among them.

Finally, as every one of us, must in all things, and all the days of our
lives, live unto our Lord Jesus Christ: so must we willingly die unto him, and
for him, if need so require: to the end, that being at the last approved of
him for good and faithful servants, we may for ever live and reign with him.

Explication and proof.
That great duty does belong to the Son of God, in that he is called our
Lord, the very title it self, does plainly import: according to that
challenge, which the Lord God makes by his holy Prophet Malachie, chap. 1.5.
If I be a Lord, where is my fear? Out of all question, rightful Lordship,
requires reverend service. Now we know, that God has set over, as it were,
the right of his government over us, to our Savior Christ. And therefore faith
our Savior himself also. Luke 6.46. Why do ye call me Master, Master, and do
not the things that I speak: as was mentioned before. For verily, it is but
trifling, yea a mere mockery, for any servant to yield his Master his title,
and to deny him his service. Well therefore reasons the holy Psalmist,
concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, when he gives the Church this charge, He is
thy Lord, and reverence thou him. The word Hishiabbani, which the Prophet
uses, signifies an humble service, by bowing unto him. Psalm. 45.12.

But let us consider a little, of some proofs, for the particular branches of
the answer.

First therefore, that we are absolutely to obey the Son of God, in that he
is our Lord; and no other, but in him, and for him: that is, according to h s
will and commandment, and as may be most for his divine honor, and glory: and
not otherwise: read 1. Cor. 7.22.23. He that is called in the Lord, being a
servant is the Lords free man. Likewise also, he that is called being free, is
Christ's servants Ye are bought with a price, be ye not the servants of men. And
Galat. 1.10. Go I about to please men? I were not then the servant of Christ;
says the holy Apostle. Read also Ephesians. 6.1. and verses 5, 6, 7. And 1. These.
4.1, 2. and 1. Tim. 6.1, 2, 3, 4. According to all which testimonies, it is
good reason, that all our obedience to any other Master or Lord; must be
limited so, as it may stand with obedience to our Lord Jesus Christ: because
all other Lords, yea even the chief of them, either be, or ought to be, his
servants; according to that admonition, Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. So that they have
no more power, to command any thing, contrary to the commandments of the Son
of God, our Lord from heaven: then any inferior justice, may contrary any law,
publicly enacted by the King of the Land.

Secondly, that we do stand bound, to imploie our selves, with all the gifts
that we have in our minds, and with all outward gifts bestowed upon us: as
also, to use all creatures and ordinances of the Lord, so as we may give a good
account thereof at the day of judgment: we may perceive, by that which we
read Matt. 12.36. and cha. 25.13, etc. 2. Cor. 5.10. and 1. Pet. 4.5. There is
good reason, that we should not abuse any thing, no not the least, or basest of
the creatures: even because they are the Lords. We must do nothing without our
commission from him.

Thirdly, that none must be ouer-masterly, or rigorous, either in domestical,
or ciui l, or ecclesiastical government: it may be evident, in that our
Savior is chief Lord in every respect. Ephesians. 6. verses 4.9. Colos. 3.19.21.
Read also Isai. 29.22, 23, etc. Moreover Romans chap. 14. verses 10, etc. And
James. 3.1. And 1. Cor. 10.22, 23, etc. Matthew. 24.48, etc.

For the proof of the last point, read Romans 14.7, 8. and 2. Cor. 5 9. And
Act. 7 59 Wh re the example of Stephen is notable. Likewise the example of the
Apostle Paul, chap. 20.24. And in the Gospel Luke 23. the believing and
repenting thief on the Cross, who though he had notoriously failed in not
living to the Lord; yet he did most singularly yield his duty to our Lord
Jesus Christ, in dying unto him: to the great glory of his grace, in the sight
of all malicious disgracers of him.

These, therefore are the duties, which the comfort of faith yields from
this: that the Son of God, is our Lord.



First, it requires that we do acknowledge our selves, to be in, and of our
selves, utterly lost yea most miserable and damnable creatures.

Secondly it requires, that we do seek to him alone, for our salvation.

Thirdly, that we use those means only, of Word, Prayer, Sacraments, which he
has commanded and sanctified, as blessed helps thereunto.

Finally, it requires at our hands, yea at our hearts, that we be in special
manner thankful with never ending thanks: and in like manner specially
dutiful, with all the best fruits of duty that may be, for this everlasting,
and invaluable benefit of our salvation.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. In this respect, justly may we enter into most earnest
consultation with our selves (after the example of King David, Psalm 116.
saying) What shall I render to the Lord, for all his benefits toward me? And
well may we answer our selves as, he did, I will take the cup of salvation,
and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, etc.

But that we may henceforth, begin with the proof of the first branch of the
answer: read Matthew. 18.11. The Son of man is come to save that which is
lost. Yea so, as he professes, that he came not to call the righteous, (that
is, such as are just in a proud conceit of their own virtues) but sinners, to
repentance. chap. 9. verses 12.13. And so consequently to salvation.

For the proof of the second branch, read Act. 4.12. There is given no other
name under heaven, whereby we must be saved. And first Tim. 2.5. There is one
God, and one Mediator betwixt God and man, which is the man Jesus Christ. Good
reason, yea necessary good reason therefore, that we do seek to him alone.
And there is no doubt, but where there is any truth of faith, in acknowledging
from the heart, that the Son of God is the only Savior of mankind: there
will be a diligent seeking after Christ; yea an earnest seeking, until he be
found by the most near approach, that may be made unto him. What a seeking was
there, to the poole at Jerusalem, called Bethesda, as it were a place of
mercy? John, chap. 5. verse 2, etc. There cannot any man come about, which
professes any special skill of curing bodily diseases: but every one that
has any imper, is ready to seek unto him. How much more therefore (above all
the degrees of comparison) ought we not to seek to our Savior Christ, who is
come, not only to repair all our impers both of body and soul, but even
wholly to save us, and to build us up into a perfect building in himself:
where as we were before, altogether ruinated, cast down, and destroyed? And
the rather ought we to do thus, because we may be undoubtedly certain, both
of the divine skill, and also of the most gracious good will and of the
all-sufficient power, of this our blessed Lord and Savior. Isai. 53.11. And 1.
Tim. 1.15.16.

As touching the cure of all bodily Physicians or Surgians, beside that it is
but bodily, and that also but for a while; and in a small measure, when it is
performed in the best degree that may be: it is for the most part, very
doubtful in the most dangerous diseases, whether the hand of the cunningest
professor can yield any help or no.

Wherefore now thirdly, as a consequent of the former; the true beleeue^ (being
persuaded of the most perfect skill of this our Physician) will doubtless use
all good and holy means, as sovereign medicines, whatsoever our Savior has
in his divine wisdom commanded and sanctified to the furthering of his so
great a salvation: namely the word, and sacraments, and such other, as was said
before. For even to this purpose, the word of God is called a healing, and
saving Word: And so are the holy Sacraments, and Prayer: as Isai. 57.18.19.
Act. 13.26. 1. Tim. 4.16. and 1. Pet. 3.21. And James, 5.15.16.

As for the last branch, the proof was set down, from the example of King
David, in the first place: and by some other testimonies. And it is so clear,
that it requires no further proof, then our diligent and careful practice of
so bounden a duty.

It follows now, that we are to inquire of the duties of faith, in the
comfort of this: that the Son of God our Lord and Savior, is the Christ, or
anointed of God.



The comfort of faith herein, requires this duty first and principally, that
we do most reuerendly obey him, in his word and Gospel, and ministry
thereof: with care of continual profiting in knowledge, and faith, and in
every other grace.

Secondly, that we do labor according to the increase of our own knowledge,
and the comfort of our faith, etc. every one to further, and profit those that
belong unto us.

Thirdly, it is our duty, to believe as undoubtedly, those things which our
Savior has prophesied and foretold, that they shall hereafter come to pass;
as those things which he has taught, and set down, for the perpetual
instruction of his Church.

"It is very meet, and necessary, that it should be so. For to what other
ends should we think, that God has anointed him, to be a Prophet unto us: but
that we should receive all such instruction from him, as he was to give, and
has given us; to make us wise, yea more and more wise unto salvation? The
children of the former Prophets, Explication and proof.
stood bound to profit by those that were sent unto them. Act. 3.25. much more
then, we that are the children of this most high Prophet, the Prince of all
the rest. Heb: 2.13.

But let us more distinctlie, consider the particulars of the answer.

And first, that we must in respect of this Prophecy of our Savior, hear and
obey his doctrine: we have the commandment of God, as we may remember, Matthew:
17.5. And 2. Pet: 1.17. He received of God the Father, honor and glory,
(says the Apostle) when this voice came to him, from the excellent glory,
etc. Here also call to mind again, Matthew: 23.8.10.

It may justly be accounted a most absurd thing, for any to profess
themselves Christians, and to have been scholars of Christ: and yet to be
ignorant of the knowledge of Christ, and of that mystery of redemption, and
salvation, which he has both taught plainly, and wrought effectually, for
all that do truly believe in him. Verily, none of that sort, ever entered
the right way into the profession of Christianity. Doubtless, they came not in
by the door, for then they should have been let in, by the keye of knowledge.
The which, seeing they want, it is apparent that they rather crept in at the
window, like thieves and church-robbers, then otherwise. And therefore they
have need to look better to themselves. For if they have no knowledge, it is
certain, that they have no faith: and so consequently, that they cannot be
saved.

We think it a just cause of reproof to young children, and a discredit to
their Schoolemaisters, if they do not in some good proportion, profit in
learning, according to the time of their going to school. And Cicero, a
heathen wise man, reasons with his son, that he ought to have made no
small profiting under a choice teacher: and in so learned an university, as
he had sent him unto, though he had (as yet) been there but one whole year.
What then shall we say of our selves, if after many years teaching, under the
ministry of the Gospel: we be found old truantes, and non proficientes in
the school of Christ, the chief Teacher, whose doctrine is the most excellent
doctrine, and his teaching, the most powerful teaching that can be?

The reproof of the Apostle, is just against all such, Hebr: 5.12. in that,
whereas they ought to have so far profited, that they might have been teachers
of others, they are yet ignorant of the first principles of the word. The
punishment also belonging unto this sin, is very fearful, as we shall
have occasion to observe further, anon.

Thus then, according to the first branch of the answer, we may easily see,
that it is a duty, whereunto we are streightlie bound: to hear, and obey,
the most holy prophecy and doctrine of our Savior Christ; and that, under
the great peril of our souls, to the contrary.

Now secondly, that it is furthermore, in the same respect the duty of
every Christian to further another, according to his own profitting, in his
several place and calling (the Minister of the word his people, parents and
Masters of families, their children and servants: and every one, his
companion, friend, and neighbor) We may plainly perceive by the parable of
the Talents. Matthew: 25. verses 14.15. etc. 30. Read also, 2. Corinthians: 3.1. And
Hebr. 6.1.

Moreover, read Ephesians: 6.4. And in the fourth commandment of the moral law
of God.

And yet further, read Isai: ch: 2. verses, 2.3. and again Micah: 4.1. and
Mal: 3.16. By these testimonies, the second branch may be plentifully
confirmed.

The third duty, is likewise evident, by those manifold testimonies, which are
every where given, concerning the most perfect truth, and faithfulness of our
Savior Christ, in every point of his doctrine: as has been declared, at
large before. And seeing every prediction of his servants the Prophets, have
been fulfilled in their times and seasons always hitherto; how may we doubt
of the fulfilling of any the predictions of our Savior himself? And the
rather also, because some of them are fulfilled since he foretold them: as
namely, his own sufferings, and the destruction of Jerusalem.

These are the duties of faith, in due regard of the prophetical office of our
Savior.

The duties belonging to the comfort of his most royal and holy Priesthood,
remain yet to be considered of us. Which therefore are the duties of faith,

In so much as faith assures us, to our comfort, that by our Savior Christ,
and through that redemption which he has wrought for us, we are advanced in a
spiritual manner (answerable to the nature of his Kingdom) to be here on the
earth, Kings and Priest, unto God: it does from the same comfort, teach us,
that it is our duty, to offer up our selves, our souls, and our bodies, a
lively sacrifice, holy, and acceptable to God; in the crucifying of our wicked
flesh, with the lusts thereof, and in rising up to care and conscience, of
yielding unto him, the holy fruits of a new life.

Secondly, as a further fruit of the comfort hereof, and of the same our care,
it is our duty to offer up every spiritual sacrifice, of true christian
obedience: and namely, contrition of heart prayer, praise, and almes-giuing.

Thirdly, it is our duty, from the virtue of the princely power of our Lord
Jesus Christ derived unto us, continually to subdue and keep under, not only
sin and the lusts thereof: but also the suggestions of the devil, and this
world, that they never reign or rule over us.

Finally it is our duty, in the same respect, (if need so require) that we
do offer up our lives themselves, as it were a sacrifice, or thank-offering,
for the witnessing of the truth, by holy martyrdom.

Explication and proof.
These things also, have indeed their warrant, from the holy Scriptures.

For the first point whereof, we have (to begin withal) one plain testimony,
Romans 12.1.2. Read also Gal. 5.24. In this respect, the preaching of the
Gospel, is a kind of sacrificing of the people unto God: even of so many, as
are thereby converted unto him. Romans 15. verses 15, 16, 17. and 2. Cor. 2.15.

For the second point: to wit, that the duties mentioned, are to be performed,
as spiritual sacrifices to God: read Psalm. 51.17. The sacrifices of God
(says the Kingly Prophet David) are a contrite heart, etc. And Psalm. 141.2
Prayer is called a sacrifice. Likewise Revel. chap. 5.8. and chap. 8.3.4. So is
thanksgiving. Heb. 13.15. And in the next verse, almes-giuing or beneficence
is termed by the same name. And again Philip. 4.18.

These are the sacrifices, whereunto (as the Apostle Peter assures us)
christians are called, as a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ. 1. Ep. chap. 2. verse 5. And verse 9. Ye
are a royal Priesthood, etc. that ye should show forth the virtues of him that
has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.

For the proof of the third point, we have Romans 6.12. Where the Apostle
writes thus, Let not sin reign in your mortal body: he using therein, a
Basil^ueto.
word noting the spiritual kingdom ore dominion of sin: which cannot be
subdued, but by a countermand of a kingly power, superior unto it. And verse
13. he says further, Neither give ye, your members as weapons of
unrighteousness: where he uses a Paristanete.
word of Priesthood, by an allusion to the presenting, and placing of the
bodily sacrifice before the Lord, after the manner of the law. Read also,
concerning that power, which we have by our Savior, against the world. 1.
John. chap. 5. verses 4, 5. And over the Devil. James 4.7. And Ephesians. 6.10,
11, etc. Likewise Romans 16.20. and 1. John. 3.8. and chap. 5.18. In all which
things, let us not lightly weigh and consider with our selves (I pray ye) how
great a dignity this is: for a man to have power to countermand and suppress
his wicked lusts, and the world, and the Devil: according to that Prou: 16.32.
And Eccles: 7.21. But now on the contrary, let us also well consider, how
absurd and unseemly, yea, how dangerous, and deadly a thing it is; for the
Prince to be his subjects vassal: yea the vassal of the most traitorous, and
murtherous subject that may be. Even so absurd it is, that a Christian should
be at the command of sin and Satan.: that they should be as the General of the
field, and we to fight under their banner. This should not only be to our own
reproach, who do bear the name of Christ; but also even to the dishonor of
our King and Savior himself. Let us therefore earnestly consider, that it is
our duty to take diligent heed, against these evils.

For the proof of the last point, let us read Philip: 2.17. For even like as,
when the zealous Magistrate puts to death the malefactor that is well
worthy of it, it is as a holy sacrifice offered unto God on his part: so when
any other faithful Christian, gives his life for the Gospel, he does in
special manner sacrifice himself unto God.

Neither let it (I beseech ye) offend any (as we were partly advised before, in
the Comfortes) touching that hateful reproach, which the Papists have justly
brought upon their sacrilegious and blasphemous Priesthood, the which, without
all ground, and to a most vain and wicked purpose, they appropriate to their
clergy. It is sufficient for us, that without them, we know the mind of our
Savior Christ, and in how honorable a sense, he has advanced us, and all true
believing Christians (without exception) to be Priests unto our God. And
therefore, in this respect, and thus far forth; let us not balke this name,
which in it self, and according to the right use, and application of it, has
been, and is still a name of very great dignity, and of a reverend and holy
honor. Nay, contrariwise, let every Christian, as well of the faithful
people, as of the public ministry, rejoice in this our dignity together: in
that we are all sanctified, and admitted, to offer spiritual sacrifices, as
has been showed. The Minister publikelie in the assembly, and the people with
him, by his special guidance and direction in the name of God: and they also
priuatlie by themselves, and with their families, in every private, and
allowable duty of Christianity, according to the rule of Gods holy word. And
herein, let us have no scruple, but that God admits us freely, to draw
near unto him, through our Lord Jesus Christ, with holy hearts and
consciences, to make our prayers unto him, at all due times, and in all meet
places, holding up pure hands without wrath, and doubting, etc. Tim: 2.8. And
in many other places of holy scripture.

The sum of all, is this: Seeing our Savior is anointed of God, to be our
great Prophet: we stand bound to submit our selves to his doctrine.

Seeing he is our only high Priest; we must seek for reconciliation, and
peace to our consciences, with God, through him.

Seeing he is our Lord and King, we must submit our selves to his laws and
government, that so we may enjoy the benefit of his protection.

And on the contrary, we must renounce all false Mediators, false Prophets,
false Christ's, and false Lords: and namely, the yoke of the most grievous
proud and stately Lord, the Antichrist of Rome.

Thus far therefore, concerning the duties belonging to the comfort of our
Christian belief, in that our Savior is the Christ, or anointed of God: and
likewise of the duties, in respect of every other of the titles, Son of God,
Jesus, and Lord: whom while we thus obey, we may be sure, that the holy Ghost
is given unto us, according to that which we read, Acts: 5.32.

ANd now at the last, to conclude this part of our inquiry, concerning
belief in the second Person of the holy Trinity, in regard of the same his
Titles, noting unto us his most high Person, and also his most holy office:
What is the danger of not believing, Lord JESUS CHRIST the Son of GOD, in all
these respects?

Ans. Who is a liar (says S. John) but he that denies that Jesus is the
Christi^ the same is the Antichrist, that denies the Father and the Son.
Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father. 1. Ep: chap. 2.
verses 22.23.

And chap. ^.11.12. Eternal life is in the Son of God. He that has the
son, has that life: he that has not the Son of God, has not that life.

And in the Gospel of John chap: 8.24. Our Savior Christ tells the Jews,
that if they would not believe in him as being the Son of God, they should
dye in their sins.

Explication and proof.
The same is likewise testified, in diverse other places of holy Scripture, to
set out this great danger: some whereof, have been mentioned before. As John
chap: 3.18.19. and verse 36. And chap: 16, 8.9. where it is noted for a very
heinous sin, not to believe in Christ. And 1. Cor: 16.22. If any man love not
the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be had in execration. etc. And 2. These: 1.7.8.
the punishment is threatened, to be answerable to the hainousnes of the sin
of not knowing nor obeying. Read also, Deuteronomy. 18. verses 15.19. Act: 3.23. Heb.
1. etc. and chap: 3, 1, 7, 8. and chap: 12, 25, etc.

For this cause it is, (that is, for the avoiding of this so great and horrible
a danger) that God of his infinite mercy, (desirous that all which belong unto
him should be saved) has caused our Savior Christ to be most famo^sly
published and made known to the world; by prophecies of men, by the testimony
of Angels, by the sound of his own voice, by the often renewed witness of
John Baptist: yea and the cause why our Savior himself preached himself;
most plainly professing, that he was the very Messiah and Savior of the
world. John: 4, 26, 41, 42. and chap: 7.37 etc. And chap: 9, 35, 36, 37, 38,
and chap: 11, verses 24.25, 26. And John: 20, 27, 28, 29. And Luke, 24, 36, 37,
38, 39, 4^, etc. And Heb: 2, verses, 3, 4. And therefore how great an
indignity is it indeed, to refuse so great a salvation, as is offered by so
worthy a person? shall it not be just with God, to punish all such with a
thousand damnations, if it were possible, And the rather, if refusing the true
Christ, any should yield himself, to the worship of Antichrist. Revel: chap:
14.9, 10, 11.

Wherefore, let all Turks and Jews, Athiestes and profane persons, reproach us
for believing in him that was the Carpenters Son, in such a one as was
crucified, and could not, as they blaspheme, save himself: let us rejoice in
this, that through the rich mercy of God, we believe in that Son of God, who
was indeed by common estimation, the Son of Joseph, and who did in very deed,
of his own most gracious good will, give himself to the death of the cross
for us, etc.

And thus may we see, that it is no vain labor, that we take: when we search
out the ground and riches of this most excellent mystery of faith and
godliness: seeing our salvation lies upon it. And as our Savior himself,
gives us to understand; they that will not receive him, being the true Christ,
are in danger to be given over to embrace a false Christ, through the just
judgment of God, John: 5, 43. I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me
not: if an other shall come in his own name, him will ye receive. Read also,
2. These: 2.10.

Finally, those horrible and blasphemous herisies which many have fallen into,
ought to awaken us, to look diligently to our hearts: that we do understand,
and believe rightly, this article of our faith. To the which end, it may not be
amiss (for the more forcible admonitions sake) if we set down some of those
sundry heresies, wherewith the Devil has perverted the minds of many.

And first, against the true understanding of the titles JESUS and CHRIST: in
that the heretics called Gnostici, and the Cerinthians, and the Colarbasij,
separated Jesus and Christ: as if these two names, had signified two several
Persons. And again, in that the Valentinians divided Jesus Christ into three
Persons.

More particularly, against the title Jesus, appropriated to our Savior: the
heretic Menander called himself, Jesus and the Savior. The Manich^^ say,
that Jesus is the redeemer only of our souls, and not of our bodies. The
Paternians, and Postillians: they forsooth, (...) ^ger of not belee^ing this
Article.
will have Jesus to be the redeemer of the upper parts of the body only, and
not of the nether parts.

Likewise, against the right understanding of the title Christ: the Nestorians,
and the Christolytes, make in Christ, one Person of his divinity, and another
of his humanity.

The Peratae say, that Christ has a threefold body consisting of three parts
of the world.

The H^lcesaites make two Christ's.

The Simonians said that Simon Magus was Christ.

The Sethians say that Seth was the Christ.

Against the true meaning of the title, only begotten Son; Basilidians, and
Origenistes, they contend that Christ was a created mind: yet so, as they say
that he was the first begotten mind or understanding.

The Marcionites say, that Christ is not the Son of God the Creator, but of
another.

The Origenistes and Arians say, that Christ was a creature by nature, and God
by grace or favor.

That Christ the Son of God, should be begotten of the seed of God the
Father, the Heracleonites and Bardesauistae made a fabulous narration.

The Valentinians, Secundians, and Colarbasij fancy, that Christ should not be
of God, but ex Aeonibus, according to their most vain and curious speculatio^.

The Benolians say, that Christ was the Son of God, but yet by adoption.

The Natiuitarij say, that Christ was indeed from everlasting with the Father:
but not the Son from everlasting, neither begotten by him.

The Artemonites, Samosateniant, Marcellians, Photinians, and Lucians, deny
Christ to be God: or to have been at all, before the time of his incarnation,
from the Virgin Mary.

The Seruetani will have the Father, to be from everlasting about to generate
the Son: but not to do it indeed, till the time he was begotten of the
Virgin Mary.

The Arians and Exoucontij, will have Christ made of things that had no being
before.

The Arians again and the Donatistes say, that Christ was no (Autotheos) God
of himself, but a made God, and inferior to the Father.

The Melchisedecians say, that Christ was inferior to Melchisedec, both in
power and nature.

The Accatians, Semi-ariani and the Macedoniani, do hold Christ, to be only
of like substance with the Father, Omoiousion, not Omoousion of the same
substance.

The Eunomians say, that he is of another substance then the Father,
Heterousios.

The Anomians and Aetians, that he is of a dislike substance from the Father,
Anomoios.

The Duliani, that he is the Fathers servant.

The Agnoetae say, that the divine nature of Christ, was ignorant of some
things.

The Monophysitae, that the divine nature in Christ, did take the beginning
from the incarnation.

Finally, against the true meaning of the title Lord: the Papists make the Pope
head of the Church: and acknowledge him to have a power, to make laws beside
the word of God, to bind the conscience under pain of damnation. These
manifold, heretical, blasphemous, and monstrous conceits, laid thus before
us: may justly admonish us, to use all good and holy diligence, with most
humble prayer and supplication to God, and all reverend attention to the word
of God: lest at any time we should be any way dangerously perverted, and turned
aside, from the true faith of the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ.

(...) God the Son, who was conceived by the holy Ghost.
The which holy care, and manifold great grace, God of his infinite mercy, The
ground of the article.
and very rich grace, grant unto us all, for Jesus Christ sake. Amen.

And thus having inquired more generally, into the doctrine of our Christian
belief in the second Person of the holy Trinity; according to these titles
attributed unto him, Jesus, Christ, the only Son of God, our Lord: it
follows now, that we are to proceed, to make our more particular inqui^ie,
concerning the manner how it came to pass, that the same second Person of the
blessed and glorious Trinity, the Son of God, was incarnate, and took the
nature of man: and thence-forth, to consider of his holy nativity, and birth:
and so of all that he has wrought, and suffered for our redemption and
salvation, as it follows further in the Articles of our belief.

Belief in God the Son, who was conceived by the holy Ghost.


It follows thus in the next place.

Who was conceived by the holy Ghost.



We have a sure ground and warrant for it, in the first chapter of the holy
Gospel written by S. Matthew, verses. 18, 19 20.

Explication and proof.
This mystery of the conception of our Savior, was revealed from God, by the
message of an Angel, to the Virgin Marie first, before he was conceived in
her womb: as we read: Luke 1.31. Thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear a
Son, and shall calt his name Jesus, says the holy Angel. And chap. 2.21.
the Evangelist Luke remembers again, that this was spoken by the Angel,
before our Savior was conceived in the womb. But after the conception, it was
likewise, upon a special occasion, revealed to Joseph by the Angel of the
Lord, before the birth of the child: as the Evangelist Matthew reports, in
the place by you alleged. Let us hear his words.



When as Marie the mother of Jesus Christ, was betrothed to Joseph, before they
came together, she was found with child by the holy Ghost.

Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a
public example was minded to put her away secretly.

But while he thought these things, behold (says the Evangelist) the Angel
of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, Joseph the Son of David,
fear not to take Marie for thy wife: for that which is conceived in her, is of
the holy Ghost.

This testimony may not unfitly be alleged in the first place here, though in
order of time it followed that other in the first chapter of S. Luke: because
that may more fitly be reserved, till we come to speak of the Promise of this
conception, to the benefit of us and the whole Church of God. Unto the which
time also, we will reserve that which is to be observed more fully, concerning
this point.

Explication and proof.
Nevertheless, here we may not neglect the testimony which was given of it the
second time, and that by the message of a holy Angel, upon such an occasion,
as serves notably, to confirm the truth of this great mystery, that our
Savior was conceived by the holy Ghost, in the womb of the virgin Mar^e, she
remaining still a virgin. For seeing both Marie and Joseph, were very chaste
and godly persons, and minded not to come to the marriage bed, till they should
be married, though they were already betrothed: as Joseph for his part, is
cleared, in that it is testified of him, that he was much troubled at Mary's
conception, Bel^efe in God the Son, who was conceived by the holy Ghost.
so soon as he perceived it to be so: and Marie also, The meaning of the
words.
cannot be accused of Joseph, nor justly suspected of him, to have dealt
vnfaithfullie and vnchastlie against him. And therefore, though he were a just
man and hated sin: yet having a secret persuasion of Mary's innocence, and
partly (it may be) giving credit to the strangeness of that defense for
herself, which it is likely she did, at the least insinuate and secretelie
lispe out unto him: he durst not once think of using any hard course against
his Spouse, but only thought to put her away secretly, and to leave the
judgment of so great a secret to the Lord himself. By all these
considerations, in the best probability that we might allege: but in way of
certain demonstration, from the testimony of the holy Angel, and by the
full satisfaction of Joseph, against all fear and doubfull distraction about
the matter; the article of the Conception of our Savior, by the holy Ghost,
in the womb of the blessed Virgin, is undoubtedly confirmed unto us. Of the
which, because, as was before determined, we shall have occasion from the
other testimony of Saint Luke, to consider more fully, from the example of
the Virgin Marie herself: when we come to the Promise. We will content our
selves, to have spoken only thus much at this time: and so come to the meaning
of the Article.

WHat therefore, I pray you, is the meaning of these words, that our Savior
Christ the Son of God, conceived by the holy Ghost, of the Virgin Marie?

To the understanding of these words, three things are to be known, and well
considered of, as I have been taught.

Let it be so, which are they?

The first is this, that the Son of God, was by the power of the holy Ghost,
made very true man, in that he took our nature of the substance of the
Virgin: and so was of the true seed of David, and made flesh of a woman, in
the fullness of time, according to the express doctrine of the holy
Scriptures.

The second thing to be considered, is that the same humane nature of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was most perfitlie sanctified, even from the
very first moment of the conception: whereby not only all original sin and
corruption, whatsoever, was utterly prevented, but also the spiritual seed
of all fullness of heavenly grace, and holiness, was conferred, with power to
grow up, with most mighty increases.

The third thing is this, that from the same first moment of the most holy
conception of our Savior, the humane nature was united to the divine: and so
became one in person with the same, to continue for ever and ever, though
always distinct in nature, without any either confusion, or the least
separation of either from the other.

Explication and proof.
These points indeed, as you have well learned, are to be diligently
considered, to the vnderstand^ng of this great mystery. The proofs and
explication whereof, we will now adioyne unto them.

Touching the first, we read thus, John 1.14. The word was made flesh. And
Galat: 4.4. The Son of God was made of a Woman. And Rom: 1.3. and 2. Tim:
2.8. He was made of the seed of David, according to the flesh. For the virgin
Marie was of the posterity of King David, as hereby plainly appears. And in
this respect, he is furthermore called the Son of David: and therewithal,
the Son of Man: as Matthew: 20. verses 28.30.31. and chapter 22 verses 41.42.

The Genealogy also of our Savior Christ, from Abraham, and so forward to
Joseph, the reputed Father of our Savior in his descent, generation after
generation, by the Evangelist Matthew: cha: 1. verses 1.2. etc. And again, from
the same Joseph backward, even to the first man Adam, set down by the
Evangelist Luke, in his 3. chap: verses 23, etc: in the ascent or parentage of
Marie: confirms this most plainly, and plentifully, to all that are
teachable, and willing to understand the same.

Moreover allbeeit the tribes did often marry one within the other, Judges
14.3. as David of Judah married King Saul's daughter of Benjamin.

And Elizabeth's mother, though of Judah in all likelihood, was married to one of
Leui, and so was cosen to the Virgin Marie, Luke chapt: 1. verses 5.36. Yet
because they did most usually marry within their own tribe, as the examples
are frequent, and the matter clear, even of it self; and in one case, even by
special commandment that it should be so. Number: ch: 36.5.6.7.8.9.10. We may
justly conceive that Joseph took Marie to wife out of his own tribe, after
the usual manner. Yea, and more then this, all testimonies of the holy
Evangelists, confirming that the holy prophesies, touching the descent of our
Savior, are fulfilled: they are so many undoubted proofs, that Marie as well
as Joseph, was of the very family and stock of king David. For otherwise the
prophesies could not have been fulfilled, and so the truth of the whole Gospel
should be called into question of wicked Atheists. etc. Read also He: 2.16. ch:
4.15.

Well therefore may we resolve of this truth, that our Savior Christ has the
very true nature of man, of the bodily substance of the Virgin Marie, like to
us in all things, even from the conception, sin only excepted: and endued
likewise with a reasonable soul, inspired of God, at the time appointed, after
the same manner, as God uses to animate (if we may so speak) other children,
in the wombs of their mothers: having an aptnes from the beginning, to
understand and affect things: and growing afterward in knowledge, and wisdom
of mind, as well as in stature of bodily substance: as it follows to be
considered of us, in the time thereof. The sum of our present instruction is
this, that our Savior did even from the conception, take the true nature of
man.

And what a wonderful mystery is this, that for the salvation of mankind,
the Son of God, being very God, should so far abase himself, to be made
man, by assuming of man's nature: the immortal, to become after a sort mortal,
the infinite, finite, the Creator, creature? This is admirable mercy, this is
a mystery most worthy to be loved and reverenced above all other.

But on the contrary side, very erroneous and heretical, is the opinion of all
such, as do obstinately hold, that our Savior did not take his humane nature
from the substance of the blessed Virgin: but came from heaven, and passed
through her womb, as if wine should be put into a vessel, and afterward to
be emptied again out of the same. whereunto they do vainly and wickedlie
abuse these holy scriptures. 1. Cor: 15.47. He is the Lord from heaven. And
Philip: 2.7. He took on him the form of a servant, etc. And Rom: ch: 8.3. He
was in the similitude of sinful flesh. For our Savior Christ is the Lord
from heaven, not in regard of of his humanity, but rather of his Deity.
Neither do the words, form of a servant, or shape of man, take away either
truth of ma^hood, or truth of service, and inferiority, in respect thereof: no
more the^ do the words (form of God) used in the same place, deny the truth
of his Godhead. And it is to be noted also, that the Apo: speaks by
comparison, and in respect of that glory, which either our Savior had with God
before his incarnation, or now since his ascension: which was greatly obscured
as it were, and hidden under the vail of the flesh, while he was here on the
earth, even from his conception, etc: till he rose again, and ascended up to
heaven. Only those words (similitude of sinful flesh) are simply to be
understood, insomuch as our Savior was never sinful indeed: save only by
imputation of our sins, which he took upon himself, on our behalf, to
satisfy for them.

Like heretical, is the fancy of such, as contend, that our Savior Christ had
no soul given unto him in the womb of the Virgin: under this imaginary
pretense, that the Deity it self, was in stead of a soul unto the body.
Wherefore, let us in the fear of God, abandon all such erroneous conceits, as
being directly contrary to the truth of the conception of his humane Nature,
must needs be contrary to the truth of belief, concerning the same.

Thus much of the first point of the Answer.

Now touching the second point, that the humane nature of our Savior Christ,
was perfectly sanctified in the Conception: the words of the holy Angel to
the virgin Marie do plainly shewe^^. Luke 1.35. The Promise
The holy Ghost shall come on thee, etc: therefore also, that holy thing that
shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God.

And so it must needs have been, to the end, that he might be the fulfilling
of that which was prefigured by the sacrifices of the law, which must be all
of them in their kind, pure and without blemish: that is to say, that he might
be that true unspotted lamb of God, that should take away the sins of the
world. And how should that cleanse away the filth of another thing, that is not
clean it self? If a soul clothe should be washed in soul water, it would
remain foul still. Likewise, if our Savior Christ had not been perfitlie
holy, how could he have been our sanctification in the sight of God?

For these causes therefore, was it necessary, that our Savior should be
conceived by the holy Ghost of a virgin, and not be begotten by ordinary
generation of man. For all that are so begotten, are sinful and unclean.

Every man must confess with King David, that he was conceived in sin.
Only our Savior Christ is of all men to be excepted, in that his conception
followed not the ordinary race. Read Heb: 2.11. and 4.15. and ch: 7.26.

Thus then was our Savior Christ in his humane nature most holy, by the
sanctification of the holy Ghost: even from the conception, according to the
Prophecy of Daniell. chap: 9.24.

The third point of the answer, is likewise manifest from the former speech of
the Angel, saying: That holy thing which shall be borne of thee, shall be called
the Son of God.

For even therefore was it to be called so, because it should answer to the
name, not in any bare likelihood, or resemblance, but in very truth. And in
the same respect also, was he to be called Immanuel, God with us.

The immediate worker of this Personal union of the humane and Divine natures;
and therewithal, of the perfect sanctification of the humanity, was the holy
Ghost: though it was the iointe-worke of the whole Trinity.

For whereas the Person of the Father sent the Son, to take our nature, and
the Son accordingly did take the same, and unite it to himself, the holy
Ghost was that Person, by whose effectual working, the Personal union was
made, in the womb of the Virgin, and by whom the humane nature was
sanctified, to the perfect fulfilling of his office. And note we also
here-withall, that in so much as the humane nature is joined to the divine;
that is, to the second Person of the holy Trinity, which has assumed, and
taken it to the same his Person: therefore the denomination of the Personal
union of both natures, is taken properly from the Divine nature assuming, and
not from the humane nature assumed. So then, the Person of our Savior, is a
Divine Person, and not a humane Person, though it consist of either nature,
through a most divine conjunction.

Thus much concerning the meaning of this Article.

Now in the next place, what promise have you, that the Son of God our Lord
Jesus Christ, holy Ghost, of the Virgin Marie: and that the humane nature
should be united to the Divine, to our endless benefit and salvation?

In the 14. verse of the 7. ch: of the Prophecy of Isaiah, Behold (says the
Prophet) a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call his name
Immanuel.

Explication and proof.
The same promise was also made, long before the time that Isaiah prophesied, as
we have seen before: to wit, even from the beginning of the world, under the
name of the seed of the woman, which should break the serpents head: that is,
the Devils head, or strength, and kingdom, here in this sinful world. And it
has been after that, renewed to Abraham, as we read, Gen: 12.13. and ch: 18.
verse: 18. Likewise to Isaak, and in Isaak: ch: 21.12. and ch: 22.18. To: 9.7.
Gal: 3.27.28. Heb. 11.18. And to Iaakob, Gen: 28.4. and verses 13.14.15. For
all what-soeuer was promised and performed, rested upon this promise, made in
Christ, as the Patriarchs well understood, as our Savior himself testifies
saying, Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. John.
8.56. Thus, I say, the Promise was made, and understood of most ancient time,
though not so expresslie, that our Savior should be conceived of a Virgin, as
the Lord revealed and foretold by his Prophet Isaiah afterward: yea so to be
conceived of a Virgin, that she should remain so, without touch of man,
notwithstanding this conception. According to that of the holy Evangelist
Matthew: ch: 1.22.23. saying: All this was done, that it might be fulfilled,
which was spoken of the Lord, by the Prophet, saying: Behold a Virgin shall be
with child, etc. For if she should not have remained a virgin,
notwithstanding this Conception, it could have been no such strange thing, that
she that was before a virgin, should conceive. Thus then we see, that this
conception of our Savior has been from the beginning, both purposed, and
promised by the Lord to his Church.

The same may appear also, by the often repeated promise, that a branche, or a
bud, should spring up unto David, as it were out of a dead stumpe: as we read
Isai: 4.2. and ch: 11.2. and 53.2. Ier. 23.5. and 33.15. Zech: 3.8. and ch:
6.12.

But that we may proceed: the same promise was made more immediately; yea, and
in the time most nearelie approaching the conception it self, to the Virgin
Marie,

The Evangelist Luke, does plainly report, and testify it unto us at large,
in the first chapter of the Gospel written by him: from the 26. verse to the
39. verse of the same. He does so in deed.

And in the sixth month (says the holy Evangelist) the Angel Gabriel, was
sent from God, unto a City of Gal^le, named Nazareth.

27 To a Virgin affianced to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of
David, and the Virgins name was Marie.

28 And the Angel went in unto her, and said, Hail thou that art freely
beloved: the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women.

29 And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying; and thought what
manner of salutation that should be.

30 Then the Angel said unto her, Fear not Marie, for thou have found favor
with God,

31 For lo, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear a Son, and shall
call his name JESUS.

32 He shall be great, and he shall be called the Son of the most high, and the
Lord God shall give him the Throne of his Father David.

33 And he shall reign over the house of Iakob for ever, and of his kingdom
shall be no end.

34 Then said Marie to the Angel. How shall this be, seeing I know not man?

35 And the Angel answered, and said unto her, The holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, and the power of the most high shall ouershadowe thee: therefore also,
that holy thing which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God.

36 And behold, thy cousin Elizabeth, she has also conceived a Son in her
old age: and this is the sixth month to her, which is called barren.

37 For with God shall nothing be impossible.

38 Then Marie said, behold the servant of the Lord: be it unto me
according to thy word. So the Angel departed from her.

Explication and proof.
Here indeed is a plain, and full report, or narration of the Promise of the
Conception, made immediately to the blessed Virgin Marie: and the same
replenished with many excellent instructions, as was declared at large, in the
Sermons made upon that text, whereof we cannot stand now to make any long
rehearsal.

Briefly two things are to be marked chiefly in these words, concerning the
Promise of this holy Conception.

First the efficient cause, which is God the Father, by the immediate working
of the holy Ghost, as has been showed before. But not by the holy Ghost, as
doing the office of a father by generation, if we would speak properly: The
Duties.
but in stead of a natural father of the body, exercising his divine power of
creation, though this his mighty working by creation, may be called also a
kind of begetting, in such sense, as God is called a Father, partly in regard
of his works of creation, as has been declared heretofore.

The second thing to be observed in the report of this promise of conception:
is the isntrumental, or material cause thereof, which was the Virgin Marie.
So that the word, Conceived, is to be referred, both to the holy Ghost, and
also to the blessed Virgin: to him, as to the author of the conception: to her
as to the instrument, ministering the matter of the conception.

The revelation of this most extraordinary conception, thus promised to the
Virgin Marie, is to be accounted of us, a singular mercy and favor of God: not
only to the Virgin her self, but also to us, and to the whole Church of God.

To Marie, because otherwise she could not have possibly conceived in her
mind, that her body had been conceived by the holy Ghost, with the Son of
God. She should have been confounded, rather then rejoiced, at this so
strange, and unsearchable a work of God. Well might she have had peace in her
conscience, in that she knew well, that she had never dishonested her self:
but comfort of faith, how could she have had any, but by revelation from God?
The revelation of this mystery therefore, was a singular mercy of God to Marie
her self, as was said.

But not only to her, but also to us, and to the whole Church, as was further
affirmed. And the rather, considering, as well the honorable Messenger, that
was sent, even the holy Angel of God: as the notable manner of his doing of
the message, from the Lord.

First, by an unwonted salutation. verse 28.

Secondly, by a sweet and comfortable encouraging of the blessed Virgin
against her fear, by reason of his sudden appearing to her being alone, and
because of the same his strange and unwonted salutation. verse 30.

Thirdly, by a plain narration of the whole matter unto her: with an excellent
description of the child, what manner of one he should be. ver. 31, 32, 33.

Fourthly, by a notable description of the manner of the conception, how it
should be wrought and effected in the womb of the Virgin: for her further
satisfaction, and confirmation, against all her doubtings. verse 35. Yea so as
the Angel would not leave her, till she was put out of all doubt. To the which
end, he gave her also, a very rare sign, and token, for the further
establishing of her faith. For he discovers unto her, the conception of old
barren Elizabeth: and the time how long since, so that she might perceive that
Elizabeth was then upon her quickening with child. verses 36.37. as Marie
found it to be true shortly after, even as the Angel had told. For she going
to Elizabeth: at her very coming to her, the child did spring in the womb of
Elizabeth: and thereupon, Elizabeth moved by the holy Ghost rejoiced, and
saluted Marie, by the most honorable name of the mother of the Lord, and
showed her self thankful to God. Whereupon Marie also brake forth in a very
heavenly and prophetical thanksgiving: as it follows in the same chapter.

So then, from this notable message of the Angel, the Virgin Marie being
plainly informed, and obtaining victory both against her astonishment, and
also against all succeeding doubtings: it is so much the more undoubted a
confirmation to our own faith, that she was that Virgin, which God in his most
holy providence, had set apart, and appointed thereunto.

To the which purpose also, the diligence of the holy Evangelist, yields a
memorable furtherance: in that he certifieth us of the time, when this blessed
message was sent, to what place, and to what person, even to this Marie, whom
he also describes by as particular circumstances as might be. verses 26.27.

Thus, the narration of this immediate promise of the conception of our
Savior, by the holy Ghost: was a great mercy of God, The Comforts.
both to the blessed Virgin Marie, and also to us, and to the whole Church of
God.

ANd thus being assured of the promise, we come to inquire of the Comforts,

This most holy conception of our Savior Christ is, as it were, the foundation
of all our comfort, concerning his humane nature: in so much as if he had not
been conceived, he could never have been borne, nor have wrought or suffered
any thing at all for us.

Likewise, the comfort is exceeding great, in that we are hereby assured, that
he in whom we believe, is not only the true Christ, according to the
prophesies of the holy Scriptures, fulfilled in his conception: but also that
he was even from his conception, perfectly fitted, to be a most worthy, and
all-sufficient mediator and Savior unto us, and for us.

Moreover, the union of our humane nature in him to the divine, is generally
the ground of all comfort: in so much as hereby, his humane nature is made the
means, and as it were the condite-pipes, to cleanse our filthy nature, and to
convey all graces, and even the gift of eternal life it self unto us, from
the divine nature: which alone, is the euer-springing, yea the euer-ouerflowing
fountain of the water of life.

Finally, this Personal union of the humane nature of our Savior with the
divine nature, is the very ground of our uniting, and espousing with Christ:
and so of our reuniting to God, wherein stands all our happiness.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. Our conjunction with God, is our happiness: even as on the
contrary, it was from the beginning, our misery, that we were separated from
him, through the fall of our first father Adam. For thereby, beside the
guiltines of his sin, we have in our selves, an original fountain of all
sin: the which, of the own accord, does continually flow forth, to our
eternal destruction, both of body and soul; unless God should be merciful
unto us. Ier. 6. verses 7.8. Now therefore, seeing, by our Savior Christ
alone, we are reconciled to God, and through him, reunited in a perfect league
of peace and friendship, never to be dissolved any more: yea, seeing we are in
and by Christ, one with God, and he with us: it is manifest, that herein
rests all our happiness, as upon the only sure ground and foundation. So that
whatsoever we lost by Adams defection: that, yea a far more excellent estate,
is restored unto us by our Savior Christ, both for righteousness and holiness,
and also for happiness and glory: partly to be apprehended by faith here, and
fully and really to be enioied for ever, in the kingdom of heaven. For our
Savior Christ is made of God, to be unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption. 1. Cor. 1.30. Ye are of him in Christ Jesus
(says the Apostle) who of God is made unto us wisdom etc. That according as
it is written, He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord. In which respect
also, he is called our life, and the hope of our glory. Colos. 1.27. and chap.
3. verse 4. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with him in glory.

This making of our Savior, to be a fit person, to these so great ends and
purposes of Gods manifesting of his rich and glorious grace: began even by the
most holy conception of his humane nature, in the womb of the Virgin.

Whence it is also, that (as the Apostle Peter teaches us) God according to
his godly power, has given unto us all things, that pertain to life and to
godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us unto glory and
virtue. Whereby (or as we may read rather) in so much as, most great and
precious promises are given unto us, that by them we should be partakers of
the divine (or godly) nature, (that is, of the renewing of the Image of God in
holiness and righteousness, as a fruit of this our spiritual communion with God,
in and through our Lord Jesus Christ) in that, (as it follows in the Apostle)
we flee the corruption that is in the world through lust.

Read also to this purpose, John chapter 14. v. 16, etc. 26. and so forth. For
these are those precious promises, which the Apostle Peter speaks of: which
are the cause also of these so great effects, The Duties.
according to that of the Apostle John 1. Epist. 1.3.4. and chap. 4.16.

And all these have their foundation in the conception and incarnation of Jesus
Christ, the very true Son of God our Lord. Yet so, as the confirmation and
ratifying thereof, has a necessary and further reference, not only to his
birth and life, but also even to his death: and thenceforth, to his sitting at
the right hand of God the Father in his divine majesty and glory.

O most blessed and happy time therefore, that ever, in Christ Jesus, this only
begotten Son of God, our humane nature was thus gloriously united to the
divine nature, by a most sacred bond, never thenceforth to be dissolved again:
that he might for ever be Immanuel, God with us, and an everlasting redeemer
and Savior unto us.

Thus much concerning the Comforts of faith, in respect of this Article.

THe duties which ought to arise from the same Comforts, are in the next place,
to be considered of us.



First, we are to take diligent heed, that we do conceive nothing carnally
or corruptly, but most purely and holily, of this conception of our Savior:
the which, though it was very natural in the effect, as touching the Virgin
Marie, and the humane nature of our Savior: yet in the manner, it was most
heavenly and divine, in respect of the holy Ghost.

Secondly, it is our duty, to esteem most reuerendly of it, blessing God
always with most thankful hearts, for his great mercy in revealing this
most secret and comfortable mystery unto us.

Thirdly, it may justly admonish us, to humble our selves, in the
acknowledgment of our own natural, and sinful corruption, in the ordinary
course of our conception.

Fourthly, hereby we may learn, that without our Savior Christ, our profane
nature could by no means, have been perfectly sanctified to God.

We may learn also from this consideration to believe in the holy Ghost, as in
God our sanctifier: in so much as he had so divine a hand, in the chief means
of our sanctification, and whole redemption.

Finally, we may justly put our selves in mind from hence, to sooke for our
sanctification, and all increases thereof, by using those means only, which
the holy Ghost has sanctified to that holy end and purpose.

We may well do so indeed. But let us see some particular proofs, from point
to point, Explication and proof.
in order.

For the first point, that which we read, John. 3.6. may afford us a good
proof, in that our Savior himself says, That which is borne of the spirit,
is spirit. For seeing he speaks so of our spiritual regeneration, it may
much rather be affirmed, that his conceiving of our Savior, was every way most
spiritual, pure, and holy.

For the second, we have Elizabeth for a notable example, in that she reioiced
at the conception of our Savior, blessing the fruit of Mary's womb, and God
for revealing it unto her, many months before it was borne. We have likewise
the example of Marie her self, who praises God, and rejoices in her Savior,
while yet he was in her womb. And thus, from them, we may perceive, that we
ought not to think, read, or hear of the conception of our Savior, but it
ought justly to be a matter of great joy, and thankfulness, even to this day,
and for ever, so long as the world shall endure.

Touching the third. It is an evident conviction of man's natural corruption:
seeing our Savior, who was to be pure from his conception, might not be
conceived by humane generation. For that which is borne of the flesh, is flesh:
that is to say, it is corrupt and sinful, as our Savior teaches in the 3.
chap. of John, the former part of the 6. verse before alleged.

According to the fourth point, our Savior is called our holiness, and so is
made unto us, as it were by the hand of the holy Ghost; as we saw it plainly
testified before. 1. Cor. 1.30. The danger of not believing this Article.


For the fifth point, read John, cha. 3. verse 3. and 5. Except a man he borne
again of water, and of the spirit, he can neither see, nor enter into the
kingdom of God. Read also 1. Pet. 1. verses 2. and 22. And 2. These. 2.12.

For the last point, read forward in the 14. verse of the same chapter. And 1.
Cor. chapter 12. verse 3. and 13. For the word and sacraments, are special means
of our sanctification. Read also 1. Ioh. chapter 17. verse 17. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27.
and Tit. 3.5.

Having thus seen the ground of this Article, as also the meaning, the
promise, comforts, and duties: the last thing to be considered, according to
our order, is the danger of not believing in our Savior Christ, conceived by
the holy Ghost, and thereby taking the true nature of man, of the substance of
the Virgin Marie.



They that believe not in our Savior Christ conceived, such manner of one as
he was, and of necessity must be: can neither believe rightly in Jesus Christ,
either brought into the world, or living in the world, or going out of the same
again: and consequently, can have no fruit or benefit by him.

It is very true. The whole doctrine of faith, is so nearely knit and lincked
together, Explication and proof.
in all the parts of it, as linkes in a golden chain: that the latter is not
perfect, and effectual to the believer, without the faith of the former, nor
the former, but in respect of the latter. The divine nature profitteth us not
to salvation, but by the humane: nor the humane, without the divine, as our
Savior himself says, John, 6.53. and verses 61, 62, 63. The conception
profits not, without the birth, nor the birth without the life, nor the life
without the death, nor his death without his resurrection, nor all that he did
upon earth, either before his resurrection, nor in the forty days after,
without his ascension up to heaven. Neither does his ascension, or sitting at
the right hand of the Father, perfect our redemption and salvation, till he
shall have executed and performed his last judgment. Read John, 16.7. I tell
you the truth, (says our Savior) It is expedient for you, that I go away:
for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come to you: but if I depart, I
will send him to you. And verses 12, 13, etc. Read also Luke, 21.27, 28. and
Romans 8.23. Colos. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Philip. 3.20, 21. and 1. Cor 15. verses 12, 13,
14. and so forth to the end of the chapter.

In this respect also, it is said of the Church of our Savior Christ, that
they who were before his coming in the flesh, were not perfect without us,
that have followed them after his coming. Neither shall we be perfect, till
all shall be gathered into one fold. Heb. 11.39.40. John, 10.16.

But touching the Article of faith, now in hand. For any to believe in the
obedience and death of our Savior, or in his resurrection, etc. without
belief in his conception: it were, as if one would build, without a
foundation. For so our Savior Christ in regard of the conjunction of the
humane and divine nature, by this conception of the holy Ghost, is compared to
the foundation of the Church: yea, to the whole and complete building, arising
from thence, in an allusion to the holy temple of Jerusalem. Hag. 2. ve. 3, 4,
etc. Zech. 6.9, etc. 15. and Isai. 60.

The foundation of this spiritual Temple, may be said to have been laid in
the incarnation of our Savior, by the conception of the holy Ghost. By his
birth, and by the obedience of his life and death, the walls were as it were
raised and set up, and by his resurrection, etc. the roof was laid over it, as
it were, and fully finished. Heb. 9.1, etc. and verses 11, etc.

Now though this house, (being well set forward in the building by God) was
attempted to be pulled down, by such as were accounted in their time, chief
and Master builders: yet in three days our Savior built it up again:
according as he had told the^ before, that he would Ioh. 2.19. Destroy this
Temple, and in three days I will build it up again.

The necessi^ie therefore of belief, concerning the truth of this Article of
the conception of our Savior, is the cause why GOD has so graciously
revealed, and confirmed it, together with the other Article of his birth, etc.
by the testimony, both of men, and women, and also of the Angels of heaven.

Now therefore, that we may grow to an issue, in this point; we may justly
affirm, that they do err in the very foundation of our salvation: whosoever
do not believe in our Savior Christ, according to the truth of this Article.

For it is no Christ, with an aierie body, or with a body from heaven conveyed
into the womb of the Virgin, as some have vainly fancied, whereby we must
be saved: but by that CHRIST, who is the seed of Abraham, and David, who
took our true nature of the Virgin Mary, etc. as has already been declared.

Let us therefore very carefully, even as we tender our souls, avoid all
erroneous and heretical opinions and fancies, swaruing from the holy truth in
this behalf. The which, that we may the better do, it shall not be amiss
for us, to set down a brief collection of the manifold heresies, of sundry
sorts of heretics, misled by the Devil from the truth of this Article: that by
other men's dangers, we may learn to beware.

First therefore, the heretics called Carpocratiani are to be utterly
condemned, who affirmed that our Savior Christ was conceived after the carnal
manner of the conception of other men.

Likewise, the Ebionites, Cerinthians, and Theodosians, who held that he was
conceived by the coming together of Joseph and Mary.

These are directly contrary to the holy Scriptures, touching the conception of
our Savior by the holy Ghost.

There have been diverse other heretics, who have partly denied the truth of
the humane nature; and partly have perverted and ouerthrown the truth of the
personal union of both the natures.

Against the truth of the humane nature.

First the Valentinians, Secundians and Apollinaristes do deny that Christ
took a body of Mary.

The Tatians and Manichaans deny Christ to be of the seed of David.

The Ophites, Cerdonians, Marcionites, Apollites, Manichaans, and
A^^artodochites, deny CHRIST, that was borne of the Virgin Mary, to be true
man, etc.

The Apellites say, that the body of Christ was compounded of the four
Elements and of the Stars.

The Armenij say, that the body, which was taken of Mary, was from the
conception, such as could not suffer any pain.

The Valentinians, and other heretics, would make Christ to have a heavenly and
spiritual body, and not an earthly body, or like to the bodies of other men.

The Arians, and Eunomian^, deny Christ to have taken a humane soul, but only
a body.

The Apollinaristes, grant that Christ took indeed a soul with the body, but
yet a vegetative soul only, and not a reasonable soul.

Such are the wicked heresies, embraced of many, contrary to the verity of our
Savior Christ's humane nature, both in body and soul.

Now, against the truth of the personal union of the humane nature with the
divine, there are many like wicked and fantastical heresies.

First, the Entychians, Iacobites, and Armenij affirm that the humane nature
of Christ, was absorpt or swallowed up of the divine.

The Nestorians, Seruetans, and Vbiquitarians, contend that the humane nature
is deified (that is, as they say) changed into the divine, The ground of the
article.
and made equal unto it.

The Timothians say, that there is a third thing, made of a certain mixture of
two natures in Christ.

This third thing, the Theodosians say, that it is mortal: but the Caians say,
it is immortal.

The Manichaeans affirm that the Son of God; descended into the Son of
Mary, at his Baptism.

The Apollinaristes say, that the word of God it self, was changed into the
flesh.

The Theopaschites teach, that the divine nature did suffer in Christ.

The Acephali and Seuerites, grant indeed, that both the divine nature, and
also the humane, do remain in Christ: but they say with all, that their
proprieties are confounded, and not distinct.

The Apollinariste^ again, they say, that Christ in that he is man, has no
will of his own, because the humane nature is, by their false doctrine,
confounded and changed into the divine.

The Monothelites say likewise, that there is one only will in Christ.

And thus, we seeing, how many and how wicked and damnable heresies, are taken
up and embraced, against the holy truth of this Article: it may and ought
justly, to star us up, to be both very diligent to ground our selves in the
truth, and also to watch with great circumspection, that the Devil do never,
by any of his wicked suggestions, or deceitful instruments, draw us away, in
one respect or other, either on the right hand, or on the left. And to this
end, let us all pray to God all ways, with great instance, that it may please
him, of his infinite mercy, even for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, to teach,
direct, preserve, and establish our hearts, in his holy truth. And so shall we
be safe. Amen.

Belief in God the Son, borne of the Virgin Marie.


It follows, that we profess our selves to believe, that our Savior was
borne of the Virgin Marie.



The holy History of it, together with the report of those things, which are
adioined to the further illustration of it, is contained in the 2. chap: of the
Evangelist Luke, from the beginning of the chapter to the 20. verse.

And in the last verse of the first chap: of the Evangelist Matthew. And in the
^^ch. from the beginning of it, to the 19. verse of the same.

Explication and proof.
So then, we have two things to observe, concerning the Nativity and birth of
our Savior.

First, the history of the Nativity it self, in respect of the most near
circumstances of it.

Secondly, those things which followed after it, for the more full
manifestation and confirmation of the certainty of it.

Let us therefore consider both of the one and also of the other of them.



It reports these three things.

First, the time when our Savior was borne.

Secondly, the place where.

Thirdly, the manner how.

Belief in God the Son who was borne of the Virgin Mary. Explication and
proof.
Qus. What does it teach us concerning the time of the birth?

Ans. The holy Story teaches us in the first place, that it was shortly after
the birth of John the Baptist.

It is true. For so may it plainly be gathered, by comparing of the lattter
part of the first chapter of Saint Luke, from the 57. verse, with the beginning
of the second chapter. For immediately after that the Evangelist has recorded
the birth of John Baptist, and the memorable matters belonging thereunto: then
he continues the holy Story thus, in the first words of the 2. chap: And it
came to pass in those days. etc. that is to say, the days shortly following
the birth of John the Baptist. So that like as he had before annexed the
History of the co^ception of our Savior Christ succeeding the history of the
co^ception of John, about sixth months after: so he does now answereably note
the birth of our Savior, as following the birth of John, in the same
proportion. And the rather are we so to understand the Evangelist Luke,
because he does observe the like course of proceeding afterward: treating of
the Preaching of our Savior, after the History of John's Preaching and the
apprehension and death of our Savior after the history, of the imprisonment
and beheading of John. The which notation of the time, is agreeable to the holy
Prophecy of Malachie, who forthwith under the name of Elijah: foretelling,
that John the Baptist should be the forerunner of our Savior, and that then
our Savior himself should follow shortly after: whereunto also the other
Evangelists, as well as Luke, do agree as touching the successiue Preaching of
our Savior, after the Preaching of John: though in the report of their
successions, in conception and birth, Luke is alone.

Thus then we see in the first place, the first note concerning the description
of the time.



He tells us, that it was at such time, as Augustus Caesar was Emperor of
Rome, a time of famous note in all the world. At the which time also, as he
further records, Cyrenius was the Governor of Syria, a thing well known to
the Jews, and other nations adioined to the same.

They are the very words of the Evangelist indeed. So that the time of the
nativity of our Savior, is described by such notes, as all both Jews and
Gentiles are plainly instructed, and certified of it as of a truth undoubtedly
to be believed. And it stands in certain record among other the famous and
well known works of God, to the condemnation of all infidels, and athiests in
the world, as a public testimony of the whole world against them, if so be
they will not repent them of their grievous sins of unbelief and
contradiction, and embrace the truth of God to their salvation.

And this description of the time, is agreeable to the ancient prophecy of the
Patriark Iaakob, Gen: 49.10. by whom God foretold that the scepter (or tribe,
Shebet.
for so the hebrewe word does often signify in the books of the Prophet
Moses) should not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet,
till Shilo (that is, until his Son, to wit, Christ that promised seed and
great Lawgiver and King) should come. Yea even of that tribe of Judah, to rule
and govern all Israel, and the whole Church of God, both Jews and Gentiles,
for ever. As though Iaacob should have said thus, albeit both distinction of
tribe, and also the power of scepter and government, shall be utterly taken
away after the birth or coming of Christ in the flesh: for so the word Shilo
(signifying the afterbirth) gives to understand, the continent being put for
the thing contained or lapped up in it: yet before this his coming, it shall
not be altogether so, says the holy Patriarch. And so it came to pass indeed.

For unto the birth of our Savior (as Josephus writes in his History of the
Jews) this tribe had the government of Sanhedrim, which was a senate of 72.
persons, among whom no doubt, some were of the stock and family of King David.
But Herod, not long after the birth of our Savior, maliciously caused those
that were then of this Senate, to be cruelly murdered. So that, though there
continued a power of government, among them after this, yet it was with great
limitation and restraint, as appears John. 18.31. Where they themselves
profess, that they had no authority to put any man to death: and it did waste
away more and more, until the Scepter altogether ceased among them; yea and
the distinction of the tribe also, by reason of that horrible destruction,
which fell upon many hundred thousands of them, and therewithal, a miserable
dispersion of those that were left alive. Thus the prophecy of the Patriark
Iaakob, described the time of the birth of our Savior, by the continuance of
the tribe and scepter till that day: insinuating therewithal, that
thenceforth, they should not only decay, but also cease, according as it came
to pass. Hitherto therefore concerning the time.



At Beth-lehem in the tribe, or territory of Judah.

Explication and proof.
So writes the Evangelist Luke in the 4. verse of his second chapter. And so
also, writes the Evangelist Matthew, in the first verse of his second chapter.

It accords also with the prophecy of Micah, the Prophet in the 2. verse of
his 5. chap. From whence it was likewise acknowledged, for a matter out of
question, that Christ was to be borne there, by the appointment of God, the
chief Priests and Scribes of the people themselves being Judges: as we read
Matthew. 2. verses 4, 5, 6. though afterward, they proved the most malignant, and
malicious adversaries that our Savior Christ had.

Joseph and Marie dwelling in Nazaret, a place far removed from Beth-lehem,
and so remaining till near upon the time of her deliverance: she should, this
notwithstanding, be brought in bed, and delivered of her child at Beth-lehem?

The Evangelist Luke shows, that God by his divine providence brought it so
to pass, in that near upon the same time, Augustus the Emperor of Rome, to
whom Judea was then subject and tributarie, gave out his edict and
commandment, that all the world should be taxed.

Explication and proof.
The Evangelist Luke shows, that it came so to pass indeed by reason of a
general taxation of all the world by Augustus the Emperor: that is to say, of
so much of the world, as was subject to the Empire of Rome, which no doubt was
a very great part, if not the greater part of the whole world.

And further also this we may easily conceive, that by virtue of the same
edict, every one of any of the tribes of Israel, must personally appear, and
be enrolled and taxed in his own City. Whereupon Joseph is constrained to
go up from Nazaret, a City of Galile, to Beth-lehem in Judea, which was the
native City of King David: there to be taxed, because he was of the house and
lineage of David. And Marie also, goes with Joseph: whether taking the occasion
to accompany her husband, that so she might visit her kindred with him: or
minding to serve the holy providence of God, to the fulfilling of the holy
prophecy of Micah, if happily by this occasion, God brought it to her mind:
or rather was enforced to go through the straitnes of the edict, specially
touching those descended of the royal stock of King David.

But howsoever it was, whether purposedly on Mary's part, or beside her
purpose: this is certain, that the matter was so ordered by divine providence,
as was answered: and namely by means of the Emperors edict (neither Joseph
nor Marie of themselves intending this long journey) that the prophecy,
touching the place of our Saviors nativity, might be fulfilled, as was
alleged before.



It was externally, every way very poor and base, answerable to the place it
self: which was not Jerusalem, nor any chief City above other, but poor
Beth-lehem.

And in this poor Beth-lehem, not any chief dwelling house, meet for man to
lodge in: but in a stable, where Mary was thrust aside, because Joseph could
get no other room in the Inn, in that time of so special resort, and
concourse of people, as it may seem.

So indeed does Saint Luke report it, in the same his second chap: verses,
4.5.6, 7. Explication and proof
Whereby it is evident, that our Savior Christ, though the only right heir
of all things, came into the world, in as poor a manner, as any the poorest
child that was borne of woman; specially of any, of orderly and honest course
of life, whosoever.

The chamber of his birth, as we see, was no better then a stable: his cradle
but a trough or manger, wherein cattle used to eat their prouender. And I
doubt not, but his swaddeling cloutes, and all other furniture, was answerable
to them. So little was our Savior beholding to the world, for that
entertainment, which it gave him for his first welcome into it.

Thus far of the holy history of the birth it self, concerning the time,
place, and manner of it; answerable to the holy prophecies, given forth by the
holy Ghost, of the same. For even from his birth and so forth, he was in
outward appearance, but as a root out of a dry ground, and having neither
form nor beauty, like to any of the bravery of this world: as the Prophet
Isaiah foretold, as we read in his holy Prophecy, chap. 53. verse 2.

Let us now proceed to those things, which are in the holy story adioined to
the most near circumstances of the birth, for the more full manifestation and
confirmation of the certainty of it.



They were these which follow.

First the testimony of the holy Angels, to the Shepherds of Beth-lehem, the
same day that our Savior was borne: first by one Angel alone, who was by and
by seconded by the acclamation of many Angels, whom the Evangelist terms to
be a multitude of heavenly soldiers; giving thereby to understand, that
howsoever our Savior was borne, as a child desolate upon earth, yet he was
guarded with all the Angels of heaven.

Secondly, the Shepheardes themselves were witnesses of the birth of our
Savior, thus testified by the holy Angels, so soon as they using great
diligence, had found by experience and trial made, that all things were so, as
the Angel had told them.

Thirdly, the circumcision of our Savior Christ, following 8. days after the
birth, and the naming of him Jesus, at the same time as the Angel had named him
before he was conceived in the womb: they tend directly to the same end.

Fourthly, hereunto also serves the appearing of the Star, to the wise men
of the East, and their coming to make inquiry of his birth at Jerusalem,
making no question but that he was undoubtedly borne: and thereupon also, the
going of the star before them, not circular wise, but in a direct course,
from Jerusalem to Beth-lehem, where they found him: both according to the
direction of the holy Scriptures, and also of the extraordinary star: and
offered their gifts, in declaration of their spiritual homage unto him.

Fifthly, that which is recorded concerning the presentation of our Savior
Christ according to the Law of Moses, together with the memorable things which
fell out at the same: such as were the testimony of Simeon, and his holy
prophecy, concerning our Savior, in the Temple: and the testimony of Anna a
holy Prophetisse, both in the Temple, and to all in the city: they were so
many testimonies of his birth.

Finally, the birth of our Savior Christ is manifested and confirmed, by that
which is recorded concerning the malice of Herod; in that he most wickedly, and
treacherously, intended the destruction and murder of our Savior, even from
his birth. And in that, to the same end and purpose, he commanded a most cruel
and barbarous infanticide, or murdering of all the young infants, that were
male children in Beth-lehem, and all the places there about, from two years of
age, and under: though all in vain, through the most watchful providence of
God, who preserved our Savior from this untimely death, that he might in due
time, be a Savior by death, to give us everlasting life.

All these are indeed, very notable manifestations and confirmations, The
meaning of the Article.
of the undoubted certainty of our Savior Christ, as the words of the holy
Evangelists themselves, do plainly declare.

Concerning the first whereof, we read in the 2. chap: of Saint Luke from the
8. Explication and proof.
verse to the 15. in these words, And there were (says the Evangelist) in the
same country shepherds, abiding in the field, and keeping watch by night,
because of their flock. And lo, the Angel of the Lord came upon them, etc.

Concerning the second, it follows in the same chapter, from the beginning of
the 15. verse to the end of the twentieth, after this manner, And it came to
pass, when the Angels were gone away from them into heaven, that the
She^heardes said one to another, let us go then unto Bethlehem, and see this
thing that is come to pass, which the Lord has showed unto us. So they came
with have, and found both Marie, and Joseph, and the babe laid in the manger,
etc.

Concerning the third confirmation, it follows still in the same chap: from
the 21. verse thus. And when the eight days were accomplished, that they
should circumcise the child, his name was then called JESUS, who was named of
the Angel, before he was conceived in the womb.

By the which circumcision, our Savior made himself subject to the Law, and
to stand bound to fulfill the righteousness of it for us. So that he did not
only take our nature, but also set himself in our estate and condition, so
far as might be without sin.

Concerning the fourth confirmation, we read, Mat: ch: 2. from the beginning of
the ch: to the 12. verse, when Jesus then was borne, at Beth-lehem in Judea, in
the days of Herod the King behold (says S. Matthew) there came wise men from
the East to Jerusalem, Saying, where is the King of the Jews that is borne?
For we have seen his Star in the East, and are come to worship him, etc.

Concerning the fifth, return again to the second chapter of Saint Luke, and
read in your Bible, from the 22. verse to the 39, as it follows thus. And
when the days of her purification, after the Law of Moses were accomplished,
they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord, etc. By the which
his presentation, he was dedicated to God, to minister in holy things, on our
behalf.

And concerning the last confirmation, we read it thus testified by the
Evangelist Mat: ch: 2. verses 16, 17, 18. Then Herod seeing that he was mocked
of the wise men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the male
children that were in Bethlehem and in all the coasts thereof, from two year
old and under, according to the time which he had diligently searched out of
the wise men. Then was that fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophet
Jeremiah, saying. In Rama was a voice heard, mourning and weeping, and great
lamentation: Rachel weeping for her children and would not be comforted,
because they were not.

Thus we see, that we have a most sure and plentiful ground and stay, for
the warranting of our belief, concerning the birth of our Savior Christ, of
the Virgin Mary.

LEt us therefore go forward to the second point of our inquiry, concerning
the meaning of the Article.



The meaning of this Article is thus much, that the humane nature of our
Savior Christ: being conceived by the holy Ghost, of the very substance of the
Virgin Marie, as touching the flesh, and continuing to receive nourishment, and
grouth, in the womb of the Virgin, after the natural course and manner of the
fruit of the womb, in all other women: yea continuing in the womb for so
long a time, as women do go ordinarily with child; was also according to the
same season, borne, and brought forth into that world, by the travel of the
Virgin, after the same natural manner, that other children, are borne.

Explication and proof.
This is the true meaning of it indeed. Al things were as ordinary in the birth,
as might be, concerning a child of so extraordinary co^ception. And yet, that
also was as ordinary, as was meet and convenient that it should be without al
unclean and sinful lust, yea eue^ as touching the holy vir: who was in this
respect, sanctified of God, above all other women. God would in the one, and in
^he other, The Promise
avoid all miraculous dealing, as much as might be, that our Savior might not
only take our very true nature, but also that we might know, and upon
certain and clear knowledge, believe it to be so.

To this very purpose it is, that in the ancient prophecy of the Patriarch
Iaakob (as was touched before) such a word is used, to signify the humane
nature of our Savior, as properly notes the afterbirth, which usually
attends upon childbearing. Shilo, 1. secunda eius, id in quo innoluitur
partus in vtero existens. Metonymia rei continentis pro contenta vt inquit Trem.

And that by this word Shilo, the Messiah or Christ is meant, all Interpreters,
both Jews and others, do consent, as the same Tremellius witnesses.

To this purpose also, mention is made of the opening of the womb according to
that Law of God, touching the first borne, which should be presented to the
Lord: Exodus: 13.2. And so our Savior was, as we saw before. Luke 2.23. Neither
is the circumcision of our Savior, nor the purification of the Virgin Mary,
impertinent hereunto.

And it is to very necessary purpose, that we should know these things to be
so: to the end we might be every way assured of the truth of the humane
nature of our Savior, against all heresies contradicting the same. For
otherwise surely, they should never have been thus plainly, and particularly
expressed, in the holy Scriptures, both of the Law and of the Gospel.

Now it is time that we come to the Promise.



All the former promises, and prophesies, concerning the conception of our
Savior for us and our benefit; they are likewise promises that he should be
borne for us, and our benefit; yea even for the greatest benefit that might
possibly be procured unto us.

Explication and proof.
It is true. It could not possibly be, that our Savior should be conceived by
the holy Ghost, in vain. His birth could by no means be hindered or defeated.
And therefore the promise of this, may be said to be included in the promise of
that.



Yes. The Lord did assure his Church of this singular mercy, by his holy
Prophet Isaiah, long before it came to pass.

Explication and proof.
This also is very true. For so we read in the 6. verse of his 9. chapter of
his prophecy, where we find it thus written, unto us (that is, to our
singular benefit and comfort) a child is borne, and unto us a Son is given,
and the government is upon his shoulder, etc. Read also, Ier: 23. verses 5.6.
Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous
branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and he shall execute judgment and
justice in the earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell
safely: and this is the name whereby they shall call him, the Lord our
righteousness. And again with some further amplification, chap: 33. verses 14,
15, 16. etc.

To this purpose likewise, serve the prophesies already mentioned, concerning
the time, the place, and the manner of his birth, etc. Wherefore of this no
more now at this time.

Comforts of faith, which arise from the birth of our Savior. Is it not a
matter of very great and singular comfort?

Yes verily. It both was, and is still, matter of great joy and comfort to the
holy Angels: much more ought it to be so to us, and so is no doubt, to all true
believing Christians.

Explication and proof.
So indeed we read Luke, chap: 2. that the holy Angels reioiced: that the
Shepherds reioiced: that Simeon and Anna reioiced at the birth of our Savior
Christ. And so ought we all to rejoice, as having singular cause with them
according to the speech of the Angel to the Shepherds, saying, Behold I bring
you tidings of great joy, that shall be to all people. That is, that unto you
is borne a Savior, etc.

But of the duties more afterward. The Comforts.
As touching the cause of joy and comfort, which we have hereby, we may
conceive of it the rather, if we help our selves by a comparison not unfit to
be made in this cause. We know that great joy arises to a nation, when the
King has an heir apparent borne to the crown: by whom there is good hope,
that the government shall not be derived to a stranger, whereby unnatural
oppression and tyrannous government might easily take footing, etc. as we our
selves have lately very sensibly felt, to the unspeakable joy of our hearts,
when after the doleful decease of our blessed Queen Elizabeth, our gracious
King James has succeeded, whose entrance upon his royal throne and scepter
among us, was right ioious to all right English hearts: but so much the more,
because he brings with him, a young Prince, yea more then one, of a right
princely seed. But the cause of joy which now we speak of concerning our
Savior Christ, is infinitely greater, not only to us, or any one nation, that
should otherwise have perished under the tyranny of the Devil, sin, death,
and Hell: but to all nations under heaven: seeing the deliverance and salvation
of all people, depends upon our Savior the only heir apparent of the most
high possessor of heaven and earth for ever and ever.

And seeing (as was said) the Angels of heaven were reioiced by the birth of
our Savior, as is evident by their praising of God for it: as we have seen
Luke 2.13.14. and namely for our sake, who have the chief benefit of it: it
follows by good reason, that we our selves, much rather have principal
cause of most abundant rejoicing herein.



First, because hereby, the Lord our God, has to the glory of his own name,
most graciously and comfortably manifested his divine nature in the Person of
his Son, so far as it is meet for the same to be manifested to us, here in
this world.

Secondly, because he has manifested his most gracious and Fatherly good will
toward all sorts of men in every nation of the whole world, whosoever shall
thankefully embrace that life and immortality, which he has brought to light,
and offers in his Son.

Thirdly, because from hence arises unspeakable peace, to the conscience of
all true believers both in the use of all present blessings, and also in the
assured hope of the inheritance of all the blessings of the life to come: in
that through him, we are adopted to be ioin^ ^eires with him.

F nally, the birth of our Savior is exceeding comfortable, because the world
is as it were borne again, and renewed unto God in him: according as it is
said, He is a light of the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel; as
Simeon said of him, while yet he was new borne. Yea because after a long time
of calamity, as it were of most gloomie dark and tempes^ous weather, he is
as the rising of the Sun upon the world, wonderfully clearing the whole face
and compass of it.

So indeed we read from the 2. verse of the 9. chap: of the Evangelical
prophet Isaiah in that he prophesied thus, The people that walked in darkness
have seen a ^reat light: they that did dwell in the land of the shadow of
death, upon them has the light shined etc. And the Apostle Paul says, that in
our Savior Christ all things are become new. 2. Cor: 5.17. Read also,
Malachie, chap: 4.2. He is the Son of righteousness, and health is under his
wings.

But that we may proceed in some order.

Concerning the first branch of the answer, read, Heb: 1. verses 2, 3. This
representation is much more gracious and comfortable, then was that sight of
Gods glory, which Moses might be partaker of, Exodus 33.20 etc.

Con^erning the second branch, read and consider the words of the holy Angel^,
Luke 2.14. Glory to God on high, in earth peace, and toward men, good will.
And 1. John, ^.5. ye know that he (that is the Son of God our Lord Jesus
Christ appeared, that he might take away our sins, and in him is no sin. And
our Savior himself in the Gospel of John, chapter 18.37. For this cause (says
he) am I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear
witness to the truth.

And the Apostle Paul, 2. Tim. chap. 1. verse 10. Our holy calling to
salvation, The Duties.
is made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has
abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light, through the Gospel.

And here note also, that it is no small comfort to us the Gentiles, that (as
it is evident in the Genealogy of our Savior) he descended on the mothers
side, from some of the Gentiles: as from Rahab, and Ruth, and not altogether
from the Jews.

Neither is it to be neglected, that our Savior did not only descend of the
godly, but also of some wicked progenitors: that it might the more clearly
appear, that no sin of ours, could either stain him, or hinder the
sanctification, either of Jew or Gentile, believing in him.

Touching the third branch of the answer, add unto that parcel of the speech
of the holy Angels alleged before, (In earth peace) the saying of the Apostle
Paul, Romans 8.17. If we be children, we are also heirs, of God, and heirs
annexed with Christ, etc.

To conclude, in all these respects, worthily does the same Apostle determine
it to be a most great and gracious mystery of godliness, that God is manifested
in the flesh: and thereby has declared the light of his countenance, most
clearly toward his people. It is a joyous and comfortable thing, as we know,
for any people to see the face of their earthly Prince, to look chearefully
upon them. But all the comfort, arising from the cheerful face of earthly
Princes, is a small comfort, in comparison of that which the christian heart
may take, from the light of Gods countenance shining upon us, in the most
sweet and amiable face of our Savior Christ, in whom he has adopted us to be
children to himself, and heirs with our Savior, as was said even now. We
may likewise conclude this point from the practice of the Prophet Isaiah, who
chap. 7 14. and chap. 9.6, 7. and chap. 11.1. repeateth this as a special
comfort to the Church of God against all discouragements that may befall it.
Behold (says he) a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, etc. And again,
For unto us a child is borne, etc. And yet again, But there shall come a rod
forth of the stock of Ishai, etc.

These comforts, have indeed a further respect, or rather prospect, as we may
say, to our Savior Christ, not only borne, but also dead and buried, and
risen again, etc. Nevertheless, we cannot but derive them from his birth,
seeing they have as it were their birth together with him.

ANd thus from the Comforts, let us come to the Duties of faith, which ought to
grow from the seeds of the same sown in our hearts by the preaching of the
Gospel.

They may be considered of us, as I have been taught, either more generally:

Or -- else somewhat more particularly.

Be it so. How therefore in the first place may they be more generally co^siderd?

First we may, yea we ought to learn, from the example of the Virgin Mary, to
keep in faithful memory, and diligently to ponder and weigh in our hearts,
the nativity it self, with all those things, that are spoken and done, for
the manifestation, confirmation, and i^lustration of the same.

Secondly, according to the nature of the mystery of the birth and Person of
him that is borne, and according to the blessed ends of his coming into the
world, which are altogether most holy, spiritual, grave, and reverend: such
also must be the nature and quality of all our joy and rejoicing concerning the
same: that is to say, nothing carnal, wanton, or licentious, but altogether
spiritual, holy, sober, and heavenly.

And answerable to this kind and nature of our joy, must be all the fruits and
effects of the same continually.

Explication and proof.
It is very reasonable, and meet indeed, that they should be so. And out of all
doubt, upon the due meditation and weighing of the birth, together with the
most worthy things belonging thereunto: very excellent and holy effects will
follow, through the blessing of God, even according to the working of his holy
Spirit, in the hearts of those whom he has made and propounded to be patterns
and examples unto us herein, both Angels from heaven, and also men and women
on earth, such as we have heard of before.

It is our bounden duty therefore, even to the same ends, so to meditate, as we
must never cease pondering and weighing of this part of the mystery of faith,
until we have prevailed with our hearts, to draw the^ to reverence, and admire
at the most high and holy wisdom, and mercy, and goodness of the lord our God,
herein.

And in this respect, as was said in the first part of the answer, the example
of the Virgin Marie is notable, as well for meditation, as for the holy and
heavenly fruits thereof. Luk, 2.19. Mary kept al those sayings, and pondered
the^ in her heart, etc.

But as touching the popish, that is to say, the superstitious manner, or the
profane and carnal manner which always accompanies superstition, in the
remembrance and solemnization of the nativity of our Savior, by keeping of a
good Chrismas unto him, in inordinate and gluttonous belly cheer, with greater
dispensation and license to all kind or revel and disorder, then at any other
time of the year; in dicing and carding, in masking and mumming, in setting up
Lords of mis-rule, as they are rightly termed: it will upon due examination be
found, to be a most absurd, and abominable kind of solemnizing: even as far
removed from the due celebratio^ of the memorial of the holy birth of our
Savior, as it draws more near to the profane and superstitious festiuities,
used at the birth days of the heathen; such as was the more private solemnity
of Herod's birth day, when John Baptist lost his head, and the public feasts of
Bacchus, in the which the reins were laid loose to drunkenness, and all other
filthiness of the flesh.

The right way of celebrating the remembrance of the birth of our Savior, is
clean contrary to this. The feast of the Lord are al of them called holy
conuocations, by his own holy ordinance. Leuit. 23.1, 2, 3, 4. etc.
That is to say, It is not only, for a few days at one time or season of the
year: but on every day throughout the whole year, and all the years of our
lives, to be more and more careful, to deny all worldly lusts, and every
practice of ungodliness: and to set our hearts to lead our lives as righteously,
soberly, and godly as we may, by all good means and helps sanctified of God,
attain unto. According to the notable instruction of the holy Apostle. Tit.
2.11, 12, etc. yea according to the teaching of the appeara^ce of the grace and
mercy of God it self, being duly weighed and thought upon.

Read also Ephesians. 5 15, 16, etc. And Isai. chapter 2. verse 2, etc. And Psalm. 12 2.1,
2.

So that to speak generally and briefly in a word, the nativity and birth of
our Savior, duly considered of us, ought to set us continually a work, to
mind our own new birth and all prosperous growth and proceeding in the same.
2. Cor. 5.17. Read also Gal. 4.19. And chapter 6.15.

Neither may we, in this general consideration of duty, neglect to admonish
our selves, to have care to strengthen our faith, by the observation of the
former prophesies, fulfilled in the birth of our Savior, both in respect of
the time, place, and manner of it, etc.

Such then is the more general consideration of the duties.



By the consideration of the time of the birth of our Savior, we may learn,
that God is specially ready to relieve and succor his Church, with spiritual
relief, at such time as it is outwardly in special distress: and therefore
that we are never to be out of heart, but to comfort our selves in the love of
Gods mercy.

The consideration of the place, as also the manner of the birth, in that it
was very poor and base, as touching all outward and worldly glory: it teaches
us, yea it sensibly represents before our eyes, that our Savior Christ came
not into the world, to bring us earthly riches, but to make us rich in
spiritual grace, nor to set us up in worldly honor, but to advance us to the
glory of his heavenly kingdom: and therefore that it is our duty to mind and
look for these things from him, and to esteem them to be riches and honor
sufficient for us, although we should want the other.

The same consideration teaches us furthermore, that they are not to estimate
and measure the love or displeasure of God, according either to abundance or
want of outward things: but according to that sheere testimony, which it gives
of it self, from the secret insinuatio^ of the holy ghost, by who^ God sheddeth
the assurance of his love abroad in our hearts.

Moreover, we may justly learn from the same, to bear all wants and disgrace
in the world, humbly and patiently: and if worldly riches and honor increase
to beware of priding our selves in them: remembering that our Savior wanted
them, even from his coming into the world to his going out of the same.

Finally, it may be an evident admonition and warning unto us, that we be not
at any time offended or caused to stumble, by occasion of any outward poverty
or debasement of the church of Christ, or of any true and faithful member, or
members thereof, whatsoever they be.

These indeed are very meet and convenient duties, or at the least a bounden
dutifulness of the heart and mind, Explication and proof.
which will no doubt yield many singular duties, even in the outward actions
of our lives.

And that the Lord would have us learn, from the seasonable time of the birth
of our Savior, that he has a special care to relieve his Church, against the
special calamities thereof, and at such times as it is so feebled, that it is
ready as it were to totter and fall: we may evidently perceive by that use,
which the holy Ghost taught both the Virgin Marie, and Zachary also to make,
even in that respect. For so says Marie in her thanksgiving. Luke, 1.54. He
has vpholden Israel his servant, being mindful of his mercy. (...): that is,
he has as one would say, taken his Church by the hand, to lift it up, being as
it were ready to fall to the ground. And Zachary verse 69. in his
thanksgiving, says likewise, to the praise of God, in respect of our Savior,
then shortly to appear. He has raised up the horn of salvation unto us, in
the house of his servant David, etc. He has raisee it up (says he) to wit,
being at that time, as it were sunk down, or broken off, as it were to the
very head. This therefore ought to encourage us to be of good comfort in the
Lord, though it do for any time go hardly with the Church more generally, or
with any of our selves in particular: seeing God is ready in due time, even in
trouble, to reach out his hand.

Secondly, that the poor and base manner of the coming of our Savior Christ
into the world, altogether contrary to the glory and pride thereof, is a plain
demonstration, that he came not in worldly respects, but to erect a spiritual
kingdom, and to enrich and beautify his Church spiritually: it is of it self
very clear. And so the Apostle Paul understands and interprets it 2. Cor.
8. verse 9. Ye know (says he) the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he
being rich, for your sakes became poor, that ye through his poverty might be
made rich. This poverty and abasement, beginning thus to show it self at the
birth, continued to the death: and therefore no part of it is to be excluded.
Yea thus does our Savior himself afterward interpret the same, to the
Apostles hand: in that he assuring his Disciples of a kingdom, yet tells
them plainly, that they must look for affliction here in this evil world.
Luke, 12.32. And Ioh. 14.17. and chapter 16.33. Hence therefore it is plain, that
duty requires, that we do embrace our Savior Christ for his own sake, and
for the hope of good things by him in the life to come: and not for the love of
any worldly thing here in this life, though godliness has the promise of the
things of his life also, so far as God shall see them to be good and
profitable for us.

Thirdly, that the same base and poor manner of the coming of our Savior
Christ into the world, ought to teach us, that we are to measure the love of
God by outward riches, and worldly preferments, it is as clear as the light of
the Sun. For whom did God, or whom could he possibly love as he loved his
own only begotten Son, for whose sake alone, and not otherwise, can any
find favor with him? And yet behold, he is borne in a stable, etc. Let no man
therefore imagine, that he is so much the better before God, by how much he
has been more richly borne: yea, though he should have been borne after the
manner of Princes children, in never so costly and decked chambers, wrapped up
in never so soft linen, laid down to sleep in never so easy a cradle,
nourced up never so daintily, etc.

This should be but a deceitful fancy. All are alike by nature, sinful and
base creatures: and as all are brought to the same baptism, so do all stand
in like need to be washed and cleansed from their sins, by the blood of
Christ, etc. without which washing away of sin, the children of Princes, as
well as of the meanest subjects: yea even Princes themselves, for all their
great riches and stately pomp, shall be condemned from the glorious presence of
the most high god.

And therefore also, on the other side, no true christian ought to be
discouraged, although they be poorly borne, nor any christian woman, though
she be poorly brought in bed, as if her child were of less account before
God, because of that. For do we not see that Marie was so? yea like enough
more poorly, then the poorer sort of women are wont to be, and with less
comfortable helpers, and in a less commodious and seemly place for such a
business, as the poorest chamber in a base cottage. But what should we speak of
Marie, thus poorly brought in bed, in comparison of the child it self, that
was borne of her? For the matter is infinitely more admirable, in respect of
him the natural Son of God, then of her by nature the daughter of Eve: yea
it is not much admirable in respect of her, save only in regard of him.

Fourthly, who shall not be ashamed to murmr at his wants: or on the other
side to be proud, when he is in wealthy and honorable estate in the world,
if he do with a right and well advised eye, look upon the birth of the Son of
God: without whom it had bin impossible, but we must have bin both borne in
most extreme dishonor, and also have continued in misery for ever.

Finally, how should we be justly offended at any outward baseness of the
Church, or any true members thereof, if we do advisedly look to the outward
baseness of the most glorious head, Prince and governor of them? Is it not meet
that the Church here upon earth, which are as the members of the body, should
be suitable to the head, such as it was while it remained here on the earth? It
may suffice us, that we know it is glorious with in, though it be outwardly
somewhath brown or black. Psalm. 45.13. Cant. 1.4.5.

Thus then we see, that many outward duties, from a great inward dutifulnes of
heart, do belong to the comfort of faith concerning the birth of our Savior
Christ duly weighed and considered: both more generally, and also more
specially, as has already bin laid forth, in diverse particulars, in such sort,
as that which has been hitherto observed, might seem to suffice.

Nevertheless for the further clearing of so worthy a point, it shall not be
superfluous for us (as I suppose) to endeavor to gather a further direction
herein, from the examples and practice of those, to whom the birth of our
Savior was first manifested: and whom we know, to have been guided by the
holy Ghost therein, as has been observed at large, in the sermons made upon
those parts of our text.

Of these duties, I desire that you do as briefly as may be, make some
rehearsal again, according to those examples, which God has set before us,
to the same end.

From the example of the holy Angels, we may justly learn, that in so much as
they, to whom the incarnation and birth of our Savior Christ did not so
properly belong, did nevertheless, to the glorifying of God on our behalf, most
earnest bless and praise the Lord: much rather ought we our selves to do so;
seeing for our sakes it was, that the Son of God thus humbled and abased
himself.

From the example of the Sheepheards we are taught, that it is our duty, to
use all diligence, both in seeking after the knowledge of our Savior Christ
borne into the world, and of the right ends and uses of his coming and abiding
in it: and also in mutual exherting and encouraging one another thereunto. We
may likewise learn from the^, that according as we our selves have learned and
found out Christ Jesus in his word, and by the instructions thereof: so it is
our duty, as much as lies in us, to make him known to al other.

And further, both from the example of the Sheepheards, and also of those which
heard the things which they reported unto them concerning the birth of our
Savior: we may well learn, that it is our duty to esteem reverently of the
same things, and of all other of like holy record, and to praise and glorify
God therein.

What the duty is, which the example of the vir: Marie teaches us, it has
bin answered before. From the example of the wisemen, who came out of the East
a long iourny to worship our Sa: Christ, we may profitablie learn diverse
notable lessons of good christian duty.

First, that we ought to esteem most highly and honorably of our blessed
Savior.

Secondly, that we ought to refuse no labor, or cost, in our seeking to know
him.

Thirdly, that no fear of danger withold us from diligent inquiring after
him.

Fourthly, that we be in no wise offended at the baseness of his coming into
the world: but on the contrary, that we do rejoice in our Savior so much
the more, as in him, that thereby gives us so much the more assurance, that we
shall be advanced, through his abasing of himself so low for us.

Fifthly, that we use all good circumspection, that we give no furtherance, or
advantage to the wicked, against our Savior, or his Church and Gospel.

Finally, that we do most willingly yield our selves, and all that we
have, to his most honorable service.

From the example of Simeon, we learn likewise, that it is our duty to
prefer the true knowledge of our Savior Christ made man, and sent into the
world, before all things in the whole world, yea before our own life and
being in it. His doctrine also teaches us, that not all in the world, but
they only that do truly believe in him, and dutifullie obey him, shall be
partakers of his appearing.

Last of all, from the example of Anna, we are taught in like manner, that it
is the duty of one as well as of another, of women as well as of men, with all
readiness to acknowledge and confess, that our Savior Christ, is verily and in
truth come in the flesh.

Explication and proof.
These things which are lightsome in themselves, have been more fully laid
forth, for a help to our weakness, by the interpretation and opening of the
text, in the Sermons made upon the same.

First concerning the holy Angels, Luke 2.13.14. from these words, And strait
way, there was with the Angela multitude of heavenly soldiers (that is, of
other Angels, as it appears verse. 15.) praising God and saying: Glory be to
God, etc. And touching our own duty: Read Isai: chapter 12.

Secondly, concerning the Shepherds, as it follows in the same ch: verse:
13.16.17.18.20. And it came to pass when the Angels (that is, the multitude of
heavenly soldiers before mentioned) were gone away from them into heaven,
that the Shepherds said one to another, Let us go then into Bethlehem, etc.

Thirdly, concerning those that heard the Shepheardes make report of the birth
of our Savior Christ, we read likewise in the same chap: verse 18. Of whom
this is testified, that they did all wonder at the things which were reported
by them. And verse 20. it is further testified concerning the Shepherds
themselves, that they returned, glorifying and praising God, for all that they
had heard and seen as it was spoken unto them.

And concerning the blessed Virgin Marie, it is said, verse 19. That she kept
and pondered all in her heart.

Moreover, concerning the wise men, we read Matthew: cha: 2. And not only of
their reverend estimation of our Savior, as the whole history shows, but
also of their great travel, as we read in the latter end of the first verse.
Of their boldness, verse 2. Of their ioyfulnes, without all offense at the
external baseness of our Saviors birth: and of their homage and worship done
unto him, verses 10.11. And last of all, of their circumspection and care to
perform their faithful allegiance, verse 12.

Concerning in the example of Simeon, we read Luke ch: 2. verses
28.29.30.31.32. He took our Savior up in his arms, and praised God and
said, Lord, now thou do let thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
word: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, etc. Read also verses 34.35.
Behold this child is appointed for the fall and rising of many in Israel.

Finally, concerning the Prophetisse Anna, we read as it follows in the same
chapter, verse 36. There was a Prophetisse one Anna, etc. And verse. 38. She
coming at the same instant upon them, confessed likewise the Lord, and spoke
of him to all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.

All which examples, no doubt, are recorded, The danger of not believing this
Article.
not only for the discourse and explanation of the holy Story: but also for
our instruction, and like imitation upon the same considerations, which moved
them, both to think, speak, and do, as they did.

THe duties therefore of faith, concerning this Article, being such as have
been described: now in the last place of our inquiry, what is the danger of
not believing in our Savior Christ, the eternal Son of God, borne in due
time, Virgin Marie?

The holy Apostle S. John teaches, and very earnestly affirms, that
every Spirit which confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is
not of God, but that this is the Spirit of Antichrist.

He does so indeed, as we read in the 3. verse of the fourth chapter of his
1. Explication and proof.
Epistle. And there is very good and necessary reason, why he should teach
so. For he that denies the truth of the humane nature of Christ, denies the
coming of Christ, yea and all the fruits and benefits, both of his birth, and
also of his whole life, and death. And therein he is an open adversary to God,
and his Christ, as the word Antichrist it self, given for the title of such,
plainly shows, according to the Greek language.

And beside that, insomuch as it is a grace of the Spirit of God, to teach
Christians to confess, that according to this Article of the Christian faith,
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh: as the Apostle says in the former verse: it
must needs be that all such as deny it, are of the Spirit of Antichrist, and
be therein open adversaries to God, who has sent his Son in the flesh,
truly Conceived by the holy Ghost.

Such Antichrists and adversaries both to God and his Son our Lord Jesus
Christ, were the Simonianites, Valentinians, Marcionites, Apollinaristes, and
many other sorts of heretics, as they have been rehearsed before, in the
Article of his Conception by the holy Ghost, with their several heresies,
against the humane nature of our Savior. The belief of all which heretics,
was no doubt, nothing better then an aierie and vanishing belief, even a
shadow and spectrum, of faith, and no true faith in deed: even answerable to
that which they held, that our Savior had no true body, but only an outward
appearance of a body, and which as the Devil bewitched them to think, was
but a spiritual or aierie thing of some strange composition, and not like unto
ours, etc.

And thus by the goodness of God, we are come to an end of our inquiry,
concerning the Article of the birth of our Savior Christ, according to the
propounded order of our course.

Nevertheless, upon some good consideration, we will yet more particularly
inquire (as in way of an appendix) why the name of the Virgin Marie is
mentioned, in this Article of our belief.

For it is very vnskilfullie, yea most wickedlie, and blasphemouslie
misconstrued by many, as though Marie herself, had been such a one, as had
been conceived without sin, to the end that in respect of her own purity
of nature, our Savior might be borne, and brought forth of her, without all
spot of sin. Whereupon also have followed these heretical conclusions: that
she is to be esteemed for our Lady here on earth, and a Queen in heaven, and
therefore to be pictured with a crown upon her head, and so painted in Church
windows, etc: with an opinion that she has power and authority to command
her Son: and therefore is to be prayed unto, etc. But all these are false
causes, coined in the deceiuable shop of man's superstitious and idolatrous
brain: to be utterly condemned and abhorred of all true Christians, as
intolerable blasphemies against God, and most heinous injuries, done to the
blessed virgin.



First, for the more full certainty, or perspicuitie and plainenes of the holy
history it self.

Secondly, that our belief might be so much the more e^^a^e and unfolded,
concerning the truth of the humane nature of our Savior.

Thirdly, that (as has been said already) she might be had in memorial, for
a notable example to us of believing in Christ, and of obeying his Gospel, and
of blessing, praising, and magnifying the name of God, for our salvation, which
is brought to light by the incarnation and manifestation of him.

Explication and proof.
These are the true causes indeed, as may be discerned, by that which has been
set down before. For how can God be sufficiently praised, for this most
gracious work of his? And what place is there left, for any doubting? seeing
not only, according to the prophecy of Isaiah, it is testified, that the
Mother of our Lord was a Virgin, notwithstanding the conception and birth of
this child: but also seeing it is particularly described unto us, who that
holy Virgin was, by her name, by the place of her dwelling, by her parentage,
in that she was the daughter of Elie, by her husband, to whom she was first
betrothed and afterward married, by her kindred in that Elizabeth the mother of
John Baptist, was her Cosine, etc. Luke chap: 1.26. etc. and ch: 3.23.

We cannot deny, but the Papists are ready to allege other causes: and
namely because (as they teach) the blessed Virgin is to be honored with a
religious worship, as though the Angel should by his example and practice, teach
us that we are usually to pray to her, and to praise her, saying, Hail Marie
full of grace, etc.

But it is more then absurd, that the extraordinary salutation of the Angel,
fitted and appropriated to his present message, whereby he magnifieth the
greatness of Gods singular mercy, in vouchingsafe to appoint Marie to so
honorable a service, as no creature was ever worthy to be used unto: it is
more then absurd, I say, that it should be so superstitiously perverted, to an
usual prayer, to be babled out of the mouth of every child, and to be
mumbled upon the beads of every ignorant sotte, in words of a language
unknown to the most of them that do so use it, and in a false translation and
sense, by those that have any understanding of them.

But some will say, does not the Vir: Mary her self, speaking by the holy
Ghost, say, that all the nations of the earth shall call her blessed? It seems
therefore that she prescribes, or at the least prophecieth, that there should a
certain religious honor be yielded unto her, It cannot be thought so, of any
that do rightly understand the meaning of the holy Virgin. Why?

She understanding, by the salutation and speech of the Angel, what a singular
blessing God of his free grace minded to bestow upon her, in that he appointed
her to be the Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ: yea she considering also and
knowing by the Spirit of prophecy, that she should in this respect, be
accounted to be blessed above other women, in the whole Church of God, from
generation to generation: she does from the same consideration, provoke her
own heart, to be the more thankful unto God.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. The blessed Virgin, does in no wise take upon her to
prescribe a law, which she knew well, she had no power to do. Neither could
it agree with that holy modesty, which was in the virgin so to do. And if God
had minded to set down such a law, as should have prescribed any religious
worship, to be done to her, he would have commanded that by the mouth of any
other, rather then by her own: The truth therefore is this, that she, from the
most dutiful thankfulness of her heart, does judge it very unreasonable, that
she herself should be unthankful to God, when all other should be thankful.
Nay rather, she considers in her mind, that she herself ought to excel all
other in thanksgiving, and all the days of her own age, to bless the Lord
for so inestimable a blessing bestowed upon her: yea and to set down a
memorial and monument of that praise, which God gave her grace, most
dutifullie to yield and ascribe unto him.

We do (as ye well know) usually account those blessed and happy women, which
bring forth such children, as prove good and profitable instruments, to
glorify God in his Church. And it is a great blessing of God indeed.

Belief in God the Son, who led a most holy and just life, full of
temptations and sufferings.
Much more therefore, yea above comparison, The ground and history of it.
must we account the Virgin Marie, most blessed of God, in that she was
preferred before all other women, to be the Mother of that Son of God, who
was not only an instrument of God, in that he was man, but also the Divine
author and fountain of salvation, and all blessing to the whole Church of God,
in that being God, he assumed and took our humane nature of the Virgin Mary,
to the same end.

And therefore also, to the end we may understand the thanksgiving of the
blessed Virgin the better, and therwithall in what respects we are to esteem
and call her blessed: we are to consider, that she is not only thankful to
God, for that it pleased him to make her the Mother of our Savior, but
chiefly for that salvation, which he gave her grace to apprehend by faith in
him, as the words of her own thanksgiving, do give us plainly to understand.

And thus, I trust, we have simply the true reasons, why the name of the
Virgin Marie is mentioned in our Creed, agreeable to that further declaration
thereof, which we hau^ ^n the holy Scriptures.

As for all popish fictions, like as they came into the Church, either by
crafty conveiance, or else by violent intrusion, against the good leave of the
word of God: so have we good leave, yea a straight commandment from the word,
not only to leave them, but even with all the disgrace that may be, to thrust
them out again, as it were by the head and shoulders. And God himself, of his
infinite mercy, by his own scourge, vouchsafe to whip such intruders and
deceivers, out of his holy Temple for ever, even for our Lord Jesus Christ's
sake. Amen.

Belief in God the Son, who led a most holy and just life, full of
temptations and sufferings.
THis thus observed, in way of an appendix to the article of our Saviors
nativity and birth, of the Virgin Marie.



It follows, that the same our Savior suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead and buried.

So it follows in deed, immediately after the former words, Borne of the
Virgin Marie.

Explication.
Neuerthelese, in so much as there are three special things to be known and
believed of us, according as they are recorded in the holy Scriptures, betwixt
the birth of our Savior, and his sufferings under Pontius Pilate. To wit, 1.
his education and life. 2. his doctrine, and thirdly his miracles: the which,
the articles of our Belief, in so great shortness as was propounded in it, in
regard of the common weakness of memory, could not in any commodious manner
set down: it shall be therefore to good purpose, in this more large collection
of the doctrine of faith, to inquire of them, before we come to his
sufferinges under Pontius Pilate.

Whereunto, that we may the rather persuade our own hearts: Let us I pray
you earnestly consider, that whereas the historical report of the lives of
other men, of any special worth or note, in common account, are willingly
read and observed, as it is meet they should: yea, and not only the report of
the lives of the holy servants of God, but also of many among the heathen,
such as Plutarch, and other learned writers have gathered together. Much more
willing, yea above comparison more willing ought we to be, to read, hear,
and continually to meditate of the most worthy and memorable life of our most
blessed Savior, the only true and perfect mirror of all virtue, as we shall
by the grace of God, from point to point observe.

There are indeed, many excellent things set down in the historical narration
of the lives of some among the heathen, for their civil justice and
liberality, for their bodily chastity and temperance, for their fortitude
and stout courage in defense of the public weal, etc: but all were in them,
but shadows of virtues, and no true and holy virtues indeed, if they be
compared with the virtues, which God by his holy Spirit of sanctification,
wrought in the hearts of many of his people.

Nevertheless, albeit the lives of the holy servants of God, chiefly of them
that are recorded in the holy Scriptures, be much more profitablie to be read,
and considered, then any of the heathen men: in so much as their virtues were
in them, the fruits of the holy Ghost, as was said: and therefore the words,
and works done in truth, and not for ostentations sake, or in any other
sinister and fleshly respect, as were those of the heathen: yet their lives are
not to be compared with the life of our Savior. For in reading the lives of
the best of them, we do meet with many unworthy and uncomfortable
declinings, both on the right hand, and on the left, which may justly cause us
to blushe and be ashamed in beholding the corruption of our own wicked nature,
represented before our eyes in them. But the life of our Savior, from the
beginning to the end, is without any the least blemish and stain.

Let us therefore bend our minds, with the best attention that we may, to
inquire after this most holy and righteous life of our Savior. And the rather
because whereas the virtues of other men are their own praise, etc: the
virtues of our Savior Christ, are not only his own praise, but also his
merit and desert for us, in the sight of God: as shall be hereafter, more
fully observed, in the due place thereof.

In the mean while, we are to observe, concerning the education and life of
our Savior, that it is to be considered of us, by certain degrees, according
to some commodious distinction of the years of his age: partly concerning the
time, wherein he lived a private condition of life, and partly concerning the
time, wherein he lived in a public estate or calling.

And concerning the time of his private life, we are to consider of it, first
of all from the time of his Presentation in the Temple, until about the fourth
year of his age.

For of his Circumcision, and of the Presentation it self, we have considered
already, as more nearely appertaining to his Nativity and birth.

Secondly, we are to consider of it, from the fourth year to the twelfth of
his age.

Thirdly, of that which is recorded concerning the twelfth year.

Fourthlie, from the twelfth year, to the time that he was thirty years
old: at what time his public estate and condition of life began.

Fiftlie, from the thirtith year to the time of his Passion, which was about
the space of three years and a half, to be considered from the time of his
baptism, under the note or mark as it were, of four several Passeouers.

And herein (when once we shall come unto it) we shall have occasion to
consider, after what manner our Savior was made known to the people, by the
ministry of John the Baptist, who was, as the Lord said by the Prophet
Isaiah, the voice of a Crier in the wilderness: by the voice of God the Father
himself from heaven: by the descending of the holy Ghost, in the visible
shape of a dove upon him: and last of all by the execution of his own most
holy ministry: in preaching his heavenly doctrine, and in working his most
mighty and gracious miracles. But of these also, more hereafter. It may
suffice, for the present, that we have an inckling concerning the order, wherein
we shall by Gods good grace, proceed from point to point.

NOw therefore in the first place, that we may begin from the time of the
Presentation of our Savior in the Temple, to the fourth year of his age. And
therein of his transportation or carrying out of the land of Israel into Egypt:
of his abode there: and of his return into Israel again, and also of that
which fell out in the land of Israel in the mean time.



It is notably (though briefly) described in the second chapter of the Gospel,
written by the Evangelist Matthew, from the 13. verse to the end of the
chapter.

Quest. It is so indeed. In which of the verses is his carrying into Egypt,
and his abode there testified and described unto us, by the holy Evangelist?

Answer. In the thirteen, fourteen, and fifteen.

Rehearse the words of the Text.

13 After their departure (that is, after the departure of the Wise men of the
East country) Behold (says the Evangelist) the Angel of the Lord appears
to Joseph in a dream, saying: Arise and take the Babe, and his Mother, and
fly into Egypt, and be there till I bring thee word: for Herod will seek
the Babe to destroy him.

14. So he arose, and took the Babe and his Mother by night, and departed into
Aegipt.

15 And was there unto the death of Herod, that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying: Out of Egypt have I called my Son.

In these words is contained indeed the holy history, both of the carrying
of our Savior into Egypt, Explication and proof.
and also of the recarrying, or bringing of him back again into the land of
Israel, with some notation of that space of time wherein he was there. And all
(as the holy Evangelist says) that the prophecy which we find in Hosea the
Prophet, chapter 11.1. might be fulfilled. For seeing God had determined to
call our Savior his Son out of Egypt, it must needs be, that he should be
first sent into Egypt.

And beside, we have in this Scripture, a further delaration of the cause of
this transporting of our Savior: which was, for that Herod maligning him,
minded to destroy him in his infancy: we have also a declaration of the means
and instrument, whereby God revealed the same, and gave direction and
commandment to Joseph and Marie, for the avoiding of his fury.

Moreover, there follows in the same 2. chapt: of S. Matthew, a like holy
declaration of the return of our Savior Christ out of Egypt, verses, 19.20.
etc.

But betwixt the connection of this and the former part of the Story, there is
inserted a narration of the lamentable event, which fell out in Israel, while
our Savior was in Egypt: wherein the deep dissembled, and most cruel malice
of Herod against him, is notably discovered.



Verses 16.17. and 18. in these words.

16 Then (says the Evangelist) Herod, seeing that he was mocked of the Wise
men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the male-children that
were in Bethlehem, and all the coasts thereof, from two year old and under,
according to the time which he had diligently searched out of the Wise men.

17 Then was that fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet Ieremias saying:

18 In Rama was a voice heard, mourning and weeping, and great lamentation:
Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they were
not.

Explication and proof.
Here, beside the singular providence of the Lord God our heavenly Father, in
de^eating the most crafty and bloody intent of Herod, against the life of our
Savior: in that he gave grace to the Wisemen to obey his commandment, and not
to regard the dissembling request of the wicked Tyrant: we see also therein, his
vigila^t care in watching over our salvation, seeing he would by no means have
his propitiatory death prevented. And further, concerning the Tyrant, his most
dissembling and hypocritical pretense, is notoriously discovered and laid
open before the whole world: according to the holy proverb: Hatred may be
covered by deceit, but the malice thereof, shall be discovered in the
congregation. Prou: ch: 26. verse: 26. For being disappointed of his crafty
designme^t, he falls into a notorious rage, commanding and perpetrating such
a savage, and more then inhumane massacre, or murdering of poor harmles
infants, and tender babes and sucklings, as was never heard of, since the
beginning of the world. For though in time of war, and in hot blood as they
say, both men and women and children are not seldom put to the sword: yet that
any in a time of peace, and in cold blood, as touching any cause of
provocation given by poor infants, should rage against them, and kill and
slaye them, were it not recorded in the holy Scriptures of God, it might have
seemed incredible.

And therefore no marvel, though the execution of it, be described by a strange
kind of effect, in that it is said to have caused Rachel: having lien dead
some thousands of years in the fields of that country, where it was done:
after a sort to mourn and lament, without any admission of comfort.

No doubt, the mothers of the children, represented under the person of Rachel:
did most pitifully houle and lament, and wring the hands, etc. And thus (says
the Evangelist) must the Prophecy of Ier: be fulfilled in a like doleful
event, to that which he did more directly prophecy of, concerning the
sorrowful captivity of Israel in Babylon: yet so as like singular joy was to
follow upon it.

It follows now, that we come to the return of our Savior out of Egypt,
into the land of Judah and Israel. In which verses of the text is that recorded?

In the nineteenth verse, and so forth to the end of the chapter.



And when Herod was dead (says the holy Evangelist) behold, an Angel of the
Lord, appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt.

20 Saying, arise and take the Babe, and his Mother, and go into the land of
Israel: for they are dead, which sought the Babes life.

21 Then he rose up, and took the Babe, and his Mother, into the land of
Israel.

22 But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea, in stead of his
father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: yet after he was warned of God in
a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee.

23 And he went, and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophets (which was that he should be called
a Nazarite.

Here indeed, we have the return of our Savior Christ, out of Egypt into
Israel, Explication and proof.
plainly recorded unto us. And that according to the express commandment
and direction of God, by the ministry of an holy Angel: with an encouragement
also thereunto, in so much as Herod was dead.

And hereby also the time of our Saviors abode in Egypt, may be collected;
insomuch as by the testimonies of such other histories, as may not justly be
despised of us, our Savior is said to be borne in the 33. year of Herodes
reign, and that Herod died in the 37. year of the same. Wher-vpon it
follows, that the return of our Savior out of Egypt, was about four
years after the time that he was carried thither. Whereby also, we cannnot but
see, that the life of our Savior, was very full of trouble, even from the
birth, in carrying and recarrying, and in all the time of his exile (as it were)
and the same also in an uncomfortable place among Idolaters, where Joseph and
his mother were unacquainted, etc.

Moreover, we see in this Scripture, the obedience of Joseph and Marie, in
their staying so long, in this uncomfortable place, even till he had a
commandment from the Lord for his return: like as Noah going into the Arc,
at the commandment of God, stayed in it, till he had another commandemen^;
that is, a like warrant to go out of it.

Thus Joseph atte^ding upon God: mark also how he receives his further
direction from him. For being in a great doubt, where he might settle himself
best for the safety of the educatio^ of the child, God himself assigns him
the place most fit to that end. So good a thing is it, for us always to wait
and atte^d upon the will of God, in the care of all things, which he commits
unto us from time to time.

Now as touching the place which God appointed Joseph, for the bringing up of
our Savior, the Evangelist shows the reason why the place was appointed to
that purpose: namely, that from the denomination of the place, our Savior
might be known to be that branch, which sprung up from the stock of king David,
which is prophesied of, and foretold in the holy Scriptures.

For in so much as, from the name of the city Nazareth where our Savior was
brought up, and lived, even till about the 30. year of his age, he was called
a Nazarite, or a Nazarenite: well may it give us an occasion, yea direct us as
it were by the finger, to that which is prophesied of him under the word
Netzar, which in the hebrewe language signifies a branch or sprought, to note,
what a poor manner of coming he should have into this world at the first,
even like to a sprought out of a stock, which seemed to be dead: yet so as he
should mightily grow up and prosper, through the blessing of God, above all
that the world should be aware of.

There is indeed another reason alleged, concerning this denomination which
we speak of: to wit, because our Savior (as some think) should by the
appointement of God, dwell in Nazareth, to the end he might, by that occasion,
be known to be that chief and principal Nazarite, above all that ever were,
most holilie separated and set apart to any special service, as Samson was,
Judges. 13.3. etc. or John the Baptist, or any other.

But the former reason seems to touch more nearelie the point of the matter.
For albeit in the scriptures of the old testament, the name of this city
Nazareth, is not mentioned by this name, no nor yet at all, by any word coming
near unto it, among those cities, which are rehearsed Josh: 19.10. etc. to be
in the lot of the tribe of Zabulon, where this city is situated: yet in the
Hebr: writings of the ancient Jews (as it is observed by sundry of our learned
writers, this name of the city Nazareth, and also of the citizens thereof, are
written with the letter Tsadi, as Notzera or Notzerath for the city, and
Notzerim or Notzerijm for the citizens: and not with zain, as the word which
notes one seperat to God, or a Nazarite according to the ceremonial prescript
of Moses law, is always written in the old Test. And it is the more likely
also, because it is certain, from this place of Matthew: and many other places
in the new Testament, that our Savior has this denomination from the city,
and not from the rite of Nazaritisme. Matthew: 21.11. Mark: 1.24. and Luke 4.34.
John: ch: 19. ver: 19. Act. 10.38. Read this point most exactly discussed at
large, by M. F. Iunius in his 8. Parallel.

Hitherto of the education and life of our Savior Christ, for that time,
wherein he sucked the breasts of his Mother, after the manner of other babes and
sucklings, according to that saying of the woman Luke 11.27. Blessed are the
pappes that gave thee suck: and thenceforth, until he was about four years
old. And therewith all, of the place appointed by God himself for his further
education, and leading of his life in subjection to his natural Parents, I
mean to Marie his natural Mother, and to Joseph his Father in Law, as we use
to speak, until he came to the age of thirty years, as was said before.

NOw it follows, that we proceed from the fourth year, to consider of the
education and life of our Savior, till he came to be twelve years old.



The holy history hereof is continued by the Evangelist Luke, chap: 2. verse
40.



And the child grew (says he) and waxed strong in Spirit, and was filled
with wisdom, and the grace of God was with him.

Explication and proof.
Thus indeed, is the holy history to be continued, from that which was before
rehearsed, out of the Gospel written by S. Matthew. For howsoever in the former
verse, that is in the 39. of the 2. ch: of S. Luke, it might seem, as if the
return of our Savior to Nazareth immediately after the Purification of the
Virgin Marie his Mother, were there intended by the Evangelist: yet the light
of the history it self, shows plainly, that the carrying of our Savior
into Egypt, and his return back again into the land of Judah and Israel, is
to be interposed, and borrowed from the Evangelist Matthew: as has already been
inserted.

Now therefore, that we may proceed in the orderly course of the holy Story,
as it is continued by S. Luke, we have the report of the education and life of
our Savior Christ, for the space of about 8. year.

It is a very brief report in deed, but very full of right excellent and
worthy matter: above that which might be said at any time, of any other
child, concerning the like time of their childe-hoode. Yea so, that even that
which may seem to be most vulgar and common, Belief in God the Son, who was
born of the Virgin Marie.
concerning the bodily and natural grouth of our Savior, which is concerning
all children, to be accounted a blessing: yet concerning our Savior, it
ministers a far more blessed consideration, in that it is most behoofull for
us, and the whole Church of God, to be persuaded both of the truth of his
humane nature, and of his being in our very natural estate and condition in
all things, sin only and always excepted. And beside it does by so much the
more, magnify the blessing of God in this respect, insomuch as no tossing to
and fro, nor by means of diet, or any thing else, could hinder the same.

But beside these obseruatio^s belonging to the body, and bodily estate of our
Savior: there are three other things, of special note, testified and reported
unto us.

First more generally, that he waxed strong in Spirit.

Secondly, that he was filled with wisdom.

Thirdly, that the grace of God was with him.

Here therefore let us pause a little while, to examine these memorable points.

And first of all, it is meet, that we should thus conceive in our minds,
that the most excellent things, which may be attributed to any child of
greatest towardnes, yea or to any men of years, for the praise of Gods grace
in them, are ascribed here to our Savior Christ, while he was yet a child, in
a most excellent degree and measure. For even to speak of men, though other of
the servants of God adopted in Christ, the only natural Son, have been
strengthened in the Spirit, of weak being made strong. Hebr. 11.34. filled
with the holy Ghost and wisdom, as it is said of Stephen, and other, Act.
6.3.5. and that God was with them, as it is written that he was with Moses,
with Joshua, with David, etc. And though Jeremy the Prophet, and John the
Baptist, were sanctified to their ministry, even from the womb: yet none
were ever so sanctified, and strengthened in the Spirit, so replenished with
wisdom, and all grace, as our Savior was, even in his young and tender
years, yea even from the womb and in the womb, so far as was meet to the
perfitting of every time of his age, and as might best agree to the present
estate, and every occasion falling out therein.

The reason of which perfection, always according to the increase and grouth
of years, yea of day after day, and of every moment one after another, was the
union of the divine nature with the humane, in one and the same Person, after a
most near and unsearchable manner. And yet so, as God would plainly let us
understand, even by these increases of wisdom and grace, that there was from
the beginning of the union, a distinction of the humane from the divine, which
cannot admit any increase of wisdom or strength, or any other either bodily
or spiritual, quality or grace.

The use of all, is this among other things, to teach us to conceive most
honorably of our Savior, even from his childhood, and throughout the same,
yea even from his infancy and birth: above all that reckoning, we may, or can
possibly make of any the most honorable Persons, Princes children, or Kings
themselves, the greatest in the whole world.

NOw let us proceed to that which is set down for the declaration of his most
excellent profitting in spiritual wisdom, and in all heavenly grace, at the
twelfth year of his age.



It is set down in the same 2. chapter of St. Luke as it follows from the 41.
v^. to the 51.



Now (says the Evangelist) his Parents went to Jerusalem every year at the
feast of the Passe-ouer.

42 And when he was twelve year old, and they were come up to Jerusalem, after
the custom at the feast.

43 And h^d finished the days thereof, as they returned, the child Jesus
remained in Jerusalem, and Joseph knew not, nor his mother.

Belief in God the Son who ^ed most holy and just life, full of tentations
and sufferings.
44 But they supposing that he had been in the company, went a days journey,
and sought him among their kinsfolk, and acquaintance.

45 And when they found him not, they returned back to Jerusalem, and sought
him.

46 And it came to pass, three days after, that they found him in the Temple,
sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them and asking them
questions.

47 And all that heard him, were astonished at his understanding and answers.

48 So when they saw him, they were amassed and his mother said, Son, why have
thou thus dealt with us? behold thy Father and I have sought thee with heavy
hearts.

46 Then said he unto them, How is it that ye sought me? knew ye not I must go
about my fathers business?

50 But they understood not the word that he spoke unto them.

Explication and proof.
In this text we see many things recorded concerning Joseph and Marie, whereby
both their godly care of worshipping God themselves, and also of performing the
duty of godly Parents, in bringing up their child with religious education:
wherein they are most memorable examples to all Parents to put them in mind of
their duty, in that behalf.

Yet, in so much as all that is recorded, does principally respect our Savior
himself, who was more willing and ready, even from his youngest years of
discretion, to practice every good and holy duty, then they were to move him
unto it: we will therefore principally consider all things, as they do concern
him.

And first of all, among the admirable things, recorded in the words of our
text, let us observe his most willing readiness to go up with his Parents to
the Temple, according to the commandment of God, wherein he gives straight
charge, that every male should do so: yea even chi dren, so soon as they
might be sit to endure the travel of the journey according to the nearenes or
far removed distance of their dwelling places, from the Temple of Jerusalem.

Wherefo^e our Savior most willingly takes pains to go a great journey
thither, with his Parents, at this twelfth year of his age. And as he went up
to Jerusalem at this feast, so no doubt he had ordinarily accompanied them to
the Syn^gogue at home, from Sabbath to Sabbath. So that he is therein to be
esteemed of us, in his childhood for a most notable example to all children,
how they ought even from their first years, to settle their hearts to seek
rightly to know God, and accordingly to worship and serve him: and to this end,
obediently to harken to the instructions and counsels of their godly Parents:
and together with them gladly to frequent the house of God, the place of his
public worship, and in the private housen of their Parents, to delight in
reading of the word of God, and in conferring and talking of it, as we may
perceive that our Savior did, being yet but a child.

And secondly, let us observe from the effect, the admirable profiting of our
Savior, under his domestical education and government: though it was not
after the manner of Scholars set to school, or sent to the university, etc.
but after the manner of the bringing up of the poorer sort, who if they be
taught at all, are taught at the leisure of their Parents at home.

For notwithstanding any defect in his education, through the poverty of his
Parents, he did nevertheless so behave himself at the Temple in the exercise of
conference and catechizing, (which was even then in use among the Teachers of
the word, an exercise allowed by God, and justified by our Savior Christ in
his ioining with them therein, and also by his express testimony, in that he
calls it by the honorable name of his heavenly Fathers business) that all the
Doctors and so many as heard his most wise questions and answers, were astonished
thereat, and for a declaration of their admiration at his wisdom, the Doctors
take him up, and set him among themselves, as the Evangelist gives plainly to
understand.

So that out of question, even in the learned Doctors judgment, our Savior
cleared many things concerning the true doctrine of God, and the holy
Prophesies concerning the Messiah, etc. in such sort as was far above that
which might be expected from a child of his years, and from such kind of
education as he had: according to that which was afterward with a bad mind
objected against him, as we read Matthew. 13. the end of the chapter. Herein
therefore, seems to be performed (at the least touching some excellent
beginnings, Belief in God the Son, who was born ^y the Virgin Marie.
and as a hand sell of that which follows) that which the Prophet Isaiah
foretold chapter 50.4 The Lord God has given me a tongue of the learned, that I
should know to minister a word in time to him that is weary: he will raise me
up in the morning: in the morning he will awaken mine ear to hear as the
learned, etc. For no doubt, this singular measure of grace at this time of his
age, which never diminished but grew continually, declares plainly, that our
Savior was specially taught of God, even from the holy Ghost, immediately,
rather then from any humane instruction, whereof to speak simply, he stood in
no need, as we and all other do from our childhood and thenceforth
continually: save that in all things, he would humble himself to the using of
the means, to the performance of all obedience, in our behalf, and to leave a
most notable example to us, what we ought to do concerning the same.

Thirdly, whereas it might be thought, that our Savior should in this
extraordinary action of his, through that zeal he bare to the glory of God
his heavenly Father, something forget his duty to Marie his natural mother,
and to Joseph his reputed natural Father, (in which respect, Marie begins
to charge him, and that with no small appearance of reason, because he put them
to great grief of mind and travel of body, by reason of his conveying of
himself from them) let us notwithstanding duly consider the matter, from the
defense of our Savior, and we shall find all things so cleared, that all the
blame (if there were any due) belonged to his Parents, and not to him.

For as our Savior gives plainly to understand, the duties to God, who is
the heavenly Father of us all, but in special manner the Father of his
natural Son; are in the seasons thereof to be always preferred before duty
to earthly Parents. And chiefly when any have their special calling thereunto,
as our Savior had, above all other. The Levites, in respect of a special
service they were comanded to perform unto god, were commended for this, that
they neither knew Father nor mother: that is, they regarded nothing that might
hinder their service: much more is our Savior to be commended, in the like
respect at this time.

And now as touching Joseph and Marie, our Savior does furthermore make it
plain, by his most wise and dutiful defense, (which it was meet he should at
this time make for himself) that the failing was in them altogether, and
nothing at all in him. For what reason had they to think, that our Savior,
having been always a most dutiful child unto them, would at this time have
withdrawn himself from them, for no other cause, then to have hasted homeward
with the first of those that returned from Jerusalem? Nay rather, what reason
had they, but that they should have thought thus with themselves, upon the
first missing of him: Surely he is now gone aside to some special purpose, to
the glorifying of God before his departure out of the City: or it is sure, that
if there be any holy exercise of religion in the Temple, he is gone thither,
etc. Such no doubt ought their thoughts to have been, as our Savior shows
plainly in these words of his holy defense, Knew ye not that I must be in my
Fathers business? as though he should put the^ in mind, that he had signified so
much unto the^ before, though either they did not mark it, as they should have
done, or else forgot it again, though they might easily have understood it from
him.

Finally, let us observe this notable history, the most holy and excellent
disposition of our Savior in this his childhood: in that according as his
Parents, at the last well bethinking themselves, and going to seek him in the
Temple, found him: there at the holy exercise of instruction or conference and
catechism mentioned before. For no doubt the rare disposition of the child to
all godliness, after they had well bethought themselves, caused the^ to think
that it was most like they should find him there. O that children would learn
from this most excellent example, to love their church as we use to speak, and
the holy exercises of religion, and namely this of catechizing, to be willing
to be asked questions, and to learn to answer them, according to the doctrine
of the holy Scriptures.

But alas, if Parents now a days miss their children on the Lords day, where
shall they usually find them? In the Church at Sermons, think we. No but in
the market places, playing or idely gazing, or if there be any other place of
special disorder and vanity. The same may be said of servants, and many of
elder years, yea even of some Parents themselves: (it is a shame to speak)
who may sooner be found in the beere-house, etc. then in the house of God.

But of the duties more afterward.

NOw in the last place, let us come to the latter part of the education and
life of our Savior Christ, under the government of Joseph and Marie: that is,
from the twelfe year to the thirtith. In what part of holy Scripture is that
recorded unto us?

It is briefly set down in the two last verses of the same 2. chapter of the
Evangelist Luke: that is to say, in the 51. and 52. verses.



Then (says Saint Luke) he went down with them, (that is with Joseph and
Marie) and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them: and his mother kept all
those sayings in her heart.

52 And Jesus increased in wisdom, and stature, and in favor with God and
men.

Explication and proof.
This also is a very short, but yet in the wisdom of God, a sufficient and
full description of the life of our Savior, so far as it is necessary for us
to know, for the space of about 18. years; if that which is set down shall be
duly weighed and considered of us. For by that which is said here, if it be
laid to that which we have seen already, we may without any great or obscure
difficulty conceive rightly, what manner of life he led: that is to say, a
private and not as yet, nor for all the time mentioned, any public estate and
condition of life: not a wealthy and delicious kind of life, but a poor and
sober life: not an idle or easy life, but a diligent and painful life.
Finally, a life in subjection and obedience to his poor Parents, and not the
life of a Master of a family, to have commandment and government over any. Yea
which is strange to speak of, and were it not testified by the holy
Scriptures, incredible to be thought, (considering who he was) he led the life
of an apprentice, or man of occupation, as we may say, working the Carpenters
work, and not a Students life, as was touched before. Matthew. chapter 13. in the
end, and as it may be further observed, from the Evangelist Mark. chapter 6. verses
2, 3. And John. 7.15.

And let us further mark, that still this is not without cause repeated, that
as our Savior grew in years, so he grew both in bodily stature, and also in
all wisdom and grace, until he came to the full stature and perfection of
both: of the body, according to a natural course and proportion like to other
men: of wisdom and grace, without measure, infinitely above all other men.

Finally, let us well observe, that as the Evangelist does plainly testify,
so gracious was the whole conversation and behavior of our Savior, that all
men were drawn to a singular love and liking of him: to wit, so many as had
any grace, and true discretion, to perceive the excellency of his rare wisdom
and all other virtues. The which were not excellent only in appearance before
men, who are not seldom deceived in their judgment: but also even in the
sight of God, who in all things, does at all times, judge most true and
righteous judgment. And therefore it is expressly testified by the Evangelist,
that our Savior increased in favor with God, as well as with men. That is,
the favor of God did shine forth more and more brightly in the most gracious
effects and fruits thereof toward him, in such sort that it did evidently
appear to all that had eyes to see, that God did singularly love and delight
in him: and that thereby also, all might be effectually moved, to have him in
like singular regard.

Such is the holy history of the most holy and humble life of our blessed
Savior, in his private state and condition of life, even from his infancy,
every way admirable to all that shall duly understand and weigh the same:
Belief in God the Son, who led a most holy and just life, full of
temptations and sufferings.
in that so high an excellency should abase it self so low, and so
obscurely: though it could not for all that, but it must needs break forth
like as the Sun of the firmament does, and in the darkest day casts forth
some light, through the thickest cloud thereof. Thus far of the private life
of our Savior.

NOw let us likewise call to mind, and diligently consider the life of the
same our Savior, in his public estate and condition; that is, from the
thirtith year of his age to the very time of his Passion under Pontius Pilate.

And first, let us consider his manifestation by the public testimony, and
whole Ministry of John Baptist: and then by the testimony of God the Father,
and of the holy Ghost, at his holy Baptism: which was a public warrant and
most divine testification from heaven, both of the most high person, and also
of his calling to his most holy office appropriated thereunto. And last of all,
let us consider of his own manifesting of himself, by the execution of the
same his office, in his most effectual preaching, praying, working of
miracles, etc. even to the last instant of his special sufferings, before the
time of his death. All which may be distinguished, according to the several
Passeouers, from year to year, as was mentioned before.

Let us therefore, as briefly, and as plainly as we can, seek to inform and
establish our faith in these excellent points, from the testimonies of the holy
Scriptures.

And first of all, insomuch as the manifestation of our Savior, by the
ministry of John the Baptist comes to be considered of us: let us inquire
after it in this order.

First, how he did it by his preaching of him being absent, as one specially
appointed of God to go before him to prepare the way for him after that
manner: that is by stirring up the hearts of the people, to a present
expectation and desire after Christ, who was now to manifest himself. Secondly
by the pointing of him out with his finger, being present among them, in such
sort that they could not be ignorant who or which he was.

And both of these, by an often repeated testimony and witness, the which he
most plainly and constantly gave of him, so long as he lived: and that not
only while he was at liberty, but also in the time of his imprisonment, even
to his very martyrdom and death, by the unjust and bloody hand of Herod, the
brother of Philip.

All which things, that we may understand the better, and to the end they may
be of the better credit and authority with us, concerning this special and
most worthy ministry of John the Baptist thereunto.



We have both special prophecies of it, from the mouth of God that it should
be so: and also the written history of the performance thereof, most notably
described by the pen of the Evangelist Luke.

We have so indeed. Wherefore let us in the first place, call to mind the
prophecies: and then proceed to the history showing the fulfilling of them.



First the prophecy of Isaiah chap: 40. verses, 3, 4, 5. Then the prophecy of
Malachie, chap: 3. in the beginning of the first verse. And 4. verses 5. and 6.
which are the last words of the old Testament.

Rehearse you the words of the Prophet Isaiah.



A voice cries in the wilderness, (says the Prophet) Prepare ye the way of
the Lord, make strait in the des^rte, a path for our God.

4. Every v^lley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made
low: and the crooked shall be strait, and the rough places plain.

5. And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it
together: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

That this prophecy was given forth concerning John Baptist, the holy
Evangelists do plainly confirm. Mat. chap: 3. Mark chap: 1. Luke chap: 3. and
John. chap: 1.

Rehearse now likewise, the Prophecy of Malachie.



In the beginning of the third chapter, thus we read.

1. Behold (says the Lord) I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the
way before me.

5. And again in the two last verses of the 4. chap. thus it is written,
Behold, I will send you Eliah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and
fearful day of the Lord.

6. And he shall turn the heart of the Fathers to the children, and the heart
of the children to their Fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with cursing.

Explication and proof.
That these Prophecies of Malachie, were likewise given forth concerning John
Baptist: Read Luk: 1, 17. Mat: 11. verses 10.14. Luke 7.27. and again, Mat:
17.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. And Mark: chap: 9, 11, 12.13. Where it is not only
testified to be so, by the Evangelist; but also by the Angel of the Lord, and
by our Savior himself.

Thus much concerning the Prophecies.

The history, showing the accomplishment of these Prophecies, is next to be
considered.

And first, concerning the preparation and appointment of John Baptist, to this
special ministry and service.



In the first chapter of the Gospel according to the Evangelist Luke, from the
5. verse to the end of the same chapter.

Explication and proof.
In reading of these parts of this chapter: we cannot but conceive, from the
accurate and exact report of the Evangelist: first, concerning the conception
of John, and then concerning his birth, that he is honored of God, as a
Person, whom he will have to be of special note; even as one appointed from
the womb, to a most notable and memorable service. For seeing he is the
forerunner, and as it were the Herald, or Scepter-bearer before our Savior,
who ought to be of more high reputation with us, then any, yea then all earthly
Princes: therefore it must needs follow, that we are to esteem of him, as of
a more honorable officer, and accordingly of his office, to be more honorable
then any of like place and standing, before any earthly Prince, or King of this
world.



First, he declares both the time when, and also the place, whether God sent
his holy and mighty Angel Gabriel from heaven; to give the knowledge of this
gracious work of God, to Zachary a godly Priest of the Law: whom God
appointed to be the Father of this John the Baptist, by Elizabeth his wife, a
like godly and ancient matrone in Israel.

Moreover, the holy Evangelist sets down a full narration, of the whole
comfortable message of the Angel: containing a description of the singular
office, and ministry, whereunto it was the will of God, to sanctify this
Son of Zachary and Elizabeth, even from the womb.

And furthermore, Saint Luke reports, that the Angel foretold, what rare and
mighty effects should follow, upon the ministry of this child: and also how
he directed Zachari^ after what manner, God would have the child brought up,
and nourished: to wit, after the manner of an holy Nazarite. The Evangelist
shows also, that in this respect, the Angel prescribes Zachary, by the
commandment of God, to call this his Son, by the name of John, to signify
thereby, the great grace and mercy of God, not only toward Zachary and
Elizabeth, but also to all Israel, in giving him such a child.

These things indeed does the holy Evangelist notably lay forth in the former
part of the chapter, beginning at the 5. verse. and so forth to the 18.

Explication and proof.
Neither is it to be neglected, that moreover and beside all the excellent
things already mentioned, he declares further, that in so much as Zachary did
not give credit to the gracious message of the Angel, but after a sort
reasoned against the possibility of it, in that, incredulously he demanded a
sign for the proof and confirmation of it unto him: he was therefore justly
stricken with dumbnes, until the time that the child was borne, as we read
from the 18. verse to the 26. Hitherto of the report which the Evangelist
makes, concerning the conception of John, in the former part of that chapter.

John: whereby it may yet further appear, that he was appointed of God to be
a singular Person, for the execution of a most rare office and Ministry?

They are these that follow.

First, the singular and unwonted joy of many, at his birth: according to the
word of the Angel to Zachary.

Likewise, the joy of Zachary himself, not only at his birth, because a
child of so gracious a promise was given him; but also, because at the
circumcision of the same child, his speech was restored unto him, and as it
seems his hearing likewise; in so much as it is said, that in the time of his
dumbnes, they made signs to know his mind, concerning the name of the child.

Thirdly, the Evangelist Luke records the excellent prophecy, and
thanksgiving of Zacharias, whereby immediately after the restoring of his
speech, he praises God, and foretells the near approaching of our Savior
Christ then shortly to follow: and the special office of his new borne
child, in that he was assured by the holy Ghost, against his former doubting,
that according to the word of the Angel, he should be the Prophet of the most
high, to go before the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways. And to give the
knowledge of salvation, unto his people, by the remission of their sins: and
so forth, as it follows to the last verse of the chapter.

Fourthly, the Evangelist reports the extraordinary education of the child
by his parents, and his religious obedience to them, according to the
commandment of God, both for diete, and apparel, avoiding all delicacie and
nicenes in them both: according also as the Evangelist Matt: testifies, chap:
3. verse 4. And the Evangelist Mark chapter 1, 6. And our Savior Christ,
Matthewe chapter 11. verse 8.

Finally, Saint Luke reports the extraordinary grouth of the child, in all
spiritual graces, meet for the furnishing of him, to the execution of his
great office, against the time thereof: as we read in the last verse of the
first chapter.

All these things, do evidently declare, that the sending of John the Baptist
before our Savior Christ was a very great, and memorable work of God.

Explication and proof.
It must needs be acknowledged to be so indeed: unless we will shut our eyes,
against the light of the clear spring of the day.

The same also may be yet further manifest, by the special calling, whereby it
pleased God to call him forth, so soon as the appointed time was come. Let us
therefore come to that.



In the first two verses of the third chapter of the Evangelist L^ke.

It is so indeed. And it is very carefully set down, as a matter of worthy
moment. For the time and season thereof, is expressed by a manifold description
of the date, and as it were the period, or full point of it. Namely in the 15.
year of Tiberi^s the Emperor of Rome, and then when Pontius Pilate was under
him governor of Judea, etc. Rehearse the words of the text.



Now (says the Evangelist in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius
Caesar, Pontius Pilate being Governor of Judea, and Herod being Tetrarch of
Galile, and his brother Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, and of the country of
Traconitis, and Lysanias the Tetrarch of Abilene.

2. When Annas and Caiaphas were the high Priests, the word of God came unto
John, the Son of Zacharias, in the wilderness.

Explication and proof.
The word of God: that is, the commandment of God came unto John; to wit, to
his hearing and knowledge, commanding and authorizing him from heaven, to
Preach and Baptize in the name of Jesus Christ, shortly to come after him. For,
that this was the word of God, which came to John: it is evident, by that
faithful obedience which he yielded to this word, in such an execution of his
office, as not only Saint Luke, but also all other of the Evangelists, have
diligently recorded the same, for the instruction of us, and the whole Church
of Christ, in this behalf; whereunto also our Savior himself gives witness.
Mat: 11.7. etc. chap: 21.25. and John 5.33.34.35.

THus much observed, concerning the calling: let us proceed to the execution of
his office, whereunto he was thus called forth.

In the which, because John according to the most wise direction of the Spirit
of God, proceeded by certain degrees; let us accordingly, follow him in his
footesteps, as we shall find him to have gone before us.

First therefore, we find that he began his ministry, by conuincing the
people of their own most sinful and damnable estate in themselves, that so
he might bring them to earnest and speedy repentance; and cause them to see
the necessity of Gods mercy to their salvation, the which was now shortly in
and by our Savior, to be more openly, and plainly revealed, then yet it had
been. And herein did John insist, until the time, that our Savior was
manifested at his Baptism.

Secondly, he gives a more direct, and often repeated witness of him, even to
the very time, that Herod beheaded him. And this did John, partly when our
Savior was Baptized: but much more, after his Baptism. And that again,
partly while our Savior was tempted in the wilderness: and partly, after his
return. And then twice, by pointing of our Savior out by the finger, at such
time as he was present: but much more often, does he testify of him, in his
absence, laboring by all means to magnify and advance our Savior, in the
hearts of his people: most humbly abasing himself in comparison of our
Savior, that by no means, their hearts might be hindered from the embracing,
and acknowledging of him, to their salvation.

This being the course, which John has tracked by his holy ministry: let us
accordingly follow him.



It follows in the aboue-named third chapter of the Evangelist Luke, from the
3. verse to the 19. of the same chapter.

There it is very notably, and most at large, set down indeed. In the reading
whereof, specially if we call to mind the interpretation of it, as we have
heard it in the ordinary course of Preaching upon it: it cannot be, but we
must needs perceive, a wonderful spirit to have bin in the servant of God: not
only touching the Doctrine, but also in respect of his most zealous
accommodating, and applying of it, to all sorts of people, as might be most
fit, and effectual through the blessing of God, to the conversion of all that
belonged to the Lord.

Whereby also, we our selves may justly be put in remembrance, how we ought
to be prepared, and to prepare our selves continually, to receive Christ into
our hearts; yea, more and more fully, to entertain him to our own endless
comfort and salvation. That is to say, we may hereby clearly perceive, that we
must admit the terror of the threatenings of God, to chase away our security:
that we must repent of our sins, deny all opinion of our own righteousness:
and rest altogether, upon the free grace and mercy of God, revealed in our
Savior Christ to salvation, through his righteousness and redemption. Finally,
that we must bring such fruits, as we may declare the truth of our repentance,
and humiliation before God: every one of us, according to the duties of our
several callings. For so does John earnestly charge all those, to whom he
preached publicly: and every one of them that sought any more private, or
particular direction from him: as appears at large, by the testimony of the
Evangelist Luke, in the chapter before alleged. The same doctrine of John
Baptist, recorded more largely by Saint Luke, is more briefly contracted by
Saint Mat: chap: 3. from the beginning of the chap: v: 1.2.7.8.9.10.11.12. And
yet more briefly, Mark ch: 1.4.7.8. Read also John: ch: 1. verses 6.7.8. and
Act: 10.37. and chap: 11.16. and chap: 13, 24: and chap: 19.4.

SVch is the more general, and preparatorie doctrine of John, before the
manifestatio^ of our Savior Christ at his Baptism. We come now, to his more
particular and direct testimonies.

And first, to that which he gave of him at his Baptism.



In the 13. and 14. verses, of the 3. chapter of S. Matthew, in these words.
Then came Jesus from Galile, to Jordan unto John, to be Baptized of him.

But John put him back, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and
come thou to me?

Explication and proof.
This indeed is the first more particular testimony, which John gave to our
Savior: wherein, he acknowledges, as we see, his incomparable dignity.

Let us proceed to the rest. The next of those testimonies, which we find
recorded, were they which John gave of our Savior, while he was tempted of the
Devil in the wilderness, whether he was led away by the holy Ghost, immediately
after his Baptism: as the Evangelists Mat: Mark and Luke, do expressly
witness.



It is set down in the first chapter of the Evangelist John, verse 15. after
this manner, John (to wit, John the Baptist) bar^ witness of him and cried
saying, This was he of whom I said, He that comes after me is preferred
before me: for he was before me.

Explication and proof
Here again, does John the Baptist, give a notable testimony to the peerles
excellency of our Savior Christ; unto whom all flesh ought to direct, not so
much the eye of their head, as the eye, and hand, of their mind and heart: that
happily they may see, and enjoy the salvation of God, which is only to be
found in him.

And thus no doubt, was John earnest, all the time that our Savior Christ was
in the wilderness, even until the day before his return out of the wilderness,
to the place where John continued his preaching, and baptizing: that is to say,
in Bethabara beyond Jorden. John. 1. verse 18.

Now as the Evangelist John shows, in the very next verse: the day next
before this return of our Savior, John the Baptist gave an other most
notable, and resolute testimony of him: by occasion of an inquisition, that
passed upon him by certain Priests, who were of the Pharisees, and that by the
authority of a Council, held at Jerusalem, to that end.



Ans. It follows in the aforesaid first chapter of the Evangelist John, from
the 19. verse to the 2^. verse of the same.

Quest. Which are the words of the Evangelist?

Ans. 19. Then (says the Evangelist) this is the record of John, when the
Jews sent Priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, who art thou?

20 And he confessed and denied not, but said plainly, I am not the Christ.

21. And they asked him, what then? Art thou Elias? and he said, I am not. Art
thou the Prophet? And he answered: No.

22. Then said they unto him, what art thou, that we may give an answer to
them that sent us?

What say thou of thy self?

23. He said, I am the voice of him that cries in the wilderness, Make strait
the way of the Lord, as says the Prophet Esaias.

24. No^ they that were sent (as the Evangelist says further) were of the
Pharisees.

25. And they asked him, and said unto him, why baptizest thou then, if thou
be not the Christ, neither E^ias nor the Prophet?

2^. John answered them, saying, I baptize with water: but there is one among
you, whom ye know not.

27. He it is which comes after me, who is preferred before me, whose
shoo-la^chet I am not worthy to unloose.

Expli^atio^ and proof.
This verily is a no^able testimony indeed, most resolute and wise concerning
himself, for the justifying of his own office and calling; and most dutiful,
and honorable, concerning our Savior Christ.

This testimony is so much the rather to be embraced of us, because it was
given upon so imperious and dangerous an examination. So that we may perceive
hereby, that John was in no doubt, either of the truth which he had taught, or
of the office which he executed: neither that he feared any danger, whatsoever
might grow unto him thereby. He was not as a reed shaken with the wind,
timorous and mutable, but a most valiant, faithful and constant servant of
God. And such ought every one of us to be, in the profession of the name and
truth of our Savior Christ, if ever we should be called into question for it.

To this end and purpose, all the testimonies, which John gave unto our
Savior Christ and his truth, are of exceeding good use, for the confirmation
of our faith. And even for the same cause, let us hold on our course to gather
the rest.

Of the which, the next that do follow, are those wherein John the Baptist did
point out our Savior Christ with the finger. And of these also, there are two
recorded.

It was that which follows in the Evangelist John, from the 29. verse of his
first chapter to the 35. of the same.



A^^were.
29. The next day (says the Evangelist) John sees Jesus coming unto him, and
he says, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world.

30. This is he of whom I said, After me comes a man, which is preferred
before me: for he was before me.

31. And I knew him not: but because he should be declared to Israel,
therefore am I come, Baptizing with water.

32. So (as the Evangelist adds) John did bear record, saying, I saw the
spirit come down from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him.

33. And I knew him not: but he that sent me to Baptize with water, he said
unto me, upon whom thou shall see the spirit come down, and tarry still on
him, that is he, who Baptizeth with the holy Ghost.

34. And I saw and bare record, that this is the Son of God.

E^^^^^ation and proof.
In this testimony, John the Baptist does not only give witness to the most
high excellency of the Person of our Savior, as he did before: but also to
the most sweet and comfortable fruits and effects of his most holy office:
that is, remission of sins, and sanctification of life, through the blood of
Christ.

This is the first testimony, given by John, of our Savior, when he was at
the same time present, and in the view of the people.

The second follows, which was of like sort; but not so public, as the
other. And it follows in the next verses after the former text: to wit, in
the 35. and 36. verses of the first chapter of John.



The next day (says the Evangelist) John stood again, and two of his
Disciples.

36. And he beheld Jesus walking by and he said, Behold the lamb of God.

Explication and proof.
This then, as we see, is the second testimony, which John gave to our Savior,
in his presence. The use of which so particular and personal testimonies, as
we may call them, give us thus much to understand: that the very true Christ
must be truly and particularly known, and discerned from all other, of every
one that shall be saved by him.

The which blessed effect, God gave to the present speech of John, to his two
Disciples. For as it follows in the next verse, etc. The two Disciples, to
wit Andrewe, Simon Peter's brother, and another not named by the Evangelist,
upon that testimony of John Baptist, follow our Savior, and become his
faithful Disciples.

NOw after these testimonies, given by John in the presence of our Savior;
there follow other given in his absence, according to the usual course of his
most holy and zealous ministry, wherein he was most constant and painful. A
particular example whereof, the Evangelist John sets down, in the 3.
chapter from the 23. verse to the end of the chapter. The which testimony, as
the Evangelist does furthermore observe, was given by John Baptist at Enon,
besides Salim, where he baptized, because there was much water. And he gave it
also for the further instruction and admonition of his Disciples, who were not
yet persuaded by his former and often repeated testimonies. So hard a thing is
it, to setle in the heart, true faith in the true Christ.

Let us therefore, for our further help, hearken to this testimony of John
also.



Ye your selves (says John Baptist to his own Disciples (are my witnesses,
that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him.

29. He that has the bride, is the bridegroom: but the friend of the
bridegroom, who stands and hears him, reioiceth greatly, because of the
bridegroomes voice. This my joy therefore is fulfilled.

30. He must increase, but I must decrease. He that is come from on high, is
above all, etc.

Explication and proof.
John we see, is always like himself: a most excellent pattern, and
president, to be imitated and followed, of all faithful Preachers of the
Gospel, in their Preaching: to wit, that their care ought to be altogether, to
make Christ known to the people, that they may truly believe in him, and above
all, to rejoice in him: and not to rest in any vain admiration of the great
learning, or zeal, or any other gift, or gifts, of their preachers.

And hence also, may all hearers receive an excellent instruction how to
hear, and whom they ought to hear, and receive; namely, those that Preach
Christ, and not themselves. Considering, that this is the scope and aiming
point, of all both hearing and preaching: yea and of reading, conferring, and
meditating, and whatsoever beside.

I cannot speak now, of this testimony, as it deserves: for that were to
make many Sermons of it again, as we have done heretofore: It may suffice now,
that we do briefly call to mind, and think more fully of the rest by our
selves, as God shall give us remembrance and a fit opportunity to the same.

Only let us not forget, that this was the last recorded testimony, which
John gave of our Savior, in the time of his liberty: and that also, not long
before he was cast into prison, as we have an inckling given us, in the 24.
verse of this 3. chap: of the Evangelist John, which now we speak of.

The last recorded testimony, is now only behind: to wit, that which this
excellent Minister of God, gave of our Savior Christ, while he was unjustly
imprisoned by Herod, that tyrannous and fox-like Tetrarch, as our Savior
himself did afterward term him.



It is recorded in the 11. chapter of Saint Matthew, verses 2.3. And in the 7.
chap. of Saint Luke, verses 19. and 20.

Explication and proof.
In these places, both the Evangelists alleged, do indeed record, that John
being in prison, sent two of his Disciples to our Sa^^^ to know whether he were
the Christ that should come, or whether they should look for another, or no.
But how may this be accounted a witness,

That John was in no doubt at all himself, but remained the same man in
prison, that he was before in the time of his liberty: our Savior Christ does
plainly confirm, as it follows in the same places of holy Scripture.

Explication and proof.
Our Savior does so indeed. For as he says, even to prevent this doubt, John
was no reed shaken with the wind, but a Prophet, yea greater then a Prophet,
etc.

These words make it plain, that John sent his Disciples to our Savior, with
such a message, not for that he himself was in any the least doubt of it: but
for their confirmation whom he sent, and for the confirmation of many other,
from that answer, which our Savior should give.

This doubtless, was the holy and wise purpose of John, in this practice of his.
And he takes a very fit occasion given him unto it, by that report which his
Disciples brought unto him, of the great works which our Savior wroght.

And beside, what more excellent way might he have taken, being shut up
himself, then to direct his Disciples, to use their liberty in making resort
to him, by whom only all true liberty, redemption, and salvation, is to be
found: and who alone was able to put them out of all doubt, and to establish
them in the true faith?

Thus therefore, ^he holy devise of John, in sending his Disciples to our
Savior: was not of doubtfulnes in himself, but to deliver the^ from their
doubting.

In which respect, it is worthy to be marked of us, how our Savior did most
excellently fit his answer: and how God also, by his divine providence, so
disposed, that at the very time, when John's Disciples came to our Savior: they
found him working many and great miracles. Luke. 4.7.21. Then the which,
nothing could be more auailable to persuade them of that truth, whereof they
were in doubt: according to that which we read, John, 10.41.42. Many resorted
to our Savior, and said, John did no miracle: but all things that John spoke
of this man, were true. And many believed in him there.

And thus, we have by the grace of God, collected and gathered together, the
manifold testimonies of John the Baptist: tending all to the manifestation of
our Savior Christ, at the time of his entrance into his public estate, and
condition of life. The fruit also whereof, was mentioned even now: in that they
acknowledging all things to be true, which John spoke of our Savior, they
believed in him, and were no doubt thereby induced so to do, as were many
thousands more.

From this whole discourse, concerning John the Baptist, and his ministry, we
may justly conclude now (as was affirmed at the first) as well from the
prophecies which went before of him, as by the history showing the
accomplishment thereof: that he was in special manner, ordained and prepared,
sanctified furnished and authorized by God himself, to be a most notable and
honorable instrument of his, to this excellent end and purpose, that he might
be a special witness of the coming of the true Messiah, our Lord and Savior,
into the world: according to that which we read in the Evangelist John, chapter 1.
verses 6, 7, 8. who writes thus of him.

There was a man (says he) sent from God, whose name was John. The same came
for a witness to bear witness of the light, (that is, of Christ) that all men
through him might believe. He was not that light, but he was sent to bear
witness of the light.

So that now there remains nothing to be said further of John, in this our
exercise: but that he, who was so famous and faithful a witness, to and of our
Savior Christ in his life time, was honored of God, with the crown of
martyrdom by his death: in that he died a most constant, and holy witness, both
of the justice of the law, in that special reproof of Herod, for the which
he was put to death, and also of the righteousness of faith in Christ, to whom
he sent his Disciples, as unto the only true Messiah and Savior, not long
before the same his death. Read Matthew. 11.2, etc. And somewhat more fully
Mark. 6.14, etc.

But touching our selves, and all other, this addition we may make, and truly
affirm, that in so much as God has sent so singular a witness, to the
appearance of his Son: whosoever do not believe in that Christ, to whom John
the Baptist gave testimony, cannot possibly believe in the true Christ.

And not only so, but this also may we truly affirm, that whosoever will not
be careful, more and more to confirm and strengthen their faith in the true
Christ, from the same testimony of John the Baptist, they do neglect a
fundamental prop and stay thereof: as may be evident, both by the diligent
record of it, by every one of the Evangelists, as we have seen: and also by
the often repetition thereof in the sermons and speeches of the Apostles, as
we may read Act. 10.37. and chapter 11.16. and chapter 13.24.25. and chapter 19.4. Yea
so, that chapter 1. verses 21.22. when an Apostle was to be chosen in the room of
Judas; such a one only, is prescribed to be eligible, and as we may say,
capable of the holy office of Apostleship, as had bin acquainted with John's
ministry.

To God therefore, be all singular praise, and honor, and glory, from us, and
his whole Church, for this so excellent a witness and Martyr of his, and of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And he vouchsafe also, to give us the right use of this so
worthy a testimony, among other of his holy Prophets, and of the Apostles of
our Savior Christ, that our weak and doubtful hearts, may be more and more
established in the faith of the same our only true and alone Savior: to whom
with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory now and for ever.
Amen.

ANd thus, from the discovery and manifestation of our Savior Christ, at the
time of his entering upon his public estate and condition of life: we come to
inquire of this most excellent part, and remainder of the same his life: as of
that whereunto all the former discourse, and preparatorie, ministry of John
the Baptist, tended. For albeit, every part of the life of our Savior (as has
been already declared) is reuerendly, and religiously, to be regarded of us,
even from the time that he was first put into swaddling clothes: yet most of
all, is the latter part, to be chiefly pondered and weighed, as that wherein,
he executed and performed in special manner, all the parts of his most holy
office of his Kingdom, Prophetship, and Priesthood: according to that which
our Savior, near the time of his death, said to Pilate, John, 18.37. For this
cause am I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear
witness unto the truth.

Now in this part of our inquitie containing many things, we must proceed, as
it were by certain degrees, or steps, in as plain an order, as God shall give
us grace to attain unto. And that also to the further establishing of our
faith: while we do thoroughly behold that faithful record, which is set before
us, concerning his own most gracious manifesting of himself, by his own
preaching, and working of miraculous works, and by his familiar and daily
conue^sation among his people, from Passe-ouer to Passe-ouer, and through the
whole course of the years, one after another; even from his baptism, to the
time of his chief passion, and death, a few days only excepted, by reason of
his special tentation in the wilderness, immediately after his Baptism.

This Baptism of our Savior, and those days of his Tentation, do ministe^
unto us, two things necessarily to be considered, before we come to the
preaching of ou^ Savior,

The first, is the most high and honorable external calling of our Savior
Christ, to the execution of his most high and excellent office.

The second thing, is his most difficult and hard entrance thereunto.



The first is set down in the end of the 3. chapter of the Evangelist Matthew,
verses 16, 17.

The second is written in the 4. chapter of the same Evangelist, from the beginning
of the chapter, to the 12. verse of the same.

Explication and proof.
The same things are likewise recorded by the Evangelist Luke. The first in the
3. ch verses 21, 22. And the 2. in the 4. ch from the beginning to the 14.
verse. And more briefly by the Evangelist Mark, chapter 1, verses 9, 10, 11,
12, 13.

Rehearse now the words of the Evangelist Matthew concerning the first thing:
to wit, the honorable external calling of our Savior Christ, to the
execution of his most holy and high office.

Jesus (says he) when he was baptized, came strait out of the water. And lo,
the heavens were opened unto him, and he (that is, John) saw the Spirit of God
descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him.

17 And lo, a voice came from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased.

Explication and proof.
The Evangelist Luke (as was alleged before chapter 3.21.) expresses further, that
our Savior Christ, after he was baptized, did pray, and that then the heavens
were opened: the Lord thereby gives plainly to understand, that his prayer
was effectual with him, even to the opening of heaven, for the benefit of
sinful men.

And the Evangelist John, for a further interpretation of the words of Saint
Matthew, witnesses expressly, that John the Baptist, saw the Spirit come down
from heaven which the prayer of our Savior had opened.

Thus then, our Savior Christ, being appointed a most high office, above all
that might agree to any creature, whether man or Angel, answerable to the most
high excellency of his Person: he has likewise a most honorable and high
calling, by a most high and heavenly testimony given of him. For to whom, or
of whom, did God ever speak thus from heaven, This is my beloved Son, etc.
Neither can these words possibly agree to any creature, but only to our
Savior Christ, in such sense as God speaks them of him, as being his only
begotten and natural Son, and as one, in whom he is well pleased, not by
grace and favor only, but even for perfect worthiness. Ye^ so pleased, as for
his sake, he was willing to be reconciled to most unworthy sinners.

The l ke may be said, concerning the descending of the holy Ghost, in a bodily
shape visibly upon him. For never did he, nor never will he descend so upon
any. Neither ever was, or shall be any, so repleat with all grace without
measure, as our Savior was; whereof this discension of the holy Ghost, was a
visible and public testimony and confirmation, according to that of John
Baptist, in the Gospel of John the Evangelist, chapter 3.34. God gives him not the
Spirit by mea^ure.

Now the end, why our Savior was thus proclaimed to be the Son of God, and
declared to be thus replenished with all heavenly grace: is for that all may
know, that they stand bound to hear him, as it was said likewise from heaven
at his transfiguration, Matthew. 17.5. though not so publicly, as it was at his
baptism. But this hearing of the Son of God, is not only to yield him
audience while he speaks: but also with attention of the care, to yield all
obedience of the heart, and life, to his most holy and heavenly doctrine.

Thus much therefore, concerning his external calling.

IT follows next, that you do likewise rehearse, that which is recorded,
concerning that most difficult and hard entrance, which, as was said in the
second place, our Savior had unto the execution of the offices and duties of
his calling.



This (as was alleged) is that which is written by the Evangelist Matthew, in
the former part of his fourth chapter, from the first verse, to the 12.
concerning the leading of our Savior aside into the wilderness: yea concerning
his driving thither, as the Evangelist Mark writes, (to wit, by the mighty
motion and earnest instigation of that Spirit, which was immediately descended
upon him) to the end he might in that solitary and most uncomfortable place,
among the wild Beasts, encounter with the tentations of the Devil, who had
full leave and liberty permitted unto him so to do.

Explication and proof.
So indeed does the Evangelist Mark, in these points, make the matter more
plain, then the other Evangelists do, chapter 1. verses 12.13.

And this verily, was a very hard, and uncomfortable entrance (if any thing
might be hard and uncomfortable at the first onset) that he should be driven
from all society of men, to be without all food, and without commodious
lodging, and that among wild savage beasts: and most of all, that the most
unwelcome Devil, should have free access to molest his holy mind, with wicked
sugge^tions and tentations, and to have power over his body, to carry it f^^m
place to place, to the troubling of his senses, and perverting of his mind, if
by any means, he might possibly have prevailed against him.

We would have thought, that our Savior being so solemnly proclaimed, to be
the Son of God, and the great Prophet of the Church; should forthwith, have
gone forth to declare his mighty grace, and power, both in word and deed above
Moses, and all that ever were. But behold, the matter is strangly carried, if
it be weighed, in the uneven balance of humane reason. Nevertheless, so it
seemed good to the divine wisdom of God, even at the first, to humble his
own Son, by such a strange trial. Yea and thus would our Savior, the Son
of God, humble and abase himself, that by his entrance, or rather even in his
preparation to his most holy office in our behalf; it might appear unto us,
that we could not by him be brought to glory, but he must be every way humbled
for us.

And yet again, this humiliation, was not without glory, in that as Moses was
sustained 40. days and 40. nights in the mount without food, so was our
Savior: in that the wild and savage beasts durst not approach to hurt him:
but most of all, in that, though the Devil himself, was le^ loose as it were,
to have his full scope, to use all his serpentine subtlety and craft, to tempt
our Savior, as he had done Adam in the garden of Eden, and that with as much
dis-aduantage to our Savior, as might be: yet he could not, in the least jot
prevail against him, but contrariwise, was altogether foiled. Whereat, as the
holy Angels were rejoiced, and ministered to our Savior: so ought we to
rejoice at this beginning of his holy victory.

But touching this encounter of our Savior Christ with the Devil, to the end,
we may consider of it to our profit, in some order: two things are of most
worthy observation.

F^^st, what the most dangerous tentations of the Devil were, to the end we may
take our warning to watch against them.

Secondly, by what means our Savior overcame them, that we may learn from
him, what course we are to take, as it were under his conduct, that we also may
overcome. For as he would not simply, and by an absolute power, overcome the
devil, by restraining him from tempting, but by resisting and rejecting of his
tentations, framed as cunningly as might be: so must not we look, to be freed
from the temptations of Satan: but we must arm our selves to resist them, in
a wise and lawful course, that so by striving through the power of the grace
of our Savior Christ, we may at the last, though with much a do, happily
overcome.

Let us therefore stay awhile, to consider of these points, most worthy our
observation, as was said even now.

And first, which were the tentations of the Devil, such as he assaulted our
Savior withal;

The first tentation was unto distrust in the fatherly providence of God: yea
to the discrediting of that express word, and testimony, which God the Father
gave from heaven, of our Savior, that he is his Son.

The second was to the contrary presumption, and tempting of God, without
warrant of his word.

The third was to ambition, and covetous desire after the riches, and
vainglory of the world: and for the love thereof, to the worship and service
of the Devil, in stead of the true God.

Let us hear the text, and so shall all things be the more clear and manifest
unto us.

The Evangelist Matthew reports the history thus from the beginning of his 4.
chapter.

1 Then (says he) Jesus was led aside of the Spirit, into the wilderness, to be
tempted of the Devil.

2 And when he had fast^d forty days and forty nights, he was afterward hungry.

3 Then came to him the tempter, and said, If thou be the Son of God, command
that these stones be made bread.

Deuteronomy. 8.3.
4 But he answering, said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread only, but
by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

5 Then the Devil took him up into the holy City, and set him on a pinnacle
of the Temple.

Psalm. 9^.11.
6 And said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: for it
is written, that he will give his Angels charge over thee, and with their
hands they shall ^^ft thee up ^est at any time, thou should dash thy foot
against a stone.

Deuteronomy. 6.16.
7 Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God.

8 Again the Devil took him up into an exceeding high mountain, and showed
him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them.

9 And said unto him, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me.

Deuteronomy. 6.13. and chap. 10.20.
10 Then said Jesus unto him, Avoid Satan: for it is written, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

11 Then the Devil left him: and behold, the Angels came and ministered unto him.

Explication and proof.
Here we see the temptations of the Devil, which were mentioned before, plainly
laid before us, and the answers of our Savior to the same. We read them
recorded likewise, by the Evangelist Luke, chap: 4. verse, 1. etc. to the 14.
as was noted before: though in a diverse disposing of the temptations, he
rehearsing the last of Matthew, in the second place. But we will follow Matthew
his order, without any prejudice to Luke, knowing that they do not so much
stand upon the order, where it is not necessary, as upon the things
themselves: which they always faithfully report, and wherein, they do in this
history, jointly accord.

In this their joint report, beside the temptations themselves, their are
diverse circumstances, or rules, profitably to be observed, as you have been
taught, the which serve well, to the discovering of the Devils notable craft*
and malice practiced in them.

Question. Which are the circumstances?

Answer. First, we are given to understand, that the Devil is ready, chiefly
to assalt those that are in special callings, and are most like to be the
special instruments of God, to overthrow his kingdom.

The second circumstance is, that he watches to take the most dangerous
occasion and opportunity thereunto, that may be.

The third is, that he tempts to contraries: that is, when he sees that he
cannot prevail, to turn aside on the left hand, he will labor to draw us
aside, on the right hand.

Moreover, when he cannot prevail upon special occasions: then he flees to
those, which do commonly most earnestly affect all flesh.

Finally, we must consider, that the tentations of the Devil, are not bare and
naked motives, as if a young child should wantonlie move his mother, to give
him some thing which she knows to be very hurtful to him: but he comes with
strong delusions, if they may be admitted: and he is armed with fiery darts,
which will mightily and dangerously pierce, except the parties assalted, be
defended, as it were, by armor of proof.

Explication and proof.
The circumstances, or rules, and observations, are evident by the practice of
the Devil, in that course which he took in tempting our Savior, as we see it
after a sort, before our eyes.

For first of all, in so much as he assalteth our Savior Christ, the Son of
God, with all the craft he can, and without all dread or shame, etc: who may
look to escape his wicked and dangerous assalts? Let therefore both King and
Prince, ministers of the word, and every good Christian, look diligently to
themselves, and stand watchfullie upon their guard. And so much the more, ought
every one to do it, by how much his fall may be the greater, and more
hurtful, not only to himself, but also to many other.

Secondly, that the Devil does most narrowly watch the occasion, it is plain
likewise, in that he tempts not our Savior Christ, to make proof, whether
he were the Son of God, by trying whether he could turn a stone into bread,
vnt^ll our Savior was very hungry.

This which he did at this time, in his dealing with our Savior, in observing
the occasion: is his usual practice, with every of us, and all other. And it
is so much the more dangerous, in respect of us, because he has the advantage
against us, by one sin to make way for another. For when a man is in his angry
mood, then does he te^pt him or rather push him forward, to use reproachful
speeches, etc. When a man has intemperatelie filled himself with dainty
meats, and strong drinks, apt to provoke lust; then he te^pteth to
fornication, etc. When a man is in want, he tempts to distrust in the
providence of God. And if he be discontented, and give place to murmuring: then
does he tempt him further, to speak, etc. He takes the advantage against us
in all things, both from the excess of natural corruption, to this or that
evil; and also from the weakness of grace, toward this or that good duty.

Thirdly, as he attempted to deal with our Savior, so does he usually with
all other: that is, to draw them aside on the right hand, if he cannot on the
left. And seeing he does so usually prevail, as he has had experience, from
the beginning of the world, to this day, in that he has drawn thousands to be
prodigal, when he has not found them to be pliable to be couetously sparing:
and others again, to be miserably sparing and covetous, when they were not so
apt t^ prodigal and wastefull expenses: yea, seeing he has prevailed so
strangely with many, that of covetous, he has made them prodigal, and other
again, of prodigal, covetous: of Atheists, hypocrites: and contrariwise, of
hypocrites atheists, etc. by a change of one sin for another. It is therefore
the less marvel, that he does in this wise set upon our Savior Christ, in
hope at the least, that peradventure, he might prevail to pervert him, one way
or other, as he had prevailed with Adam and Eve in the beginning.

But the Deceiuer is here deceived, and altogether frustrated of his hope, to
the great glory of God, and to the singular reioicing of our hearts: in that
we have in the conquest of our Savior, the assured hope of our victory, and
prevailing against him.

Fourthlie, the Devil is so expert, that when he wants special occasions,
yet he is never destitute of matter to work upon: seeing he has always at
hand, the common and continual corrupt disposition of man's nature, howsoever
he was disappointed in our Savior. For he knows well, that self-loue, and
the love of this world, with ambition, and pride, etc. are naturally, borne
and bred in every man: Yea so, as that which is bred in the bone, will hardly
out of the flesh, as the common proverb is. Every man is desirous of worldly
riches, and preferment, etc. In these respects therefore the Devil never
wants work: though he have not always those special occasions, which he
hops for, and takes hold of, whenever they come in his way.

Finally, that the Devil is no weak and trifling Tempter, after the manner of
a wanton child, etc. it is evident from that we read, 2. These: 2.9.10.11.
etc. 2. Tim: 2.26. and Revel: 12.9. For he is mighty against the wicked, yea
sometime against the poor children of God: though we see no powerful effect,
against our Savior: blessed be God for it.

Such therefore, were the temptations of the Devil, against our Savior: the
which also, are his daily tentations, and the very manner of his tempting:
which he does most cunningly practice, with new devised plottes and
stratagemes against us all. For this we must understand, that the temptations
mentioned by the Evangelists, are not all, wherewith the Devil assaulted our
Savior, in the tentation of forty days. Neither did he leave our Savior,
but only for a season, when those days were ended: as Saint Luke certifieth
us, cha: 4.13. Only these few are mentioned, which it concerns us specially
to know: and that from those instances, we might be made wary and watchful
against these, and all other like unto them, whatsoever we shall be tempted
unto, contrary to the holy will and commandment of God: as it is our duty,
and does stand us most necessarily upon, to watch always most earnestly
against them.

Now therefore, from the temptations themselves, and the circumstances, or
rules, for the discerning of the crafty trade of the Devil therein: let us
come to see, how our Savior did repel, and beat back the tentations offered
unto him. For this also, is very behooffull to practice, after the example of
our Savior himself: to the end, we may through his grace, overcome.



By the right use, and application of the holy Scriptures (the which are
rightly termed the Sword of the spirit) our Savior did cut asunder, and
utterly frustrate all the Devils tentations: though he had every way, most
subtilie contrived them, and that even under colorable abuse of the holy
Scripture it self.

Explication and proof.
Herein therefore, let us for our imitation, observe this excellent wisdom of
our Savior: that we rightly understanding the holy scriptures, may rightly
use them, to the discovering, and repelling of the Devils abusing of them. By
cleaving to the truth of the scriptures, let us reject all his forgery and
lies, which he shall go about to countenance, and impudentlie to face out by
them. For so we see plainly, that out Savior did. As for example, whereas in
the first tentation, the Devil sought as cunningly as he could, to discredit
the word, and testimony of God the Father, uttered in his most solemn
proclaiming of him, to be his Son: our Savior does contrariwise, uphold the
truth of the word of God, by the word: that is, the truth of the word lately
uttered, by the word long before written. Yea for answer of all the
tentations, he says. It is written. It is written. It is written. Wherefore,
for the answering of tentations, if we will t^ke the speeding course, we must
not betake our selves to revelations from heaven, nor to carnal and earthly
reasonings, wherein the Devil will easily go beyond us: but to the written word
of God, which God has established, for a most sure and infallible refuge, and
direction unto us.

And hereby, it may evidently appear, how necessary a duty it is, for
every Christian, even to his own safety, and as the only preservative
against his utter overthrow, yea against his eternal destruction: to be well
acquainted, and stored with the word of God, that we may thereby discern
aright, which are the temptations of the Devil. For otherwise it is an easy
matter for him, to delude us, when the Devil shall tempt us to steal: if we
have not the 8. commandment in a readiness to reply against him, and say in our
hearts, and in the fear of God. It is written. Thou shall not steal. Nothing
else, shall be a ^^fficient counterpoison against the tentation. And the same is
true, concerning all the rest: when any of us shall be temp^ed to uncleanness,
to revenge, to contempt of our governors, to profanesse, to swearing, to
idolatry. etc. Assuredly of we have not the word written in our hearts, to
allege, It is written in the book of God, Thou shall not commit adultery,
Vengeance is mine, Honor thy Father, and thy mother, etc: there is no
sufficient help, for resistance, but we shall fall down like wounded men
before the Devil.

F^nallie, seeing as was said before, the Devil is continual in temptation,
(though God will not suffer him to be always alike vehement and pressing)
therefore let us be continually in our watch and ward against him: and
especially then, when any prick in the flesh, the messenger of Satan, as the
Apostle Paul speaks, shall be near at hand, soliciting us, as it were, to
any special sin, either secret, or open, of the flesh, or of the Spirit, of
what sort so ever it be.

And always, let us have in mind, this encouragement, which the Lord,
himself gives us to understand, by his Apostle James, that if we resist the
Devil, he shall fly from us. chapter 4.7. The ground of which comfort, is
this, that our Savior Christ has vanquished the Devil on our behalf: as is
most clear, by this history of his tentations.

Thus much therefore, concerning the hard entrance, or preparation of our
blessed Savior, unto the execution of his most holy and happy public
ministry for us, according to the will of God, and according to his own
voluntary good will toward us: that hereby it might appear, even from the
beginning, that the Devil must be vanquished by him, or else we could not be
saved, but must abide for ever, most miserable and slavish vassalls unto him,
and so to lie eternally under die wrath of God, together with him.

LEt us now go on, and see how our Savior Christ does publicly execute his
most gracious and high office and ministry, whereunto he was thus most
sufficiently called, and every way fitted and prepared.

We will consider of this public ministry of his, from the more near
beginnings, both for doctrine, and also for miracles: and so forth to the
further proceeding of it.

The which beginnings, though they may seem to have been in weakness, at the
first, as the Sun in the rising: yet they shall be found to gather strength, as
it were with a swift course, of the wings thereof, and wax brighter and
brighter, until the high noone of the day.



We have these beginnings, faithfully set down and recorded, in the first
chapter of the Evangelist John, as it follows after that, where we left,
concerning John the Baptistes pointing out of our Savior with the finger, from
the 37. verse, to the end of the chapter. Let us hear the words of the
Evangelist.

37 It follows thus. And the two Disciples heard him (that is, they heard)
John the Baptist their Master) speak (that is, using these words, concerning
our Savior, being then in their sight) Behold the Lamb of God, and they
followed Jesus.

38 Then Jesus turned about, and saw them follow, and he said unto them, What
seek ye? And they said unto him, Rabbi (which is to say by interpretation,
Master) where dwell thou?

39 He said unto them, Come and see: They came, and saw where he dwelt, and
abode with him that day: for it was about the tenth hour.

40 Andrewe, Simon Peter's brother, was one of the two, which had heard it of
John, and that followed him.

41 The same found his brother Simon first, and said unto him, we have found
the Messiah, which is by interpretation, the Christ.

^2 And he brought him to Jesus. And Jesus beheld him, and said, Thou art Simon
the son of Iona: thou shall be called Cephas, which is by interpretation, a
stone.

43 The day following, Jesus would go into Galilee, and found Philippe, and
said unto him, Follow me.

44 Now Philippe was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.

45 Philip found Nathanael, and said unto him, We have found him of whom Moses
did write in the Law, and the Prophets, Jesus of Nazareth the son of Joseph.

46 Then Nathanael said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of
Nazareth? Philip said unto him, Come and see.

47 Jesus saw Nathanael coming unto him, and said of him, Behold indeed an
Israelite, in whom is no guile.

48 Nathanael said unto him, Whence knew thou me? Jesus answered and said
unto him; Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree,
I saw thee.

49 Nathanael answered, and said unto him, Rabbi thou art the Son of God,
thou art the King of Israel.

50 Jesus answered and said unto him, Because I said unto thee, I saw thee
under the fig tree, beleeuest thou? thou shall see greater things then these.

51. And he said unto him, Verily, Verily, I say unto you, hereafter ye shall
see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son
of Man.

Explication and proof.
Here are the beginnings of the doctrine of our Savior Christ, very
faithfully recorded unto us: small indeed in outward appearance, but great
and mighty, and most gracious in effect; as they will appear to all that
shall duly consider them.

They have been, by preaching, laid open to you at large, as you know. Now we
can but cursorilie call to mind, a brief sum of these excellent things.

And first, concerning the entertainment which our Savior gave to Andrew, and
his companion, whether it was John the Evangelist, (who uses to conceal his
own name) or any other: it was kind indeed, but very simple and plain, in
these words, Come and see. Nevertheless, this is wonderful, that these two,
tarrying with our Savior but one night, should see and hear those things from
him, whereby they were for ever confirmed, to believe the testimony, which
John the Baptist gave of him, to be undoubtedly true: namely, that he was, as
he had said the day before, the Lamb of God. Yea, they were so persuaded, that
they do not only believe themselves: but they are careful also, to bring
others to Christ, that they might likewise believe. For Andrewe finding Peter
his brother, he reports to him with great joy, that they had found the
Christ, or anointed of God: and in this persuasion, he did lead his brother
unto him. Our Savior, by telling Peter his name, as soon as he came unto him,
and whose son he was, and what was his natural timorousnes, in the
profession of the name of God, though otherwise of courage enough, and too
much: and likewise prophesying further, or rather of his divine grace,
promising him the gift of true spiritual fortitude: our Savior does hereby,
work the like effect in Peter's heart.

The next day, as we see, it follows in the text, our Savior going into
Galile, and finding Philip a stranger to him, in respect of humane knowledge or
acquaintance, and only saying to him, Follow thou me: forthwith Philip most
willingly followed him, and became his Disciple, and believed in some measure,
though (yet in much imperfection) that our Savior Christ was he of whom Moses
wrote in the law. And his heart was in like ma^ne^ so reioiced than meeting
Nathanael, he leaves him not, till he have brought him to our Sa: Christ.

Heerevpon, our Savior so entertaineth Nathanael, that he perceives by that
speech which he used to him at his first coming, that he knew the very
inward and secret disposition of his heart, which God had wrought in him by his
holy spirit. And therwithall he perceives also, that while he was yet out of
the view of the natural eye of our Savior, he was nevertheless, in the sight of
his divine providence. For our Savior tells him plainly, that he saw him
under the fig tree. The which things, so wrought in the heart of Philip, that
by the grace which our Savior gave him: he was brought immediately to believe,
that he was the Son of God, the king of Israel. And thereupon, our Savior
promises, (as we have seen in the end of the chapter) that both Nathanael,
and the rest, thus apprehending some smaller beginnings of faith, should in
time to come, see greater things, for their further confirmation. For this he
means, by the opening of the heaven, and the Angels of God ascending and
descending upon the Son of Man.

These were the first beginnings, even as it were the seed time of the holy,
doctrine of our Savior: whereby he began to manifest, and make himself
known, though yet somewhat more privately.

The which beginnings, though they were small in outward show (as was said)
yet they were so mighty and effectual, that our Savior is acknowledged of
his disciples, though very Nouices as one may say, to be in respect of his
Person, the Son of God: and in regard of his office, the Messiah or anointed
of God, the Prophet of whom Moses wrote, and the very true King of Israel:
according to the Promise, which God had made to the seed of David. For so no
doubt Nathanael meant.

LEt us now, from the beginnings of the doctrine, proceed to consider likewise,
what manner of beginning our Savior made, concerning his Miracles: which
served for the confirmation of the same his doctrine, and also of the truth of
his divine Person, and likewise of his most holy office annexed thereunto, as
will hereafter better appear.



The record hereof, follows from the beginning of the 2. chapter of the same
Evangelist S. Ihon to the 12. verse of the same.



His words are these. And the third day, there was marriage in Cana (a town of
Galile, and the Mother of Jesus was there.

2. And Jesus was called also, and his Disciples unto the marriage.

3 Now when the wine failed, the Mother of Jesus said unto him, they have no
wine.

4 Jesus said unto her, Woman what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not
yet come.

5 His Mother said unto the servants, Whatsoever he says unto you, do it.

6 And there were set there, six water-pottes of stone, after the manner of the
purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins a piece.

7 And Jesus said unto them, Fill the pottes with water. Then they filled them
up to the brimme.

8 Then he said unto them, Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the
feast So they bare it.

9 Now when the governor of the feast, had tasted the water which was made
wine, (for be knew not whence it was: but the servants which drew the water
knew) the governor of the feast, called the Bridegroom.

10 And he said unto him, All men at the beginning set forth good wine, and
when men have well drunk, then that which is worse: but thou have kept back
the good wine until now.

11 This beginning of miracles did Jesus (says the Evangelist John) in Cana of
Galile, and showed forth his glory: and his Disciples believed in him.

Explication. Here we have, as it is plainly testified, a very notable and
right gracious beginning, of the miraculous works of our Savior: to the
making of his divine Person known, by this effect of his divine power, like as
before he showed some tokens of his Prophetical Spirit.

NOw if you go forward, to read where you left: that is, from the beginning of
the 12. verse, to the end of the chapt: we shall see the same things, yet mo e
clearelie, and more publikelie, manifested and confirmed unto us.

For our Savior Christ by his Divine power, and Regal authority, came into
the Temple of Jerusalem, as the Sovereign Lo^^, into his own house, according
to the Prophecy of Malachie, chap: 3.1. and reformed the abuses thereof.

And besides that, the holy Evangelist testifies, that our Savior, did both
know the thoughts and intents of his adversaries, even from the first peeping
out of their malice against him: and also the false hearts of all hypocrites,
who made a show of beginning to believe, and of bearing hearty good will
toward him, when as they did neither of them from any, either soundness of
judgment, or truth in affection.

Read the text attentively, and you shall easily perceive it to be so.



It follows thus. After that (says the Evangelist) he went down to
Capernaum, He and his Mother, and his Brethren, and his Disciples, but they
continued not long there.

13 For the Jews Passe-ouer was at hand. Therefore Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

14 And he found in the Temple, those that sold Oxen and sheep, and doves,
and changers of mone^ sitting there.

15 Then he made a scourge of small coardes, and drove them all out of the
Temple, etc. And ver^es, 23.24.25.

23 Now (as the Evangelist writes further) when he was at Jerusalem, at the
Passover in the ^east, many believed in his name, when they saw his Miracles
which he aid.

24 But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew them all.

25 And he had no need, that any should testify of man, for he knew what was
in man.

Explication.
May we not see plainly now, even by the reading of the text, as was said,
that our Savior comes into the Temple, with all authority, as the sovereign
Lord, into his own house, etc.

And do we not see likewise, how he plainly espieth and discerns at the
very first, both the hidden malice of his adversaries, and also the hypocrisy
and dissimulation of his hollow hearted friends?

These things are very evident, to every one that has an eye of iugdement to
see withal.

And thus we see plainly, the beginninges of our Savior his manifesting of
himself to be the Messiah: both by his doctrine, and also by his Miracles,
from the end of the forty days temptation, to the end of the first
Passe-ouer, next after that he was baptized.

And herewithall, we may perceive likewise, in what manner of conversation our
Savior carried himself, among the people of God: to wit, with singular
vprightnes toward all, with great gentleness toward those that show themselves
teachable, and with as great authority and Majesty, to the reproof of the
rest: according to the testimony of this same Evangelist. John ch: 1.14. The
word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the glory thereof, as the
glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth.

But ^t would ^e very long to prosecute all things, concerning the orderly,
and successiue proceedings of the life, doctrine, and miracles of our Savior
Christ This we e ^o make a full Commentary, and not to use any convenient
expedition in our propounded course of Catechizing.

We will therefore henceforth, The meaning of it.
only inquire briefly of the life of our Savior, in a general
consideration: and after the heads or chief points of his doctrine, and after
the kinds of his Miracles, in some plain and familiar order, pointing to the
places, where we may read them fully.

Question. In the first place therefore, what are you taught to believe,
concerning the life of our Savior, in a general consideration of it.

The holy Scriptures teach me, and every Christian to believe, yea they do
plainly describe, and lay before our eyes as it were, that the life of our
Savior Christ, was a perfect mirror of all true virtue and godliness.

And namely, that he was in all holy duties, both to God and man, upright and
entire, diligent, and painful, faithful, constant, and unweariable, even
from the first time that he had any discretion, to the end of his life:
notwithstanding all temptations, and afflictions, whatsoever he met withal.

Explication and proof.
It is true. The life of our Savior, as it stands recorded in the holy
Gospel: but much more plentifully, as he led it: is a most perfect mirror of
all true holiness and righteousness, in every part of it: according to that
which we have already seen concerning the whole private estate of it: he
therein increasing more and more, in wisdom, and grace, before God and men, we
have seen it also, in the beginning of his leading of it, most worthily, in
his public estate.

The proceedinges of it, were answerable to the beginninges, so that in
nothing, it was wanting. For herein was it fulfilled, which is written, that he
was full of grace and truth. John 1.14. God gave him not the Spirit by measure.
chap: 3.34. And that in him are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. Coloss: chapt: 2. verse 3.

For his zeal of the glory of God, read Ioh: 2.17. The zeal of thy house
has eaten me up. And chapt: 4.31. etc. He preferred the doing of the will of
his Father before the taking of his meat, though he were very hungry.

For his hatred against sin read Mark 3.5. See his earnest rebukes, and
threats against obstinate sinners, Matthew: 11.20. etc. and chapt: 18.6.7.8.9.
and chapt: 23.

For his pity and compassion, over poor penitent sinners, read Matthew: 9.36.
and chapt: 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are weary, and. and chapter 18. He
came to seek up the lost sheep. And again, He was so tender, that he would
not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed.

And for his compassion, over the outward necessities of men: read Matt: ch: 14
verse 14. and ch: 15.32. I have compassion on this multitude.

For his humility, read again Matthew 11. verse 29 and John 13. He washed his
Disciples feet. He was more ready to serve, then to be served. Suffer little
children to come to me, says our Savior. Mark: 10.

The particulars of the obedience and righteousness of our Savior are infinite:
according to all the commandments, as has been more fully set down, at the
end of every commandment, in the former part of the Treasury, to show,
that our Savior has fulfilled the law for us, above that we can stand to
rehearse now.

Only let us see some proofs, for the virtues expressed in the answer:
seeing they contain the grounds of all the rest. For in so much as he was, in
all things upright and entier, diligent, and painful, faithful and constant,
without any wearines and fainting: what might be further required of him?

First therefore, for his vprightnes, read, 1. Pet: 2.22. There was no guile in
his mouth. No, nor in his heart neither. He would by no means exceed the
limits and bounds of his calling: as Luke 12. v. 14. who (says our Savior)
made me a deuider of inheritance? He refused to be a civil King or ruler, etc.

Concerning his great diligence and paines-taking, and that also constantly and
vnweariably: consider it in his Preaching, Matthew: 4.23. chap: 9, 35. and chap:
26, 55. Luke 4.43, 44, cha: 8.1. ch: 13, 22, and ch: 22, 53. Heb: 3, 1, 2. etc.
It is thus often mentioned, The ground and history of it.
because it is a matter very worthy to be diligently observed.

Consider the like diligence, and painfulnes of our Savior, without wearines
in prayer. Luke 6. the whole night in renewing of his supplications. And
usually, and very often, by himself, Mark, 1.35. Luke 9.18. chapt: 11.1.
Matthew: 14.23. Mark. 6.46.

And that no discouragement could daunt our Savior, or cease his most holy
course: no though he was requited with all evil dealing, it is many ways
evident. The peoples atte^pting, to throw him down headlong, from the top of an
hill, could not do it. Lu: 4.29. Their lying in wait to entrap him in his
speech, Matt: 22.15. and Luke 11.53.54. Their attempting to stone him, could
not do it. John: 8.59. and ch: 10.21. The most blasphemous reproaches, which
they and their rulers, raised up against him, could not do it. Math: 11.19. and
chapter 12.24. No other grieuance, or undutiful dealing of the part of any, could
do it, as it is notably testified in the holy Gospel.

If we would have any further proof, of the most perfect constancy of our
Savior: hi^ death was the full sealing up, and confirming of all, as we shall
see further, when we come to inquire of ^t. And in the mean while, we may take
a taste, from his most resolute settel^ng and preparing of himself, to the
enduring of it Matt: 16.23. and 26.53.54. and Lu: 12.49.50.51.52.53.



Yea, God made a promise of it to his Church, as it is evident, Isa. ch: 11.2^:
v: 1.2. etc. And ch: ^0.8. and ch: 53.9. Likewise Ier: 23.6. They shall call him
the Lord our righteousness.

These Prophesies have indeed, the nature of promises, and were given for^h no
doubt, Explication. and proof.
by the commandment of God, for an assured testimony, that he should be such
a one, as he was by the holy Prophets, described to be.

Hereunto also, tend those allegorical, and patheticall loue-descriptions of
our Savior Christ, by the Church, in the Song of Songs, where he is set
forth, to be most comely and beautiful, from the top to the toe: yea
altogether delectable, matchles, and incomparable.

And thus the Promise being comfortable of it self, may well draw us to a
further consideration of the comfortes, that faith finds in the perfect
holiness, and righteousness of our Savior Christ.



All do rest in this one: in so much as hereby we are assured, that he has
fulfilled the law for us: and that he is a fit Person to stand betwixt God and
us, and to offer up that only propitiatory sacrifice, which is auailable to
take away our sins, and to reconcile us for ever to God.

Explication and proof.
All rests in this inde^d. For insomuch as he was to die for our sins, it
was necessary that he should live without sin. And so it is testified of
him, that he knew no sin. Otherwise, he could not have taken away our sins.
But now, that we know, he was perfitlie righteous, even that holy and
righteous one, so appointed and approved of God; there is nothing wanting, that
we can desire more, to the comfort of our consciences, in this behalf.

Now therefore, what duty belongs hereunto?

The holy Scriptures do teach us, in this respect, that our Savior Christ
has not only fulfilled the perfect righteousness of the law for us: Answer
but also that he has therwithall given us an example, how we our selves, and
all Christians, ought, trusting in his grace, to endeavor more and more, to
serve and obey God, our heavenly Father, in all righteousness, and true
holiness, all the days of our lives.

The holy Scriptures do teach us so much indeed, The danger of not believing.
according to that which we read, John, chap. 13. verses 12, 13, etc. 1. Cor.
11.1. Ephesians. 5.2. and 1. Pet. 2.12.

And it stands with all good and holy reason, that it should be so. For
seeing our Savior humbled himself to walk in all good duty both to God and
toward all men, neither refused the duty belonging to every age, nor the
labor of his hands in a poor estate: yea though he was the Son of God: who
can, without shame and blushing, go about to draw his neck out of the yoke.
Nay, who can but acknowledge, that it is his bounden duty, after the example
of our Savior Christ, to endeavor after all vprightnes, and integrity, after
all diligence and painefulnes, after all faithfulness and constancy, in the
discharge of the duties of our callings, wherein the Lord has set us.



They that do not know and believe this, cannot believe in our Savior Christ,
as in a meet and sufficient Person, to be a mediator to satisfy Gods justice
for our sins, and to make an everlasting reconciliation, and atonement with
his divine Majesty for us.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. Neither can any such, reap any profit, or benefit by his
death. This therefore, is carefully to be avoided, as a very great danger, and
as rock that would cause shipwreck of faith. For if our Savior Christ had
been a sinner himself, (which God forbid we should once think, though his
adversaries did so blaspheme, as our Savior himself complains, Matt.
11.19.) how should we have any comfort, that he satisfied for our sins, and
not rather for his own? But for the removing of this so dangerous and
uncomfortable a doubt, he does elsewhere very earnestly reply against all
these, and all such slanderous calumniations, to justify the righteousness of
his life. And namely, John chapter 8. verse 28. I do nothing of my self, etc. and
verse 29. I do always those things that please my Father. And verse 48. Which
of you can rebuke me of sin? And whereas they fear not to blaspheme most
wickedly, and to say, that he had a Devil: our Savior answered them, I have
not a Devil: but I honor my Father, and ye have dishonored me. And I seek
not mine own praise: but there is one that seeks it and judges. And verse
55. I know God, and keep his word. And chapter 10.32. When the Jews went about to
stone our Savior: Many good works (says he) have I showed you, from my
Father: for which of these works do ye stone me? As though he should say, If
ye will needs stone me, it must be for well doing, and not for any evil,
which ye can justly charge me with. And he proceeds further, to justify
himself against their reply, in the same place. Read also chapter 12.49.50. and
chapter 14.31.

Hitherto of the life of our Savior. Only this reserved, that we are
hereafter, to inquire more fully, of the last part and conclusion of it:
wherein, the perfection of all his most holy virtues, do most brightly show
themselves, as then we shall by the grace of God, make it very plain, from the
holy history thereof.

Belief in God the Son, who taught a most holy and perfect doctrine.
Belief in God the Son, who taught a most holy and perfect Doctrine.
IN the mean season, his doctrine is next to be considered of us.



We are to believe that our Savior Christ, taught a most perfect doctrine;
containing both the grounds, and also the sealing up, or ratification of the
whole truth of God, necessary to be believed and obeyed of us, and the whole
Church, for our direction in the way of salvation, even to the end of the
world.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. For in this respect, as we have already seen, we are to
believe in our Savior, as in the great Prophet sent of God, whom all stand
most strictly bound to hear and obey. Act. 3.22.23. Heb. chap. 1. verses 1.2.
and ch 1^.25.

And that our Savior, has taught a most perfect doctrine, we may easily show
it in way of induction, by collecting of the beads or chief points thereof,
set down in the holy history of the Gospel, written of him. And that also, so
exactly and perfectly from his own sacred mouth, may justly and as it were
upon a sure ground and foundation build our faith thereon. For whereas the
whole doctrine of God, is comprehended either in the law, or the Gospel: our
Savior has taught all things most perfectly, concerning both of them.

And first concerning the Law, that is to say, the moral law, which has a
perpetual use and authority in the Church: though the ceremonies, and many
political ordinances of the law are ceased by our Saviors coming.

First, he teaches the perpetuity of it, and therewith also, the perfection
of it, to all such ends, as God appointed it unto: in so much as, If any shall
break the least of the commandments, and teach men so our Savior affirms,
that he shall be least in the kingdom of God. Matthew. 5.17.18, 19, 20. Read
also chapter 19.16, etc. Where he tells the rich young man, that this law of God,
is a perfect rule of man's life. Thou know the commandments (says he) Thou
shall not commit adultery, etc. Luke, chap. 18. verse 18, etc. Read also chap.
10.28. and chapter 16. verses ^9, 31.

Secondly, our Savior distributeth the law most perfectly, according to the
several contents of either table: under the name of the first and second
Commandment. Matthew. chap. 22. verses 36, 37, 38, 39. The first and the great
Commandment (says our Savior) is this, Thou shall love the Lord thy God,
with all thy heart, etc. And the second (as he says further) is like unto
this, to wit, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. On these two
Commandments hangs the whole law and the Prophets: says our Savior, the
Prince of all Prophets, and he by whose spirit they spoke and wrote all that is
written of them. Read also Mark. chap. 12. verses 28. and 24. And after this
(says the Evangelist there) no man durst ask him any question: to wit, with
any vain confidence, or bold conceit, that they might put him to silence. For
they were convicted in their consciences, of his most perfect knowledge,
according to that testimony which the expounder of the law, gave to this his
answer, made unto him.

Thirdly, as in the same place he makes it clear who is the true God, even
the God of Israel, one only God: so Luke, chap. 10.29, 30, etc. 37. he does by
a notable parable declare, whom God in his law, would have us account to be our
neighbor. And Matthew. 5.43, etc. It has been said, Thou shall love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemies. But (says our Savior) I say unto you, love
your enemies, etc. Where he includes them, under the word neighbor, against
that former blind distinction. Read also chapter 7.12.

Fourthly, our Savior Christ does most purely, and faithfully clear the right
interpretation, and scope of the law, against the corrupt and defective
glosses, wherewith the Scribes and Pharisees had obscured, and perverted the
same. This he does by giving particular instances, in diverse of the
commandments: the sense whereof, they had curtailed, as one may say: as we
read, Matthew. 5. verses 22, 23, etc. In which words he gives instance
concerning the 6. Commandment. And verses 27.28, etc. concerning the 7.
Commandment. And verses 33.34, etc. concerning the third commandment. And
again, concerning the same, chap. 23.16, etc. And against cruelty, forbidden
in the 6. Commandment.

Likewise also, at another time, concerning the seventh Commandment. chapter 19.3,
etc.

Moreover, concerning the 5. Commandment, chap. 15.3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Yea and
generally against their tradition, verse 11. showing that the heart is
principally to be cleansed, or else all is to no purpose. And again concerning
the 5. Commandment, chapter 22.18, etc.

Yea, in that one most notable, and large Sermon of our Savior upon the
mountain, recorded in the 5, 6, and 7, chapters of matthew: if we shall mark
it well: it will appear, that he speaks of all the principal duties,
commanded in the whole decalogue, or ten Commandments of the moral Law:
though not in the order of the Commandments, which was not necessary.

And concerning the 4. Commandment, very often does our Savior Christ both
by doctrine, and also by practice, clear the right use of it; and so
delivers it from all pharisaicall and superstitious abuse. Matthew. 12.1, etc.
Luke, 4.16, etc. And chap. 6.1, etc. And chap. 13.10, etc. And John, chap. 5.9,
etc. and verses 16, 17, etc. and chap, 7, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Did not Moses
give you a law? etc.

The sum^e of all, concerning the interpretation, which our Savior gives of
the Law, is this, that the whole Law, and every commandment thereof, both
pertaining to God, and also to man, does not only bind the outward man, as
the hand and tongue, etc. to obedience: but even the most inward and hidden man
of the heart, touching the most secret thoughts, motions, and intents thereof.
So that, not only by the prescription of the Law of God, are good actions to
be done, but it is also required by the same Law, that they be done in the
right manner: without all hypocrisy, without vain glory, without bitterness,
without flattery, without envy, without desire of revenge, etc. Yea, and on
the contrary, in all vprightnes of heart, and with a good conscience, from
faith and love unfeigned: even to our enemies, as in the sight of God, in pure
zeal of his glory, etc. to the end that all our actions may be pleasing unto
God.

In this wise, does our Savior make it clear, how the law of God is rightly
to be understood and interpreted, against the corrupt glosses of the Pharisees.
Neither is there any special virtue, commanded by God, in his holy Law, which
our Savior does not earnestly commend, and exhort unto: nor any vice of
special note, which he does not zealously reprove, and dehort from; as also
from the inward thought and motions thereof.

And to this purpose, according to his special kind of teaching, he does very
elegantly, and plainly, sit many notable similitudes and parables. As for
example, by the parable of a certain Lender, who had two debtors, Luke, 7.39,
etc. he reproves the rash and unadvised judgment of a Pharisie. By a parable
of the Plough-man, looking back, he reproves lightness and inconstancy, chap.
^.62. By the parable of a certain rich man, he reproves covetousness and trust
in riches, chapter 12.15, etc. Likewise 16.13. by a parable of one that should take
upon him to serve two Masters, he reproves the same, and shows the
impossibility of it. And chap. 13.6, etc. by a parable of a barren figtree, he
reproves all vnfrutfulnes, in those which do profess the name of God: as also
that heinous abuse, which all such do make of Gods long sufferance, and
patience toward them. And chapter 16. verse 19, etc. by a parable of the rich man
and Lazarus he does reprove, and condemn unmercifulness, in all rich men. And
chapter 18.9, etc. he does by a parable of the Pharisie, and Publicane, reprove and
condemn likewise, the proud opinion of justification, by man's own works.

Contrariwise, by a parable of guests bidden to a wedding, he teaches and
exhorts to humility, chapter 14.7, etc. And likewise by a parable of a Master
and his servant, chapter 17.7, etc. To continuance and watchfulnes in good duties,
our Savior moves and persuades, by a parable of men waiting to light their
Masters home, in the night from a marriage feast, chapter 12.35, 36, 37, 38. And
again, ver. 39, 40, etc. by a parable of the Master of a family, who watches
against the coming of a thief.

By the parable of a certain wary and provident Steward, he commands and
exhorts all christians, to mercifulnes and liberality to the poor, chapter 16.1,
etc. And chapter 12.58.59. he exhorts to speedy reconciliation, from a
similitude of one, that has gotten out an attachment for his debtour, and has
already done him the arrest, etc.

These are part of the parables, whereby our Savior Christ has partly given
admonition and warning, against vice: and partly, has exhorted to godliness and
virtue. We have alleged them out of the Evangelist Luke, because he is most
plentiful in this kind of record.

Yet we must in no wise think, that our Savior exhorts thus, to the duties
of holiness and righteousness, commanded in the law: as though any might obtain
righteousness thereby, to their justification before God: (for that is contrary
to his express doctrine, according to that parable of the unprofitable
servant, Luke 17.10.) but only to declare our thankfulness to God, for his free
grace, and mercy toward us, by all good fruits of obedience, so far forth, as
by his grace, we may attain unto.

As touching our justification before God, our Savior teaches us plainly,
that Moses the immediate giver of the Law from the hand of God, and all the
holy Prophets, who were the faithful interpreters thereof, do in that
respect, direct all to look unto our Savior Christ himself: according to
that of our Savior, John, 5.46. Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed
me, for he wrote of me, etc. And verse 39. he says more generally of the holy
Scriptures, They testify of me. And Luke, chapter 24.44. All things must be
fulfilled, which are written of me in the law of Moses, and in the Prophets,
and in the Psalms. Read also John, 3.14, 15. and chapter 8.24.

Thus much therefore, for a taste of the most excellent, and perfect doctrine
of our Savior Christ, concerning the law of God.

We come now to give a like taste, of his most holy and perfect doctrine,
concerning the Gospel.

And herein, first more generally, concerning Faith and Repentance: and then
more particularly, concerning every Article.

Secondly, concerning Prayer.

Thirdly, concerning the Sacraments.

Fourthly, concerning the external ecclesiastical government of his Church.
For if we shall see plain and full grounds for these things, in the doctrine
of our Savior: we shall have sufficient ground to believe and acknowledge,
the perfection of his doctrine, such as is recorded in the history of his
Gospel.

First therefore, more generally concerning Faith: our Savior Christ does
notably describe the nature of Faith: and therewithal teaches also, the
necessity of it, in so much as without faith none can be saved, no more then a
man can be nourished without bodily food. John 3.18. and chap: 6.3^. etc. in a
large disputation with the Jews, by a comparison taken from Manna, and under
the tropicall speeches of eating his flesh^, and drinking of his blood.

Secondly, he teaches the excellency of faith, as of that grace, which is
specially well pleasing unto God, John chap: 6. verse 29. This is the work of
God (says our Savior) that ye believe in him whom he has sent. And chap: 3,
14.15.16.17. the excellency of it is noted, in that this grace alone
apprehends salvation. And chap: 7, 50. Thy faith has saved thee. Moreover it
is through says that our p^ai^rs are auailable with God Mark: 11.24, And ch:
9, 23. To him that believes (says our Savior) all things are possible.

Thirdly, ^o the end he might the rather stir up all to a careful seeking
after this grace and to continuance and abiding in it: he tells us that it is
rare, and shall be found nothing so common, as men in outward profession, do
make show of it Luke chap: 18.8.

The doctrine of our Savior concerning Repentance is, first, that it is a
grace, arising from the apprehension of Gods comfortable grace, and mercy,
through our Savior Christ, as it may appear, Matthew: 4, 17, Amend your lives
(says he) for the kingdom of God is at hand. Wherein also our Savior gives
to understand, that it is a necessary grace, as it were the pathway to the
kingdom of heaven. And Luke 13.3.5. Except ye repent, ye shall all perish.
Wherefore, as our Savior teaches further, it was a special end of his
coming, to call sinners ^o repentance. Mat: 9.13. And chap: 18.11. etc. where
he lays it forth, by a parable of the Shepherd, who is exceedingly careful,
to seek up his sheep, which he has l^st. In which respect also, our Savior
prefers most grievous sinners, repenting them of their sins, before the
goodliest hypocrites, that are in the world, as we read Mat: chap: 21. verse 28,
etc. where our Savior lays in forth, in the parable of the two sons. And
chap: 25.10.11.12.13. by the parable of the five foolish Virgins. He
prefers them also, before all secure and negligent ^^^de^bles: such as we
spoke of before from the Evangelist Mat: chap: 22.12. In the which part of the
parable, our Savior seems to allude to some such custom, among the Jews,
as is among us in giving bride-laces or bride-gloues, or some other thing,
whereby the guests of the bridegroom are for the time, known from other.

Finally, for the encouragement of sinners to repentance, our Savior
teaches, by many parables, one after another, how singularly well pleasing
it is unto God, that Sinners should repent: and how ready he is, to accept of
such as do so. Luke chapt: 15. from the beginning to the end of the same. Yet
with this condition, that it be in truth, and that there be no general
relapse, and falling away to sin again: because then all is lost, yea a more
wo^full estate attends all such; as our Savior admonishes, and warns us,
Matthew: 12.41.42.43.44 45.

Thus far concerning the doctrine of Faith more generally, and also
concerning repentance, arising from, and with the same, as our Savior taught
it.

We come to his doctrine, concerning the several Articles of our Faith, or
Belief.

And first concerning the unity of the Godhead, he teaches plainly, that
there is one only God: as we read: Mark, chapt: 12.29. Whereupon as it
follows, verse 32. Well Master (says the Scribe) thou have said the truth,
that there is one God, and that there is none but he. Our Savior Christ
teaches also, this one only God, is all only goodness, so that none is good
but he, as touching both the original, and also the perfection of goodness.
Matthew: chapt: 19.17. and Luke 18. verse. 19.

He teaches also, that this one only true GOD, is of a Spiritual nature,
infinite, invisible, and incomprehensible: and that therefore he requires,
that such as worship him, should perform it in spirit and truth, John ch: 4.
verse 24 God is a spirit, etc. Let this suffice for a taste of the most
excellent doctrine of our Savior Christ concerning the Unity of the Godhead.

Let us proceed to his doctrine, touching the dictinction of Persons, the
Father the Son, and the holy Ghost. And first, that our Savior
distinguishes the Persons in the Deity or Godhead, it is evident, in that he
says, that he came from the Father John: 6.29. and chap: 10.36. And likewise,
in that he says, that the holy Ghost proceeds, and is sent both from the
Father, and the Son, John chap: 1^.26. and chap: 15.26. and chap: 16.7. But
most plainly in the form of Baptizing into the name of the Father, and also
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, instituted by the divine authority of our
Savior himsel^e, Mat: ^8 ^9.

Now let us briefly observe his doctrine, concerning every person distinctly.

And first, concerning the Father, he teaches that he is the almighty God,
John: 10.29. My Father is greater then all, etc.

That he is a Father, most properly, in respect of our Savior himself, he
teaches plainly, John: 5.28. For he said, that God was his own Father: yea
and that also, with an equality of Person, a^ the Jews did truly, though not
obediently understand him, as it is evident in that place.

Yet he does not teach, that God is so his natural Father only, but that he
is a Father to all the elect through him, by adoption and grace: according to
that, John. chap: 20.17. I ascend to my Father, and to your Father: and to my
God, and your God. And as he does likewise call him our Father, in many other
places of the Gospel: and namely, where he teach h us, and all Christians,
together with these, which were his choice Disciples at that time, to pray to
God, as to our heavenly Father, Mat: 5.45.4^. and ch 6. verses 9.14, 15.

Our Savior teaches us also, that God the Father, is the maker of heaven and
earth. Mat: 19 4. For in that he alleged Moses, as a true and faithful
historiographer, in one point of the Creation, he confirms the whole history
thereof, as it is recorded by the same Prophet.

He teaches also, that God the Father, is the most wise and provident ruler
and goue nour over all; yea so that, a sparrowe falls not to the ground, nor
one hair from the heads of Gods children, without his Fatherly providence.
Mat: 10.29.30. The which most holy, and comfortable doctrine, he does most
earnestly teach and affirm, in the 6. chap: of the same Gospel. Read also,
chap: 7. verse 11. and chap: 26, 53. The Angels are under his Fathers
government. Yea the calling, and salvation, and whole government of the Church,
is in his Fathers hand, Mat: chap: 11.2^.26. The same is likewise evident, from
his most divine and heavenly prayer. John: chap: 17.

Thus much for a hand^^ll of ^he doctrine of our Savior, concerning the first
Person of the holy Trinity, God the Father.

Secondly, t^uchin^ himself, the second Person of the holy Trinity, he
teaches first, concerning his Person, that he, who was from all eternity, very
God, and int at respect equal with the Father, as we saw even now: is also,
ever sin^e his incarnation very man, and so in one Person both God, and man.
Yea our Savior taught this so plainly, that as true believers were confirmed
by it, to believe in him accordingly. John: chapter 16 29 30. so the
unbelieving, and contradicting Jews stumbled at it more and more: John 5.28.
as was also alleged a little before, as we may read further, chap: 10.33. But
for the further confirmation, that this doctrine was taught by our Savior,
read ch: 14.7. etc. in the same Evangelist: and chap: 10.30. I and my Father
are one.

Moreover, for the proof of his divine providence, and government, together
with his Father over all things, both natural in the world, and namely
touching the bodies of men: and also over all spiritual things in the Church
of God, and specially concerning men's souls, we read his plain doctrine
generally affirmed. John, 5, 17, My Father works hitherto, and I work: And
verse 19 20 etc Then answered Jesus, and said unto them, verily, verily, I say
unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, save that which he sees the
Father do, for whatsoever things he does, the same does the Son also. For
the Father loves the Son, and shows him all things, etc.

And now touching his office, he taught with like plainenes, while he was here
on earth, that he was the Messiah and anointed of God. Luke 4.17, etc. 21. And
John 4, 25.26. He said to the woman of Samaria, I who speak unto thee, am he.
And chap: 6.27. he affirms to the same end, that God the Father has sealed
him. And ch: 8.12. and ch: 12.35.36. and again, verse 46. I am the light of
the world, etc.

Concerning his Priesthood, and the sacrifice thereof, in that he was to offer
up himself, to the death of the cross, our Savior foretold it, that it
should so come to pass: and also what should be the mighty and wonderful
effect of it; in that by the virtue thereof he would draw all men to himself:
that is, so many as were given him of God, for whom he died, etc. John
12.23.24. and verses 32.33. But of this more, when we come to the doctrine of
his death.

Now concerning his kingdom, he professed plainly, that it is not of this
world: that is, after the manner of the earthly and transitory kingdoms
thereof, John 18.^6 And therefore it was, that he frustrated the vain attempt
of the people, at such time as they would have made him their king: chap: 6.1^.
And therefore also, even then when it pleased him to make some declaration of
his kingly authority concerning his spiritual sovereignty over his Church:
to wit, when as he rode to Jerusalem, to reform the abuses of his Temple the
second t^me, he did it in a manner altogether unlike to the statelines and
pomp of ^iuill Kings and Princes: that is to say, he did as much come short of
their pomp in world^y show, as he exceeded them in spiritual majesty and
power, a^ the most strange effect thereof declared Mat: 21. verses 1.2.3. etc.
17. And Luke cha^: 19. verse 27, etc.

And answerable to this profession, and practice of our Savior, concerning his
kingdom, was his usual description of it. The which we will now henceforth
bri^fly touch.

To this purpose, he uses many very notable parables and similitudes: the
which sort of parables, the Evangelist Matthew does most fully record unto us.
And therefore we will take them from his hand especially, as we did another sort
of them before, concerning the doctrine of the Law, from the report of the
Euange is it Luke, who is most plentiful in that respect.

First therefore, to begin wi h all, we have even in one chapter, to wit, the
13. of Saint Matthew, the record of seven diverse parables, used by our Savior,
to lay forth the nature, or estate of his kingdom thereby: and to show what
manner of one it is to be here upon the earth.

Among all which, the first is of seed sown in four sorts of grounds: of the
which one sort only brought forth increase. Wherein our Savior admonished his
Disciples, and in them al other, that it is not enough for any, to hear the
word preached, which is the Scepter of his kingdom, unless we do hear it
with honest and dutiful hearts, and with care and conscience to practice and
obey it: According to that use which Saint Luke notes from the words of our
Savior himself, chap: 8 18. And by this parable also our Savior preuenteth
that offense, which might otherwise have arisen, when the vnprofitab^^^e^ of
many hearers of his word, should be observed: as though he should (...) s^id,
do not look that all will submit themselves to my word and doct^^ne. The
state of my kingdom here in this world, shall be such, as I have descr^^e^
unto you in this parable, Mat: chap: 13. verse 3. and so forth to the 23. vers^
^ the same.

An^ secondly, he says to the same end, and therewithal to stir up all
(whom he calls the children of the kingdom) to watchfulnes: that his
kingdom is like to a man which sowed good seed in his field, But while men
slept, there came his enemy and sowed tears among the wheat, etc. Mat: 13,
24, etc. 31. whereby our Savior gives plainly to understand, as he himself
afterward interprets, as we read in the same chapter, verses 36, 37, etc. to
44. that the Devil will use his instruments, even men of perverse minds, such
as are heretics and others, to sow false and erroneous doctrine: and
accordingly, that he himself will do what he can by his wicked suggestions,
to pervert the lives of many professors, and by all means to hinder the good
success of the Gospel, and of the blessed kingdom of our Savior here in
this world, where the Devil also has his kingdom. We must not therefore look
for a perfect estate of the Church here. That is reserved till the end of the
world, when our Savior shall come again to judge the same.

Nevertheless, for the comfort of all that shall submit themselves to our
Savior, as dutiful and obedient subjects in his kingdom, he shows by a
third parable of the grain of mustard seed, that howsoever the spiritual
graces and gifts of the kingdom, may seem every small and weak in the
beginning, yet they shall grow and prosper with mighty increases, through his
divine and secret blessing, as it follows verses. 31.32.

To the same end tends the fourth parable of the leaven verse, 33. unless we
may extend the meaning of our Savior in them both, to express not only the
mighty and secret work of his grace, in every member or true subject of his
kingdom, for the present: but also the sprea^ing of his Gospel, far and
near, from time to time notwithstanding all resistances whatsoever.

The fifth parable is of the treasure hidden in the field, verse 44. And the
sixth is of the precious pearce, verses 45, 46. both of them, tending to set
forth the excellency of the kingdom of our Savior, above all worldly riches
whatsoever, whether we respect the glory of it in the life to come, or the
present graces thereof, while we live here.

And herewithall our Savior admonishes, that his kingdom is diligently to be
sought after, of all those that would find it indeed, seeing it is a thing
hidden: yea that no cost of diligence and labor, nor of goods, or life be
spared, to the obtaining of it, seeing it is most precious above all things in
this transitory and base world.

In the seventh parable, our Savior compares his kingdom to a drawenet,
which catches both good and bad fish, verse, 47.48.49.50, the end and use of
which parable is like to that which was set down concerning the tears sown
among wheat: least that any should be offended and so caused, either through
pride, or of unjust scruple to forsake the outward society of the church, when
they should see many wicked persons to be found therein: but rather to be so
much the more careful, to look to their own standing, and to yield so much
the more diligence, every one in his place, wisely and with all discreet
patience to hinder the ouerflowings of iniquity. These are the seven parables
contained in one chapter, namely in the 13. of the Evangelist Matthew. All of
them expressing, as was said, the estate of the kingdom of our Savior here in
this world: far otherwise then we of our selves would have conceived of it:
had not he stored us with this his excellent and manifold instruction.

Unto these seven, we may add two other, recorded by the Evangelist Mark,
chap: 4.21. etc. and verse 26. etc. The one of a candle, to signify that all
things in the kingdom of our Savior Christ shall be made manifest, and
therefore that every one is to beware of hypocrisy and of negligent profession
of the Gospel: according to that of Saint Luke chap: 8.18. Take heed
therefore how ye hear, etc.

The other is of corn, which grows in the field, above that the owner can
discern, how it grows at every instant thereof: to signify the secret
blessing of the kingdom of our Savior, in the hearts of the true subjects
thereof. For so is the kingdom of God (says our Savior) as if a man should
cast seed in the ground, And should sleep and rise up night and day, and the
seed should spring and grow up, he not knowing how, etc.

Yea, many other parables, does our Savior use, to express the estate of the
same his kingdom here in every other respect. As for example, he uses the
parable of the King, calling his servants to an account, to declare both the
mercy and justice thereof. Matthew: 18.23. etc. The kingdom of heaven (says
our Savior) is likened to a certain King, who would take account of his
servants.

Likewise he uses the parable of the house holder hyring laborers into his
vineyard. Matthew: chap: 20.1.2 etc. to give to understand, that no man is of
better reckoning with God, for their long continuance, under the profession of
the Gospel, specially if they presume of any merit or worthiness above others
in that respect: but rather according to his diligence and faithfulness in the
labor of Christianity, and according to that humble trust which he has in
the free grace and mercy of God. And to this end he concludes the parable
with this sentence, The last shall be first, and the first shall be last: for
many are called, but few chosen.

Moreover, by another parable, of the vineyard let out to unfaithful
husbandmen, our Savior describes the reiection of the Jews, for their
treacherous st^^-bournes and cruelty against him: and on the otherside, the
calling of the Gentiles, through the free grace and mercy of God, Mat: chap:
21, verse. 33 etc.

And chap: 22, 1, etc. he does to the same end use another parable concerning
the marriage of the Kings Son, and the contempt thereof, by the first bidden
guests which were the Jews: and also by the example of that special rudes by,
tha^ thrust in himself, without his marriage garment.

And ch^p: 25. verse 1. etc. by the parable of the five wise, and five foolish
Virgins, our Savior does likewise admonish us to take heed, that we do not
securely rest in an outward profession of the Gospel, without inward truth of
the heart, which is a thing abhorred of God.

And verses, 14. and 15. of the same chapter, by the parable of the talentes,
which a certain Master going into a far country, delivered to his
servants, etc. Our Savior teaches plainly, that he will look to have all the
spiritual gifts and graces of his kingdom, to be industriously employed in
every man's calling, and acc^rding to the diverse measure of them, specially in
the calling of the ministry of the Gospel, to all those profitable ends
wherefore he has given them. Or othe^wise, that f^arefull vengeance is to be
looked for, from his hands, against every vnpr^fitable servant.

Such was the doctrine of our Savior, concerning his spiritual kingdom here
on earth, the which he calls the kingdom of heaven, because it is from
heaven by the special ordinance of God: likewise, because the government of it
is most spiritual and heavenly: and also because it prepares and fitteth all
the elect of God, who as we saw before are called the children of the kingdom,
to be part^kers of heavenly glory.

No^ let us proceed, according to the order of the articles of our belief.

The next doctr^ne therefore, of our Savior is that which concerns his own
conception and birth. Of the which he says thus before Pilate. For this cause
am I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear
witness of the truth.

Next to the birth of our Savior, are his sufferings. Of the which he did
very of^entimes forete^l his Disciples, to the end they might be the less
troublesome or uncomfortable to them, when they should fall upon him: as Luke
ch: 9, 44 45 And Mat: 17.12.13. and verses 22.23. And Mark. 9.12. And more
particularly he foretold his betraying, as we read, John chap: 13, v. 18. etc.
The which our Savior did, as he says in the same place, to the establishing
of their faith, when it should come to pass. Of his crucifying, he spoke
likewise beforehand, John ch: 12.32.33.

Belief in God the Son, who wrought most miraculous and ^^uine works.
Of his burial, by occasion of that costly ointment which Mary powered on him.
Mat: 26.12. John, 12.7.

Of his continuance in the grave, answerable to the type of Jonas, abiding so
long in the Whales belly, Mat: 12.39.40.

Of his resurrection also, he usually spoke, adding the prediction thereof, to
the foretelling of his sufferings, to mitigate the discomfort of that part of
his speech: as John 2.19.20.21. Mat. 16, 2. ch: 17.9. and verses 22.23. And ch:
20.17.18.19. This thing (as the Evangelist Mark says) our Savior spoke
plainly. And ch: 10.32.43.34. And all this, according to the former
prophecies, of the holy Prophets, as the evangelist Luke observes. And that
also in a merciful regard of his Disciples, lest they should be over whelmed,
and confounded with excessive sorrow; as we may perceive plainly John, ch:
14.1. etc. and ch: 15. and ch: 16. and by his most sweet and divine prayer in
the whole 17. chapter.

Our Savior being risen again, as he had often said that he would: he then
foretold his ascension, to Marie Magdalene, John, 20, 17. I ascend to my
Father, etc.

That he should sit at the right hand of God, and come again to judge the
world, our Savior boldly professed before the chief Priest, Mat: chap: 26.
verse 64. Hereafter (says our Savior) shall ye see the Son of man sitting
at the right hand of the powers God, and come in the clouds of heaven.
Moreover, touching his coming again to judgment, he had spoken before that
time, John 5.22. and verses 27.28.29. But yet more fully and plainly, Mat:
25.31. etc. The precedent signs of which time of his coming, our Savior has
also declared, Matthew: 24. And before this, chap: 13.39. etc. in the parable of
the tares. And again, verses, 49, 50. in the parable of the drawenet.

We are come now to the doctrine of our Savior, concerning the holy Ghost. Of
whom he speaks most comfortably, as of the only comforter of all the Elect,
distinct in Person from the Father and the Son, and yet one with them both,
every where present, of equal power and dignity with them, etc. John chapters
14. and 15. and 16. Which also our Savior makes very plain in that form of
Baptism which he instituted after his resurrection. Mat: 28.19.

C^ncerning the catholic Church, the doctrine of our Savior is this, that it
consists both of Jews, and Gentiles, and that he himself is the only
universal P^stour and shepherd thereof, John 10. verses 14, 16. Read also Luke
13.28.29.30.

Touc^ing the Communion of Saints: and first in respect of their union with
himself, and so by him among their own selves, our Savior teaches it
plainly, John ch: 15 1, 2, 3 4, 5. etc. And ch, 17.22. etc.

What his doctrine is, touching the forgiveness of sins, and namely that there
is mercy with God to forgive them, and what course we are to take, that we
may attain to the comfortable assurance thereof: we read, Mat: 6. v. 12.14.
and chap: 9.6. and chap: 18.21.22.27. and Luke 7.48. and chap: 15.1.2.3, etc.
and verse. 20. etc.

Concerning the resurrection of the dead, we read that our Savior does
confirm it, John. 5.28.29. and Mat: chap: 22. verse 23. etc. where he
confuteth the heresy of the Sadduces against this article.

Likewise, he assures all that shall believe in him, of everlasting life, not
only in those places now last alleged, but in many other not easily to be
numbered.

And thus we see, that the doctrine of our Savior is entire and perfect,
concerning all the articles and grounds of our Christian belief.

As for prayer, it is familiarly known to every one of us, that he taught us a
most perfect rule and direction of it, as we find it recorded, Matthew: chap:
6.9. etc. and Luke chapter 11.2. etc. And again, Matthew: chapter. 7. verse 7.
Belief in God the Son, who taught a most holy and perfect doctrine.
etc. we read how our Savior incourageth all faithful Christians to this
duty, as to a special fruit and exercise of faith. Read also, John 14.
verses 13, 14. and chap: 16, 26, 27. Likewis^ Luke, chap: 11.5. etc. Moreover,
ch: 18.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. he exhorts to constancy in prayer without
fainting.

Likewise, as our Savior was the ordeiner of the Sacraments, both of Baptism
and the Lords supper; so he has with the institution of them, plainly set
down the doctrine and instruction, concerning the right manner of the
administration, and also the ends and uses, whereunto he has appointed the
same, Mat: chap: 26. verse 26, etc. and chap: 28.18.19.20.

Last of all, concerning the external government of the Church of God, such as
he would have to be in perpetual use, for the well ordering thereof, tha^
offenses might be avoided, and al disorders rebuked and censured: we have the
express grounds of it, delivered and taught by our Savior, Mat: chapter 16.19.
And ch: 18. verses 19.16.17.18.19.20. Read also John ch: 20. verses 22, 23. But
of these things more afterward.

In the mean season, it may suffice us, that from this brief collection, and
suruaie of the doctrine of our Savior Christ, we see that he has set it
down, most holily and perfitly in all points: and therefore, that he is worthy
to be acknowledged, and believed in, as being a most faithful Prophet, yea
greater then any Prophet, yea even as in the author of all holy doctrine
together with the Father and the holy Ghost, to guide us in the perfect way to
his everlasting and glorious kingdom.

It is true, that the whole body of the holy Scriptures, is the only entire
doctrine of our Savior Christ, by what instruments soever the same was spoken
or penned. For they both spoke, and also wrote, as he directed them by his holy
Spirit. But in this our present discourse, we have spoken only of that his
doctrine, which he uttered by his own most holy and sacred mouth, while he
abode here upon the earth.



Yea. For in this respect, the Lord by his holy Prophet Isaiah, long before the
coming of our Savior, calls him wonderful, and Counselor -- as one that
should in most excellent manner, declare the high counsels of God, to his
Church and people, Isaiah, chap: 9.6.

He declares also, that our Savior should, to the same end, be endued with
the manifold, and most excellent gifts and graces of the holy Spirit of God,
in that he was to come in the nature of man, chap: 11, 2.3.4.5.

Likewise he declares further, that he should have the tongue of the learned,
and know to minister a word in due time, to him that is weary, chap: 50.4.

Finally he prophecieth, that by his knowledge he should justify many, chapter
53.11.

Explication
These prophecies, uttered and set down, in the name of the Lord, do contain
evident promises from the Lord. For as our Savior testifies, All things must
be fulfilled that were written of him. Luke 22.37.

And touching the special manner of his teaching by parables, as we have
observed, and set them down before, that was therein fulfilled which was
prophesied, Ps. 78. I will open my mouth in parables, etc. according to the
testimony of the Evangelist Mat: ch: 13.34.35. And accordingly, are we to
hearken to the same his special kind of teaching, with special reverence
agreeable to the exhortation and example of holy Psalmist, Ps. 49.1.2.3. Hear
this all ye people, etc. I will incline mine ear to a parable. etc. But of
the duties more afterward.

THe comfort of the doctrine is first to be considered.



It is even the same, which was declared to the comfort of faith, concerning
the spiritual anointing of our Savior Christ to be a most high and perfect
Prophet unto us.

It is the same indeed. That is to say, it is a very great and singular
comfort, The Duty
that we have so perfect a doctrine, delivered unto us by our blessed Savior,
that we may safely and undoubtedly rest in it, as in the very truth indeed:
yea as in the whole truth of God, which it behooves us to know. For as the
doctrine of Moses, and all other the Prophets, which were before our Savior,
pointed on still to look toward our Savior then to come, so our, Savior
being come, the Euangel^sts and Apostles point us back to him, and to that
doctrine which he preached and taught himself, and which he commanded them (as
they acknowledge) to preach in his name, as the only true doctrine of God. And
so does our Savior himself profess, saying, John 7.16. My doctrine is not
mine, (to wit, in such sense as the malignant sort took it) but his that sent
me. That is, no otherwise mine, but as it is his also. And then it ^olloweth,
If any man (says our Savior) will do his will, he shall know of the
Doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. He that
speaks of himself seeks his own glory: but he that seeks his glory that
sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. And ch: 8.31.32.
If ye continue in my word ma^ke that he calls it his own word, speaking to
the teachable and believing Jews) ye are verily my Disciples. And ye shall
know the truth, and the truth shall make ye free.

And for all other, whosoever they be, which teach not this doctrine of our
Savior, they are false Prophets: they have not entered in by the door, but
they have climbed up some other way, and show themselves to be thieue, and
robbers come in to spoil, and not feed and cherish the flock John: 10.1. etc.
So that we may boldly reject al other doctrines of Antichrist, and of every
strange teacher, whatsoever agrees not with the most holy doctrine of our
Savior. We may boldly say to all such, both Pope and Prelate, popish Priest,
and Seminary Jesuit, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, Psalm: 6.8. For so
will our Savior say to them at the last day, Mat: 7, 23.

Thus ^herfore, it is a singular comfort, and brings unspeakable peace to our
consciences, that we have so perfect a doctrine, delivered unto us: according
as our Savior admonished his Disciples, Mat: 13, 16, 17, saying, Blessed are
your eyes, for they see; and your ears for they hear. For verily I say unto
you, that many Prophet^, and righteous men, have desired to see those things
which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye
hear, and have not heard them.

THe comfort being thus great, the duty ought to be as great in all thankfulness
to God, and our men gracious Saui: to be blessed and praised for ever. What
therefore is our duty,

This likewise t^ the same which was observed before, to be our duty in regard
of his most holy and perfect pro^hecie. That is to say, it is our most bounden
duty, with all readiness, ^^^gently ^o learn the doctrine and in all
faithfulness consta^tly to obey it our selves: and as much as l eth in us to
instruct others also therein, and to call upon them for like dut^full
obedience.

Explication and proof.
Such indeed is our most bounden duty, according to that saying of Peter, Ioh:
ch: 6. v. 6^. Master to whom shall we go* Thou have the words of eternal
life, and we believe and know that thou art the Christ the Son of the living
God. Here also call again to mind the saying of our Savior himself, John
7.17. and ch: 8.31.32. alleged before in the comfort. Where, as we then saw,
our Savior requires obedience, yea even entire and constant obedience, at the
hands and hearts of all those, that would attain to the most sweet and
constant comfort of his most holy and perfect doctrine.

Thus much therefore concerning the Comfort and duty.



Whosoever do not believe, nor obey the doctrine of our Savior Christ, as a
most holy and perfect doctrine; they cannot possibly, either truly know, or
rightly believe, and obey our Savior himself.

Nay on the contrary, they are in the very beaten high way, The danger of not
believing and obeying it.
to be drawn and carried aside to harken to all false doctrine and lies: and
so to become the vassalls of the Devil and Antichrist that great false Prophet,
or of some other Master heretic: in stead that they ought to be the only
teachable scholars, and obedient servants of the Lord Jesus Christ, our
heavenly Teacher and Master.

It is very true. And the danger is most woeful, yea rather it is presently an
evil in it self most miserable: Explication and proof.
and therefore with all care, to be most earnestly shunned. For even hence it
was, that all obstinate Jews, fell away from God, and are lest even to this
day, in their damnable unbelief, and most blasphemous contradictions to our
Savior and his doctrine. To whom our Savior himself said, while he taught
among them, Because I tell ye the truth, ye believe me not. Which of you can
rebuke me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? He
that is of God, hears Gods words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye
are not of God John, chap. 8.45, 46, 47. And yet again, chap. 10.26. Ye
believe not, for ye are not of my sheep as I said unto you. My sheep hear
my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal
life.

And chap. 12.14, etc. If any man hear my words and believe not, I judge him
not. For I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. He that refuses
me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him, the word that I have
spoken, it shall judge him at the last day.

We may evidently see therefore, that the neglect of hearing and obeying the
doctrine of our Savior Christ is very dangerous: yea so dangerous, that it
makes way to all false and erroneous doctrine, as was answered: according as
our Savior does give plainly to understand, John, chap. 5. verse 43. Where
he says thus, I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not: if another
shall come in his own name, him will ye receive. And so it came to pass, with
these disobedient Jews.

This also made way, for that false Prophet Mahomet, to be received among the
Turks. And likewise, hence it is, that the Antichrist of Rome, has so
mightily prevailed with his devoted Papists, that they dare receive nothing for
truth, unless he and his Prelates allow it: and that on the other side, they
doubt not credulously to receive any thing for truth, which is authorized by
them, be it never so contrary to the truth and doctrine of our Savior Christ.

The same neglect, has betrayed a number, and made them as a prey to the lying
allegories and heretical speculations of H. N. and to be incorporated into his
schismatic Family of false and counterfeit love, as if his doctrine did now
in this last day, perfect and accomplish the doctrine of our Savior: and as if
he did in the stead of our Savior, execute the last and general judgment
here on earth. So greatly does the wicked heretic blaspheme.

Let us therefore, in the fear of God, take warning from the woeful examples
of these and all other Apostataes and backe-sliders from the true doctrine of
our Savior, that we do in no wise, neglect to embrace and love it, and to
hold it so fast, that we never suffer our selves to be removed from it. That
henceforth (as the Apostle Paul admonishes, Ephesians. chap. 4 verses 14, 15.) We
be no more children, wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by
the deceit of men, and with craftines whereby they lie in wait to deceive. But
let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up into him, who is the
head, that is, Christ, etc. For otherwise, as the same Apostle writes 2 Thessalonians. chap. 2. verses 10, 11, 12. the danger which we speak of, is at hand,
yea to eternal damna^ion.

Thus much therefore it was necessary, that we should add to all other things
concerning the doctrine of our Savior, for our instruction and admonitions
sake, Belief in God the Son, who wrought most miraculous and divine works.
lest we should by any means neglect it, The ground and history of it.
to the hazard of our salvation, whereunto this doctrine only, and no other is
able to make us wise. God therefore of his infinite mercy, even for our
Saviors sake, give us grace with all holy care to attend unto it.

Belief in God the Son, who wrought most miraculous and divine works.
THe miraculous works of our Savior, are next to be considered of us.

What therefore are we to believe concerning them?

We are to believe, that the miracles which our Savior Christ wrought, are
perfect declarations and confirmations, that he both was, and is for ever, the
Son of God, the only true Messiah, and Savior of the world: and also, that
the doctrine which he taught, was and so is still, and shall remain to the
end, the very true doctrine of the kingdom of God, and even the power of God
to salvation, to all that do, or shall hereafter truly believe.

Explication and proof.
It is true that you say. For so the Evangelist John teaches, chap. 2.11. The
very beginnings of the miracles of our Savior, showed forth his glory: and
his Disciples (as the Evangelist says) believed in him. That is, they were
better confirmed in their faith thereby.

This glory of our Savior, thus beginning to break forth, by the beginnings
of his miracles: did shine out more and more brightly, in the proceedings
thereof. It was no doubt, part of that glory, which the Apostles saw:
according to the testimony of the same Evangelist John, chapter 1.14. We saw his
glory, etc.

Yea our Savior himself teaches us, that these were the ends, wherefore he
wrought his great works, as the same Evangelist witnesses further, in sundry
place^ of the Gospel written by him. As chap. 5.36. I have greater witness
(says our Sau^our) then the witness of John, for the works which the Father
has given me to finish, even the same works which I do, bear witness of me,
that the Father sent me. And chap. 1^. verses 24, 25 The Jews (says the
Evangelist) came round about (our Sauio^r) and said unto him, How long do
thou make us doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell v^ plainly. Jesus answered
them, I told ye, and ye believe not: the works that I do in my Fathers name,
they bear witness of me. And therefore he blames them the rather, for their
unbelief. And yet more earnestly, verses 37, 38. saying, If I do not the
works of my Father, believe me not, yet believe the works, that ye may know and
believe that the Father is in me and I in him.

And chap. 11. verse 4. This sickness (says our Savior, speaking of Lazarus
the brother of Marie and Martha) it is not unto death, but for the glory of
God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby. And verses 41, 42. After
that our Savior had made his prayer to God, that he would show his glory in
raising of Lazarus from death to life: I know (says our Savior to God his
Father) that thou hear me always, but because of the people that stand by,
I said it, that they may believe that thou have sent me.

And chap. 14. verse 11. Believe me (says our Savior to Philippe) that I am
in the Father, and the Father in me: at the least believe me for the very
works sake. Read also chap. 20. verses 30, 31. Many other signs did Jesus
(says the Evangelist) in the presence of his Disciples, which are not written
in this book. But these things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus
is the Christ the Son of God, and that in believing, ye might have life
through his name.

This often repetition, shows that the miraculous works of our Savior
Christ, were of very notable and ne^e^sarie use, to the manifesting and proving
of himself to be the Christ, and that ^is doctrine was the true doctrine of
God: and all this for a help to the weakness of his people.

Now as these were the ends, which our Savior propounded to himself, in the
working of his miracles: so through the blessing of God, they attained to the
same blessed ends and effects in the hearts of the children of God. As for
example, the place first alleged, chap. 2. verse 11. argues that it was so.
For the Disciples seeing that miracle: are said to believe in our Savior. And
chap. 4. verse 35. That Ruler, whose son our Savior delivered from a deadly
feue^, was confirmed thereby to believe in him, (yea and as the Evangelist
testifies) all his household with him. And chap. 6. verse 14. They which had
seen the miraculous feeding of multitudes of people with so few loaves and
fishes, said, This is of a truth the Prophet, that should come into the world.

Likewise chap. 9. verse 17. The blind man to whom our Savior gave sight, was
induced by the miracle, wrought on him, to begin to believe in our Savior,
that he was a Prophet. And verses 35, 36, 37. after that the Jews had
excommunicated him, for this his profession: our Savior the^ finding him, and
saying unto him, Do thou believe in the Son of God? He answered and
said, Who is he Lord that I may believe in him? Whereupon, so soon as our
Savior answered him, Both thou have seen him, and he it is that talks with
thee: the man was confirmed to believe in him, and said Lord I believe, and
worshipped him.

And chap. 1^. verse 15. I was glad for your sakes (says our Savior, speking
of the death of Lazarus) that I was not there, that ye may believe: but let us
go unto him. And verse 45. Many of the Jews (says the Evangelist) seeing the
things which Jesus did, and namely this, that he had raised Lazarus from the
dead, they were moved thereby to believe in him. And whereas (as it follows
in the text) that some of the people went away to the Pharisees, and told them
what things Jesus had done. Then (as the Evangelist shows further) the high
Priests and the Pharisees gathered a Council, and said, What shall we do? For
this man does many miracles. If we let him alone, all men will believe in him,
etc. verses 46, 47, 48.

And in the next chapter, verses 10, 11. The high Priests consulted that they
might put Lazarus to death also, because that for his sake, many of the Jews
went away, and believed in him. And verses 17.18.19. The people that was with
him, did bear witness that he called Lazarus out of the grave, and raised him
from the dead. Therefore met him the people also, because they heard that he
had done this miracle. Whereupon (as it follows in the Evangelist) the
Pharisees said among themselves, Perceive ye not how ye prevail nothing?
Behold the world goes after him.

Yea these wicked adversaries themselves, howsoever, through obdurate malice,
they would not be brought to believe in our Savior: yet were they convicted in
their consciences, to acknowledge among themselves, that he could not have done
such works as he wrought, unless he had been a Teacher sent of God; and unless
God had been with him: as Nicodemus a fellow Ruler, and one conversant among
them, did before this time, bewray to our Savior: as we read John, chap. 3.
verse 2. Rabbi (says he) we know (that is, we Pharisees know) that thou art a
Teacher sent from God: for no man could do these miracles which thou do,
unless God were with him. Read also Act. 2 22. Ye men of Israel, hear these
words. Jesus of Nazaret, a man approved of God among ye, with great works, and
wonders, and signs, which God did by him, in the midst of you, as ye your
selves also know.

Finally, the works of our Savior Christ, were so wonderful, that (as the
Evangelist Luke reports) all were amazed at the mighty power of God,
declared by them, chap. 9.43. And chap. 7.16. Fear (says he) came on all
people, and they glorified God, saying, A great Prophet is raised up among us,
and God has visited his people. The ground and history of them
And this rumor (as he reports further) went forth throughout all Judea, and
through all the region round about. At what time also, as it follows in the
same chapter, verses 18, 19, etc. the answer of our Savior to the Disciples of
John Baptist, shows plainly that such as have been already declared, are
the uses and ends, why he wrought so many miraculous works. For thus he said
unto them, Go your ways, and show to John what ye have seen and heard: that
the blind do see, the halt do go, the leapers are cleansed, the deaf here,
the dead rise again, and the poor receive the Gospel. And blessed is he that
shall not be offended in me. As if our Savior had said, These things are
sufficient confirmations, that I am the true Messiah, and that no other is to
be waited for: as John well knows, and has already most faithfully and
plentifully testified unto you, though you and many other, are yet offended in
me, and have not received his testimony. Read also Matthew. 14.33. They that
were in the Ship, when our Savior stilled the tempestuous Sea, worshipped him
saying, of a truth thou art the Son of God. And Mark 1, 27. by occasion of
casting out of an unclean Spirit, out of a man of Capernaum, the people were
amazed so, that (as the Evangelist says) they demanded one of another, saying,
what thing is this? what new doctrine is this? For he commands the soul
spirits with authority, and they obey him.

Thus then it is evident, that as our Savior intended, by his miraculous
works, to make himself known to be the Christ, the Son of God, and the true
Prophet sent of him, etc. so they had the same effect, in the hearts of many of
those, among whom he wrought them, who observed his divine power therein.

But for our more full instruction in this point: I will ask you this one
question.



There is no doubt to be made, but that the doctrine, and testimony of our
Savior Christ, was fully worthy, and ought to have been sufficient, in, and
of it self alone, to these ends.

Nevertheless, for a help to our weakness, and for the more clear manifestation
of his divine glory, as was said, it pleased him of his special goodness and
mercy, to make this addition of his miraculous works.

Explication and proof.
So it was indeed, as the former testimonies have given us plainly to
understand. And namely, John cha. 11. verse 15. Whence we may well remember
here again, that our Savior professed, that he was glad of the occasion which
he had to work that great work of his, in raising Lazarus from the dead, to
the end his Disciples might thereby be confirmed to believe in him. And he
uses the like words again, verses 41, 42. to show his like gracious desire,
that the weakness of the people, might be helped by their beholding of the
miracle. To this end also, may the consideration of that reproof well serve,
which our Savior gives the people, for not attending to the right use and end
of his miracles, John, 6.26. Matt. 16.8, 9, etc. and Mark. chap. 6, 25.

And thus the good and merciful affection of our Savior, is clearly
manifested unto us.

But that his doctrine and testimony, ought of it self to have been of
sufficient authority: it is plain by that other reproof which our Savior
gives, in respect of them that looked too much after miracles, John, chap.
2.48. saying, Except ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe. Of which
sort were those mentioned after this, cha. 6.30. Who over boldly asked our
Savior, What sign show thou, that we may see and believe thee? What do
thou work? And again, Matthew: 12.38. Master, we would see a sign of thee. To
whom our Savior answers, in the verse following, An evil and adulterous
generation seeks a sign, but no sign shall be given unto it, save only the
sign of the Prophet Jonas. And again chap 16. verses 1.2.3.4.

On the other side, it is set down to the praise of the work of Gods grace,
in the Samaritans, who believed our Savior for his words sake, though he
wrought no miracles among them: but only heard the woman say, that he had told
her all things that she had done, as we read, Ioh: 4 40. Whereupon they desired
our Savior to tarry with them. The which when he had yielded unto, for two
days, Many more (says the Evangelist) believed because of his own word. And
they said unto the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying: for we
have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the
Savior of the world.

Moreover, many were brought to faith and repentance, by the preaching of John
the Baptist, though he wrought no miracle, Matthew: 21, 32. John 10.41. Much
rather ought our Savior to have been believed, for his own sake, although God
would have so appointed, that he should have wrought no such great works as he
did. Thus much for the confirmation of the former answer.

But yet one question more, for the further clearing of this matter.

Be it granted, that the miracles, which our Savior wrought, were necessary
for those, who at that time were the beholders of them, to the end they might
be confirmed by them to believe in him:

As the working of them was necessary to help the weakness of the faith of
them, that then lived, and might see and behold them with their bodily eyes:
so it is necessary for us, that live at this day, to read, hear, and
meditate upon the same miraculous works of our Savior, to the same ends,
whereunto the beholding of them was necessary for those that lived then.

Explication and proof.
They are so indeed. And even for this purpose is it, that God of his great
mercy, tendering our weakness, which is now as great as theirs was then: has
caused them to be faithfully set down in the holy Gospel, for a perpetual
memorial of them: according to that notable testimony of John, the holy
Evangelist, and Apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ, chap: 20. verses 30.31.

Read also Luke, chap: 24.19. and Acts chapt: 1. verse 1. For whereas, not only
the words and doctrine of our Savior, but also his works, were of necessary
use, to be known, for the confirmation of Faith, to the end of the world: by
the manifesting of the glory of the Son of God: the holy Evangelists, as
we see, were careful, according to the commandment of God, to record them
both. That thus it might come to pass; that as they were blessed, which saw
them, and believed, as our Savior said to all his disciples, Matt. 13.16.17.
so they also might be blessed, that should at any time believe (even by the
faithful testimony of the Evangelist) though they never saw with their
bodily eyes, as our Savior said more particularly to Thomas, John ^0.29. in
these words, Because thou have seen me, thou beleeuest: blessed are they that
have not seen, and have believed.

These things being so, according as we have already taken a view, of the
doctrine of our Savior, (which usually he preached, before he wrought his
miraculous works, because his doctrine was, as it were, the life of them, as
they again were a kind of underpropping of the doctrine, in regard of the
weakness of the people) so let us make some like collection of the miracles,
hoping that this also, shall be a labor profitable unto us. And whereas we cannot
in this our exercise, stand to treat of every one at large, let us at the
least, gather together the diverse sorts and kinds of them, in some familiar
order, fit for some help to our memory, that so our faith may therwithall, be
the rather succored and helped, answerable to the use and end of our Saviors
working of them.

This therefore we will by the grace of God, do in this order following.

First, we will make the beginning of our rehearsal, according to that
beginning, which our Savior made of his Miracles: concerning the water, and
those other creatures, which do belong to the same.

Secondly, we will gather together those Miracles, which he wrought,
concerning the earth, and the fruits thereof.

Thirdly those, which concern the persons of mankind.

Of the first sort were these next following.

First, touching the water it self, our Savior, as we know, at the marriage
feast in Cana of Galile, alleged before, turned water into wine. John, chap:
2. verse. 6. etc.

Likewise he made the waters solid and firm, fit to be walked upon, as if it
had been firm land, wheresouer he was to set his foot, chapt: 6. verse 19.
of the same Evangelist. At which time also he caused Peter to walk on the Sea.
And when by reason of a mighty gale of wind, Peter fainting in faith, began
to sincke, our Savior by his divine power, saved him from drowning. And forth
with also, stilled the blustering wind, and troublesome waves of the Sea, by
his word and commandment. And the ship also, was by and by, at the land,
whether they went, as we read in the 21. verse. And likewise Matt: 14. verse
24. And again at another tune as we read, Luke 8.22.23.24.25. And yet again
Matthew: 8.26.27. Our Savior rebuked both the winds and the Sea, and they
obeyed him. Thus therefore, it is evident, that our Savior has power by Sea,
as well as by land, as it follows to be considered further: according to that
Revel: 10.1.2.3. where he is described, to stand with one foot in the Sea, and
with another on the earth. Thus much therefore concerning the water it self.

Now secondly, as touching the fishes of the sea, our Savior declared his
power over them, by causing an exceeding great draught to come into the net of
Simon Peter, Luke chapt: 5. verse 6. And that also, at such a season, as he
and his company, had traveled all the night, and could get nothing. The like
to this our Savior did likewise after his Resurrection, John 21.6. Moreover
Matthew: ch: 17. verse, 27. he caused a fish to come to Peter's angle, yea and
that fish among all other, which had a piece of coin of twenty pence in the
mouth of it, to pay that polle-money which was at that time demanded.

Such were the Miracles which our Savior wrought concerning the waters, and
the creatures belonging unto them. Whereunto we may well ad, the miraculous
augmentation, and increasing of those two fishes, in the distribution of them,
whereof we read, Matt: ch: 14. verse. 17. etc: and likewise of those few little
fishes, chapt: 15. verse 34. etc: to the feeding of multitudes of people. But
herewithall, he did to the same end, increase the virtue and substance of the
five loaves, at the first time, so that there was left of the fragments, twelve
baskettes full: that is, more at the last, by a great deal, then was at the
first. And at the second time also, he so increased the seven loaves, that
after four thousand men, beside many women and little children we^ fully
sufficed, there remained seven baskettes full.

ANd thus, with the end of the first sort of our Saviors miracles, concerning
the waters, we having made an entrance into the second sort, which is,
concerning the earth, and the fruits thereof: let us now proceed to the
collection of them.

Among the which, we may reckon that for one, that our Savior made clay,
contrary to the nature of it, medicinable, to the restoring of sight to a man
that was borne blind. John. ch: 9. verses 2.3.4.5.6.7.

And on the contrary, Mark chapt: 11. verses. 12.13.14. And verses, 20.21. we
read, that our Savior cursing a fig tree, it lost forthwith, the natural
force and life of it, and so withered away, and never after bare any fruit.

These, and if there be any like to them, they are of this second sort of the
Miracles.

We come to the third sort of our Saviors Miracles, which it pleased him to
work, for the benefit of the Persons of mankind. The which as they were most
in number, so were they more gracious then the rest, to declare thereby, that
special good will and pitiful compassion which our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ has over us, above any other of his creatures. Let us therefore make our
collection of them also, with a mind to stir up our selves thereby, to be in
special manner thankful to our Savior for the same. And first, let us gather
together them that respect the bodies of men: and secondly them that respect
their souls.

Touching men's bodies, some miracles which our Savior wrought, were concerning
their outward parts, and some were more inward.

The outward also, were either concerning particular members, or the whole
body.

Such as concerned the outward parts, or members of the body: (that we may
begin with the head, and so go to the inferior parts) they were, first,
the curing of the eyes of such as were blind: as Matthew: 9.27. etc. Our Savior
opened the eyes of two blind men, who besought him to show this great mercy
upon them.

And again, ch: 20. verse 29. etc. He touched the eyes of other two blind
men, who with like instance, craved this mercy of him, and immediately restored
their sight. The Evangelist Mark tells us that the name of the one of these
was Bartimaeus the Son of Timaeus. ch: 10.46.

The Story is notable, in respect of that man. If you remember it not, read
it, and you shall find it to be as I say.

And chapter 8.22. the same Evangelist testifies that at Bethsaida, our
Savior restored sight to a blind man that was brought unto him, by moistening
his eyes with his spittle. Yet so, as he restored his sight by little and
little, as it were by degrees: that the man might the rather be moved to
consider the greatness of the benefit, while he did more sensibly feel, as it
were, and plainly discern the divine power of our Savior therein.

And John: chapt: 9.1. etc. 6.7. our Savior healed the eyes of a man that was
borne blind, by laying claye moystned with spittle upon them, as appeared
plainly, so soon as the man had by the appointment of our Savior, washed it
of again, in the poole of Siloam: as was mentioned before.

Moreover Matthew: chap: 21.14. Blind men (says the Evangelist) and such as
halted, came to our Savior, being in the Temple at Jerusalem, and he healed
them.

Finally, he healed that miserable blind man, of whom we read in the same
Evangelist, ch: 12. verses 22.23. who beside that he was dumb, and so could
make no request for himself, by an^e word of mouth to our Savior: he was also
possessed with a Devil. Yea our Savior healed him so, that he both spoke,
and also saw: in so much that all the people were amazed.

This was that miracle, that the wicked and malignant Pharisees, most
malitiouslie blasphemed, as it follows recorded in the same chapter.

Likewise, that now (by occasion of this last blind man, who was also dumb)
we may proceed: let us from the cure of the eyes, come to consider those like
miraculous cures, which our Savior wrought upon dumb men. And first, Matthew:
ch: 9.32.33.34. We read, that after our Savior had healed the two blind men
mentioned out of this chapter before, they brought to him one that was dumb,
who was also possessed with a Devil, like as that other man was, of whom we
spoke a while since. Our Savior therefore, casting the devil out of this man
likewise, gave him also the gift and power of his speech.

At the working of which miracle, The multitude (says the Evangelist)
marvelled, saying, The like was never seen in Israel, But the Pharisees showed
themselves like to themselves. That is, they blasphemed this miracle also
saying: He casts out Devils through the Prince of Devils. And ch: 15. v:
30.31. He healed many at once, both halte, blind, dumb and maimed, as the
same Evangelist testifies. Insomuch that the multitude wondered to see the
dumb to speak, the maimed whole, the halt to go, and the blind to see: and
as he observes further, they glorified the God of Israel.

Moreover, as we read Mark: 7.31.32. etc Our Savior healed one, that was
greatly stammering in his speech: for he loosened the string of his tongue, so
that he spoke as expeditelie and plainly, as any other man. The same man was
also deaf, of the which infirmity, our Savior likewise healed him. For as
the holy Evangelist reports the history, our Savior did put his fingers in
his ears: and looking up to heaven, he sighed and said unto him, Ephphatha,
that is, be thou opened. And strait way his ears were opened. etc. Wher^^ (as
the Evangelist testifies) the people were beyond measure astonished, saying, He
has done all things well: he makes both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to
speak.

Hereunto may we ad, that other miraculous work of our Sau our Christ, which
the same Evangelist records, chapt: 9.17. etc. 25. For he delivered the son
of a man, which from his childhood, had be^ both dumb and deaf. The work was
very great, and gracious, as it cannot but be acknowl^dged from the reading of
the holy history thereof: whether we read it in the Evangelist Mark, now
recited, or in Matthew: ch: 17.14. etc. or in Luke, chap: 9.38. etc. For the
people were all amazed at the mighty power of God, evidently showing it self
therein.

And thus we see, which were that kind of Miracles; which our Savior Christ
wrought upon the ears of men, and therewithal, upon the tongues of many.
Among the which we have heard also, the cure of those reckoned up, who halted
of their legs. For seeing they were joined together in one text, we could
not think it meet to sunder them, though our order is something broken
thereby.

But that we may hold on our course, as orderly as we can. We come now to
the rest.

And herein, the cure of the man, who had his hand dried up, and withered, may
well be first remembered. For the history of it is very memorable, as we read,
Mark 3.1. etc. and Luke, chapt: 6. verses 6.7. etc. It was the man's right
hand, which our Savior restored, and made as sound as the other. Whereat (as
the Evangelist Luke shows further) the unreasonable adversaries of our
Savior were filled with madness, in stead that they ought to have given great
glory and praise to God, and our blessed Savior.

Neither may we pass over in silence, that our Savior healed the right ear
of the servant of the high Priest, which one of his Disciples, in zeal of his
Masters defense, as he intended in his own rashness did cut off with his sword,
Luke 22. verses, 50.51. The name of him which made the ma^me, that is, Peter,
and also the name of him, to whom our Savior restored the ear, that is
Malchus, they are both mentioned, John chap: 18.10.11.

Hitherto concerning the sundry sorts of miracles, which our blessed Savior
wrought externallie upon the particular members of the bodies of men.

Now more generally, concerning the cures of the bodies of men, wholly
infirm and diseased.

And among these, he that comes first to our remembrance, is that poor
creeple, who had been diseas^d 38. years, whom our Savior made pe^fitlie well
and wholle: as we read John chapt: 5. verses. 5.6.7.8.

Likewise Matthew: 9.2. etc. And as the same is more fully recorded, Mark 2.
verses. 3.4. etc. 12. And Luke chap: 5.1^. etc. Our Savior Christ restored one
that was wholly taken with the numme or dead palsy, so that he could not go,
but must be carried in his bed. This work of our Savior was so reverend and
gracious, that the people were amazed at it, and praised God (as Saint Luke
reports verse 26.) and bee^^ filled with fear, they said, Doubtless we have
seen strange things this day. And Mark: chapter 2.12. We never saw such a thing.

Moreover, Luke chap: 13.10 11. Our Savior of great compassion, The ground and
history of them.
loosed a woman from her disease, who had a spirit of infirmity eighteen
years, and was bowed together, so as she could not in any wise lift up her
self. For (as the Evangelist says) our Savior seeing this pitiful
creature, called her unto him, and said unto her, Woman thou art loosed from
thy disease. And he laid his hands on her, and immediately she was made strait
again, and she glorified God. The which gracious work of our Savior, when it
was reproved by the ungracious Ruler of the Synagogue, under this pretense
that it was unlawful to be done on the Sabbath day: our Savior does so
graciously defend it, that he put his adversaries to shame: and all the
people rejoiced, at all the excellent things that were done by him.

Of this sort also, were those merciful cures which our Savior did upon
many Lepers. As Luke, chapter: 5. verses 12.13. He healed one that was full
of leprosy, that is, one that was, as we would say, in our language, a foul
leper. Such a one as was also, that Simon of whom we read, Matthew: 26.6. who
for the memorial of that gracious cure which our Savior wrought on him, did
bear the name of Simon the leper: as though it should be said, This was he
who being a very leprous man, was by the favor of our Savior Christ
cleansed of it.

And again, Luke chapt: 17.12.13. etc. He healed ten lepers at one time. Of
whom it is said to their reproof, that although all were cleansed, yet only
one returned to give thanks to our Savior, for this great benefit.

Such therefore, were the miracles, which our Savior wrought, for the helping
of the bodies of men, in regard of their bodily diseases, more externallie
apparent to the eyes of men.

Now concerning more inward diseases and sicknesses: we read first John:
4.50. etc. that our Savior healed the Rulers son, who was sick of a burning
ague, even near unto death.

Likewise Mark chapt: 1.30.31. he healed Simons wives mother, who lay sick of
a fever. For as the Evangelist reports, Our Savior came, and took her by
the hand, and lifted her up, and the fever forsook her by and by, and she
ministered unto them.

He healed the Centurions servant also, who was sick unto death, Luke 7.
3.4.5.6. etc.

Of this sort of miraculous cures, was the healing of the woman troubled
greatly, by the space of twelve years together, with an issue of blood, who
had spent all her substance upon Physicians, but could not be healed, by the
skill of any of them. This woman did our Savior heal. Luke: chapter. 8.43
etc. 48.

Of this sort also, were those inward and dolorous gripings, by collicks and
conuulsions, etc. Of the which our Savior healed many. For so we read, Matt:
ch: 4.24. They brought unto him all sick people, that were taken with diverse
diseases, and gripings, etc. and he healed them. And Mark chap: 1.34. He healed
many that were sick of diverse diseases. And likewise Luke. 4.40.

Yea our Savior did not only heal many that were sick of diverse inward
diseases, even to the point of death: but for a further declaration of his
divine power, he restored diverse of those to life, whom diseases and
sicknesses had deprived of life.

These therefore we will, in way of an addition to the former, here call to
mind, as a further amplification of the divine power of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Of these, we have three recorded, every one more notable, and admirable then
the other.

For first, our Savior restored the daughter of Iairus, a child of the age of
twelve years, her life being new gone out of her body, Mark chapt:
5.21.22. etc.

Secondly a widow of Nai^es only sonn^, he being not only laid forth by
the walls for dead, but also laid upon the bear, yea carried on men's
shoulders, onward to the place of burial, Luke chap: 5.12. etc. This corse did
our Savior restore to life.

T^irdlie, he restored Lazarus to life, after that he had been dead by the
space of four days, and so had layen buried in the grave, John chapter 11
verse 39. etc.

Hitherto of the two former sorts of our Saviors Miraculous works, in their
se^erall kinds.

Now the third and last sort of those mentioned in the beginning of this our
collection, was concerning the souls of men. Let us henceforth c^ll them also
to mind.

Of these there are two sorts, or rather two degrees of one, and the same kind.
For our Savior did not only restore those to their right minds, who were
Lunatike, that is to say, either sick of that disease, which we do call the
saking sickness or otherw se frantike and mad at certain times and se^sons of
the yeer^: but also he changed the hearts of great sinners from their sins,
to the says and obedience of God, by the speedy, and as one would say,
extemporall power of his divine word and commandment.

Of the first sort we read Matthew: 4.24. Where it is written that our Savior
healed the Lunatike. And chapt: 17.1^. etc. the man's son whom ^ur Savior
healed of his deafenes, and dumbnes, as S. Mark wr^teth, ch: 9.^^. was also
Lunatike, as the Evangelist Matthewe testifies repor^^ng the Fathers words
thus, Master have pity on my son, for he is lunatike, and sore ve^ed: for
oftentimes he falls into the fire, and often times into the water, etc. This
child, our Savior healed of his lunasie, as it followe^h verse, 18.

To this sort belongs the deliverance of those that were possessed of
Devils. Of which most miserable persons, our Savior delivered some who were
possessed of one: a^ Mark chapt: 1. verse 23. etc.

Upon the sight whereof, the people (as the Evangelist observes) were all
amaz^d, so that they demanded one of another, saying, What a thing is this, etc?

And v^rse, 34 He cast out many Devils, and suffered them not to say they knew
him. O^^ S^ui^ur did likewise cast a Devil out of the Canaanitish woman's
Daughter. Matthew: 15.22. etc. 28. Thus our Savior delivered many, that were
possessed, only with some one Devil a piece.

B^t out o^ some other, he cast out many Devils, which had taken possession of
^ne. For out of Marie Magdalene he cast seven, as we read, Luk: 8.2. and Mark
16.9. And out of the man that kept among the graves, whom n^ fetters or chains
could hold, our Savior cast out very many Devils. For as we read M^rke. ch:
5.2.3.4. etc. when our Savior demanded the Devils name (not that he was
ignorant, but that hereby might be known to us the grea^nes of this work) the
Devil answered that his name was Legion: for says one of them, as if he were
the chief among the rest we are many.

These we^e those Devils, who being cast out of the miserable captive, did by
the permissi^n of our Savior, for the further manifesting to us, how
malicious and mischievous they are, enter into the heard of the Gadarens s^ine,
in n^mber about two thousand, and carried them all with violence into the Sea,
and so drowned them every one.

Finally, touching the mi^aculous conversion of poor sinners, from their
sinful estate, with the gift of grace, to mind the holy ways of God:
these already mentioned, who were delivered and set free from that bodily
possession, which the Devils had of them, may be notable examples.

For this I doubt not, but that our Savior did magnify his mercy, from one
degree to another, as was said before.

But beside these, the admirable grace and power of our Savior, The Comfortes
of them.
was extraordinarily manifest, in the calling of his disciples: some from
fishing and mending of their netts: and Matthew from the custom table to his
ministry. And by the conversion of the thief hanging upon the cross. etc.

These, (and if there be any other such like beside them) are the sundry
sorts and kinds of those miracles, which our blessed Savior wrought, to
declare himself to be the only true Messiah, sent of God: and that the
doctrine which he taught was the doctrine of his heavenly kingdom. The
particulars of which miracles, were infinite as the Evangelist John witnesses,
chap: 21. verse. 25. in the last words of the Gospel: which he affirms to be
very true, by this word of holy asseueration. Amen. Of the which truth, it is
both our duty and our blessing, to be undoubtedly persuaded: yea, and also of
every other thing which is written by him, and other Evangelists concerning
our blessed Savior.

Thus far concerning those miraculous and divine works, which our Savior
Christ did in due time perform, to the end he might make himself known to
be the true Messiah, and the great Prophet sent of God.

But was there any former promise made to the Church of God, that the Messiah
should work such great and admirable works,

Yea. God promised of old, that he should be a Prophet like to Moses: that is
to say mighty both in word and also in deed, as Moses was.

Explication and proof.
It is true: according to that we read Deuteronomy: chapt: 18. verse 15. etc. And that
Moses was mighty in word and deed, the history of Exodus etc. is a plain and
plentiful proof of it. And so is it worthily testified by Stephen, that
notable Martyr. Act: 7.22.

Moreover, there are sundry other prophecies, which do not obscurelie point
us hereunto: as namely Isai: 35. verses. 5.6. etc. The eyes of the blind
shall be lightened, and the ears of the deaf shall be opened. Then shall the lame
man leap as an Heart, and the dumb man's tongue shall sing, etc. And ch: 62.1.
etc. compared with Luke, chap: 4.18.19.20.21. And Joel, 2.28. etc. compared
with Act: 2.14.15.16. etc. For all those graces and gifts, depended upon the
appearing of our Savior, and were given by him unto the Apostles, according to
that Prophecy of Joel, and such other like.

Now from the Promise, let us come to the Comfort, whereunto the Promise
always leads faith,

What therefore may that Comfort be which faith lays hold of, from these
miraculous works of our Savior?

Much every way, while we consider, and believe that the most gracious and
saving power of^ our Lord Jesus Christ, extends it self both to soul and
body, to every faculty and power of the one, and to every part and member
of the other, both inwardly and outwardly, yea and to all creatures else both
in the Sea, and on the land, and in the air: for our preservation against the
Devil, and all calamities or molestations of this life, that they should be no
way perniciou^, and hurtful unto us: but chiefly, for the furtherance of the
eternal salvation, both of our bodies and souls in the kingdom of heaven.

^xplicatio^ (...) proof.
Great indeed, is the comfort hereof, to all true believers; in that the due
consideration of all the gracious and mighty works of our Savior cannot but
exceedingly relieve and strengthen the imbecilitie and weakness of Faith. Be
of good comfort, say the people to blind Bartimaeus. For say they, He calls
thee. Wherefore Bartimaeus threw of his cloak, and ran to our Savior, as
we read, Mark 10.49.50. Much more may we comfort our selves, to hope for good
things from our most blessed Savior, considering his own words to some
other: as Matthew: 9.22. Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee
whole.

And further, that it was the purpose of our Savior, by all his miraculous
works to comfort us, from the beholding of his merciful affection, to hope
for all the good things from him: it may be observed from the Prophecy of
Isaiah chap: 53.4. as it is applied by S. Matthew, chapt: 8. verse. 17. in
these words, That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the
Prophet, saying He took on him our infirmities and bare our sicknesses. Yea
our Savior himself testifies expresselie, that he wrought his great works
to comfort our faith in the hope of salvation by him. And therefore, at such
time as the scribes cauilled in their hearts against him, because he had said
to the sick of the palsy, Thy sins are forgiven thee. Our Savior rebuked
the^. But for the comfort of those of the company, that were teachable, he
says, That ye may know that the Son of man has authority in earth, to for
give sins, he said to the sick of the palsy, (says the Evangelist) Arise,
take up thy bed, and go to thine house.

Now this we may assure our selves of, that our Savior having this power, and
therwithall this merciful affection, while he was on earth, has not laid it
down or diminished it, by his Ascension up into heaven.

O therefore how preciouslie ought we to esteem of all the gracious miracles
of our blessed Savior, as being very necessary, beneficial, and
comfortable helps to the strengthening and chearing up of our feeble faith!

Verily, if we would diligently, and reuerendlie read, hear, meditate, and
ponder them in our hearts, as we ought: we should assuredly find them
exceedingly comfortable to us, even in the times of our greatest distress:
They would surely raise up our hearts, to the cheerful hope of all meet
succor from him here, and of eternal salvation by him, in his heavenly
kingdom, in the life to come.

Thus then, as was answered, we may justly affirm, that the comfort is
every way very great.

ANswerable therefore to the Comfort, ought the duty to be.



We ought indeed, to be as earnestly affected to give glory to God, in the
reading, hearing, an^ meditating upon them, as any ever were, or ought to have
been, in the present beholding of them, when they were wrought before them.

We ought likewise, from them, to comfort and strengthen our faith, that our
Savior is the very true Son of God, the promised Messiah, etc. Yea, and so
to rest satisfied, in the confirmation thereof, by his miracles: that henceforth
we desire no more, for any further confirmation thereof.

We ought accordingly more and more, to submit our selves unto him, and his
holy doctrine, even as we would gladly be more and more partakers of the
fruit and benefit of his most gracious, divine, and all-sauing power.

Finalie, we ought to take encouragement from hence, to seek unto our Savior
Christ, for help and succor in all our necessities.

It is very meet indeed, that we should do so.

Explication and proof.
And herein, as touching the first branch of the Answer, we have many of the
^eholders of the working of these miracles by our Savior, very worthy
examples, as may appear from their speeches rehearsed not long since. The
which also, we may easily call again to mind, if we shall turn to these and
such like places of the history of the Gospel, Matthew: 15.30.31. Mark. 7.37.
Luke 5.25.26. and ch: 7.16. and ch: 13. verses 13.17. and John 6.14.

Touching the second branch of the Answer, that the Miracles of our Savior,
are sufficient to confirm our faith: the testimony of S. John the Evangelist
alleged likewise before is plain, chapt: 20.30.31. For as a lease or a deed
of gift, being once sealed, is as firm at the last, and for the last year,
as it was for the first: so it is in this case. The Apostle Paul alleges the
miracles which he wrought among the Corinthians, for the proof of his
Apostleship, 2. Epist: chapt: 12. verse 12.

Much rather then may we reason from the miracles of our Savior, The danger of
not believing.
to make proof of his calling, etc. Away therefore with all the pal^^ie
miracles of popery, to confirm any doctrine contrary or not agreeing with
the least point of the Gospel. Away I say, with all their lying Legends, etc.
For they hinder and destroy faith: but no way help and establish it.

The third branch is of it self so clear, that we need use no proof for it.
And so is the last branch also to every teachable Scholar. For seeing our
Savior has healed all kind of diseases: the due consideration hereof does
notably discover the wicked vanity of all superstitious ones, who seek to
themselves so many Patrones, as the several members of our bodies, etc. are
subject to diverse and sundry maladies.



They that will not believe the miracles to be wrought by our Savior,
according to their testimony, will never truly believe in him to be the true
Christ, nor that his doctrines recorded by them is the only true doctrine of
salvation.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. For the doctrine of our Savior Christ, is in majesty and
strangenes to humane and carnal reason, like to his works. That is, the
doctrine is as much above carnal reason, as the works exceeded common sense.
This is as strange to the carnal ear, as they were in the eye of flesh.

Moreover, this is certain, that such as will not believe the true miracles of
our Savior Christ, they are in very great and speedy danger to be deceived by
false miracles in time of te^tation: and so to be led to embrace lying
doctrines, as our Savior gives to understand concerning all such, Matthew.
chap. 24. verses 23, 24, 25. And so does the Apostle Paul, 2. These. 2. verses
9.11. And John, Revel. chapter 13. verses 1^.14

Let us in this behalf, take warning from the heavy judgment of God upon the
proud Pharisees. For they blaspheming the miracles of our Savior, were given
up to the hardness of their hearts, and to believe lies.

Let us also admonish our selves, from the fearful example of the foolish
Papists even to this day, who for want of due regard of the miracles of our
Savior, have suffered themselves to be blindely led and confirmed in false
doctrine, by every fabulous report or superstitious beholding of lying
miracles, which were no better then iuggling tricks of deceivers, such as were
the sweating of the crucifixe, and the weeping of their Lady, etc.

Finally, let us be admonished from the words of the Evangelist John, chap. 12.
verses 37, 38, 39, 40, 41. Though (says he) our Savior had done so many
miracles before them, yet believed they not in him. That the saying of Esaias
the Prophet might be fulfilled, that he said, Lord who believed our report?
etc. And from the words of our Savior himself, chap. 1^. verse 24. If I had
not done works which no other man did, they had not had sin: but now they
have both seen, and have hated both me and my Father. And Finally from the
words of the Apostle, Hebr. chap. 2. verses 3.4. How shall we escape, if we
refuse so great salvation as has been both preached by the Lord, and also
confirmed by signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles and gifts of the holy
Ghost, according to his own will?

Belief in God the Son, who suffered under Pontius Pilate.
Belief in God the Son, who suffered under Pontius Pilate. The ground and
history more generally.

Having thus interposed our inquiry, concerning the life, doctrine, and
miracles of our Savior Christ, bet^e^ the birth and the time of his principal
sufferings under Pontius Pilate, the which were approaching the time of his
death. Let us now proceed to consider of these his sufferings, as they follow
mentioned in the Articles of our belief. Rehearse ye therefore the words
again.

They are these, He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and
buried, he descended into hell.

Explication and proof.
In these words, the Articles of our belief do show us, how after that our
Savior Christ had performed his office of Prophetship, in teaching the
doctrine of the Kingdom of God, and also given forth such a glimse of his
kingly d^gnitie and government as was meet, the time of his humiliation yet
continuing: they do show us now in these words, how he performed his office of
Priesthood, and therein his most deep sufferings and humiliation, in that he
offered up himself a sacrifice to God, for our eternal redemption, and prayed
for his Church in most earnest manner, etc.

It is true indeed, that our Savior Christ was from his conception anointed
of God, to be both a Prophet, high Priest, and King to his Church, and people:
and so is to be accounted of us, even from the first moment of his conception,
to the last breath, and so remains for ever, as we are hereaf^er to consider.
Nevertheless, as he began not his public Prophetship, (...) he was about
thirty years of age, so he began not the public execution of his office of
high Priesthood, until near the end of his life: like as also: albeit he gave
forth some glimse of his kingly dignity. Matthew. 21.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Luke 19.35,
36, 37, etc. And John chap. 12. verses 1^, etc. Yet he was not fully blazoned
as we may say, and publicly proclaimed, crowned King and Prince over his
people, until he was risen again, according to that, Act. 5.30, 31. The God
of our fathers, has raised up Jesus, whom y^ sle^, and hanged on a tree. Him
has God lifted up with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior to give
repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. And we are his witnesses: says
Peter and the rest of the Apostles. And according to that, Romans 1.4. Whereof
the Apostle Paul testifies, that he was declared mightily to be the Son of
God, by the resurrection from the dead. And Phil. 2.9. That since that time, he
has a name given him above every name, etc.

Moreover, it may not be denied, but that our Savior Christ abased and humbled
himself and suffered all his life time, even from the womb: yea we may say
even in the womb of his mother, in that he took our base nature: and in that
it could not otherwise be, but troublesome, both to Marie, and also to the
blessed fruit of her womb, to travail so long a journey as Bethlem was from
Nazareth, when she was great with child, even near upon the time of her
deliverance. Likewise, it must needs be troublesome to the child, after that
he was borne, and that so poorly, circumcised on the tender part of the flesh:
and a few days after, carried a further journey into Egypt and there to
remain with hard education, some three or four years, as it seems: and
further, in that as the child grew to strength, so he gave himself to a
labours^me and base course of life, enduring pains, wearines, hunger, and
thirst, working with his hands for his living: even such works, as Joseph
wrought, unto whom he was, in all duties of service, willingly subject, till
the time was c me, that he must leave all other works, to do the will of his
heavenly Father, in the public duties of his heavenly calling. But from that
time also, it was not less troublesome and painful, but full of humiliation
to him, in respect of humane infirmity and passion, even from his entrance
thereinto, as it appears in that he was forthwith carried into the
sollitarie and uncomfortable wilderness, to be among the wild beasts tempted of
the Devil, without lodging, without food, suffering hunger. And likewise in
the time following, when he came and preached among the people, great was his
pains in going about from place to place, finding oftentimes very hard
entertainment, yea being sometimes refused and rejected, and many times
reproched and cruelly laid in wait for, with violent attempts against his life:
namely at Nazareth, where they offered, and for their parts, did what they
could to have thrown him down headlong from that steep hill whereon their
City was built. Luke 4.29. And afterward in Judea, the Jews went about to
stone him. John 8.59. And again chap. 10.31. and chap. 11.8. And thus it was
with our Savior, even to the time of his last most low humiliation, and most
bitter sufferings, which were under Pontius Pilate, approaching the time of his
death, as was observed of us.

Of these last sufferings therefore, and of this most low humiliation, (the
which as they were to the special debasement, and in a great part of them,
most bitter and doleful to our Savior Christ: so were they, and be they
still, most beneficial and comfortable unto us) we will by the grace of God,
with speciciall diligence inquire, as after a special ground and portion of
our christian belief. According to that of the Apostle Peter, 1. Epist. chapter
5.1. Where professing himself a special witness of Christ, he gives the
instance concerning the suffering of Christ, as being a matter worthy to be in
special manner testified and confirmed to the Churches of God: in so much as
our Savior Christ, by the sacrificing of himself, has utterly removed and
taken away the guiltines and wrath due to sin, etc. Heb. 9.26. The same his
sufferings, being also the perfect sealing up, and as we may say, the crown or
garland of his obedience, and of his expiation, or satisfaction made for our
sins. Col. 2.14.15. and finally, the only way whereby he was, on our
behalf, to obtain all the glory which followed after: according to that,
Luke chapter 24. ver. 25, 26. and John 12.23, 24, 25, 26. and 1. Pet. 1.11. and 2.
Tim. 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

Pontius Pilate, in the execution of his most holy office of Priesthood: to
wit, in that he was crucified, etc. to such singular ends and purposes as has
been said? Where are they most faithfully, and fully reported unto us?

They are at large and with all faithfulness recorded unto us, as it were in a
perfect harmony by all the four Evangelists.

Explication and proof.
It is very true: as we read Matthew. chapter 26. and chapter 27. Mar. chapter 14. and chapter
15. Luke chapter 22. and 23. and John chapter 18. and chapter 19. And they are thus
diligently and fully set down, by all the Evangelists, and commended to the
Church of God, as being a most worthy part of the most holy history of our
Savior Christ, most diligently to be read, heard, meditated, and conferred
upon, of all christians, all the days of their lives. And that, to many the
most excellent ends and purposes, as was said, and as by the grace of God,
shall hereafter be declared.

But before we come to inquire of those excellent ends, or any other of those
excellent things, which are to be considered concerning the chief humiliation
and sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ: let us inquire of the sufferings
themselves, and of the same his humiliation: and that also, in as commodious an
order, as we may, for the help both of our understanding, and also of our
memory,

The chief sufferings of our Savior Christ, may not unfitly be considered
under these heads or several branches following.

First, those that belong to his preparing of himself to the enduring of his
sufferings, at such times as he entered into the most serious thought and
meditation of them.

Secondly, they that belong to his betraying into the hands of his wicked and
malicious adversaries.

Thirdly, they that belong to his apprehension.

Fourthly, they that belong to his examination, or arraignment, and indictment:
and that in diverse branches. First before Caiaphas the high Priest, then before
Pi^ate in the common hall, and after that, before Pilate without, in the
hearing of the chief Priest, and the rest of the Jews: and after this, before
Herod: and last of all, before Pilat again, and again.

Fifthly, those things that belong to his judgment and condemnation.

Sixthly, they that belong to the execution of the same judgment, or sentence
of condemnation Which was gi^en against him.

Finally his bur^all, and the continuance of his body, as it were under the
power and domin^on of death, separated from his most holy soul, until the
third day after the same his burial, was a part of his lowest humiliation, yea
and also of his holy sufferings, though not to be reckoned among those, that
were painful and dolorous; but only in the judgment of his adversaries,
dishonorable and reproch^ull unto him.

Explication.
Under these heads or branches, we may indeed, not unaptly consider of all the
principal sufferings an^ humiliation, or abasement of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Let us therefore accordingly, make our inquiry into them: and that also in the
same order, wherein you have rehearsed them.

And first, of those which do concern our Savior, his preparing of himself
by the serious meditation of them. The which a^ they were either a little more
removed, or more nearely approaching to his betraying, and the troubles thereof,
so let us inquire of them.



In the 27. verse of the 12. chap. of the Evangelist John we read it
testified, that our Savior Christ, in speaking and forethinking of his death,
breaks forth very pathetical^y into these words: Now is my soul troubled:
and what shall I say? Father save me from this hour: but therefore came I to
this hour.

This was five days before that Passover, at the feast whereof, he was
crucified, and put to death.

Explication.
Read a so Luke, chapter 12. verse 50. I must be baptized, (to wit, of a most bitter
death. and how am I grieved till it be ended? Of the which words, thus wri eth
a learned Interpreter Consi^eranda hi^ est causa cur Christus supplicium quo se
afficiendum notat, tantopere exhorruerit etc. Causa (inquit interpres) fuit,
non tam metus cruciatuum corporal^um, quam metus spiritualium: quia sciebat
oportere se in cruce gustare iram Deiaduersus peccata electorum, ac proinde
sentire cruciatus infernales: quales cruciatus reprobi in Gehenna in aeternum
sensuri sunt. That is, Here is to be considered the cause, why Christ did so
much fear the punishment, which he notes should be laid upon him. The cause
(says the interpreter) was not so much the fear of bodily torments, as of
spiritual: because he knew that upon the Cross, he most taste the wrath of
God against the ^lect, and so feel the pains of hell: even such as the
reprobate shall feel in hell for ever.

And that our Savior Christ uttered these words in John, of exceeding dolor
and heaviness, with a certain confusion and astonishment, at the sodainnes of
it, falling upon him from the hand of God, while he did earnestly think of his
most horrible and fearful death: it is also evident, both by that which goes
before in the same chapter, ver. 23, 24. and also by that which follows
after, verses 32, 33. This trouble of soul fell upon our Savior Christ,
shortly after the raising up of Lazarus from the dead, and that the glory of
his kingly dignity began to break forth: the which is worthy the noting, in so
much as our Savior Christ, knowing that he must suffer, he did according to
his excellent wisdom, never bend his mind more earnestly to think thereof,
then when the glory of God did shine most brightly upon him, as beside this
time, we may take another special instance from the time of his
tran^fi^uration, Mat. 17. verses 9.11. And again chapter 25.31, etc. compared with
chapter 26.1.2. Neither is it to be neglected, that as the glory of his kingly
dignity, The ground and history of his agony in the Garden.
shined forth, when our Savior Christ was near to the going down of the
mount of Olives, as the Evangelist Luke records, chap: 19.37. so this trouble
mentioned, John: chap: 12. fell upon his soul, if not at the same time, yet
shortly after, as it might be from the admonition of the place, where he was
within a while, to feel the renewing of the trouble in greater measure, as it
were by the croched arrowe of the Lord, shot into the midst of his soul so
as it could not be pulled out so soon as this, which being as it were more
smothly headed, was taken away. But of this more hereafter. Let us in the mean
while come to those testimonies of holy Scripture, which declare unto us, the
trouble of soul, or inward passions and sufferings of our Savior, which fell
upon him from the hand of God, at such time as his betraying was even at hand,
and more nearely approaching. These were either in the chamber, where our
Savior Christ did eat the passover with his Disciples at even: or else the
same night, a few hours after in the garden in the declining, or valley of the
mount of Olives: even in Gethsemane the valley of fatnes, a place likely where
they pressed there olives, to make their oil, etc.



In the 31. verse of the 13. chap: of Saint John, thus we read, when Jesus had
said these things, he was troubled in spirit, and testified: and said; verily
verily, I say unto you, that one of you will betray me.

Explication
This Testimony, as we see, is not only the testimony of the Evangelist John:
but also from the mouth of our Savior himself. And in that he bewraieth, and
utters this trouble of his spirit, the which it was behooffull for his
Disciples and the whole Church to know, as he had done before: we may justly
conceive, that it was no small or light perturbation, but a very heavy
pressing and perplexing trouble, above that he did express it unto them. Some
cause of it was the deep thought of Judas his intended and plotted treason
against him (intended I mean, six days before this time,) and that upon a
very uncomfortable, and most unworthy occasion, even for that our Savior
defended the fact of the woman, that powered the costly ointment upon him,
against the unjust and hypocritical murmuring of Judas; according to that
which we read John, ch: 12.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.) The which treason of Judas, upon
that most unworthy occasion, so intended and plotted, our Savior Christ
speaks of again, four days after. Mat: 26. verses 1.2 where also the
Evangelist Matthew, does in the verses following, record the same wicked
occasion that Judas took, and testifies further, and that from that time he
sought opportunity to betray our Savior: he even therein, (as the Devil would
have it) fitting the malicious desire of the chief Priests, the Scribes and
Elders of the people, who consulted before, how they might take him by
subtlety, and kill him, so as they might best avoid the vproare and tumult of
the people, verses 3.4.5. etc. 14.1^.16. and Luke ch: 22.1.2.3.4.5.6.

Thus, I say, the thought of the indignity of the most wicked intent, and
devilish practice of one of his own Disciples, with whom he had always dealt
lovingly and kindly, etc. was some cause of this trouble, to the spirit of our
Savior Christ. But this was little in comparison of the chief cause, which
was, that most heavy trouble which he did see by this occasion, and with the
occasion, to have on a pace to the most deep piercing and wounding of his
soul: as we shall see further, according as the time of the practicing, or
executing of the treason intended and plotted already, approached more near,
and grew as it were to the maturitie and ripenes of it.



In the 26. chapter of Matthewe, thus we read from the beginning of the 36.
verse.

36. Then went Jesus with them into a place, which is called Gethsemane, and
said to his Disciples: sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder.

37. And he took Peter, and the two Sons of Zebedeus, and began to wax
sorrowful and grievously troubled.

38. Then said Jesus unto them, My soul is very heavy, even unto the death:
tarry ye here and watch with me.

39. So he went a little further, and fell on his face and prayed saying, O my
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I
will, but as thou will. And ve se 42.

42. He prayed the second time, saying. O my Father, if this cup cannot pass
away from me, but that I must drink it, thy will be done.

44. And yet again we read, verse 44. He prayed the third time, saying the
same words.

Explication
This third spiritual trouble, and agony, fell upon our Savior Christ in
Gethsemane, as the Evangelist Matthew testifies: the which place as appears
before in the 30. verse of the same chapter, and Luke ch: 22.39. was a part of
ground, of, or belonging to the mount of Olives, the which also, was on the
other side of the brook Cedron, distant from Jerusalem some good space, a mile
or two. And it was also a garden, or Ortchard, either of Olive trees, or some
vineyard: as the Evangelist John, does more particularly record, and describe
the place. John chap: 18.1. where also it is very likely, there were some
dwelling housen, as every where there is, on every side of great cities: at the
least, for the dressing, and looking to the Gardens there about, as may appear
by that which the Evangelist Mark writes, ch: 14.51.52.

The unspeakable greatness of the trouble, and agony of our Savior Christ in
this place, at this time, and that for a long time, as may be gathered (the
greatness of the sorrow, and anguish considered) it may be in some good measure
conceived of us, if we will only consider that which the Evangelist says
(guided by the holy Ghost) that our Savior Christ began in this place, even
while he was with his Disciples, to wax sorrowful and grievously troubled. The
Evangelist using such words, as note an astonishing and amazing, or confound
ng sorrow and distress, or a perplexity of mind, such as no humane succor or
solace, can mitigate or assuage.

But it may be more lively discerned from our Savior himself, partly by his
behavior, and partly by his speech. By his behavior, first, in that albeit
he took three of his Disciples with him: to wit, Peter and James and John, as
Mark more expressly names them: even such, as having seen his glory before,
at his transfiguration, might have been most fit, to be eye witnesses of his
humiliation, and abasing: yet his sorrows increasinge exceedingly, much more
then the sorrows of the woman going to her travel, and seeing them unfit to
be very near beholders, or hearers of them: he gives them their charge, that
they pray to God for grace that they should not be led into temptation: and
suddenly breaks from them, as one violently pulled away, the space of a
stones cast, as the Evangelist Luke describes it, chap: 22.40.41. that so he
might without their utter discomfiture, the more freely humble himself, and
most lamentably bemone his distressed estate before his heavenly Father, the
bitter cup of whose wrath, bent against that sin of ours, which our Savior
Christ had undertaken to bear the punishment of, and to satisfy for, was even
now put near as it were to his mouth, to the end he should drink it up for us.

Hereupon therefore, he falls down upon his face, groueling to the earth: not
satisfying himself, to kneel upon his knees, Mark 14.35. And afterward,
through the vehemency of the agony, and conflict of his soul, his sweat was
like drops of blood, trickling down to the ground Luke 22.44. A most strange
sweat, both for the matter unheard of before in any, never so grievously
tortured, and also for the quantity, it being so abundant, and that from so
thin, and spare a body, as we may conceive the body of our Savior to be:
which no doubt was not gross and corpulent, as the bodies of many full fed and
pampered are.

Thus, by the behavior of our Savior Christ in this time of his trouble, and
dolor, we may perceive, that it was exceeding vehement and bitter: and the
rather, if we do consider the most perfect patience and magnanimity of our
Savior Christ, whereby he was able, as afterward he did, to pass through all
the external vexations, that man could possibly provoke him with.

The same extremity, of the most grievous sorrow of our Savior Christ, may
be yet further discerned, from his own speech: partly by those words which he
spoke to his three choice Disciples, while yet he was with them: My soul is
heavy even unto death. The which no doubt, if it had been upon any of us
sinful wretches, it would not only have taken away all natural life, out of
our bodies, but have pressed our souls down for ever unto the bottom of Hell
But yet more fully, may it be discerned, by the words of his most lamentable
prayer. O my Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me. Yea, in
that he insisteth so upon the almighty power of God, joined with his infinite
mercy, as it is further expressed by Saint Mark, chap: 14.36. Abba Father, all
things are possible unto thee: take away this cup from me etc. And yet
again: the same may be further argued, both from the increase of the
vehemency of our Saviors prayer, as the Evangelist Luke reports, that he
being in an agony, when the Angel came from heaven to strengthen him, he
prayed the more earnestly to God, who alone was able in that his distress to
support and relieve him. And also it may be argued from the repetition of the
same prayer: for the repetition of the same prayer shows p^ainely, that there
was a continuance of the same grief: so that, as was said, this arrowe of
Gods vengeance, bent, yea shot forth against our sin, and lighting upon our
Savior, pierced so deep, and grappled so fast, that it could not be pulled
out easily, but with greater wrastlings, then were the wrastlings of Iaacob,
with that Angel, with whom, yet at the last, he prevailed. All which things,
d^ly considered, and laid in equal balance: and considering that it is a
familiar phrase in the holy Scriptures, to express great afflictions and
sorrows, by the name of the sorrows of hell. What should hinder, why we
should not esteem the sufferings of our Savior Christ in his soul, which are
above all humane estimate, and not possibly to have been endured by any mere
humane strength: to be such as may justly bear the name of hellish sorrows,
as being comparable to those torments of Hell, which we should justly have
suffered there for ever, if he had not suffered them for us, for that time
which God saw it meet, that he should endure them? And if he had not by the
propitiatory prayers, and sacrifice of his most holy Priesthood, obtained and
purchased deliverance from the same? For whereas some fear, least when we do
so speak, we do impute that to our Savior which is impious, and
blasphemous, once to be thought or spoken: to wit, that he should loose all
faith, be utterly rejected of GOD, and that he must consequently remain in
final despair and torment: this fear, or any such like, it is altogether
needelesse, in so much as these things could not possibly fall into Christ,
seeing they are partly sinful, and cannot touch the holiness of his humane
nature, and partly of weakness, implying such a contradiction, as can by no
means stand with the Deity of his person. For, that GOD should finally reject
and forsake his son, (yea in that he has assumed and taken man's nature to
the divine, by personal union) it is as impossible, as that God should deny,
or reject himself. Besides it is one thing, to be without the comfort of faith
for a while and another to be without faith it self. Likewise to be forsaken
of GOD, as touching present comfort and to be for ever cast off in the counsel
and purpose of God. These latter, are proper to the reprobates; the former may
betide the elect children of God: and were in peculiar manner in Christ, and
that in such measure and degree, as they cannot befall any other. Moreover, we
may justly distinguish betwixt the torment of the reprobate, and their wicked
and sinful qualities, the which are in them either causes of their torment: as
their infidelity, and all other their sins, and impeniten^^e, while they
lived in th s world: or else they are such, as their torments do augment, by
reason of their wicked disp^sition; such as are impatience, cursing, and
blasphemy. Our Savior Christ therefore, might and did endure the curse and
torment which is due to our sins, though he was perfitly free from every
action, or thought of sinning. And whereas he endured the punishment of our
sin, but for a short time: This does not disanull the pain i^ self, in so
much as the eternity of the pain, is but a circumstance, and not the essence
or nature of it. Finally, the excellency of the Person, of him that suffered,
even the Son of God, God and man, has in a short time satisfied for, and
swallowed up, or disannulled the eternity of the punishment of us all, as the
punishment it self, that it cannot rest upon, no nor attach and arrest the
elect of God, whom he has redeemed and purchased from it. Wherefore, if reason
will be more curious, to pry into this mystery then is meet, and not content
it self with that, which the holy Scriptures show us, to be the truth of God:
Let us not yield to make reason to be a wanton, but let it suffice our faith,
that the sufferings of our Savior Christ are a mystery, and far above the
reach of humane reason, grounded and built upon the grounds and principles of
GODS most high and divine wisdom.

And therefore also, whereas the shallowe conceit of man's reason, stumbleth at
the prayer of our Savior Christ, as if it could not stand with obedience to
the will of God, or with that constancy, which ought to have been in Christ:
we are to believe as the truth is, that it is a most holy prayer, most
perfectly beseeming the present estate of our Savior Christ, both thereby to
express the extremity of his inward distress and horror, and therein the
infirmity of his humane nature, unable of it self to endure it, and also to
show forth the fruit of his invincible patience and ^aith, in that he
prays to his heavenly Father, only for relief and succor, submitting his
own humane will and desire, to the good pleasure of his divine will: which is
a more perfect confirmation of the most perfect obedience of our Savior, then
if he had yielded to drink the bitter potion of Gods wrath, without any such
grievous, and sore temptation to the contrary. So then, our Savior Christ was
tempted in the infirmity of man's nature, like as men are tempted, yea above
all temptation of men, but yet without sin, as the holy Apostle truly
teaches, in that he never yielded to any sin, through any temptation, and
therein is unlike to all me^, and i^ alone, the only perfect and undefiled one.
But of the virtues of our Savior Christ: shining forth in all perfection, in
the whole time of his chief sufferings, and perturbations, both of soul and
body, we shall have another occasion even of purpose to inquire more fully
hereafter.

Hitherto of the sufferings of our Savior, in his preparing of himself to his
sufferings, by the serious thought and meditation of them, specially of those
that were to fall upon him, most near unto death. The premeditation and
thought of which cup, being so sharp and bitter in the taste and sippe of it;
how sharp and bitter may we suppose the whole draught, even the drinking of
it, dregs and all, to have been unto him?

LEt us now proceed to the second branch of the sufferings of our Savior,
which concern the act of Judas his prodition or betraying of him into the
hands of his malicious adversaries, most sinful and wicked men.



In the 26 chap: of the Evangelist Mat: beginning from the latter part of the
45. verse, thus it is written.

Behold (says our Savior to his Disciples) the hour is at hand, and the
Son of man is given unto sinners.

46. Arise let us go: behold he is at hand, that betraieth me.

47. And while he yet spoke lo, Judas one of the twelve came, and with him a
great multitude with swords, and slaves from the high Priests, and Elders of
the people.

48. Now he that betrayed him, had given them a token, saying, whomsoever I
shall kiss, that is he, lay hold on him.

49. And forthwith, he came to Jesus, and said, Hail Rabbi, that is according
to our phrase of speech: God save thee Master, and kissed him.

50. Then Jesus said unto him: Friend wherefore art thou come?

Explication
We have scene before, the plot and compact of this treason by Judas, who
therein greatly gratified the wicked Priests, and Rulers of the people,
according as it is the manner of the wicked, to rejoice greatly in the success
of th^^r wicked devises to their own well away, and utter destruction, in the
end. Here we have the practice, and execution of it, according to the
trauerous fidelity of wicked Judas: a most unthankful and graceless
servant, against a most gracious, kind, and beneficial Lord and Master. And
he performs his treason to his new couenanted Master the Devil, and his
instruments, very substantially: and against his Master renounced, most
hypocrytically. For he hasted a little, before the company, to salute and kiss
his old master, according to the sign, which he had given his new
masters, that they might not in any wise take their marks amiss, in the
dark of the night, and so apprehend one in stead of an other. God save thee
(says he) when (wicked cai^iffe as he was) he sought his life. And not content
with this, he returning back to the company, inciteth his masters, who were
too forward, and eager of themselves, that they should lay hold on him, whom
they might see to be of his own accord coming toward them. Yea as the
Evangelist Mark writes, chap: 14, 44. so carefully, that they might not in
any wise, let him escape. Take him (says the traitor) and lead him away
safely; that is: very diligently, and circumspectly, as it is in the Syrian
translation. And (that there might be no defect in this service, he did all,
with great diligence, and expedition, as it follows in the next words of the
same Evangelist.

But in this part of the narration of the betraying of our Savior Christ we
may not omit, that which the Evangelist John declares, concerning our Savior
Christ in that to the conuincing of the evil conscience, both of Judas, and
also of the rest, in seeking his life, without cause on his part given to them,
or to any other in all the world: he causes them to fall down backward, at
his first meeting of them. And also, he does by name reprove Judas, for his
wicked treachery against him, which could not but be grievous unto our
Savior: as we may perceive, by that report which the Evangelist Luke makes in
this behalf.

Let us therefore, here call to mind, the further testimony of either of
these Evangelists. And first of John, as it is written in the 18, chap: from
the beginning of the chapter.



After that the Evangelist has described the place where our Savior was
betrayed, as we have heard before: then it follows thus.

2. And Judas who betrayed him, knew also the place: For Jesus oftentimes
resorted thither with his Disciples.

3. Judas then, after he had received a band of men, and officers of the high
Priests, and of the Pharisees, came thither with lanternes, and Torches, and
weapons.

4. Then Jesus, knowing of all things, that should come unto him, he went
forth, and said unto them, whom seek ye?

5. They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth, Jesus said unto them, I am he. The
ground and history of his apprehension.
Now Judas also, who betrayed him, stood with them.

6. As Soon then, as he had said unto them, I am he, they went backward, and
fell to the ground.

7. Then he asked them again, whom seek ye, and they said, Jesus of Nazareth.

8. Jesus answered, I said unto you I am he: therefore if ye seek me, let
these go their way.

He means his Disciples. And then it follows in the next verse. This (says
the Evangelist) was, that the word might be fulfilled, which he (that is Christ
h^mselfe spoke: to wit, in his prayer, as we read in the 12. verse of the
former chapter) of them which thou gave me, have I lost none. And it was
indeed a great deliverance, as we shall see more fully by the sequel, in that
every one of the eleven escaped the fury of this band, thou^h Peter, by his
rash attempt, had generally ind^ngered, both himself, and all the rest: and in
that they were all reserved, to serve afterward in the office of Apostleship.
To the which very end indeed our Savior did principally work the former
great work: as it may well be conceived of us. Thus much, out of the
Evangelist John concerning the divine power of our Savior Christ.

Now let us likewise see, how the Evangelist Luke reports the ^eproofe, which
our Savior Christ gave Judas.



In the 22. chap: verses 47.48. thus we read.

47. And while he yet spoke (that is, while our Savior spoke to his Disciples,
exhorting them to prayer) behold, a company, and he that was called Judas, one
of the twelve, went before them, and came near unto Jesus to kiss him.

48. And Jesus said unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a
kiss?

Explication.
A sharp rebuke no doubt, a just reward of his wicked forwardnes: a corosiue
meet to be laid to his heart, if he had had any desire of recovering his
desperate health. For the height of his most heinous sin in his treason,
together with his most deep hypocrysie, and dissembling, in the manner of his
perpetrating, and committing of it, is as quickly laid before him, as he was
expedite, and speedy in the bold and shameless working of his mischief. So
that, he might easily have perceived by a short view, that he had to deal
with him, before whom, all things are naked and bare: and to whom, he must at
the last, give an account of this his villainous treachery. At what time, all
his new masters the Devil and his instruments, shall not be able to bear,
neither him nor themselves out, in that, which they had so boldly and impiously
taken in hand.

And thus we see how unworthily, our Lord Jesus Christ, the king of kings and
Lord of al Lords, by the right of his most holy anointing, was in this time of
his humiliation betrayed. The which, though he did most patiently endure, yet
the indignity of it, specially from the hand of Judas, one of his choice
Disciples, as touching the external chosing, and calling, and to whom he had
showed equal kindness with the rest: it could not, but be grievous and
troublesome unto him, as that, which beside other things, inboldened all the
rest of his adversaries, in their most malicious and dispitefull course against
him.

IT follows now, that from the betraying of our blessed Savior, we proceed
to his apprehension: and therein, to his pinnioning, or binding.

Matthew, is that recorded?

It follows thus, in the latter part of the 50. verse of the 26. chapter.

50. Then came they, and laid hands on Jesus, and took him: wherein, the
Evangelist John is something more f^^^. chap. 18.12. in these words. Then
(says he) the band and the Captain, and the officers of the Jews, took
Jesus and they bound him.

Thus then, according to the manner of their coming forth against our Savior
Christ, so do they deal with him, as if he had bin some notorious male-factor.

But before this, as the same Evangelist John testifies in the 15. verse of
the same 18. chap: 22.49.50. there arose a new trouble, very dangerous, and
uncomfortable: yea troublesome, and grievous to our Savior Christ concerning
the same his apprehension.



The Evangelist Luke reports it thus. Now when they which were about him,
saw what would follow, they said unto him, Lord shall we smite with the
sword? And one of them smote a servant of the high Priest, and struck of his
right ear.

Explication and proof
The Disciples did well, in that they did ask our Savior, whether they shall
smite with the sword. But in that one among the rest, does forthwith, not
tarying to hear the answer of our Savior) let drive at the party mentioned,
even with a down right blow, as it might be to cleave his head, this was very
rashly, and very ill done of him. The which fact, in so much as the Evangelist
John does more particularly report, then any other of the Evangelists: let us
hear his words.



Then (says he) Simon Peter: having a sword, drew it, and smot the high
Priests servant, and cut off his right ear. And be adds fu^ther, that the
servants name was Malchus.

Explication and proof.
In these words, we see indeed, that for the more full clearing of the
history, the Evangelist names both the party that rushed into this
unadvised, and dangerous attempt: and also the party that was thus suddenly
wounded and hurt.

How evil and dangerous, this rash attempt of Peter was, it may easily be
discerned, not only in respect of Peter himself, but also in respect of our
Savior Christ and all the other ten. Yea so: as it will be evident, from the
due consideration of it that it was (as we may say a stra^ageme, which the
Devil for his part, had most subtly contrived; and that in Peter, it was a
fruit of his former drousines, and neglect of prayer, notwithstanding our
Savior Christ had admonished him, and the rest, to watch and pray, by reason
that dangerous temptations were at hand. For if our Savior Christ had not in
his most excellent wisdom, even in that he was man, and by his divine power
concurring therewithal, presently espied, and with admirable dexterity
prevented that mischief: the Captain of the Romans, and the officers of the
Jews, might have had great color to have accused and condemned our Savior
Christ, as a seditious, and rebellious person, in gathering together unto him,
a mutinous and rebellious company to resist the authority of the civil
Magistrate, under whose government they lived: the which was not lawful for
them to do. And they might likewise have indicted and condemned all his
Disciples upon the same crime. The which devise of the Devil, if it had taken
such effect: we should not have been able so clearly to have discerned, the
innocence of our Savior Christ for the comfort of our faith. And as for the
Disciples of our Savior, they should have been cut off from spreading the
light of the Gospel of salvation over the world. Yea and it is a wonder that
presently the band of soldiers did not fall upon them, and slay them all, in a
rage. This then the danger of Peter's attempt was as great, as great might be,
and very evil: what fair pretenses soever the Devil, might upon the sudden,
suggest unto him, as that it was in the defense of his most worthy master, and
that he had promised him a little before that he would rather dye with him,
then forsake him, etc.



This i^ very clear and evident, by that earnest and sharp reprofe which he
gives Peter, and therwithal, both by the most grave and weighty reasons which
he uses to the same end; and also by his gracious act in the miraculous
healing of the ear which was cut off.

It is very true: All these considerations do make it very clear that our
Sadid utterly mislike this fact of Peter, and that his whole soul was greatly
gr^eued for it.

To this end therefore, let us come to the reproof which our Savior gave to
the reasons which he used; and to the cure which he wrought.

Ques. And first, which were the words of reproof?

Ans. Jesus said unto him. Put up thy sword into his place. Mat: 26.52. And
according to the Evangelist John, chap: 18, 11. Then said Jesus to Peter, put
up thy sword into the sheath.

Explication
These indeed, are words of earnest rebuke. For in that our Savior commands
Peter to put up his sword, he condemns the drawing of it, to be unlawful.
But this will further appear, by the reasons which follow.



In the first place, we may well rehearse that, which the Evangelist John
sets down, in the verse before alleged, which is this: Shall I not drink
of the cup, which my Father has given me?

Explication
This reason must needs, even at the first, as it were pierce Peter to the
heart, so soon as he hears, that by his venturous rashness he went about,
though at unawares, to frustrate, or at the least, to hinder the holy counsel
and appointment of God. In these words also, let us observe to our comfort,
the perfect victory of our Savior Christ over the most horrible temptation
which he incountred withal, a little before, in the garden: whereby he was
provoked to pray, that he might not have drunk of this cup, if so it had
been possible. But let us have forward, with as much speed as conveniently we
may.



They are those which the Evangelist Matthew records in the 26. chap: of his
Gospel: verses 52.53.34. And they be three in number.



Then said Jesus unto him, put up thy sword into his place: for all that take
the sword, shall perish with the sword. Either think thou, that I cannot
pray to my Father, and he will give me more then twelve legions of Angels. How
then should the Scriptures be fulfilled, which say, that it must be so?

Explication
The first of these reasons, is taken from the danger of the attempt, against
Peter himself: it proceeding of his own private motion, and therein presuming
against public authority. In which respect our Savior Christ tells in the
hearing of the whole company, that by the sentence and decree of God himself,
he had run himself into a capital crime. For (says our Savior) all that
take the sword shall perish with the sword: to wit, unless they be called of
God, and have the sword put into their hands by his appointment.

The second reason of our Savior to the reproof of Peter, is for that his
enterprise was as vain and needles, as it was evil and unlawful. For (says
he) think thou, that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he will give me
more then twelve legions of Angels; that is, many thousands, yea many times
ten thousand. For every legion contains diverse thousands. And therefore
Peter's attempt was merely vain.

The third reason, is the same in effect with that which we have seen already
recorded by the Evangelist John: yet so, as he does furthermore amplify it,
from the revelation of the counsel and will of God in this behalf, in the
holy Scriptures: as our Savior himself had often told his Disciples before.
And therefore he says, if either Peter, or the Angels, or any other, should
have restored and delivered him: that he should not be apprehended, etc. How
then should the Scriptures be fulfilled which say that it must be so?

These so many and so weighty reasons, do plentifully declare, in very deed
and truth, that the fact of Peter, was exceedingly disliked of him: and that
his soul was greatly grieved at it. Yea, and therewithal, so evidently do
they clear the innocence of our Saui: Ch: that none of his adversaries could
take exception against it, but rest satisfied: as it is plain, in that they
make no complaint of it, to color any indictment against him afterward. And
the rather also, were these reasons, a clearing of him in their consciences,
because unto these gracious words and reason of his earnest reproof, he
adds his most gracious working, in healing the wound that was made, and so
salueth the whole matter, as if it had never bin. Where is this gracious and
miraculous work of our Savior recorded?

This we read in the 22. chapter of the Evangelist Luke, verse 51. Jesus
(says the Evangelist) answered, and said, Suffer them (that is, my Disciples)
thus far: to wit, though they have dealt disorderly: and then he touched the
ear of the man and healed him.

Explication
Here indeed is a very gracious and miraculous work of our Savior Christ, not
only in healing the ear, but also in that by his authority, he limiteth and
boundeth the rage and fury of the whole company: so as they are content, to be
prescribed and ordered by him, in this difficult and provoking fact of Peter,
together with the buskling of the rest of his Disciples.

The which authority of our Savior Christ, does furthermore appear, in that
which follows by his reproof which he gives, not only to the whole
multitude, as the Evangelist Matthew reports, but by special direction to to
the high Priests themselves, and to the Captains of the Temple; and to the
Elders of the people, for their causeless and unjust manner of pursuing of
him. What are the words of this reproof?

In the 57. of the forenamed 22. chapter of St. Luke, thus we read: Then Jesus
said unto the high Priests and Captains of the Temple, and the Elders which
were come to him. Be ye come out as unto a thief, with swords and slaves? When
I was daily with you in the Temple, ye stretched not forth the hands against
me: but this is your very hour, and the power of darkness.

And in the 46. of Matthew. verses 55, 56. thus we read. The same hour, said
Jesus to the multitude, Ye be come out as it were against a thief, with swords
and staves, to take me. I say daily teaching in the Temple among you, and ye
took me not.

But all this was done (as says the holy Evangelist) yea our Savior Christ
himself (as St. Mark seems to report) that the Scriptures of the prophets
might be fulfilled.

Explication
That is to say: all was ouer-ruled by the supreme, most holy, and divine
providence of God. And as every one of us may see, our Savior himself uttered
this his reproof against the high Priests, Captains, and whole band of men,
with more then humane authority, to the conuincing of them of their unjust
course, in their proceeding against him: and gives them plainly to
understand, if they had had any grace to understand, that they were set a work
by the Devil, and that if God had not thus far given leave unto the Devil,
they could not have thus prevailed against him.

The issue therefore of this branch of the sufferings of our Savior Christ is
this, that he willingly, of himself, and by no compulsion on their parts,
yielded himself to be apprehended, and bound of them, according to the good
will and pleasure of God, and according as he had foretold in the holy
Scriptures: not only as Isaak was bound, when Abraham his father intended at
the commandment of God, to offer him up in sacrifice to God, but even as the
figurative Sacrifices of the Law, which were bound first, and then slain and
offered indeed. As Abraham also afterward, bound the Ram and offered him
instead of Isaak. The truth of all which sacrifices was even then shortly
fulfilled in, and by our blessed Savior thus taken and bound by them.

Whereupon also, as the Evangelist Matthew immediately observes: All the
Disciples forsook our Savior Christ, and fled. And so was fulfilled, that
which our Savior had fore-tolde them, verse 31. And John, chap. 16. verse 32.
Behold, the hour comes, and is already come, that ye shall be scattered,
every man into his own, and shall leave me alone. But (as our Savior Christ
says, for the comforting of himself, and to testify that comfort which he
had above all causes of discomfort) I am not alone, for the Father is with me.
And thus was it not only necessary, The ground and history of his examination
and indictment before Cataphas.
but also behoofull, that our Savior Christ should be left alone, to the
working and perfiting of this work of our redemption, and eternal salvation.

Hitherto of the apprehension and bonds of our Savior Christ, and of the
troubles and afflictions, belonging to them.

THe sufferings belonging to his examination, and therein to his arraignment
and indictment, are next. And that at sundry times, he being carried from place
to place: not so much bound in body, as in some respects spiritually
streighted and distressed, as being all the while, under the heavy judgment
of God, for our sins: though he did with invincible patience bear it out.
But first of all, he was led bound to Annas: for so the Evangelist John
testifies, chap. 18.13, 14. They led him away (after they had taken and bound
him, as it is in the former verse) unto Annas first, (for says the Evangelist)
he was father in law to Caiaphat, who was the high Priest that same year. And
this Caiaphas, (as the Evangelist records further) was he that gave counsel
to the Jews, that it was expedient, that one man should die for the people.
And therefore, was no doubt, ready enough to serve the turn of the rest, or
rather to go before them, in furthering the death of Christ.

But the Evangelist reports nothing of Annas his dealing with our Savior
Christ, though it was like enough, he spoke his pleasure to him. Only he says,
that Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas the high Priest, verse 24. that by the
continuance of his bonds and pinioning, it is evident, that Annas showed him no
favor. And no marvel, for as they were more nearly allied: so they were of
like wicked mind. Let us therefore proceed, to see the dealing of Caiaphas.

John set down concerning this?

It follows from the beginning of the 19. verse, thus;

19 The high Priest then (that is Caiaphas) asked Jesus of his disciples, and
of his doctrine.

20 Jesus answered him, I spoke openly to the world: I ever taught in the
Synagogue, and in the Temple, whither the Jews resort continually, and in
secret have I said nothing.

21 Why ask thou me? ask them which heard me, what I said unto them:
behold, they know what I said.

22 When he had spoken these things, (as the Evangelist further reports) one
of the officers which stood by, smote Jesus with his rod, saying, Answerest
thou the high Priest so?

23 Jesus answered him, If I have evil spoken, bear witness of the evil: But
if I have spoken well, why smitest thou me?

24 Now Annas (as the Evangelist writes further) had sent our Savior bound
unto Caiaphas the high Priest.

Explication
This indeed, does the Evangelist add by recapitulation, as it were, or by an
Epanalepsis, to show at the last, something more plainly, after a long
parenthesis, that the examination of our Savior Christ, repeated immediately
before, was made by Caiaphas: though it was not so expressly mentioned.
Nevertheless, in some books these words; (And he sent him bound to Caiaphas the
high Priest:) they are set down for text, in the latter part of the 13. verse,
namely, in the translation of Beza, who also shows, that Ciril, a Greek
interpretor of special good credit, does so read that 13. verse, and uses
sundry reasons, why he is of this judgment, that they should be read there,
for the words of the Evangelist himself.

But leaving the order or placing of the words, let us come to the matter.

So soon as Caiaphas had gathered together a solemn Council, and that our
Savior Christ is brought as a malefactor bound before him: he examineth him
very strictly, and imperiously of these two points, to wit, concerning his
Disciples, and of his doctrine: with a mind no doubt to charge him with two
notorious crimes, sedition and false doctrine. That is to say, with a mind to
charge the Prince of peace with rebellion, and the Prince of all Prophets, yea
even the truth it self, with false and lying doctrine: as if he were a
deceiuer, and a false Prophet. For so does Caiaphas, and also the rest of the
wicked Council, discover the wicked malice of their hearts, as we shall see
more fully hereafter. Our Savior Christ therefore knowing their malice, and
that the high Priest sought not to be informed of the truth; but to get further
pretenses, to color their unjust, and on their parts, causles proceedings,
against him. Insomuch also, as it was too general an inquiry, unless he had
particularly articled against him. He does most wisely (all things considered)
refer the high Priest to his ^earers, of whom he might know what his doctrine
was: our Savior himself, knowing that his doctrine was not preached without
good effect unto them. Protesting therewithal, for the removing of all unjust
suspicion of treason or sedition, that he never taught any thing in secret to
his Disciples, as touching the substance and scope of his doctrine, the which
he did not teach publicly, in the Synagogues, and even in the Temple of
Jerusalem: where they themselves were, or might have been ordinary and daily
hearers. This was the most wise answer of our Savior, to the examination of
the high Priest: the which might justly have satisfied him and all the Council
in the general, or in genere is we may say, to his general and large
inquisition.

But that it might be evident, that there was no regard of justice, nor any
just form of dealing intended among them: the Evangelist records, that
immed^ately upon this answer, so wisely and discreetly delivered, a base fellow
standing by, one of the Bailies, or Sergeants, or Apparitors, or howsoever we
may call him, disdainfully smote our Savior Christ with his rod, and that with
no gentle blow, as we may well conceive: saying also tauntingly to him,
Answerest thou the high Priest so? Of whom we may justly say (wicked sycophant
that he was) that he had deserved by this disordered fact of his, to have been
commanded to the Jail. Yea, considering the person, whom he struck, to have
lost his hard by the judgment of a righteous Judge here upon earth. Yea, to be
condemned for ever to hell, from the judgment seat of God. But the high
Priest, with all this unequal assembly, like well enough of it. There is no
reproof ^iuen, but they are content rather to laugh in their sleeves. Our
Savior Christ therefore, patiently bearing the indignity offered, with the
smart of the blow, he does yet so join the wisdom of the Serpent, with the
simplicity of the Dove, that in the silence of all other, he does reprove it
himself: though in a most mild and patient manner, saying. If I have spoken
euilly, that is, otherwise then I ought, then bear witness of the evil: he
gives to understand, that it is a very unequal course, to do execution
before judgment be given: and then it follows, But if I have spoken well:
that is no otherwise then might well beseem me: why smitest thou me? For
herein, his sin was doubled, first that he did smite him having no authority
at all: secondly, in that be smote him having no cause at all. Thus much
concerning the first Act of this Session, against our Savior Christ.



In the 26. chapter of the Evangelist Matthew, we read it described from the
59 verse to the 69 in these words.

59 Now the chief Priests and the Elders, and all the whole Council, sought
false witness against Jesus, to put him to death.

60 But they found none: and though many false witnesses came, yet they found
none: but at the last came two false witnesses.

61 And said, This man said, I can destroy the Temple of God, and build it in
three days.

62 Then the chief Priest arose and said to him, Answerest thou nothing? What
is the matter that these men witness against thee?

63 But Jesus held his peace. Then the chief Priest answered and said to him I
charge thee by the living God, that thou tell us, if thou be the Christ, the
Son of God.

64 Jesus said unto him, Thou have said it. Nevertheless, I say unto you
hereafter shall you see the son of man sitting at the right hand of the power
of God, and come in the crowdes of heaven.

65 Then the high Priest rent his clothes, saying, he has blasphem^d: what
have we any more need of witnesses? behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy.

66 What think ye? They answered and said, He is worthy to die.

67 Than spate they in his face, and buffetted him: and other smote him with
their rods.

68 Saying, Prophecy to us, O Christ, who is he that smote thee?

Expli. In these words, the which, as was said, do contain as it were the
second Act of the hasty proceeding of the early Session of this most wicked
Council: it consisting of such as the Prophet Isaiah describes, chapter 59.7.
Whose feet run to evil, who make haste to shed innocent blood. Yea and that
with an extreme thirst like unto the thirst of them, whom the same Prophet
reproves. chap. 5.11. for their early rising to follow drunkenness, etc.

We have, I say, in these words, containing the second Act; first of all, to
mark the most unconscionable practice of the whole Council, in seeking by all
means, to oppress our Savior Christ by false witnesses. To the which end,
liberty was granted to every one to say what they could: yea they were no doubt
earnestly incited and suborned unto it. Neither wanted there readiness in many
that were present, as the holy history does make it plain. For many false
witnesses stood up to depose against our Savior. But as the Evangelist Matthew
testifies: though many came, yet they could find none. That is to say, they
could find none, of any validity; no not in their own corrupt judgments, to
bear the ground of any indictment against our Savior. The reason whereof, the
Evangelist Mark expresses: which was this, that their Testimonies were like
unto untempered mortar, not fit to botch up the most base building, which now
the rude builders had in hand. Their witnesses (says the Evangelist) agreed
not together, chap. 14. verse 56. They were like greasy pieces of wood, which
no glue could hold together: or like drossie metal, that would take no
sodder. That which one said, could not stand with the deposition of another. So
great was that babilonish confusion that was justly upon them. And it may well
be to our singular comfort, in that we may the more clearly behold the most
perfect wisdom and righteousness of our Savior Christ, which by the brightness
of it, so dazzled and confounded them.

And that we may conceive the greatness of their confusion, so much the better,
in the testimonies of those that were so frivolous, that the Evangelist would
not once mention them: let us consider a little of that one, which both Matthew
and Mark do express, as being the most colorable and weighty among the
rest. And we shall find, that besides the gross falsehood of it, there was
exceeding disagreement in the deponents. For as the Evangelist Matthew
reports, and gives his evidence, that our Savior should say: I can destroy
the Temple of God, and build it in three days. The other, as we read in the
Evangelist Mark, accused our Savior, that he should say, I will destroy this
Temple made with hands, and within three days I will build another made
without hands. Thus the disagreement of the allegations of these their most
substantial witnesses, was very great. The falsehood was as palpable; insomuch
as their witness was not only more differing from the words, which our
Savior spoke, then their own were each from other: but also, most of all,
contrary to the intent and meaning of our Savior. But how shall we know this?
The Evangelist John is a most faithful witness thereof. For he does of purpose
set down, both what were the very words, and also, what was the true meaning
of our Savior Christ, uttered three years before this false calumniation was
framed. The words, as St. John writes, chapter 2.9. were these, Destroy ye this
Temple (said our Savior to the wicked governors of the Jews, whose deadly
malice he saw from the beginning) and in three days I will raise up again. He
neither said, I will, nor I can destroy: but, Do ye destroy: showing that he
knew what was already in their wicked hearts. Neither did he speak of any
making with hands, or without hands, but of raising up. Neither did he name the
Temple of God: that is, the Temple of Jerusalem: but this Temple, pointing as
it were to his own body, and spoke only of the resurrection thereof, after
they should crucify and slay him, as the Evangelist John does in the same
chapter furthermore open and expound the same. And thus, the insufficiency,
yea the mere vanity, The ground and history of his condemnation by Caiphas
and fals-hood of this Testimony, is most plain.

And therefore the unreasonable impiety of the high Priest is manifest, in
that he does so earnestly urge our Savior Christ to answer so light and
unjust a slander. Answerest thou nothing (says he?) what is the matter that
these men witness against thee? As though there were so great honesty in the
men, that they would not have accused our Savior Christ, unless he had been
worthy of blame. The high Priest might with as great reason, have been both
accuser and judge: as he began at the first, if he had had any just cause,
as now (he most absurdlie pretends occasion) to urge a false Testimony
against an innocent and guiltles man.

What does our Savior answer to this? verily nothing at all: Neither to the
false witnesses: Nor yet to the high priest, though he provoke him
thereunto. But he continues in holy silence, not a little grieved no doubt,
in his righteous soul, to see such an unjust and unconscionable course of
their proceeding against him. And this is the second thing, that we have to
observe in the second Act of their proceeding.

Thirdly, the high priest, and the whole Council, being as we say, at a non
plus, for all that help and furtherance, that their witnesses could help
forward their bad enterprise: he falls from witnesses to a vehement adiuring
of him, in the name of the living God, as it were upon an oath, to the end he
might draw out some thing from his own mouth, which they might take advantage
of, that they might pretend some cause of death. For that was already
determined by them, and it was the very cause of their coming together, as
the Evangelist Matthew notes in the beginning. I charge thee by the living God
(says the high priest) yea, even as it were upon the religious regard of an
oath, and as thou will answer before God (for such is the force of the word
Exorcizo, which he uses) that thou tell us if thou be the Christ, the Son
of God: whom for the further coloring of his pretended zeal, he calls the
blessed God. Mark. 14.61.

Unto the which vehement adiuration of the high priest, we are fourthlie to
observe, that albeit our Savior Christ, knowing his wicked drifte, continued
his silence for a time: and as the Evangelist Luke records, rendered these
reasons of his silence, ( If I tell you, ye will not believe it: And if also, I
ask you, ye will not answer me, nor let me go,) yet seeing it was a
material point, for the Church to be persuaded of our Savior Christ, (knowing
as well when to answer, as when to be silent) he answers directly, though
he knew that it should cost him his life, Thou have said it, says our
Savior, that is, it is as thou have said it, I cannot, neither may I deny it.
And that this was the meaning of our Savior Christ, the Evangelist Mark makes
it plain, chapt: 14.62. For he adds that our Savior Christ said further, I
am he. Yea, and notwithstanding he saw himself most extremely despised and
abhorred of the high priest, and the whole Council: Nevertheless (says our
Savior) I say unto you, hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man, (that is to
say, the Son of God, even my self, in that I am the Son of man, even in my
humane nature) advanced to sit at the right hand of the power of God, and come
in the clouds of heaven.

In the which words, our Savior does notably, even upon the danger of his
life, testify and confirm all the Articles of our Christian faith, concerning
his whole Exaltation, and divine glory, in his humane nature, in regard of
the humiliation, whereof they so vilelie accounted of him.

Hereupon, in the fifte place we have to observe the counterfeit, or blind and
malicious zeal of the high priest, joined with most current and exquisite
malice, in his extreme detestation of the most holy and reverend answer of our
Savior. And so the venomous spider sucketh poison out of that sweet flower,
from whence every true Christian gathers plentiful store of honey, to the
replenishing of the hiue of his faith, etc.

He blasphemeth (says the blasphemous and lying high priest) and rent his
clothes, as an effect of his malicious detestation of that, which he ought
most thankfully, and dutifullie, to have embraced: and at the hearing whereof,
he ought to have fallen down most humbly before our Savior Christ: and to
have craved mercy of him, whom he most sinfullie blasphemeth. But in steed of
this, he goes on insulting upon our Savior saying. What have we any more
need of witnesses: Behold now ye have heard his blasphemy. What think ye?
Thus as we are to observe in the first place, he who ought to have been the
chief in giving glory to the Son of God, is the principal blasphemer of
him: and as the bellows of the Devil, to inflame the rage, and blasphemy of
the whole Council against him.

Now therefore in the sixte place, we have in a short view, th'acclamation of
the whole Council. They are all birds of a Fether. With one consent they give
their voices, that he is worthy to die. A most strange spectacle, or most
hellish consent, even a work, fit indeed, to be wrought in the hour of the
power of darkness, as our Savior himself spoke of it.

And finally, that nothing might be wanting in this wicked Session, to make up
the full measure of all the iniquity that might possibly be practiced in it,
against our blessed Savior, the Lord of life and glory, most worthy of all,
and above all to be reverenced and honored: both in regard of the excellency
of his Person, and also of the holiness of his office, and of the righteousness
of his life: we are to consider, and in considering, justly to tremble, in
thinking of the most Barbarous and Devilish practices of those that were the
keepers or guard of the poor bound Prisoner, as also of the Sergeants and many
other of the company, to the most vile disgrace, and molestation of our most
blessed Savior, that possibly might be: both by word and deed, above all
reproach and disgrace that ever was done to any prisoner, yea, to the most
wicked malefactor, that ever was, in any examination before any commission, or
Council, from the beginning of the world.

Their molesting of our Savior Christ, by their most vile and reproachful
actions and deeds, was practiced sower ways; first they spit in his most pure
and holy face: and that we may justly think, with no small quantity of
spawlings among them, as we would not use a dog. The which also, must n^eds
be the more grievous and uncomfortable to our Savior, because being bound, he
could not wipe it of again: but must stand and go still thus dreuelled, and
defaced, for any help that he could yield to himself.

Secondly, they blind-folded him, as we read Mark: 14.65. and Luke. 22.64. as
though he that is the only true and glorious light of the world, had been
unworthy to see the light. And that they might make way for that sport, and
pastime, which they intended to make themselves, hereby.

For their third practice was, that they did beat him thus blind-folded, upon
the face, with their fists: as we read in the places of Mark, and Luke,
before alleged. And as Mark adds further, for a fourth practice: because the
sergeants could not come at him, to strike him with their fists, they reach
over the heads of the rest, and strike him with their rods. And thus was
fulfilled, that of the Prophet Isaiah: chapt: 50.6. that our Savior Christ
gave his back to the smiters, and his cheeks to the nippers: and that he did
not hide his face from shame and spitting. These were their most wicked, and
vile disgraces, done to our Savior Christ, by actual practices.

Their speeches were every way suitable to their deeds. For they having
blind-folded our Savior, they mocked him, as the Philistims mocked Samson.
Yea, they most scornfullie de^ided his holy and heavenly Prophecy, sporting
themselves thereat, saying: Prophecy to us o Christ, who is he that smote
thee?

Thus, they feared not to play blind hobbe, as it were, with the Lord of
eternal life and glory.

And not contenting themselves with this: they spoke many other things
blasphemouslie against him: as the Evangelist Luke testifies: ch: 22. verse.
65. Behold therefore, a spectacle, for the time, no less horrible then
lamentable.

The Son of God stands bound, as a malefactor, The ground and history of
his leading before Pilate.
before most sinful and wicked men: a a Sovereign Prince, accused of
Treason, by rebellious subjects: he that is the glorious Truth, accounted a
blasphemer: he that is innocent, is smitten: the Light of the world, is
blindfolded: the Lord of Glory, is most vilely disgraced, they most shamefully
spit upon his face, who were unworthy to kiss his feet: he that was, and is,
and shall be for ever, most reverend, is derided, and scorned. Finally, he that
had the right of all just judgment, and the power of life and death, he is
condemned as unworthy to live, etc.

Now moreover and besides all these griefs, and forcible causes thereof,
falling out in this second Act (for we may not but think, that our Savior
Christ, not only beholding, but even feeling this extreme wickedness, and
sustaining so great reproach at the hands of his own people: yea and that also,
under the managing of the high priest of God, who by duty, ought to have
showed himself a dutiful type and figure of Christ, in all holiness and
righteousness, and to have laid down his miter, and all his glorious robes,
before him) we may not think, I say, but he was exceedingly grieved at so
extreme an impiety, in his most holy and righteous soul, far above that
Lot was vexed, in beholding the vncleanlie conversation of the Sodomites. But
yet, moreover and beside all this, as we began to say: the fall of his own
dear Disciple Peter, yea his great downfall, whereinto he threw himself, in
the time of this our most blessed Savior his doleful and confused
examination, and sifting: it was not the least part of his sorrow, as it
appears by his turning back, and mindful and admonitorie looking upon
Peter, while he himself was in the midst of his trouble: as we read Luke
22.61. And in very deed, the history of Peter's fall, was very lamentable, as
the holy Evangelists do describe the same, as it follows in our Text,
Matthew: 26. from the 69. verse to the end of the chap: And Mark 14. from the
66. verse to the end of that chapter. And Luke 22. from the 54. verse to the
63. And John chapt: 18. verses 15.16.17.18.25.26.27. But it is not our purpose
to stay upon the particulars of this part of the Story, but only to touch
this point of the increase of the sorrow of our Savior Christ, by occasion of
the same: because we have to the rest of the sufferings of our Savior, the
which are th'argument of our inquiry at this time.

Thus much therefore, shall suffice, concerning the explication of the second
Act of this wicked Session of the Council of the Jews, against our Savior
Christ, with the appurtenances thereof.

THe third Act is yet remaining, as it follows in the beginning of the 27.
chapter of Matthewe, unless we shall call it a new Session, according as the
Evangelists Mark and Luke, seem more plainly to distinguish the same, from
the former, as if there had been some intermission, for a while, after they
had wearied themselves, in laboring a good part of the night, all that they
could, to tire and weary our Savior Christ.

To the which end, let us hear, and compare the words of the holy
Evangelists together.



His words are these. When the morning was come, all the chief priests and
Elders of the people, took Council against JESUS, to put him to death.

And led him away bound, and delivered him unto Pontius Pilate the Governor.

These are the words of the Evangelist Matthewe: Let it not be tedious to you,
to rehearse likewise, the words of the Evangelists Mark, and Luke.



Thus writes the Evangelist Saint Mark, in the first verse of his 15. chapter.

And anon^ in the dawning of the day, the high priests held a Council with
the Elders, and the Scribes, and the whole Council, and bound JESUS, and led
him away, and delivered him to Pilate.

And the words of the Evangelist Luke, are these, chapt: 22. verse 66. The
ground or history of his examination or arraign^ment before Pilate
And as soon as it was day, the Elders of the people, and the high Priests, and
the Scribes, came together, and led him into their Council, etc. And ch: 23.
the first verse. Then (says the Evangelist) the whole multitude of them arose,
and led him unto Pilate.

Explicatio.
Thus then, by the comparing of the Evangelists together, it may seem that the
high Priest, and the rest of the Council, made a new Session, and
consultation, after some intermission. And it may be after that they had
cheared themselves to their mischief, by eating some spiced cakes of
wickedness, and by taking a morning draught of the wine of violence: according
to that which we read in the fourth chapter of the Proverbs, while their rude
company abused our Savior Christ.

And therewithal it may appear also, by that which the Evangelist Luke seteth
down, verses 67.68.69.70 71. that they renewed the former adiuration of the
high priest, in the examination of our Savior Christ, whether he would stand
to his former asseueration, that he is the Christ, the Son of God: to the end
they might make their evidence the more strong in their accusing, and inditing
of him, before Pilate, upon some capital crime. For as it is furthermore
evident by the Text: this was the drifte of this last consultation, added to
the former. And so the effect it self does plainly euicte. For insomuch as
they themselves, had no power to give capital judgment, in matters of life
and death: therefore, after they have made sure in binding our Savior more
strongly, then before: they arise with one consent, and being inuironned with
the whole multitude, they led him away, and delivered him to Pilate, then
chief Governor, and Lord President among them, under the Roman Empire,
Tiberius being then Emperor.

ANd thus, we are come from the sufferings of our Savior Christ, belonging to
his examination before the high priest, and the Governors of the Jews: and
therwithall, of his condemnation, so far as they might condemn him: unto
those that belong to his examination before Pontius Pilate. Whereupon, follows
his indictment, and condemnation before him: but not until he was sent also to
Herod, to be examined of him, etc. Wherefore, let us now proceed to inquire of
the ground, and interpretation, of these parts of the holy Story.

Pilate.

It follows thus, in the Evangelist, Matthewe, chapt: 27. verses 11.12.13.14.
in these words.

11 And JESUS stood before the Governor, And the Governor asked him, saying,
Art thou the king of the Jews?

12 JESUS said unto him, thou say it.

And when he was accused of the chief Priests and Elders, he answered
nothing.

13 Then said Pilate unto him. Hear thou not, how many things they lay
against thee?

14 But he answered him not one word, insomuch that the Governor marueiled
greatly.

Explication.
Thus indeed, it follows in the Evangelist Matthew, concerning the proceeding
and course of the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ: Nevertheless, we may not
altogether neglect that which he inserteth betwixt the condemnation, which
passed upon our Savior Christ, by the judgment of the Council of the Jews,
so far as they might proceed against him (that is, to conclude, and set
down an Act in register, as it were, that they judged him worthy to dye, to
wit, as a blasphemer) and betwixt the first examination before Pilate: that
Judas who had betrayed our Savior Christ, seeing him to be condemned; repented
himself: that is to say, being now convicted in his conscience, that his fact
was damnable, because he had betrayed innocent blood: is swallowed up with a
despairing sorrow, and therefore brings again the money, that he had received
of the chief priests and elders, for the reward of his iniquity, and
confesses his sin, not with godly sorrow, but in a servile terror, and
confusion of his soul, a just reward for so horrible a Traitor: and most
desperately and woefully hangs himself, Matthew: 27.3.4.5. For casting himself
down headlong, with great violence from that gibbet, as it were, which he had
chosen to dispatche himself withal, he burst in sunder in the midst, so
that his bowels gushed out: as we read, Acts, 1.18. But of the particulars of
this heavy judgment of God, and all things to be considered therein: as also
how the Scriptures were fulfilled in this wrath, which fell upon Judas, and in
those thinge^ which followed upon the restoring of the money, in that the
chief priests etc: bought a potters field therewith, as it follows, Matthew:
27. verses, 5.6.7.8.9.10. we will not stay now: because the sufferinges of
our Savior Christ requires all the time that we may well spare, at this
present, for the more thorough opening of them. But in the mean while, the
Testimony of a chief aduers^rie, to the clearing of our Savior Christ, and
that with the condemning of h^msefe, as having no cause at all, wherefore he
should be moved to deal treacherously against him, as if he had been worthy to
have been delivered as an offender to the sword of the magistrate: and the same
test^monie also, confirmed by most heavy punishment, and vengeance of God,
upon the Traitor: it may justly be of no small weight with us, to confirm
th'innocence of our S^uiour Christ, even from heaven it self. The which
iudgem^nt against the traitor, was likewise an evident declaration of the
singula love, which God the Father did bear to our Lord Jesus Christ, his
Son, even in that he was the Son of m^n: although, he setting himself in
the stead of v^ sinners, did bear the hatred and curse of our sins. For it
was vnp^ssib^e, that the Father should not most perfitlie, and most
constantly, love hi^ Son: yea even in respect of his humane nature, in that
he was therein perfectly holy and righteous, and in all things obedient to the
Father, and chiefly, because of the most near union thereof, unto the divine
nature. It was impossible a so, that God, though in his divine justice
permitting, yea ordayning and appointing, that all these things should be thus
disposed, to these most holy ends, which he of his infinite wisdom and
mercy intended: should not therwithall, most perfectly hate and abhor, all
the mal^tious enemy, and persecutors of our Savior Christ, and all their
wicked and unjust proceedings against him: Whereof, this one judgment against
Judas, was a shewe-token, portending like heavy judgment against them all, in
due time, whosoever should not by another manner of repentance, then was the
repentance of Judas, prevent the same.

These things therefore, thus observed, in way of an interim: let us now
return to go forward, to inquire of the rest of the Sufferinges of our most
blessed Savior.

Wher^n, because the Evangelists Mathewe, and Mark, are very brief, as
touc^^ng those that belong to his examination before Pilate: and also do
altoget^er omit his examination and s^fferings before Herod: we will repair to
the other Evangelists L^ke and John, for our further supply in this behalf:
and that, even to the end we may so nea^e as we can, consider of all things in
such order, as they fell out against our Savior.



In this part of the Story, th'Euangelist John is first: as we read chapt:
18. verses, 28.29.30.31.32.



His words are these. Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas into the Common
hall. Now it was morning, and they themselves went not into the Common hall,
lest they should be defiled, but that they might eat the Passover.

29 Pilate then went out unto them, and said, what accusation bring ye against
this man?

30 They answered, and said unto him, if he were not an evil doer, we would
not have delivered him unto thee.

31. Then said Pilate unto them. Take ye him, and judge him according to your
own law, Then the Jews said unto him, It is not lawefull for us to put any
man to death.

32 It was (says the Evangelist) that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled
which he spoke signifying what death he should die.

Explication.
In these words the Evangelist S. John repeateth, that the chief priests, and
the Elders having condemned our Savior Christ, in their own Council, and
proceeded so far as they could, by their own ecclesiastical jurisdiction:
they do thenceforth deliver him over to Pilate, as it were to the secular
power. But they themselves having very rank malicious, and murdering hearts:
they will not forsooth, go into the common hall, the place of civil justice,
lest they (being very devoutly minded, to eat the Passover, in th'euening of
this day: by the religion, or rather licentious tradition of their own
custom: the which by the law of God, they should have eaten th'euen before, as
our Savior Christ, obeying the law, had done with his Disciples) should be
defiled. Pilate therefore, as the Evangelist writes, yields so far, as to
go forth unto them. And carrying our Savior Christ with him, he requires (as
good reason led him to do) what they had to say against him, before he should
give any sentence. Whereunto (as the Evangelist shows) the Jews answer in
general terms, that if our Savior had not been an evil doer: or in more
plain s^eache, in the use of our language, a malefactor, they would not have
delivered him unto Pilate: presuming belike, that Pilate should by and by have
approved of their proceeding, and of the decree of their Council, without any
further question.

But Pilate, as one discontented (and loath also, to meddle in the cause) would
have returned him back again to themselves, and to their own judgment, so
far forth as it was lawful for them to proceed: and therein to rest.
Whereunto they reply so (as the Text shows,) that they profess plainly,
that as they had already judged him worthy to die: there was no want at all of
will, and resolution in them, but only want of power, that they did not
without seeking to him, put him to death. The which because they might not do
of themselves, therefore they required that he would confirm their sentence.
And this, says the Evangelist, was thus ouerruled by the providence of God,
that the word which our Savior had spoken before to his Disciples, and even
the counsel of God himself, to th'effecting of our redemption, might be
fulfilled, concerning that kind of death, which he should die: to wit, not by
stoning, as Stephen was afterward tumultuouslie, but by the death of the
Cross, according to the manner of the judgment of the Roman governor.
Concerning the which words of our Savior, Read Ihon, ch: 12.32. And I, if I
were lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. Thereby signifying
(as the Evangelist says, in the next verse) what death he should die. And yet
more fully and plainly, Matthew: chapt: 20.18.19. Jesus (says the Evangelist,
in that place) took the twelve Disciples aparte in the way, and said unto
them, Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be delivered to
the Chief priests, and to the Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death,
And they shall deliver him over to the Gentiles, to mock, and to scourge, and
to crucify him. etc.

The Jews therefore, for want of power in themselves, urging still their plea
against our Savior: Pilate not satisfied with their general accusation, nor
minding without further examination, to confirm their decree, he puts them
to some particular information.

Heerevpon therefore, aptly may that seem to follow, which we read recorded
by the holy Evangelist Saint Luke, chapt: 23.



They began (says the Evangelist) to accuse him, saying, we have found this
Man perverting the people, and forbidding to pay Tribute to Caesar, saying,
that he is Christ, a King.

This indeed, may well seem to follow in th'orderlie course of the Story:
wherein the wicked men, show themselves like themselves, or if it might be,
worse then themselves. For whereas before, in their own Council they had
s^borned false witnesses, but could not with any color proceed against our
Savior Christ, Explicat o^.
upon their dis-agreeing allegations, but insist, and make their decree, onel^
upon a forged accusation, of (pretended) blasphemy, in their own hearing.
That is to say, from the words of our Lord and Savior himself, whereby in
truth, he gave God the greatest glory, that might be, in acknowledging
himself the Son of God, according to the same end, wherefore he was sent
into the world, by God himself, yet now before Pilate, in this first
accusation, they omitting their former blasphemy till afterward, do play the
false witnesses themselves, in charging our Savior, with other false matter,
of sedition and treason.

The falsehood whereof, is evident, by the open and direct practice, and doctrine
of our Savior himself, clean contrary thereunto, as Matthew: 17.27. and
chapt: 22. verse 21. For he both paid tribute himself, and also taught the
people so to do. Nevertheless in omitting the forged crime of blasphemy against
God, and by their taking up of this slander of sedition and treason against
Caesar: they take the most dangerous and speeding course that might be, against
our Savior. For they knew well, that Pilate would be more easily urged, upon
this accusation concerning Caesar, and his usurped right, then concerning any
dishonor done to God, although th'accusation had been just and true.

WEll then, that we may now proceed: Pilate hearing thus, the matter whereupon
they principally stood: he leaves the Jews, and goes back again, into the
common hall, and takes our Savior with him. For so follows the History, as
it is continued by the Evangelist John, chap: 18. verse 33. etc.



Let us here them.

Pilate (says the Evangelist entered into the Common hall again, and called
Jesus, and said unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews.

34 Jesus answered him, say thou that of thy self, or did other tell it
thee of me.

3^. Pilate answered him, am I a Jew? Thine own nation, and the high priest
have delivered thee unto me, what have thou done?

36 Jesus answered, my Kingdom is not of this world, if my Kingdom were of
this world, my servants would surely fight, that I should not be delivered to
the Jews: but now is my Kingdom not from hence.

37 Pilate then said unto him, Art thou a King then? Jesus answered, Thou
say that I am a King: for this cause was I borne, and for this cause came I
into the world, that I should bear witness unto the Truth, every one that is
of the Truth, hears my voice.

38 Pilate said unto him, What is Truth? And when he had said that, he went
out again unto the Jews, and said unto them, I find in him no cause at all.

Explication
In this Scripture, we see how after Pilate had understood the chief point of
the accusation of the Jews against our Savior: that having gotten some
ground, he proceeds iudiciallie to examine him. And this is his first
examination by Pilate. In the which we have to consider four questions, that
Pilate made: and three answers which our Savior gave.

The first question of Pilate was asked in hypocrisy, or more particularly
thus, Art thou the King of the Jews?

The second and third are demanded in thesi (as we may say) that is, more
generally, after this manner, in the second place, What have thou done? And in
the third place, Art thou a King? that is, Do thou profess thy self to be a
King at all: if not of the Jews, or any other people ciuillie, yet any other
way, or in any other manner? For thus far does this question of Pilate extend.

The last question is only by occasion, and in Pilates rash and hasty conceit
not to be ^tood upon: though it was indeed most pertinent, if he had had the
grace to have considered, and accordingly to have stayed for the answer of our
Savior. For what might be more meet, and necessary for a Judge in any case
to understand, then the truth of that which is called into question before him?
And specially for Pilate in the present cause, which was the most grave and
weighty, that ever came before any Judge, since the beginning of the world:
or shall be to the end of the same.

But because he staid not to hear the Answer, he lost the knowledge of the
truth: and so d^mnified himself, no man knows how much. And thus it came to
pass, that to four questions of Pilate, we have but three answers of our
Savior. The first whereof, is not direct and plain, for holy modesties sake:
or lest he might seem to a profane Ethnike over light, and in his conceit
very ridiculous, in taking to himself, that great and stately name of a King,
he standing before Pilate, in a poor and base estate.

So that we may call it an answer, in way of a modest demurre, until the
occasion should wax more pressing, and grow to some further maturitie and
ripeness: ou^ Savior also hereby preparing Pilate to consider, that he had a
more weighty matter in hand, then all the days of his life, he was in all
his politic wisdom aware of.

The second answer of our Savior, contains a description of the nature and
quality of his Kingdom: wherein also, is implied a more direct answer to the
first question, then was made before. And so did Pilate understand it, as
appears by his third question.

Whereupon, in the third Answer, our Savior does furthermore render a most
grave and weighty reason of the same profession of his: to the further
removing of that appearance of vanity, and lightness, which Pilate no doubt,
would easily have imputed unto him, as was mentioned in the first answer, if
it had not been most prudentlie prevented by the wisdom of our Savior. And
so might have been, as a rock to the profane and ignorant man, who had not
learned to distinguishe betwixt an earthly and a heavenly kingdom: even at
once, to have made shipwreck of an equal proceeding in the examination of
this innocent cause of our Savior.

But this being prevented, at the very first: our Savior takes the fit
occasion, which he had thus prepared for himself, very notably, though
briefly, to describe, who and what manner of ones they be, who are right and
kindly subjects of his kingdom.

All which Questions of Pilate, and Answers of our Savior Christ: the three
former Evangelists do very briefly contract, according to that of S.
Matthew, who is in this matter, the largest of them, chapter 27. verse 11. in
these words.

And JESUS stood before the Governor, and the Governor asked him, saying,
Art thou the King of the Jews? Jesus said unto him. Thou say it.

Of these things therefore, let us here stay a while to consider, for our
better understanding, according to the full report of the holy Evangelist
Saint John.

And first, the most wise and holy modesty of our Savior is diligently to
be weighed of us, from his first Answer. Wherein, he has clearelie showed
himself to be of a clean contrary disposition, to our most vain and corrupt
nature. F^r every one of us, is ready to vau^t and boast our selves, to the
uttermost, yea unasked, though we hear that all flesh is grass: and though
in truth, we have nothing of our selves worthy to be gloried in. But behold,
our Savior Christ (though he was most worthy of all glory, and had all
excellency of graces, most justly to be reioiced in) yet he most wisely, and
with all holy modesty, auoydeth even the appearance of vain boasting. The
which, as he did at this time before Pilate, being examined of his Kingdom:
so did he before in the working of his miracles. For though they could not be
hidden, yet he showed plainly, that he did not by them seek any vain
applause of men: as that charge, which he gave to diverse of those, in whom he
showed his gracious power, does declare. See thou tell it to no man, says our
Savior. See that no man know it, etc. Mat. 9.30. Mark. 5.43. And again, chapter
8.26. Read also Matt. 17.9. and chapter 21.5. And so was the prophecy of Isaiah
fulfilled in this behalf, as the same Evangelist St. Matthew declares at
large, upon the like occasion, chapter 12. verses 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Our
Savior Christ therefore, is herein, a most notable example, and pattern unto
us, both to teach us true and discreet modesty, and also to reprove and
condemn the extreme vanity and folly of that arrogance, which is seated in
our light and hauty nature.

Secondly, from the description of the nature and quality of the kingdom of
our Savior Christ, contained in his second answer: we have to consider, first
the meaning of the words, and then the uses which we are to make of the same.
And so also concerning the third answer of our Savior.

In that therefore he says, My kingdom is not of this world: the meaning of
our Savior, is not to exempt (no not the wicked, which be thick and threefold
in it) from his regency and government: as touching their restraint from much
mischief, which otherwise they would surely practice against his Church here in
this world. Nor yet to exempt them, or any kingdom of this world, from his
judgment, and utter destruction at the last: whosoever should rebel against
him. Only his meaning is, that his kingdom, being of another nature, then are
all or any of the kingdoms of this world: is to be erected and administered,
wheresoever it shall please him to rule and reign among his subjects, after
another manner, then the kingdoms of this world, are begun at the first, or
afterward vpheld and maintained. That is to say, the kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ, being a spiritual kingdom: all his subjects are ruled and governed
spiritually, and they do yield him a spiritual obedience, etc. And for the
same cause it is, that our Savior Christ does not say, My kingdom is not in
this world: but thus, My kingdom is not of this world. The which words also,
are so to be understood, as they may no way debase the kingdom of our Savior:
but so as may serve best for the advancing of it, infinitely above all the
vain and transitory kingdoms, of this fading and decaying world. For of the
kingdom of our Savior Christ, there is no end: but it shall put an end to all
other kingdoms, and remain it self alone, in all perfection of eternal
blessedness and heavenly glory, for ever and ever. Luke. 1.32.33. and chap.
19.27. 1. Cor. 15.24, 25, etc. Revel. 19.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. And all this,
according to the former prophesies, which we read Psalm. 2.8, 9. and Psalm.
110.1, 2, etc. Dan. 2.34, 35, 36. a part of the dream of Nebuchadnezzar: and
verses 44, 45. which is the Prophet Daniels interpretation of the same.

Such is the meaning of the most wise and grave answer of our Savior Christ to
Pilat, concerning his kingdom: by an excellent and lightsome distinction of
his spiritual and eternal government, and the temporal and worldly
government of all worldly Kings and Rulers. Wherein also, he gives Pilate
plainly to understand, that his kingdom was such a one, as was no way
prejudicial to the kingdom or Empire of Caesar, nor to any other kingdom of
the world, that should be subject unto it: but that they may well stand
together, yea that his kingdom shall cause them to flourish and prosper. And
so Solomon, a most wise and prosperous King, testifies of this our King and
Savior: that by him Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. That by him,
Princes do rule, and the Nobles, and all the judges of the earth. Pro. cha.
8.15.16. Neither did ever any Caesar of the Roman Empire, prosper so blessedly,
as did that most noble Constantine, who first submitted himself, and his
worldly government, to the spiritual government of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
those other Caesar's likewise, who were the most kindly and christian imitators,
and successors of him. The same experience, have many other kingdoms had: and
namely the prosperous government of the Constantina of England, I mean our
late most gracious and constant christian Queen, (most honorable in her own
name Elizabetha) is a mirror hereof, never to be forgotten: but to be always,
of blessed remembrance to all posterity, throughout all christian Churches.

The Popes kingdom indeed, falsely boulstered and borne out, under the most
sacred name of our Savior Christ, though in truth it is merely Antichristian:
it cannot (as the world has now had long experience) stand with the kingdoms
of the world, and least of all with any right christian kingdom: but it will
either ouer-dreep it so, that it shall not grow upward, or undermine it so,
that being grown up, it can have no firm and peaceable continuance, further
then it pleases God our Savior, to restrain that his double sworded and
triple crowned power which he usurps. But concerning the kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ, as he himself, (who knows his own kingdom and government best)
has plainly and truly testified before the Roman Governor: that it is no way,
in the least point, preiud^cial to the lawful and just government of any
Caesar, King, or Prince in all the world: but that they may stand entirely, the
one with the other, and either of the^ be mutually helpful to the prosperous
success of the^ both. But chiefly, his kingdom to all other kingdoms of the
world, which shall at any time submit themselves unto it, and to the spiritual
laws and ordinances thereof.

For the confirmation of the which answer, our Savior Christ adds further,
in his own defense, against the false accusation of the slanderous Jews a
notable reason, from his own former and constant practice, in all his
behavior. As Pilate himself, no doubt, did know and observe: or else he for
his part, neither would nor durst have suffered him to continue his course as
he did. In which respect no doubt, our Savior said to Pilate before,
appealing as it were to Pilates conscience: Say thou that of thy self, or
did another tell it thee of me? Our Savior by the latter, disanulling the
former; as he knew Pilate himself could not deny.

Let us therefore now come to the reason, whereby our Savior Christ does
notably clear himself, from the malicious slander of the Jews. If (says our
Savior) my kingdom were of this world, my servants would surely fight, that I
should not be delivered to the Jews. But seeing they did not once attempt that
course, neither did he ever teach them so, but the contrary: and of purpose
withdrew himself from the Jews, when they inclined to such an attempt: yea so
that when Peter rashly began to resist, he sharply rebuked and suppressed his
attempt, as we have seen before: whereof also it is like that Pilate might
have intelligence: neither would our Savior use his own divine power, nor the
ministry of Angels to that end: therefore he concludes, But now is my
kingdom not from hence. As though he should say, By this may it be evidently
perceived, that my kingdom is neither of, nor from this world. So that as I
never sought or minded it, so ca^ it not be justly laid to my charge. This is
the meaning of the 2. answer of our Savior to Pilate the governor. As for the
uses which we are to make, both for the comfort of our faith, and also to the
informing of us in our duty from this answer, and the rest: we shall have cause
to observe what they be hereafter.

Let us proceed to the third answer of our Savior. For Pilat understanding, in
some sort, the distinction of kingdom and government, which our Savior Christ
made: and therefore standing no longer upon the crimination of the Jews, but
(as was mentioned before) asked more generally, whether he did profess
himself to be a King, in respect of any princely government, of what kind
soever: our Savior prudently shunning still the name of King, which would
easily have seemed ridiculous to the profane company about him, and to Pilat
himself, (our Savior standing before him as a prisoner, pinioned and bound)
he did nevertheless acknowledge the truth of the thing, and answers Pilat
thus, Thou say that I am a King. As though he should say, it is enough that
thou have spoken it, though I do not rehearse the words again. And then he
annexeth a very grave and sufficient reason, why, though he used as excellent
modesty as might be, he did nevertheless acknowledge the truth of the matter,
in such sense as he had cleared the same. For says our Savior, For this cause
am I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear
witness unto the truth. As though he should say, I may not in any wise,
frustrate the counsel and purpose of God, who has sent me to testify his
whole truth, concerning the redemption and salvation of all his people: and
namely, this special point of truth, that God has for the same cause ordained
me to come into the world, and to do the office of a spiritual King and
Savior unto them. And that is the cause, as our Savior gives Pilate plainly
to understand, why he stands upon those terms with him: and not of any
vain glory, as one arrogating that, which did not in truth belong unto him.

Finally, as was said in the last branch of this third answer, our Savior
Christ describes unto Pilate, not so much for Pilates sake, who despised that
which he said: but for the sake of all true believers, who cannot but
reuerendly regard this part of the answer, as well as all the rest; he
describes I say, who and what manner of ones, the subjects of his kingdom
are: namely such, as being of the truth, do also hear and obey his voice. In
the which words, he describes them from the cause, which is before, and above,
and without themselves: that is, from their election, according to the eternal
good will and pleasure of God. For to be of the truth, as our Savior says in
this place: and to be of God, as he says otherwhere, and namely John, 8.47. He
that is of God, hears Gods word, etc. these two kinds of speeches, they are
in sense all one. Likewise, to hear Gods word, and to harken to the voice of
our Savior Christ, they are also one and the same. For the voice of Christ, is
not only that word and doctrine, which he uttered by his own sacred mouth,
while he was here on earth: but also, that which he has spoken by the
ministry of his servants, the Prophets, from the beginning of the world, till
his coming: and from the time of his ascension up into heaven, by his holy
Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, and Teachers, even to this day, and
so forth to the end of the world, even by all whosoever have, do, and shall
preach his word and Gospel faithfully: according as it written: John, 7.15.16.
My doctrine is not mine, (that is, not mine alone) but his that sent me. Also,
If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of my self. And Ioh. 10.27.28. My sheep hear my
voice, and I know the^, and they follow me. And I give unto the^ eternal life,
etc. And 13.20. Verily, verily, I say unto you, if I send any, he that
receives him receives me, and he that receives me, receives him that sent
me. Read also Ephesians. chapter 4.10, etc. And Mat. 23.37.

But insomuch as there be diverse kinds of those, which hear the voice of our
Savior Christ, (as our Savior himself has taught and declared by the
parable of the sower, whose seed fell into diverse kinds of grounds: Matthew. 13.
and Pilate himself heard the sound of the voice of Christ, though he was never
the better for it) let us for our parts therefore, labor that we may be of
those, that do hear the voice of our Savior, to our eternal salvation. Of
the which number, we shall know our selves to be, if we hear the voice of
Christ, speaking to us in his Gospel, by the ministry of his faithful
servants, with a mind constantly to believe and obey the same: according to
that saying of our Savior himself, to those that believed in him. Ioh.
8.31.32. If ye continue in my word, ye are verily my disciples. And ye shall
know the truth, and the truth shall make ye free. For as he says further, Ioh.
14.6. I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No man comes unto the Father
but by me. And as S. Paul truly testifies, Ephesians. 4.20.21. where remembering to
the christian Ephesians, the vain and wicked thoughts, and works of other
Gentiles not yet converted unto God, writes thus: But ye have not so learned
Christ. If so be ye have heard him, and have bin taught by him, as the truth is
in Jesus, etc.

Thus the^ we see, how we are to understand the most wise and grave answers of
our Savior to the examination of Pilate. And this is that good confession,
which the Apostle so solemnizeth. 1. Tim. 6.13. where he makes it a special
clause, in that zealous contestation and charge which he gives Timotheus that
he do observe, (and as much as lay in him, to cause to be observed) the
precepts contained in that his epistle, without spot, and unrebukable, until
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. The ground and history of his second
examination or arraignement before Caiaphas.
I charge thee (says the holy Apostle) in the sight of God, and before Jesus
Christ, who under Pontius Pilate, witnessed a good confession; That thou keep
this Commandment without spot, etc.

And herewithall, we see how that which Pilate scornfully rejects, asking
What is truth? and so turns his back upon our Savior Christ, is a matter of
most worthy and reverend regard.

Now therefore, that we may say something concerning Pilate, in his dealing
with our Savior Christ, we may perceive by his questions, (the which beginning
with more Candor or ingenuitie and equity of mind, as a man may say, by and by
sauoured of pride, and afterward ended in open contempt) that howsoever his
course is to be preferred before the proceeding of the Jews, 'yet he is not
simply to be commended. For in this beginning, he shows himself to be a very
wicked man, having more care to please the wicked humors of men, the^ to obey
the holy will of God. And afterward, as we shall see further, eue^ against his
own conscience, he grows in conclusion as corrupt in his dealing, as the
Jews themselves, in satisfying their wicked desire in co^de^ning of him, yea
and more the^ they desired, for he caused him to be scourged, and most
reprochfully abused.

To this end and purpose, let us go forward to trace out the unconscionable
dealing of this evil and corrupt Magistrate. For not able to resist the
answers of our Savior Christ, but holding them in conscience, for a just
Apology and defense: he goes forth again unto the Jews, as the Evangelist
John declares, and says unto them, I find in him no cause at all. Here is
therefore a plain justifying of our Savior, by the verdict of Pilates own
convicted conscience; whom yet afterward he condemns, to satisfy the rage of
the Jews: though he found then no more cause then he did now, but still
pronounced him innocent again and again, as we shall see further, in the
times and places thereof.

In the mean season, that we may understand what followed upon the first
clearing of our Savior Christ by Pilate: we are to resort to the Evangelist
Luke, as we read chap. 23. ver. 4, 5, etc.

First therefore, Which are the words of the Evangelist in those two verses?

4 Then said Pilate to the high Priests, and to the people, I find no fault in
this man.

5 But they were the more fierce, saying. He moves the people, teaching
throughout all Judea, beginning at Galile, even to this place.

This indeed is the holy History continued by S. Luke. But yet for a further
supply, touching this point: we must here take in that, which the Evangelist
Matthew writes, chapter 27.12, 13, 14. And the Evangelist Mark, chapter 15.3, 4, 5.

Which are the words of either Evangelist in those places?

The words of the Evangelist Matthew are these.

Matthew. 27.
12 And when he was accused of the chief Priests, and Elders, he answered
nothing.

13 Then said Pilat unto him, Hear thou not how many things they lay against
thee?

14 But he answered him not a word, insomuch that the Governor marvelled
greatly.

The words of the Evangelist Mark, are like to these of Matthew.

Mark 15.
3 And the high Priest (says Mark) accused him of many things.

4 Wherefore Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing? Behold
how many things they witness against thee.

5 But Jesus answered no more at all, so that Pilate marvelled.

Thus then, all the Evangelists laid together, the narration of this second
examination of our Savior Christ by Pilate, in the presence of the Jews, is
this: that Pilate justifies our Savior Christ, upon his first examination:
the Jews accuse our Savior Christ of many things, yea they are the more
fierce, by occasion of Pilates clearing of him, as one minding to have
dismissed him: Pilate provoke our Savior to answer to the accusations of the
Jews: but our Savior is altogether sile^t, unless we admit here, that at
this time Pilat asked him again. Art thou the king of the Jews? to whom our
Savior said only, Thou say it. Mat. 27.11. and Mar. 15.2. the which yet is
more likely to be the same which has bin set down already by the Evangelist
John, as was observed before.

Concerning the silence of our Savior, we have seen the reasons of it before,
Luke 22.67.68. for the same causes moved him thereunto at this time, The ground
and history o^ his examination and accusation before Herod.
wherewith he was moved then; And the rather now at this time, because he had
s^fficiently cleared himself, in the former examination of Pilate before he
come out this second time to the Jews. Wherefore though Pilate marvelled
greatly, we will not think it strange that our Savior should be so silent as
he was, seeing we understand from our Savior himself, the excellent reasons
and causes thereof. But all this is but a continuance of the trouble and
sorrow of our Savior Christ to see the renewed fruits of the malice of the
Rulers of the Jews, and to continue thus in his bonds.

And this also is specially to be observed, from the Evangelist Luke, that they
accuse him, as of a great and capital trespass, for that he took most
diligent and unweariable pains in preaching the Gospel of the kingdom of
God: in respect whereof, no thanks which may be given to God, or praise to our
blessed Savior, can be sufficient. For say they. He moves the people,
teaching throughout all Judea, beginning at Galile even to this place: that is
to the chief city Jerusalem. But in the heat of this raging and unreasonable
accusation, they had almost mard all. For Pilate upon the mention of Galile,
takes advantage to pick an occasion to rid his hands of the whole matter, or
at the least to breed delay. For so the Euang: Luke prosecuteth the story, as
it follows in his 23. ch, in the 6. and. 7. v. What are the Evangelists
words?

Now when Pilate heard of Galile, he asked whether the man were a Galilean.

7. And when he knew that he was of Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod,
who was also at Jerusalem in those days.

Pilate indeed seeks thus, (at the least for a while) to rest himself: and it
may be to gratify Herod, and somewhat to trouble the Jews, who had begun to
trouble him, about the matter more then he would. But howsoever Pilat eases
and pleases himself, by his polit^ke devise: the trouble of our Savior go
on, and is multiplied by this tossing, as it were from post to pillar, as one
may say.

THe which part of the holy story is continued by the Evangelist Luke, as it
follows from the beginning of the 8 verse to the end of the 12.



And when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad: for he was desirous to see
him of a long season (says the Evangelist Luke) because he had heard many
things of him, and trusted to have seen some sign done by him.

9. Then questioned he with him of many things: but he answered him nothing.

10. The high Priests also and Scribes stood forth, and accused him vehemently.

11. And Herod with his men of war despised him, and mocked him, and arrayed
him in white, and sent him again to Pilate.

12. And the same day says the Evangelist) Pilate and Herod were made friends
together, for before they were enemies one to another.

Thus then, we are come to new examination of our Savior Christ before H^rod,
and the sufferings belonging to the same, by occasion of Pilates sending of our
S^^iour unto him, upon the sight of whom, as the Evangelist writes, Herod was
exceeding glad: and that for two causes. First, because upon former and famous
reports of great works done by him, he had of a long season bin desirous to see
him: and secondly, because he conceived hope, that he should now at his
pleasure, procure our Savior to work some miracle before him. For it seems,
the profane man thought, that he should have found our Savior C^r^st, like to
such as are ready to play their iuggling tricks, or other strange feats, to
satisfy the vain humors of their beholders. And the rather did the proud m^n
persuade himself, that he should have had our Savior at his beck, because he
was brought as a prisoner before him: and in that respect, might by his power
and authority, be either greatly hindered, or furthered, in his cause brought
before him.

To this end, he is very inquisitiue with our Savior Christ, concerning many
things (as S. Luke writes) and therewithal no doubt, partly by fair and
flattering speeches, and by threatenings (as the manner of such men is) to frame
our S: Chapter to his mind, and to get something from his own mouth, whereby he
might take some advantage against him. But Herod is deceived in his
expectation. All the vain hope, wherewith he fed himself a while before, is
frustrate. For our Savior Christ in his excellent wisdom and upon weighty
considerations, as we shall consider by and by, answers the vain man
nothing at all.

Yea, though, as the holy Evangelist records, the high Priests also, and
Scribes, stood forth and accused our Savior vehemently, according to such
things as Herod objected against him: Yet our Savior Christ was moved, neither
by the one, nor by the other, to answer any thing at all at this time for
himself, but let them talk to themselves, and so answers them in the best
manner, by patien^ si ence.

Here upon, Herod being greatly disappointed, and no less discontented,
despises our Savior Christ in his heart; and accordingly, both he himself,
and his soldiers also, who were as forward as their master (for like master,
like servant) they fall to open deriding and scorning of our most reverend and
blessed Savior. And that especially, upon the false accusation of the Iew^s,
that he affected a worldly kingdom, and government, over them. As it appears
by their kind of mockery, in that they cast some white piece of cloth about
him, as if he were some Candidatus, or competito^r for the kingdom, after the
manner of such as stood for offices in their so^^mne elections a^ Rome, for
they mock him most contemptuously, as being a goodly man to be a king, etc.

Thus they sport themselves in their own most wicked and blasphemous fo^lie.
The conclusion of all was this, that Herod being soon weary of his part, he
returns our Savior back again to Pilate: so that as he had begun, so he
might make an end, for all him. Yet in such friendly manner, and holding
himself so singularly gratified by Pilate, that the same day, he and Pilate
being enemies before, are now made friends. This is the sum of this
answereles examination of our Savior, and of the sufferings accompanying the
same, by the contin^ance of his bonds, and the tedious molestations of his
adversaries, su^drie ways.

But i^ shall be profitable for us, to consider somewhat more fully, of some of
these points at the least.

And first, concerning the exceeding gladness of Herod, upon the sight of our
Savior Christ: it shall be to good purpose, to consider what manner of gladness
it was, from the causes and grounds thereof. Whereupon also, other things will
be made more clear and lightsome unto us.

Herod was affected?

It was not of any holy love, and desire, that he bare to our Savior Christ,
or to his doctrine, or to his miracles: but altogether of a profane curiosity,
he rejoicing rather to see our Savior apprehended and brought before him as a
prisoner, then in any other respect.

Explication
It is true indeed, as the effects of this joy, do open both the nature of it,
and also of the causes and grounds thereof. And in very truth, how could it be,
that Herod a man of most wicked and incestuous life and of a most guilty
conscience, imbrued not only with the imprisonment of John, but also with his
innocent blood above all other his sins (he of an hypocrit^ becoming a hard
hearted sinner) seeking also (as it is likely, by that we read, Luke 13.31.)
the life of our Savior as may appear further, by that answer which our
Savior sends, at the same time, saying; Go ye, and tell that Fox. Behold I
cast out Diuel^, and wilt heal still to day and to morrow, and the third day
I shall be perfected: that is, I shall continue yet a while longer and do the
works o^ God, and Herod shall not be able to interrupt me: Herod also being
the wicked son of that most wicked Herod, who even from the nativity of our
Savior sought to destroy him, and to that end murdered the children of
Bethlehem, and the places there about, as we have seen more at at large
before: how therefore could it be, I say, that Herod being such a one, should
in any godly manner desire after our Savior, and joy to see him? specially to
see him in such a plight as he was brought before him. Verily, if he had loved
him, he would rather have been stricken with sorrow, to see our Savior so
pitifully abused, and defaced, as he was by former spittings and buffettings,
etc. And besides, if Herod had had any true desire to have seen our Savior
Christ: or to have heard his doctrine, or to have beheld his miracles, he might
long since this time, have seen, and heard, both him and them, many a time and
often, For our Savior Christ both preached, and wrought miracles daily, in all
parts of Herod's jurisdiction, even in Galile. He that heard John willingly,
though he wrought no miracles; would much rather have heard our Savior, who
was mighty in deed, as well as in word. The truth is plain therefore, that
Herod had noe good affection toward our Savior. All his desire, was of a
profane curiosity: and his gladness, a rejoicing in our Saviors outward
calamity, he thinking this to be a fit occasion, to make our Savior servile
to his proud humor.

But our Savior knowing the wicked mind of this profane and ungodly man, he
does disapoint him as much as possibly might: and thereby shows himself, to
be altogether an other manner of man, then Herod took him to be. That is to
say, he shows himself a most wise and discreet man, of invincible patience,
joined with singular valor, and holy fortitude of mind: knowing most
perfectly, when to be silent, as well as when to speak.

The which, that we may more clearly see into, we are to call to mind, the
former reasons alleged, concerning our Savior his silence. And beside those,
to consider of two more special, upon the present occasion. First, as we have
seen, that Herod was a most bad man, and accordingly our Savior Christ well
knew that he desired not, to hear any word to proceed out of his mouth, to
his instruction in the way of the kingdom of God, or to see any work wrought
by him, to the end he might be moved thereby to give glory to God: and
therefore, as our Savior Christ had taught his disciples before, that they
should not give holy things to dogs, nor cast pearls before swine, so he
practices the same himself at this time, being before such a manner of man,
the Jews also continuing and persisting in their malice, being justly to be
accounted of like sort with him. Secondly insomuch as our Sa: Ch: knew well,
that Pilate, and not Herod, must be his Judge: and that he must be crucified at
Jerusalem, and not to be sent to be executed in Galile therefore he will not
answer his cause before Herod. And to speak the truth, our Sa: Ch: was neither
a Galilean, nor as the cause stood, was of Herod's Jurisdiction. For first,
although our Savior was brought up (from the time that he returned out of
Egypt, that is about four years after he was borne, until he came to about
thirty years of age) in Nazareth a city of Galile by the special appointment
of God, that it might the rather be manifest, even from the name of the place
of his educatio^, that he was that netsar, or branch, springing out of the
stock of David, so often spoken of by the holy Prophets: yet he was by birth
and lineage, a Bethlehemite, of the tribe of Judah. In which respect also, he
being apprehended at Jerusalem, or at the least within the liberties thereof,
and conuented first before Pilate the governor of those parts: the judgment
of his cause, belonged rather to Pilate, then to Herod. And this no doubt, did
Herod well enough consider, and therefore returned him again to Pilate: he and
his soldiers, beginning the pagea^t of the mockery of our Savior Christ's
kingdom, to Pilate and his soldiers, who prosecuted the same more fully
afterward But Herod's white, was no black spot, to diminish the most bright and
clear innocence of our Savior: but rather an ensign and confirmation
thereof, insomuch as Herod could certify Pilate of nothing criminous against
our Savior, though he had bin much conversant in the parts of his
jurisdiction, as Pilate himself afterward acknowledged: as we shall see, in the
process of the holy story, by the Evangelist Luke. Wherefore, hastening to the
rest of the story, we will stay no longer upon this, but briefly conclude, that
whatsoever was the cause of the enmity of Pilate and Herod: The ground and
history of his third examination and arraignment before Pilate.
whether for that outrage which Pilate committed against the Galileans of
Herod's jurisdiction, mentioned by Saint Luke, who records this their enmity;
chap: 13.1. or whether it were any other cause: this we may say, concerning
their friendship and loue-day: that, according to the holy Proverb, chap:
14.9. sin (or guiltines of sin specially in the same sin) is a means to
set fools (that is the wicked and ungodly men) at one: but that which is
acceptable (to wit before God, and good men) makes agreement betwixt righteous
men. As Tremellius well translateth and interprets that sentence. Wherefore
far better had it bin, either for Pilate, or Herod, to have remained in former
enmity, which soever of them had sought true peace and reconciliation with
God, and our Savior Christ: then to be thus reconciled betwixt themselves, by
joining, as it were in Giantlike battle, against the God of heaven.

ANd thus, leaving this examination of our Savior before Herod, and the
sufferings thereof laid up in our mind: let us proceed to that which
follows, concerning his renewed examinations and troubles throughout all the
proceedings of Pilate.



Upon the return of our Savior Christ to Pilate, thus the story is continued
by the Evangelist Luke.

13. Then Pilate called together the high Priests and the Rulers of the people.

14. And said unto them, ye have brought this man unto me, as one that
perverted the people: and behold I have examined him before you, and have found
no fault in this man of those things whereof ye accuse him.

15. Noe, nor yet Herod; for I sent you to him: and lo, nothing worthy of
death is done by him.

16. I will therefore chastise him, and let him loose.

Explication
Here the Euangel^st Luke declares, that when Pilate saw his former devise to
be at an end; and yet continuing to make some conscience of giving unjust
sentence of death against our Savior, whom he judged to be innocent, as most
justly he might well so deem: he falls to the practice of two other devises,
which he had in his head. But every one worse then other, all only increasing
the trouble and sufferings of our most blessed Savior, and no way working any
relief either to him or to his cause. And no marvel: for beside that the
justice of God must take place: (insomuch as our Savior, by his divine
appointment, and of his own willing submission, must bear the fearful
punishment of man's sin, even to death: for the full satisfaction and
redemption thereof: and therefore all the practices to the contra^ie, must of
necessity, be so far off from hindering, that they must, through the
almighty providence of God, rather further the same:) beside this, I say, no
marvel though Pilates policies took no good effect, to the relieuing of our
Savior, who neither needed, nor sought any of his relief: insomuch as Pilate
did not any thing, of all that he might seem to do, of love and reverence to
our Savior: but only, for the love he did bear to himself (if happily he
could have loved himself aright) that he mig^t relieve his own snarled
conscience and dangerous estate. For on the one side, he feared the present
tumultuous rage of the Jews, (as not knowing what it might grow unto: neither
if he should not satisfy them, what after complaints their malice might frame
against him at Rome before Tiberius the Emperor) and on the other side, he
feared, lest for the avoiding of these evils, he should be condemned of his
own conscience, if he should yield to satisfy the Jews malice, by pronouncing
the unjust sentence of death against Christ. Thus stood Pilate perpelxed,
concerning this most high cause of judgment: God himself, noe doubt, (as was
meet) awakening his conscience, even from that natural light, and ground of
equity, which is reserved in every one, that has not violently put it out:
that no innocent, and guiltles person, ought to be condemned. And therefore,
seeing at this time the condemnation of him, that is not only the most
innocent, The ground and history of his examination and accusation before
Pilate.
but also actually, the most righteous man, yea the only perfect righteous of
all men, yea more then a man, both God and man, comes into question, and that
before a mortal man: how could it be otherwise, then that he must be troubled,
above that he himself, being a profane man, should see or know any full and
sufficient cause of it? Nevertheless, to the end it might be evident unto us,
and to the whole church, that all light of nature, reaches no further, then to
leave us all without excuse: and that our only true direction, and stay, must
be in that grace, which is powered into us, from the sanctifying and
regenerating spirit of God, according to the light of his holy word: Pilate is
set forth, as upon a Theater, to the view of the whole world, for a pattern of
that notable lightness, and vanity, and injustice, which is in man's corrupt
nature. The which, notwithstanding it has all the most grave inducements, and
encouragements, and admonitions that may be, to deal justly, and uprightly:
yet it is soon turned out of the way, and utterly wresteth it self against
God, whom it ought most dutifully and constantly in all vprightnes to serve.
For Pilate, beginning tolerably well (as we would think, and indeed did begin
commendably in comparison of the Jews, as has been before observed) yet by
little and little, putting out as it were the eye of his own conscience, grew
to the same evil issue with the most wicked Jews, who had before pulled out,
not only the eye of their natural light, but also that eye of understanding,
which they ought to have reserved in them, clear and bright, from the word of
God. Whereby, they might have learned, to know Christ, to be their only Lord
and Savior: whom they should most willingly have acknowledged, and most humbly
reverenced, and obeyed: and not thus, most spitefully and blasphemously, to
have pursued and persecuted. And thus in Pilate, together with his company: as
also in Herod, and his band: and in the high Priest Caiphas, and his
conspiracy: all both Jews and Gentiles, are most famously, convicted by their
practices, that all are traitors and rebels against the Majesty of God: and
justly inwrappe^ (...) the same condemnation, ever since the first traitorous
conspiracy, of our first parents, with the Devil against him. Neither may we
except our selves, or any other in any age: but all of us, through the
corruption of nature, are so attainte, that rather then we would want of our
own wicked lusts, we could be well content, that God were pulled out of his
throne. Unto all this, does the example of Pilate, in his inconstant, and
deceiuable, and unequal proceedings, under a color of justice; worthily lead
us: even to the humbling of us all before the only incorrupt and pure
judgment seat of God.

But that we may proceed in the holy story: it is necessary, that we come to
the consideration of the proceedings of Pilate, in the particulars thereof.

First therefore, as the Evangelist Luke tells us, in the words last
answered: Pilate calls together the high Priests, and Rulers of the people,
and makes an Oration unto them, solemnly justifying, and acquiting our Savior
Christ in express words, as touching the accusatio^s of the Jews. And that
not only by his own authority and knowledge, but also under the name of
Herod: insomuch as he received no information against our Savior, from him.
And thereupon concludes that he would dismiss our Savior. The which also, he
ought no doubt, in justice to have accordingly performed without delay, and to
have been heartily sorry, that he had delaied the time so long as he had done.
But as there was no soundnes in his heart; so there was no constancy in his
practice: And therefore he himself, is justly a snare to himself. For seeing
Christ is guiltles of any crime objected: what reason is there, why Pilate
should once make mention of chastising of him before he would loosen and
discharge him? Pilate therefore, having crazed his conscience already, yea even
by sending our Savior to Herod, in stead that he should rather, even then have
finally acquitted him: he corrupts himself more and more. But God the Judge of
heaven, is righteous: for our Savior might not be discharged, till he had
endured yet a far more heavy sentence, The ground and history of his third
examination and arraignment before Pilate.
and much more heavy sufferings for a while that his elect might be discharged
of their sins before his Judgment seat for ever. Wherefore in this respect,
most highly reuerencing the justice of God, ^et us go forward, to consider the
injustice of Pilate.

This is evident, as was noted before, from the practice of two other devises:
before we come to the last examination of our Savior Christ, and consequently
of Pilates sentence of condemnation, against him.

The first of these his vain devises, the which only (as was said, and as we
shall see) bred further trouble to our Savior: was, that whereas they had a
custom (a wicked one no doubt) that at the passover, they should have a
prisoner let loose unto them, some malefactor, whom they should think good to
desire: Pilate nominateth our Savior Christ to be the man, whom he would let
loose unto them. A very absurd offer, as we shall further see by and by.

His second devise, was, that he would gratify the Jews malicious
importunity so far, that he would not dismiss Christ, without all
correction, and note of reproach, least forsooth the Jews might otherwise have
taken his deliverance to be their reproach: Pilate thinking by this wicked
means, to obtain his desire: which was no more, but to avoid the pronouncing
of sentence of death, against his own cons^ience. Although all in vain,
because he had not a clear conscience herein. Of these things therefore, let us
henceforth consider. And first, concerning the former of these two latter
devises.



To the full understanding of this point, I have heard you say, that the
Evangelists are diligently to be compared and laid together.

So indeed it was said: and not without cause. For the whole contriuing, or
conueiance of this devise, is not fully laid forth by any one alone. But by
conference of one with the other, it may be observed in this order. First, the
custom is set down. Secondly, Pilate seems to propose Christ, as the party
to be released, upon his own choice, and by the countenance of his authority,
who had the power of release and pardon in his own hand, by the appointment of
the Emperor. When this would not be accepted of the Jews, then he puts
Barabbas, a notorious malefactor upon their voices together with our Savior;
im^gining that they would rather choose Christ to be delivered, then Barabbas.
Thirdly, when the Jews choose Barabbas to be delivered, and still prosecute
their suit against Christ: he contendeth with them, and expostulateth what evil
they can lay against him, and so justifies our Savior Christ the third time.
Of these things therefore, let us see some ground, from the conference of the
holy Evangelists.



Of necessity (says the Evangelist Luke) he must let one loose unto them at
the feast.

So indeed it follows in the 17. verse of the 23, chapter. The other
Evangelists do testify that the Jews had a custom that the Governor should
let a prisoner loose unto them, at the passover, whomsoever they would: as we
read, Mat: 27.15. Mark 15.6. John 18.39. you have a custom (says Pilate)
that I should deliver you one loose at the passover. But the Evangelist Luke,
in the words alleged in your answer, does most expressly declare, that the
Jews having such a custom, did stand most precisely, and vrgently, upon it:
yea though, as was touched in a word, it was in truth a very bad and wicked
custom, not to the honor of God, or any godly solemnity of the holy feast,
which they celebrated: but contrary to the will of God, who professes that it
is an abomination before him, that the wicked should be justified: and namely,
that any wilful murderer, or that is guilty of any other capital crime,
should be acquitted, Proverbs 17.15. Numb: 35. verses 30.31.32.33.34. But an
evil custom, we see, is easily taken up: and being up it is eagerly
maintained, as this was by the Jews, The ground and history of his third
examination and arraignment before Herod.
though as yet of no great prescription, as may easily be discerned, from the
deep silence of all former Scriptures. B^t leaving the custom: let us come to
see, how Pilate goes about to frame it, to serve his own turn: in that he
would nominate, and determine Christ, to be the party, who should, by the
privilege of this custom, be delivered.



The words of Pilate, which the Evangelist Luke rehearses, do show it to be
so. For he writes, that Pilate, in regard of the liberty of this custom,
attempted to set our Savior loose: as was answered before.

Hereunto also, tend the words of the Evangelist John, chap: 18.39. ye have a
custom, that I should deliver you one loose, at the Passover: will ye then
that I loose unto you the king of the Jews?

The words of exception likewise, which the Jews take against Pilates course,
(expressed by the Evangelist Mark, chap: 15.8. seem to confirm the same. For
the people cried aloude, and began to desire, that he would do as he had ever
done unto them.

It seems so indeed. And hence it may appear, that it was as was touched
before, but an absurd devise of Pilate, and as we may see now, by the
experience, but a mere trifling in so grave a cause. For he could not drive
the Jews from their custom, which was granted before unto them. Neither could
our Savior be accounted, one liable to be let loose, according to that
custom: seeing he was no offender, nor yet at all convicted before the
Magistrate to be so: but rather, held and pronounced innocent by him.

Leaving this therefore, as an idle and vain attempt, as it was, let us go
forward in the third place, to see some ground of this, that Pilate goes about
to draw the Jews to admit of Christ to be the party to be loosed: or else
that he would discharge Barabbas, whom he thought they would be more loath to
be let escape, then that Christ should: albeit he knew they greatly envied and
maliced him.



It is plainly to be seen, that Pilate grew thus far to limit their
custom, to one of these two: from that which we read, Mat: 27 verses 16.17 in
these words.

16. And they had then a notable prisoner called Barabbas.

17. When they were then gathered together (as the Evangelist writes) Pilate
said unto them, whether will ye that I let loose unto you Barabbas, or Jesus
who is called Christ.

21. And again, verse 21. Whether of the twain will ye that I let loose unto
you?

Explication
Here indeed we see plainly, that Pilate grew very peremptory, as one loath to
be too much ouerruled of the Jews. But the injury against our Savior, was
hereby made the greater, while he puts him upon the voices of his most
hateful adversaries, with so notorious a malefactor as Barabbas was, to wit a
seditious person and a murderer, as Mark, 15.7. and Luk, 23.19. and John
18.40. Insomuch as he might well know, by their open and extreme malice,
already manifested that they would prefer any other, the most vile and wicked
wretch, before our Savior, And so it came to pass: for they did most doggedly
envy him, even because of the excellency of those graces, which they had
experience to be in him, infinitely above themselves, as Pilate well considered:
as we read, Mat: 27.11. For he knew well (says the Evangelist) that for envy
they had delivered him. And Mark 15.10. He knew that the high Priests had
delivered him for envy. The which foul sin of theirs, as it is a notable
blot to them: so it is a clear testimony, of the most excellent virtues of
our Savior, the which they wickedly made the matter of their envy. Wherefore
as fruit of this most wicked envy, before which who can stand? as it is in
the holy proverb chap, 27.4. they cry out upon our Savior Christ having
nothing in their malicious mouths, but Crucify, Crucify him, and they make
choice of Barabbas to be delivered. The ground and history of his examination
and arraignment before Pilate.
Thus did the chief Priests, and the Elders themselves: and thus did they
persuade the people to do Mat: 27.20. and Mark 15.11. Yea and herein they
persist, notwithstanding Pilate (to satisfy his own humor) contendeth with
the Jews, by a threefold resistance of their choice of Barabbas: to the end
he might have driven them to have chosen Christ, as the Evangelist Luke
records. Chap: 23.22. What evil has he done? And if I let Barabbas loose,
what shall I do with your king? Yea so does he resist them, in their choice,
that notwithstanding they will not alter their election, yet he seems for his
part, to resolve that he will chastise our Savior and let him loose: as we
read in the latter part of the same verse.

Thus then, Pilate being frustrate in his former devise, he proceeds to his
second. But all in vain, and that not only to the increase of his own sin,
but also to the increase of the trouble of our blessed Savior.

The performance of this second bad devise of Pilate, is set down most fully,
by the Evangelist John. For Matthew and Mark say only, he was scourged: and
Luke goes not so far, but only shows what Pilate purposed to do. Let us
therefore hear this part of the history, from the record of John.



Then (says the Evangelist) Pilate took Jesus and scourged him.

Explication
So indeed the Evangelist John writes in the first verse of the 19. chap:
wherein he reports a strange thing, and that also a very injurious practice
of Pilate: insomuch as he commands such a one, as in his own judgment was
innocent and guiltles, to be scourged. But see how far the profane man is
carried, in the liking of his devise, and for the accomplishing of his own
private purpose: that he cares not how it may be wrought, so as he may have
his will. For thus he thinks, that if he shall proceed to lay some
punishment upon our Savior, and do him some notable disgrace: that then the
Jews will be satisfied, and so desist and leave of all further pursuit: and
that he should thereby avoid the giving of sentence of death, the which he
saw he could not do with a good conscience. He therefore follows his own
humor, without any regard of our Savior. For otherwise, the same conscience,
that told him, that he ought not to have given sentence of death against our
Savior, would have told him likewise, that he ought not to have whipped him,
or done him any disgrace at all. But as the holy Proverb says: The mercies of
the wicked are cruel. And so does Pilates favor prove still more and more.

The strangenes of this Act of Pilate, is to be considered, from the Person
whom he commands to be whipped: he being the most holy and glorious Son of
God. A most unworthy thing. If a Magistrate should command the poorest man in a
country, to be whipped without cause: all men would speak shame of such a
Magistrate. Much more then, if a man of good credit and estimation should be so
abused, at the will and pleasure of any: but most of all, if a vassal should
whippe his Sovereign. What an absurd villainy were this? But what is any
comparison, that may be made, equal to this, that the Son of God should be
whipped, by such as were not worthy to lick the dust of his feet: nor once to
come in presence, where he should be! And the rather also, may it be the more
strange unto us, because we may well conceive, that it was no gentle or soft
whipping, but a cruel cutting or rasing of the holy flesh of the Son of God.
For they were very spiteful persons, to whom this execution was committed: as
is evident, by that most contumelious dealing against our Savior, the which
they practice, moreover and beside the scourging.



The Evangelist John adds further, in the 2. and, 3. verse of the same 19.
ch: That the soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and
also that they put on him a purple garment. And said, Hail king of the Jews.
And they smot him with their rods.

This shows plainly, that they were most despitefull people, The ground and
history of his third examination before Pilat.
by whom our Savior Christ was scourged. And therefore, how can we think, but
that he was pitifully abused in that part of their despite: as we see him to
be, in every part of this which is now before us. As first, in this, that
whereas they fully set themselves to deride and scorn his kingdom, they make
choice of such a matter to make a crown, (to wit, brambles wreathed) that in
putting the same upon his head, they might vex and ranch his holy skin that
way: and easily cause the blood to run down his blessed cheeks. And the
rather, when they smite him on the head with their rods, as the Evangelist John
reports that they did, in the last branch of their present despite: and as we
shall ^aue an occasion afterward to consider of it further, from the
Evangelists Matthew and Mark. And now likewise, in that they, having put upon
our Savior, this base and pricking crown of thorns, do disparage it thus,
with a robe of purple: this was to make our Savior seem the more ridiculous, in
such a contrary habit. For the crown of thorns would not so much have
disgraced a beggars cloak, if they had cast it upon him; as did this princely
robe, that paltry crown. Thus it pleases them to sport themselves. And that
nothing might be wanting, to make out a full pageant of mockery, they salute
him thus disguised, with Hail King of the Jews: as though they should say,
you are a goodly King, are you not? Long may you rule, much peace may your
subjects have, under your princely government, etc. Thus do the most vile and
base vassalls of the earth, abuse the King of heaven, to their own perpetual
destruction by his rod of iron, whosoever of them did not repent of their most
heinous sin, and believe in him, to be their only Sovereign Lord and
Savior, whom they had thus wickedly scourged and scorned.

Thus then we see to what manner of instruments Pilate committed our Savior to
be scourged: whereby the manner of his scourging may easily be discerned. But
was it Pilates mind, that our Savior Christ should be thus notoriously
abused? It may be peradventure, that some will imagine that this was the
licentious disorder of the soldiers, above the commission of Pilate, etc.



Answer.
Whatsoever the commission of Pilate was, this is certain from the faithful
report of the holy Evangelist, that he liked very well of their doings. For so
we read, as it follows verses 4. and 5. of the same 19. chapter of John, in
these words.

4 Then Pilate went forth again, and said unto them, Behold, I bring him forth
to you, that ye may know, that I find no fault in him at all.

5 Then came Jesus forth, wearing a crown of thorns, and a purple garment.
And Pilate said to them, Behold the man.

Thus then, we see the hand and approbation of Pilate, in all this most
unworthy and contumelious abuse, Explication and proof.
against our most worthy and reverend Savior. Whereby, he now supposes, that
he has done fully enough to satisfy the Jews. And to this end, he wishes
the Jews to consider, that although he found no fault in him, as he had often
protested before, though not so sliely as he does it now: yet to gratify them,
(most wicked Judge that he was) he brings our Savior forth, with all the
disgrace, that he and his company could cast upon him. O extreme wickedness of
the heathenish and damnable crew! O admirable and most gracious patience, of
our blessed Lord and Savior!

But what? does Pilate win his humorous purpose, by this his practicing of
devises? Nothinglesse. And so it is just with God, to curse those that walk by
crooked ways. Whereby, all Judges may learn: yea all of us, may justly
receive our instruction: that if we would be blessed of God in our enterprises,
we must walk uprightly before him, doing that directly which he would have us
to do, and not lean to our own corrupt inventions. We must not only
propound to our selves good things, but also we must use good means, to the
bringing of them to pass; and always look that we carry honest hearts with
us, etc. The which, though Pilate did not, but altogether erred, The ground and
history of his last examination and arraignment before Pilate.
as one led by a corrupt and troubled conscience; he is in the end, as far
from his purpose, as he was at the beginning: as is is evident by the words
that follow in the Evangelist John: ver. 6.



When the high Priests and officers saw him, (says the Evangelist) they cried,
saying, Crucify, crucify him.

Explication.
The words of the Jews tend to this end, that it is nothing to them, to see our
Savior in a disguised habit: no though he had been sharply whipped, as no
doubt they did well understand. It was his life that they sought, and without
the which, they could no more be satisfied, then the hungry woolfe, or bear,
or Lion, without the blood of the Sheep, which they had gotten as a prey
between their teeth. They are like to the covetous wilful man, they will have
all or none.

Pilate indeed is angry with the Jews, because they would not be subject to
his devise: and therefore says unto them in haughty displeasure, Take (...)
him, and crucify him: meaning if they would needs have it so, or if they
durst: for as touching himself, he professes to them yet again, that he
found no fault in him. But all Pilates anger will not serve: for he has by all
means disaduantaged himself, and given the Jews all the advantage that might
be, by his cowardly and groundles declinings.

Hereupon therefore, by occasion of Pilates words, Take ye him and crucify
him: they answer, that if their government were not restrained, they had a
plain law, by the warrant whereof, they could and would put him to death:
namely say they, because he made himself the Son of God. The Law which they
mean, is the law against the blasphemer, whom God commands to be put to
death: Leuit. 24.15.16. And blasphemy is indeed a sin most worthy to be
punished by death. From the which law, thus they reason, that if he that
blasphemeth God is to die: then much more, he that challenges the Godhead to
himself, and so arrogateth most blasphemously to himself, that he is God. The
reason also is good, and would surely be a full indictment against any man to
death: save only in the present instance of our Savior, whom that law or
reason drawn from thence, could no way touch: seeing he only, of all men,
was, and is for ever, the only natural Son of God, and therefore very God:
which these wicked Jews, in their malicious wilfulnes, blinded through envy,
and altogether hardened in heart against our Savior, would by no means see
and acknowledge. For then they must needs have acknowledged him, not only
worthy to live, but to be the very Lord of glory, and life it self: and
therefore in stead of seeking his death, to have craved pardon of their own
wicked and rebellious life, and finally to have yielded all honor and glory
unto him.

But behold a strange thing, which the Evangelist John tells us of, in the 8.
verse: namely, that Pilate was made yet more afraid to proceed against our
Savior then before, upon the hearing of that word, that he should be the Son
of God. And thereupon, takes our Savior, and returns again into the common
Hall, and enters into a new examination of him: as one checked in his own
conscience, for his notorious abasing of him. The which also was the last
examination of our Savior, and went immediately before the sentence of his
condemnation.





8 When Pilate, heard that word (says he) he was the more afraid.

9 And he went again into the common Hall, and said unto Jesus, Whence art
thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.

10 Then said Pilate unto him, Speak thou not unto me? Know thou not,
that I have power to crucify thee, and power to loose thee?

11 Jesus answered, Thou could have no power at all against me, except it
were given thee from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee, has the
greater sin.

12 From thenceforth (says the Evangelist) Pilate sought to loose him, but the
Jews cried saying, if thou deliver him, thou art not Caesar's fr^end: for
whosoever makes himself a King, speaks against Caesar.

Expl^catio^.
Here we have to consider: first, the fear of Pilate, yea his augmented and
increased fear: secondly, his first question to our Savior, upon the same his
increased fear: thirdly, the silence of our Savior, answering nothing to the
question: fourthly, the second question of Pilate, arising from that
displeasure, which he took at the silence of our Savior: fifthly, we have in
this part of the history, to consider the answer of our Savior to Pilates
second question: sixthly, the last endeavor of Pilate, to set our Savior loose:
and finally, the frustrating of the same his endeavor. Of these things
therefore even as briefly as we can.

And first of all, concerning the increased fear of Pilate: the cause of it,
is first to be observed of us: which was, that mention, which the Jews had
made before, of the name of the Son of God. The which no doubt, if Pilate had
well understood, it would not only have caused him to tremble; but also to
have fallen down before our Savior, and most humbly and supplicatorily to
have begged pardon, of the great injury and contempt, that he had committed
against him. He would have been so far from using his power, and authority,
against him: that he would rather have yielded it up into his hands, though no
doubt, our Savior would never have accepted it from him, seeing he was
appointed of God, to another most high and excellent end. But because Pilates
fear was but as a flash of lightning, arising from a sudden stroke of
thunder, as he does by and by cast off all fear. Nevertheless, he does first
ask our Savior, whence he is: as though he should say, what manner of one art
thou? Art thou a man as other earthly and mortal men are, or art thou one come
from heaven? what say thou of thy self? Thus Pilate presumed, that he might
command our Savior, to answer him at his pleasure. And this is the second
thing which was said to be observed.

But as it follows in the third place: our Savior Christ knowing that Pilate
made no good use of his fear, and that he was not humbled, to desire to be
instructed in the truth: but that, as he had despised his former answer, in
that he told him he came into the world to bear witness of the truth: so he
would as lightly reject, whatsoever he should now affirm, concerning the
Deity of his Person, or union of his divine nature to the humane, etc.
Therefore, touching this point, which he was not fit to hear, he answers him
by most wise and discreet silence: the mind of our Savior, being wholly
settled to the fulfilling of the rest of his sufferings: and not to seek any
deliverance at the hands of Pilat, the falsnes of whose heart he did better
know, then Pilat did.

By the occasion of which silence of our Savior, though most just and
discreet, Pilate (as was observed) does in the fourth place, proceed to a
second question: wherein, he does first no less hautily or imperiously, then
angerly, reprove our Savior for his silence: Speak thou not to me, says
Pilate? And then he rendereth a reason of his reproof, saying further, Know
thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and power to loose thee? As though
he should say: Herein thou do against thy self, thou know not what. But
the matter duly considered, we do easily find, that as Pilates reproof was
unjust and indirect, so his reason is altogether void of reason, and is no
better, the^ a vain and presumptuous boast of a power, which he had not
indeed. For no Magistrate, no not Caesar himself, whose substitute only Pilat
was, nor any Magistrate in all the world, ever had, or have power to do what
they list: to save or destroy, at their pleasure, unless they will play the
wicked Tyrants: but they are limited of God, what they stand bound to do: that
is, they must so justify the innocent and righteous that they may not think it
lawful for the^ to condemn him, and they must so condemn the wicked, and him
that has capitally deserved death, that they may not at their pleasure without
sin against God, justify and acquit him. Pilates reason therefore, is no
reason; but a proud and unreasonable boast, of that power which did not belong
unto him. And no marvel, though Pilate light upon an unjust reason: seeing he
has taken upon him, to reprove the just silence of our Savior. Wherein also,
as we shall further perceive: he is utterly deceived, in that he thinks by
this his lofty and threatening speech, to make our Savior pliable to serve his
humor: as if he had to deal with some timorous and fearful spirited man.
For as it follows in the fifth place, our Savior Christ shows himself, to
be of a most stayed and resolved mind: knowing perfectly, both what he was to
say, and also what he was to do, without either the enticing, or terrifying,
either of Pilat, or of any other. And therefore, though he do now answer
Pilate, having a fit occasion so to do: yet he does it, with all holy liberty
of mind and spirit, answering as the matter it self required, and nothing
regarding to please the humor of Pilate. The which also, our Savior does not
so much, for Pilates sake, or in regard of the Jews, whom he taxes in this
his answer, as that he might leave a common instruction to the Church of God,
concerning the ground and foundation as it were, of all power and authority:
and also concerning the right use of the same, as well touching the Magistrate
himself, in the sentence and execution of justice, as those that do require
justice at his hands.

To this end, we are to consider either part of the answer of our Savior: the
first whereof, concerns Pilate himself more directly: the other respecting
the Jews, yet so, as the sin of Pilate, is secretly insinuated and reproved
therein.

In the first part of the answer, our Savior tells Pilat, who had vainly
boasted of an absolute power, (as we have seen before) That he could have had
no power at all against him, unless it had bin given him from above. As though
our Savior should have said in more words: howsoever thou do licentiously
boast of a power at large, not knowing, or advisedly considering what thou
speak: I know assuredly, that it is so far off, that thou could do
what thou list with me, touching life or death, crucifying or loosing of me:
that unless it were given thee from above, (I do not mean from the higher
power of the Emperor, under whom thou art Governor here) but unless it were
given thee from heaven, even by the divine counsel, and appointment of God,
the most high Ruler and Governor above all: thou could do, neither the
one, nor the other, nor any thing at all against me. And thus does our Savior
Christ, plainly open a special point, concerning the mystery of his holy
sufferings, under this whole course which Pilate takes with him: both in that
which is already past, and in all which he knew was behind: to wit, that he
had not so much to do with Pilate, and his judgment, as with the divine
justice of God, before whose tribunal seat he did stand; and that in all his
sufferings he did sustain the wrath of his judgment, districtly bent against
the sin of mankind: the which, he in that he was man, did on our behalf,
answer the divine Majesty for. But the general instruction, which he
intimates and sets down in these words, is this: that according as all
power and authority, of civil magistracy, is the ordinance of God, according
to that of the Apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.1. There is no power
but of God, etc. And as our Savior himself is by King Solomon, under the name
of the wisdom of God, described to say, By me Kings reign, etc. Prou.
8.15.16. so ought not Pilate only, but likewise all other Princes, Judges, and
Rulers, to look well to the discharge of their office: as they will answer
unto God, and to the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, when he shall come at
the last day, to call all Magistrates, to give an account, how faithfully they
have discharged their offices, committed to them by the supreme and almighty
God.

Now in the second part of the answer, our Savior Christ infers upon the
former, that in so much as Pilate was the Magistrate of God: and by virtue of
his office ought to do justice, therefore they that had delivered him unto
Pilate, had the greater sin.

And this, as was said, does directly concern ^he Jews, whose sin our
Savior Christ aggrauateth in this respect, that in seeking to put him to
death, and having no just cause on their part, they did therefore go about to
pervert the ordinance of God: and to make the magistrate, a minister of their
malice. Wherein also (as was further said) he does closely admonish Pilate, of
the greatness of his sin, in that, through his own corrupt dealing he stood
inwrapped in the guiltines of the sin of the Jews though not yet so deeply
plu^ged as they were. And therwithall, he does likewise give to understand,
that he was in danger to have his part in that vengeance, which could not, but
ha^g over their heads: for that high injustice, which they committed against
him, and that also with a most high hand.

W^erfore, as touching the general doctrine, of this latter part of our
Savior his answer to Pilat it is this: that all inferiors, and every one in
place of subi^ction, stand th bound, even for that reverence which they bear
unto God himself, to take heed, that they never go about to pervert the
judgment seat of iusti^e, by any wrong information, or accusation or by any
other corruption, or accusation whatsoever: under the pa ne of his high and
heavy displeasure. And proportionablie, that all other in their infe^iour
places and callings, be careful i^ the Lord, both how to rule, and also to
obey: as well in the family priuat^ly, as in the town or City publicly, and
in the church also, as well as in the common wealth, as wear further, by the
grace of God, hereafter to observe. For God will ^all all to an account. And as
he has given any power, as a grace, to those that have it: according as
Kings and Princes do in their styles worth^lie and honorably acknowledge,
that they are such as they be, by the grace of God: so God looks (and so he
may justly) that all do behave thems^lues graciously in their places, as
instruments both of his holy justice, and also of his clemency and mercy, and
not of their rigorous wilfulnes and tyranny, whereby they should alter their
own gracious styles, as being such as they are, by the anger and wrath of
God, rather then by his favor, and grace.

Thus much, concerning the most wise, and seasonable Answer of our Savior
Christ, by occasion of Pilates vain boast of his power and authority, to the
prejudice of the most Sovereign power and authority of God.

Now in the sixth place, concerning that which followed, upon this last
examination of our Savior, on Pilates part: it was, as the Evangelist
testifies, this: that thenceforth, he sought still to loose our Savior: but
on the Jews part, that they, by their outrageous impo^tunitie, do frustrate
the endeavor of Pilate, notwithstanding his manifold attempts to the contrary.

In Pilate therefore, we may well observe, at the least a great show of some
regard of just ce: or rather of avoiding the extremity of injustice, whereunto
he was most vehemently solicited and importuned. And the rather, because he
continues in his manner, to plead the innocence of our Savior: although our
Savior no way sought to make him inclinable to show him any favor, above
that he in his own conscience, did see the equity of his cause: but carries
himself in such vprightnes, that with all holy wisdom, and modesty, he
has even now last of all, very gravely reproved Pilate of his vain and proud
boasting of a power, above that which was communicated unto him. A thing
verily, which men of lower place the^ Pilate, yea which men of lowest pl^ce,
will hardly endure: that is, to hear the particular reproof of their sin:
and therefore may well be set to school, to learn this lesson of a heathen
man.

But yet so, as we be all careful, to show forth a more constant fruit of
reproof then Pilate did: and so settle our consciences upon a better ground,
then he settled his. For in so much as he had not a clear conscience, neither
looked up directly to God, but sought rather to please men the^ God, and to do
that which might be most to the credit and praise of his own ambitious
policy (wading cunningly in so weighty a cause) rather then that which
might be most to the glory of God, in the upright discharge of his duty:
therefore all Pilates virtue, how great in show soever, vanished away very
sudenlie, as the morning dew, and came to nothing. Nay it ended in his most
foul sin, as it follows in the last place of our present text, to be in
part considered. For the Jews are more strong to frustrate and ouerturne
Pilate, then he was to hold out in his good endeavor. For so soon as they
return, to grate upon their former string, (how false and untunable soever
Pilate had tried it to be; namely, that our Savior Christ had committed
treason against Caesar: and further, yell out in threatening wise against
Pilate, as if they would draw him, as an accessarie, in the same pretended
treason: For if thou deliver him, (say they) thou art not Caesar's friend)
howsoever Pilate carries the same face a while longer, yet because his heart
was not upright, all at once he yields most cowardly, and so bewraieth what
the vanit^e of all heathenish virtue is: not only in Pilate, but in all other,
whosoever make the greatest show, if they be not renewed and sanctified by the
holy Spirit of God: of whose glory, all both Jew and Gentile, are deprived,
through our own corruption, as it is notably discovered unto us, in this the
final conspiracy and consent, both of Jews and Gentiles, against the Son
of God.

But that we may see the full issue, let us hear what follows in the holy
Story.



It follows in the 13.14.15. and 16. verses of the 19. chapter of S. John.

13. When Pilate heard that word (says the Evangelist) he brought Jesus forth,
and sat down in the judgment seat, in a place called the pauement, and in
hebrew Gabbatha.

14. And it was the preparation of the Passover, and about the sixth hour: and
he said to the Jews, Behold your King.

15. But they cried, Away with him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate said
unto them, shall I crucify your King? The high priest^ answered, we have no
King but Caesar.

16. Then delivered he him unto them, to be crucified.

Explication.
Thus then, we are come to the condemnation of our blessed Savior, and his
sufferings that belong thereunto.

THe which that we may see, in a more full and ready view: we are to take
in here, that which the ^ther Evangelists do furthermore write, concerning
the whole process of the same matter.



Here, (as I have learned) we may not unfitly consider, of that which he
writes, concerning the message which Pilates wife sent unto him, as we read,
chapt: 27. verse 19. in these words.

19. Also, when he was set down upon the judgment seat (says S. Matthewe)
his wife sent to him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for
I have suffered many things this day in a dream, by reason of him.

Explication
This indeed, may not unfitly be thought, to have the just place here. For the
holy Evangelist John, very particularly recording the troublesome and unsettled
course of Pilate: now going out to the Jews, and eftsoons returning into the
Common hall again, and that four or five times: he does not at all mention
his sitting down on the judgment seat, till this last time. And as touching
the Evangelist Matthew, he does not so exactly observe the orderly courses:
but speaks jointly, both of the Jews, their rejecting of our Savior
Christ: as abhorring him more then Barabbas, and also of Pilates condemning of
him. Neither will this grave sitting down, agree to the former light and
passionate course, which Pilate took. And therefore may we, as was said, not
vnaptlie consider of this point here in this place. And moreover, we may
with like reason, add next unto this, that, which the same Evangelist writes
further, concerning Pilates washing of his hands, before he gave sentence of
condemnation against our Savior: as also the extreme and most desperate
malice of ths Jews, as it follows in the same 27. ch: verse. 44.45.

Question. What are the words of the holy Evangelist to this purpose? The
ground and history of his condemnation by Pilate.


Answer. 24 He writes thus, when Pilate saw he auailed nothing, but that more
tumulte was made, he took water and washed his hands before the multitude,
saying: I am innocent of the blood of this just man: look you to it.

25 Then answered all the people, and said, His blood be on us, and on our
children.

These things the Evangelist S. Matthewe alone does testify. And his witness is
true, and sufficient, as of one sanctified and appointed by God himself
thereunto. Now of the rest, the Evangelist S. Luke does make most express
mention of that judicial sentence of judgment, which Pilate gave against our
Savior: and therefore, we are to receive his more full testimony, in this
behalf. What does he set down,

His words are these. chapt: 23. verses 23.24.25.

23 They (that is the Jews, says S. Luke) were instant, with loud voices, and
required that he might be crucified, and the voices of them, and the high
Priests, prou^^^ed: or were mighty and great, to wit, by an exceeding
out-crie.

24 So Pilate gave sentence that it should be done as they required.

25 And he let loose unto them, him that for insurrection and murder, was cast
into prison, whom they had desired: and he delivered Jesus, to do with him
what they would.

Yea, and as the Evangelist S. Mark tells us, ch: 15. ver. 15. Pilate did
this, being willing to content, or satisfy the people: so far did his own
false heart deceive him. And then it follows in the same Euang: verse:
16.17.18.19.20. How our Savior Christ was again most vilie abused by the
soldiers of Pilate immediately upon judgment pronounced: as they had dealt
before, so soon as they had cruelly and despitefullie scourged him.

Then (says the Evangelist Mark, the soldiers led him away into the Hall,
which is the common hall, and called together the whole band.

17 And they clad him with purple, and put about him, to wit on his head (as S.
Matthewe expresses a crown of thorns, which they platted and wreathed.

18 And began to salute him, saying, Hail king af the Jews.

19 And they smote him on the head with a reed (to wit, with a reed of a
greater sort, such as is the Ca^e) and spat upon him, and bowing the knees, did
him reverence.

20. And when they had mocked him, they took the purple off him, and put his
own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him.

Explication
The same also does the Evangelist S. Matthewe record, and that with some
enlargement in some points: and therefore we will here set down his words
also, which are these. Then the Soldiers of the Governor, took Jesus into
the common hall, or Praetorium (that is, as we may perceive by the words of
S. Mark, the Hall which belonged to the Praetor, or Roman Governor) and they
gathered about him the whole band.

And they stripped him, and put upon him a scarlet robe. Like enough, it was a
dark or sad scarlet, inclining to purple, or a very bright purple, inclining
to scarlet, and therefore is called purple by S. Mark, and scarlet by S.
Matthewe: it mattering not greatly, what the very proper color of the garment
was.

And they platted a crown of thorns, and put it upon his head, and (as S.
Matthewe adds moreover, and above that we read in S. Mark) a reed in his
right hand, and bowing their knees before him, they mocked him, saying God save
thee (or hail thou) o king of the Jews. And spitting upon him they took the
reed, and smote him on the head.

Thus when they had mocked him, they took the robe from him, and put his own
raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him. These most vile and unworthy
abuses Pilates soldiers thus recorded by both the Euang: S. Matthew, and Mark:
may worthily be accounted, as an appendix or shutting up of the Act of our
Savior, his unjust condemnation, by the mouth of Pilat: who had so often
already, and even immediately before he gave sentence, justified him.

And further, howsoever these Evangelists do so write, as if our Savior were
now first of all, thus ill entreated: as it might seem, by that they write,
that the soldiers at this time stripped our most blessed Savior, etc. Yet by
the Evangelist John, we have seen expresslie already, that as our Savior was
scourged before he was condemned, so also he was in like manner thus abused.
Since which time also, it seems to be plain, by the same Evangelist, John
chapt: 19.5. that the crown of thorns, and purple garment, once put on, were
not taken of, till he had been the second time, most contemptuously reproched.
The two former Evangelists therefore, do note the second contempt in the due
place: but not the first disguising of our Savior, in the time thereof: like
as the Evangelist John, recording the former also, writes nothing of the
latter. So that we are by due, and reverend conference, to understand the one
by the other: and from them all, to learn one and the same truth, of the whole
matter, so far forth as it has pleased God to reveal it unto us, by them
all.

And thus we have the whole history of the condemnation of our Savior before
us, with all things appertaining thereunto: both immediately going before,
and also immediately following after, as the proper appurtenances of the same.
The order of which things is this.

First, the place from whence Pilate gave sentence.

Secondly, the time when it was given. John chap: 19. verse. 13.14.

Thirdly, the message which Pilates wife sent her husband, when he was set
down upon the judgment seat. Matthew: chapt: 27.19.

Fourthlie, the contention of Pilate against the Jews, to the end he might
have quieted and stayed them from their enterprise, yet at the last. Ioh:
19.14.15.

Fiftlie, the most furious and desperate obstinacy of the Jews in their
persisting: in the same 15. verse and Luke 23.27.

Sixtlie, Pilates washing of his hands. Matthew: 27. verse 24. And upon this, the
extreme madness and impiety of the Jews renewed, verse 25.

Seventhly, the sentence it self. Luke 23. verses 24.25. And finally, the
most licentious, profane, and impious petulancy of the soldiers, in their
abusing of our Savior. Of these things therefore, let us I pray you, stand a
while to consider, in the same course and order, that we have now rehearsed
them.

And first, concerning the place, from whence our Savior was condemned by
Pilate, the chief Magistrate and governor over the Jews, under the Roman
Emperor: it is described unto us by the Evangelist John by two names, the one
in the greek language, the other in the hebrewe. The greek is Lithostroton
signifying that it was a place curiously paued and laid with stone-work. The
hebrewe name is Gabbatha coming of Gabbah, which signifies to lift up,
giving to understand, that it was a place built in stately manner, to the use
of giving judgment out of the same. The which being so diligently noted by
the holy Evangelist, it must in no wise be neglected, not only for the truth
of the history, but also for the use of the matter in hand? in so much as God
would to singular purpose, have our Savior condemned to death, as also after
to be put to death, not secretly and obscurelie, or tumultuouslie, as Stephen
was stoned: but in a solemn manner, from a Theater, as it were, to the view of
all the world, both of Jews and Gentiles: that all may see in our Savior
Christ his condemnation, first, the deserved condemnation of us all, and then
that we have no other means whereby we may be cleared, and acquitted before the
judgment seat of Almighty God, but through him alone.

The like is to be observed, concerning the time, which was, as the holy
Evangelist does of purpose expresslie mention, at the Preparation of the
Passover. That is, on the day wherein the Jews prepared themselves, and made
preparation every family for to eat their lamb, at the evening in thankful
remembrance of their most favorable deliverance out of Egypt: at such time,
as God smote all the first borne of the Egyptians, with death, all in one
night, both of men and beasts. So that the condemnation of our Savior Christ,
was at such a time as the Jews made their special resort to Jerusalem, out
of all their tribes, yea and like enough many Proselytes, out of other nations.

wherein also it might the more lively appear, that our Savior Christ being
now in preparing for the offering up of his most holy Sacrifice upon the
Cross: was the true Lamb ordained of God, and the true Passover, unto all
that should believe in his name, to turn away the everlasting wrath of God
from them, and to procure and purchase them his eternal salvation. Thus, the
time of the condemnation of our Savior, as well as the manner of it, was most
open and famous, to singular ends and purposes, by the most holy counsel and
appointment of God. Yea and herein, the Lord did not refuse, to defer the
execution of his counsel in this behalf, a day longer then his appointment
was, that the Passover should have been celebrated: by reason that the Jews,
by their abusiue custom, had altered the day, as was heretofore observed, when
we spoke of the time wherein our Savior did celebrate the Passover with his
Disciples, which was the evening before. Moreover, as touching the time of the
condemnation of our Savior, the Evangelist Ihon does yet mo^e particularly
express, that it was about the six^ hour of the same day, as our
translations, yea and the greek copies themselves, do usually, and for the
most part record the wo^ds of the Euangel: John. But because the Euang: Mark
writes, ch: 15.25. that it was the third hour, when the Jews crucified our
Savior: therefore a question may be moved (though not to contrary either of
the Evangelists, but for the removing of the scruple of our own minds) how it
can be that the condemnation of our Savior should not be till about the 6.
hour, when as the Jews had crucified him, that is, had nailed him to the
Cross, about the 3. hour: and ye this must needs be after the time of the
comdemnation? To the answer of which question, and for the removing of every
scruple, which might arise from it, it may not seem altogether strange unto us,
that the Eua^gelists do mention diverse hours in so small a distance: because
it may easily be admitted, that there was a diue^se reckoning of the how s,
partly after the Jews manner, who reckoned their day from Sun rising, to Sun
going down, to co^teine always, (whether the day were longer or shorter) 12.
equal hours, specially at the Aequinoctiu^, as it was at the Passover. The
which reckoning, the Evangelist Mark follows here, as the Apost: Peter does.
Act: 2.15. These are not drunken, as ye suppose, since it is but the third
hour of the day. But the Romans, as it is testified of some, followed an
other order of reckoning: in so much as they began to reckon their day, for
civil use and government, about midnight. Whereupon says Piscator upon the 33.
verse of Mark. Admit that the sun rose then at Jerusalem, about the fourth
hour after midnight: then this, that is, the 6. hour of John, to wit, after
the Roman reckoning, shall be the second hour of the natural day, or from the
rising of the sun. And so there may pass the space of about an hour,
between the delivery of Pilate, whereby he delivered Jesus to be crucified,
and the crucifying it self. And thus the third hour which Mark speaks of,
f^r the time of the crucifying, according to the Jews account, might well
follow that which John calls the 6. hour, when our Savior was condemned,
according to the account of the Romans. So both the Eua^gelists may under
diverse numbers, aptly point, and direct us to one, and the same hour And
the rather may it be probably supposed, that the Evangelist John, writing of
the Act of a Roman, did in that respect, follow the Roman account^ and so
much the rather also, may it be ^hought so, for that some then living, loking
^o the Roman account, and not marking the Jews course, might peradventure
cavil a^ the Euang: Mark, for reckoning the third hour, for the hour of the
Crucifying, which was of the Gentiles more vs^ally spoken of as being after the
6. hour: in so much as he was condemned about the 6. But Beza upon Mark 15.25.
answers t^is d^ub^ two other wa^e. First, because the Jews themselves have
double reckoning of the day as we^l as of the night: ^ither by twelve several
portions, as it were, 12. inches of the foo^e rule, according to that of our
Savior, Ioh: 11.19. Are there not twelve hours in the day? or by quadra^ts,
and 4. equal parts, as they divided the night into 4 watch, so that the 1.
fourth part, was called the 1. hour of the morning: the 2. fourth part, the
third hour, the 3. fourth part of the day, the sixth hour: the last fourth
part the 9. hour, or the evening, according to that of Matt: ^0.1. etc. The
householder went out to hire laborers into his vineyard, at 4. several times
of the day: that is, in the morning, at the 3. hour, at the 6. hour, and at
the ninth According to the which account, Marks third hour, being the 2.
quadrant, or fourth part of the day, bearing the name of the third hour,
containing the fourth, fifth, and sixth hour: reaches to John's sixth hour or
noonetide, agreeable to the former reckoning of twelve hours to the day: But
then we must allow but three hours to the crucifying of our Savior, which
cannot well be thought to suffice, for the leading of him to the place of
crucifying, and for all things that fell out, while he continued upon the
cross: to wit, the crucifying of the two thieues, whose suspension and nailing
must needs spend time: all the secure and often mockings of our Savior, by all
sorts of wicked beholders, and namely of the passengers, beside the rest, etc:
before the 3. hours of darkness, which fell upon the earth, and continued near
to the time that our Savior died. And besides, to put us out of doubt,
concerning the continuance of the crucifying of our Savior: the Euang: Mark
does not only mention the third hour, but also the sixth and ninth. ch:
15.33.34. Wherefore, unless we could see sufficient reason, why that should
prevail with us, which Piscator observes: we are to resolve our selves, to
think with Beza, according to some very ancient Greek copies, that the text in
John is o be ^edde (about the third hour) in stead of this, about the sixth
hour. But yet so to resolve, that with him, for the avoiding of contention,
we leave the liberty of resolution, free to every man, upon any more sound
reason, which he has to stay his judgment upon. For the which, read Beza in
his 27. Hom: upon the hist: of the Passion, about three leaves from the
beginning of the Homily: and in his larger annotations both upon Mark and
John. The words of Beza, in his annotations upon Mark: ch: 15.25. are these,
touching this point. Si libet existimare de trauata^ esse numeri notam: quod ad
me quide^ attinet, malim existimare apud lohar^e potius reponendum esse (Hoses
^rite) qua apud Marcum (Hosei hecte.) Praeterqua^ enim quod Nonnus, Euangelij
Iohannis interpres non recens sic legit, and v^tus D. Camerarij codex, and meum
vetustissimu^ exe^plar hoc confirmat: ipsa historiae ^erte^ hoc postulat Nam si
hori erat pene sexta, quum danatus est Christus, qui potuit tam ^reu^ spacio
abduci, crucifigi cum latroribus, ita otiose derideri a praetercuntibus.
Necesse fuerit en^m vt his omnibus vix dimidiu^ horae trihuatur, quum a sexta
ad nona^, terebrae terram inuo^uerint. Oportet ergo, cum primo diluculo ad
Pilatu^ ductus fuerit Christus, tres pene horas fuisse in ipsius causae
cognitione co^sumptas, vt qui hora pene tertia a^natus fuerit: deinde hora
tertia crucifixum, ad hora^ vsque sexta^ fuisse omnium sud^^rij^ expositum,
sicut copinse explica^t ^uangelistae: and hora demum nona post trium horarum
tenebras mortuu^: quod ante^ dici superfuit, fuisse sepulturae datum. Sed
liberum, hic cuiuis iudicium esto. If it be to our liking, to think that the
note of the number to be misse-copied: I for my part (says Beza) had rather
suppose, that these words (Ho sei trite) about the third hour, should be
restored again to his place in John, then these words (Hosei h^cte) about the
sixth hour, should be set down in Mark. For beside that etc. And upon John,
cha: 19.14. his words are these, In vno codice scriptum inuenimus (trite)
tertia quae vera est iectio, vt ostendimus. Mark. 15.25. In one book we have
found it written (trite) the third, which is the true reading. Thus much,
concerning the second thing, which we are (as was said) to consider in our
present text of S. John: that is, the time of the comdemnation of our Savior.

Now thirdly, touching the message which Pilates wife sent to her husband,
according to the record of S. Matthew: when he was set down on the judgment
seat: we may justly account, both the occasion of it, (which was her
troublesome dream, whereby her thoughts were greatly cumbred and feared) and
also the message it self, to be so far forth caused and directed, by the
providence of God, that there might as well be an extraordinary testimony,
concerning the innocence of our Savior touching himself, as that Pilate,
dallying so notably with his own conscience, and with the seat of justice it
self, might be left the more without excuse.

What we should think furthermore, concerning Pilates wife her self, we have
no further ground, then charitablie to hope, that this trouble of her mind
now, might be a means of bringing her to the true faith of Christ afterward.
The duty, no doubt, which she performed, was in it self commendable, and
worthy the imitation of every faithful servant of God: according to that which
we read. Prou: 24.11.12. Deliver them that are drawn to death, etc.

Fourthly, touching Pilates last contention with the Jews, even from the
judgment seat, that he might set our Savior at liberty, from the sentence
of death, whereunto it is very likely, he was the rather incited, by the
former message of his wife: we can judge no otherwise of it, then of the
unfaithfulness of Balaam, in another cause, who looked in his deceitful heart,
rather to the wages of unrighteousness, then to the holy will and pleasure of
God. And so did Pilate: he looked more to keep himself from the displeasure
of the Emperor, and to content and satisfy the Jews, the^ to please God by
executing true justice and judgment, in this most weighty cause: as the issue
will evidently discover and declare.

Fiftlie, he confirmed, or rather obfirmed an obstinate malice of the Jews, in
most savage wise, v^tering it self, by howling and yelling out, Crucify,
Crucify him. And again, we have no King, but Caesar: and charging Pilate,
that he was no friend to Caesar, if he should let Christ loose. And last of
all, His blood be upon us, and upon our children. They show themselves herein,
to be rather senseless, and wood beasts, then reasonable and meek spirited
men: as David prophesied long before of them. Ps. 22.12. Many young bulls have
compassed me: mighty bulls of Bashan have compassed me about. They gape upon
me with their mouths, as a ramping and roaring Lion: And verse 16. Dogs have
compassed me, and the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me, etc. Whereupon
also, it is evident, how justly the Lord has rejected and cast them off, from
being a people to h m, seeing they rejected him from being their King: and also
has brought all evil upon them, even the revenge of most innocent blood, shed
by them, both upon themselves, and their children, according to their own
wicked and furious imprecation, as we shall have further occasion to note
afterward. Yea and for a worthy punishment of their dissembling, in renouncing
any King but Caesar: as though they had been singularly devoted to him, when
in truth, they abhorred his government: the Lord has not only stirred up
Caesar, to take severe vengeance, not many years after, but also he has
scattered them from being a Nation, and made them vassalls to every King
almost in all the world. And thus, according to the holy Prou: cha: 26. He
that diggeth a pit, shall fall therein, and he that rouleth a stone, it shall
return upon him.

In the sixth place, the washing of Pilates hands, howsoever it pleased
himself, who rather in a profane imitation of the superstitious washinges of
the Jews, or otherwise: it is worthily to be accounted of us, as a vain and
absurd practice. For to what purpose is it, that he washes his hands, for a
sign of his innocence, when he minds forthwith to pollute and defile the
same again, by imbruing them as it were, in the blood of our Savior? Verily,
the washing of the hands is nothing before God, so long as the conscience is
defiled in his sight, and the tongue also defiled, by giving forth a most
unjust sentence, as Pilate did. For immediately upon the outcrie of the Jews
before mentioned, Pilate notwithstanding all former goodly protestations,
wholly condescendeth unto them: as one most baselie and seruilelie fainting,
yea clean giving over the defense of the most holy and righteous cause, and
Person, that ever was called in question, before the judgment seat of any
mortal man. But it m y be, some will say, Pilate is to be excused, because he
was after a sort en^orced, by the importunity of the Jews, to do that which
otherwise he would not have done. We answer no, Pilate is at no hand to be
excused. Fo^^e ^n- the coact^^n were the sin of the Jews, yet Pilates
yielding (...) ^^ttle purpose, justice, was his sin alone, and not theirs. So
likewise it (...) for our s^l^es to say as Adam did, The wom^^ (...), and I did
eat. Or as the woman did, The Serpent deceived me. For God does justly proceed
to give sentence for all that they alleged: seeing they consented to sin.
Neither enticing, nor terrifying, can excuse: if a man by any means give
consent. And therefore it is expresslie said, that the fearful and unbelieving
shall have their part in the burning lake, if they repent not of their sin,
etc. Revel: 21.8. Coaction, or enforcing to an action in it self eui^l, is
only then excusable, when the party compelled, has no way yielded to it: but
clean against his will, has been constrained to do that which he constantly
resisted to the end: as if one stronger then himself should forcible bow his
arm, and hand, to wound or stabbe his dear friend. But as touching Pilate,
his arm was strong enough to have resisted all the force of the Jews, if he
had not bowed it of himself. Or if he had found it to weak to have repressed
them, it had been a thousand fold better for him, to have died himself for
Christ, then to have been their vassal, to the unjust murdering of him. It is
true indeed, that the most strong and righteous arm of the Lord had a most
sovereign, and ouerruling stroke, in all these things: but we speak now,
what was the sin, and on the contrary, what the du^ie of man ought to have
been. For in all things God is most perfectly holy and righteous, but vain
man seeks to himself many wicked inventions.

Seuenthlie therefore, as touching the sentence of Pilate against our Savior:
it was from his mouth, yea and also from his deceitful, light, and inconstant
heart, a most unjust, wicked, and cruel sentence. There is little recorded, by
the Evangelists, concerning the manner of the pronouncing of it. Nevertheless
we cannot but think, it was done in judicial manner: not only because it
was done f om the judgment seat, but also because there was a
gaole-deliuerie, as we may say, at the same time: as it is evident by the
condemnation of two thieues or cruel and murdering robbers, besides the
acquiting of Barabbas that most wicked and seditious murderer, in this
Assizes, as it were. Only this must not be neglected, to the perpetual
reproach of Pilate, that in giving sentence, he shows himself a most servile
vassal to the malice of the Jews, in that he is content to be prescribed by
them, what sentence he shall give. For as S. Luke says, He gave sentence,
that it should be as they required. And so in effect, he made them the judges,
who were the malicious, and false accusers. Yea, and S. Mark says, he was
willing to content the people.

Now in the last place, touching the most vile, and unworthy abuse of the
soldiers renewed against our Savior Christ, after his condemnation, like as
they had dealt with him, after his scourging: we may well reckon it, as an
appurtenance to the condemning of himself. For albeit (as was observed before)
the Evangelists Matthewe and Mark, do now first mention the putting on of
the Crown of thorns, and the Purple: Yet John makes it plain, that this was
done before: to wit, immediately after he was scourged. Neither was the purple
garment taken off, till now that he was condemned.

And as touching the crown of thorns, there is no mention of the taking away of
that at all. So that like enough, they led him forth to be crucified, wearing
that ensign of their reproach, even to the cross, and on the cross also, as
it may seem. So the^, besides the former derisorie putting on of the Crown, and
the purple garment, here are now the second time, five most vile and
reproachful indignities offered to our most blessed Savior, from these base,
lewd and licentious soldiers.

The 1. was this, that they put a reed into his right hand, in a scorn against
the scepter of his Kingdom, even as by their crown of thorns, they reproched
his Kingdom or Roialty it self: notwithstanding in truth, no gold most pure,
nor bar of the strongest iron, could have sufficiently shadowed forth the
glory and power of the everlasting and most victorious Kingdom and Scepter of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

The 2. indignity of those lewd soldiers, was, that they mock him with their
(...) by bowing of their knees, and making of a scornful obeisance unto him:
w^^^ ^^eed it had been happy for them, (if they had had grace) most humbly
indeed, (...) fall^n down hefore him, to have craved mercy and forgiveness at
his hands.

The third indignity was, that they mock him with their tongues, The ground
and history of his leading to execution.
saying in derision, Hail King of the Jews.

The fourth most vile indignity was, that they did spit in his most holy and
reverend face. A most strange and horrible thing, once to think, that any one
should be found so diuelishly minded: save that we may see in these, whereunto
partly ignorance, and partly malice, would drive any of us, without the grace
of God. Nothing is more vile then we are prone unto of our selves, not only
against men, but even against God himself.

Last of all, they take a reed, or rather the reed; to wit, that which before
they had put into his hand: (like enough it was some Cane reed) wherewith they
smote him on the head, thereby showing their contempt against both Scepter and
Crown: and also (as we may well conceive) to the molesting of the holy flesh
of our Savior, by setteling the thorns, or pricks of the bushes thereon, to
the causing of blood to run down his cheeks. What christian soul, duly
considering these things, must not needs be astonished with them, and enforced
to acknowledge these wicked wretches, to be most worthy to be cried out upon,
and to be condemned for ever. And so no doubt they are, unless God vouchsafed to
give them repentance, and a heart most dutifully affected toward him, whom
before they had most grossly abused. But leaving them, let us turn to our
selves: and in regard of our selves, let us learn from hence, that
notwithstanding we have not done these things actually against the person of
our Savior: yet besides that, our pride and contempt has been great against
him, in the contempt of his word and Sacraments, and of the persons of our
brethren, (the which he takes to be done against himself) all that fell upon
him, was for our sins. And therefore, that we ought to be now most
dutifully affected toward our Savior, and to yield him all the honor we
may possibly perform and procure unto him, as we shall have further occasion
to consider, when we come to the duties belonging to the comfort of faith,
concerning these and all other the sufferings of our Savior.

THus then, from the condemnation of our Savior, and the sufferings perteining
to the same: we are now come to the execution of the sentence which Pilate
gave against him: and therein, to the last part of his sufferings, I mean, of
his sufferings with the sense of dolor: though the humiliation of his
sufferings, continued to the third day after his death, as we shall see when we
come unto them.

In the mean while, as touching this last part of the sufferings, which are as
the sealing up, and ratifying of themselves and all the former, to our
everlasting benefit, and endless comfort: yea so as without these, all the
former could not have profited us: (for our sin being capital and deadly, it
could not be fully satisfied for, but by the death of our Savior) let us
therefore use as great diligence as possibly we may attain unto, in the
reverend consideration of them.

The whole history of this last part of the Passion of our blessed Savior,
may be, for orders sake, distinguished into these several branches, as it were.

First, the leading or carrying of him away from the place of condemnation, to
the place of execution: with the things done there, before he was crucified.

Secondly, the fastening of him to the Cross.

Thirdly, his continuance in hanging upon the same.

Now unto every one of these, diverse worthy things do belong. Of the which,
let us henceforth inform our selves, from the text of the holy history it
self. And first, concerning the leading away of our Savior, to the place of
execution.

Quest. What do the Evangelists write of this point? The ground and history of
his leading to be crucified.


Ans. The Evangelist Matthew, continues the holy history in these words,
chap. 27.31.

31 Thus when they had mocked him, they took the robe from him, and put his
own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him.

Like to these are the words of Saint Mark.

It is very true, even such as are all one in sense, as we may read chap.
15.20. Next unto these, we may see the process of the history, from the
Evangelist John.



In the latter part of the 16. verse, and in the whole 17. of his 19. chapter,
thus we read.

16 And they took Jesus and led him away.

17 And he bare his cross, and he came to the place of the skull, so called,
the which is called in Hebrew Go^gotha.

32 Moreover, Luke 23.32. There were two others (says the Evangelist) which
were evil doers, led with him to be slain.

Explication.
Thus then, we see in what manner they led our Savior to the place of his
execution, described by that name, whereby it was familiarly and vulgarly
known, as differing from other places: the which also, the Evangelist John,
verse 20. gives to understand, that it was without the walls of the City: in
that he says, it was near the City. But before our Savior came to this
place, diverse memorable things fell out in the way as they led him: the which
the Evangelist Luke does most fully record. Let us therefore hear them from
him.



They are these, chap. 23. from the 2.6. verse, to the 32.

26 And as they led him away, (says the Evangelist Luke) they caught one Simon
of Cyrene, coming out of the field, and on him they laid the cross to bear
it after Jesus.

27 And there followed him a great multitude of people, and women, the which
bewailed and lamented him.

28 But Jesus turned back unto them, and said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep
not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your children.

29 For behold the days will come, when men shall say, Blessed are the barren,
and the wombes that never bare, and the ^appes which never ga^e suck.

3^ Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us, and to the
hills, Cover us.

30 For if they do these things to a green tree, what shall they do to the
dry?

Explication
These indeed are the memorable things, which fell out in the way, as they led
our Savior to the place of execution. Those things only remain, (concerning
this first branch of the history of his execution) the which were done at his
coming to the place. The first whereof, seems to be that which is mentioned
by the Evangelists Matthew and Mark: to wit, the offer that was made of drink
to our Savior: and his refusal to drink, after that he had tasted what it
was.

Matthew concerning this point?

Mat. 17. verse 33. And when (says he) they came unto the place called
Golgotha, (that is to say, a place of the skull so called)

34 They gave him vinegre to drink, mingled with gall, and when he had tasted
thereof, he would not drink.

Explication.
So indeed we read, Matthew, chap. 27.33.34. The same thing is testified by
the Evangelist Mark, though in some little difference of words, chap. 15.
verse 23. And they gave him to drink wine mingled with mirrhe, but he received
it not. This, as it seems, was the first thing that was done after that our
Savior was come to the place of execution: even while they fastened his cross
into the ground.

A second thing was, that together with the setting up of the Cross: there was
an inscription, and title, lifted up upon it, to the view of the people,
according to the appointment of Pilate: which contained the cause why he was
crucified, or rather in truth, a most deep conviction of the extreme
wickedness of those, that did crucify him: insomuch as, most rebellious
subiect^, do crucify their most lawful and rightful King. To the which end,
read the parable of the Lord of the Vineyard, Matthew. 21.33, 34.35, 36, etc.
44. The which title, because the Evangelist; Saint John does more fully
record, then any other of the Evangelists; let us therefore borrowe it from
him.



It follows thus, chap 19. verses 19, 20, 21, 22.

John 19 verse 19. And Pilate wrote also a title, and put it on the cross, and
it was written, JESUS OF NAZARETH KING OF THE JEWS.

20 This title then read many of the Jews: for the place (says the
Evangelist) where Jesus was crucified, was near to the City: and it was
written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.

21 Then said the high Priests of the Jews to Pilate, write not the King of
the Jews, but that he said, I am the King of the Jews.

22 Pilate answered, what I have written, I have written.

Thus then, we have the first part of the history, of the execution of the
sentence of condemnation, given against our Savior Christ laid before us.
Wherein, the things to be observed are these.

First, the manner of the Jews and Soldiers, their leading of him to the
place of execution.

Secondly, the description, or notation of the place.

Thirdly, the great lamentation and weeping of the women, that were among that
great multitude of people, which followed our Savior.

Fourthly, the excellent speech of our Savior unto them, while he was in the
way.

Fifthly, his refusing of the Mirrhie-wine which was offered unto him at the
place.

Finally, the inscription, or title, which was set up upon the Cross.

These things therefore, are in the same order, not unfitly to be considered of
us, before we proceed any further.

First therefore, as touching the manner of the leading of our Savior, it
stands in three things.

First, it is said, that the soldiers took off the purple garment, and led
him forth in his own clothes: but we do not read that they took off the
crown of thorns from his head.

Secondly, they caused him to carry the tree, or timber of his own Cross:
first all alone, until, as it seems, he fainted under it, as one through
hum^ne infirmity, not able to bear it any longer. For so it pleased our
Savior, to make himself every way known, to be very true man, in bearing
every weakness and infirmity, of man's weak and frail nature, which is come
upon him by reason of his sin: though he himself was free from all sin.
By reason of which fainting of our Savior, the Jews also and soldiers,
hastening forward the execution: they allow him a help. Hereupon therefor, it
follows in the holy history, as it is written by the Evangelist Luke: that
as they led our Savior away, they caught one Simon a Cyrenian a poor
stranger, coming out of the field, and compelled him to carry the Cross of
our Savior after him: at the least, the hinder part of it, though as some
interpret these words (and so it is very likely) they made our Savior carry
the fore part still. For out of all question, they would permit him as little
case as they could. Beza. Hom. 27. in Hi^t. Pass. pa. 671. and 672.
And why do they thus roughly deal with the poor Cyrenian, coming peaceably
out of the field: when they had store about them nearer hand? It is the
property of the wicked, when they are about their wicked practices, to desire
that all should like of them, and to hate those that shall not be of like mind
with them. Now therefore, insomuch as this stranger came, as one not liking,
nor having any fellowship with them in this business: therefore they do the
rather of purpose fetch him in, to have a hand in it, with them: or else to
take the occasion, further to abuse him, according to that petulancy, which
rude and unruly soldiers are very apt unto.

But God, as we may well perceive, in his divine providence, aimed at an other
thing: even hereby to show, that it was his good pleasure, that the Gentiles
should be taken into the fellowship of the Cross, and sufferings of our
Savior: not to be any partners in the merit of the Cross, but in the fruit of
that redemption, which our Savior alone, has most fully and perfectly made
for us. And touching this Cyrenian himself, we may easily conceive, that this
impulsive bearing of the material Cross of our Savior, was an inducement
unto him, willingly to bea^e his own Cross afterward, as a faithful Disciple
of Jesus Christ. And therefore is not only he himself mentioned, as being of
good note in the Church: but also two sons of his likewise, according to the
testimony of the Evangelist Mark, cha. 15. verse 21. Where he describes this
Simon of Cyrene, to be he that was father of Alexander and Rufus: to wit, both
father and sons, being afterward (as was said) of good note in the Church of
God.

Now thirdly, in that they lead other two malefactors with him: this they did,
the rather to prejudice the innocence of our Savior, as if his cause had been
like to theirs, because they had obtained of Pilate, the like judgment against
him.

Secondly, the place of execution is noted unto us: and that also is described
two ways.

First, by the common and usual name.

Secondly, by the situation of it.

The name of it (as the Evangelist John tells us) was in the Hebrew language:
that is to say, in that dialect which was now in common use among the Jews
(though not the pure and natural Hebrew) called The natural Hebrew word is
Gulgoleth, noting the head or skull of a man, from the roundnes of it: as Judge.
9.53. 2. King 9.35. and 1. Chr. 10.10. But it is oftentimes used for the whole
person of a man, reckon^ng men by the p^ules as we use to say Read Ex. 1^.
ver. 16. an^ chap. 28 ve. 26. Numb. 1. ver. 18.20.22. and chap. 3.47. and 1.
Ch^o. 2^.3^. and ver. 24.
Golgotha, which signifies the skull of a man's head: like as in the same
signification, we may call it, as the Evangelist further adds Kranion topon,
a place bearing the name of a skull. And as Luke says, that answerable to the
Hebrew, it may be called in greek Kranion, without any further addition. And
so may we call it in Latin, from the Greek word Cranium, or otherwise
Caluaria: and in English, the Skull. But why do the Evangelists, with a full
consent, thus mention the name of the place? Not that we should seek out any
blind and curious speculation about the name, as some have done: as though
Adams skull had been buried there, and had thereupon borne that name, etc. but
to note the place by that name, whereby it was familiarly known: most likely
so called, because it was a piece of ground fit for execution, in that it
contained a little round hillocke, from whence the concourse of people, might
more evidently behold those that were executed. For they which have been
there report, that it is such a piece of ground, called to this day, Caluarie.
So then, the mention of the place by the Evangelists, is to very good purpose,
to argue the certainty of the story, from this circumstance.

But there are beside this, two worthy reasons of worthy observation, The grou^
and history of his leading to be crucified.
in this respect: both of them set down by the holy Apostle, in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, chap: 13. from the 10. verse to the 15. The one is, that the place
where our Savior was crucified (being known to be without the city) does
notably declare the accomplishment of that by our Savior in truth, which was
prefigured by those sacrifices for sin, which were by the commandment of
God, burnt without the Camp: as we read, Leuit: chap: 4.11 12. and chap:
6.30. and chap: 16.27.28. In which respect, says the Apostle in the place
before alleged: We have an altar, whereof (that is, of the sacrifice whereof)
they have noe authority to eat, which serve in the Tabernacle: For the bodies
of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the holy place by the high
Priests for sin, are burnt without the Camp. Therefore even Jesus that he
might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate, Yea
and he did so, enduring there the fire of Gods wrath, burning hotely upon him,
till by his water and blood, issuing out of his most holy body, he had for ever
quenched the same, for the benefit of all, that are allowed to eat of him:
that is, truly to believe in his name. This therefore is the first reason, why
the place where our Savior Christ was crucified, is so diligently recorded by
the holy Evangelists: and it is singularly to our comfort. The second reason
noted by the same Apostle, both confirms the same comfort, and also from the
comfort thereof, teaches us, what our duty is, in this respect: namely, eue^
willingly, and courageously, to bear our reproach for Christ's sake: though we
should be cast out from men, as judged unworthy to enjoy the common privilege
of other men, but to be as the offscouring of the earth, etc.

For so it follows in the words of the Apostle, Let us go forth therefore,
out of the Camp, bearing his reproach.

For here we have no continuing city, but we seek one to come.

The third thing to be observed in this part of the story, is the weeping and
lamentation of the women which followed our Savior Christ, in beholding how
unmercifully he was dealt withal. Among the which women, there were some, no
doubt, of his most loving and dutiful disciples, even such as are mentioned by
the Evangelists afterward. But as touching the rest, they could not but be
moved greatly, to see him of a sudden, thus strangely and furiously carried
away to be crucified; whom they had seen and heard, to work most gracious
works, and to preach most holy doctrine, as a singular Prophet of God, by the
space of more then three years past, even to the day immediately going before.
Nevertheless, neither the one, nor the other, could direct and order their
affections, to weep as they ought: either in respect of the special cause, or
end whereunto they should have employed their tears. Only they were moved
with a certain natural pity and compassion, to the outward calamity of our
Savior, as of a most forlorn man. Yet many degrees are they to be preferred,
before all the multitude of men, who followed our Savior Christ all of them
well near, rejoicing at the external misery of our Savior. Wherein, their
sin must needs be most grievous, in the sight of God. For when as this evil
rejoicing, is deeply condemned in any toward his enemy, according to that,
Prou: 24.17.18. Be not thou glad when thine enemy falls, and let not thy
heart rejoice when he stumbleth. Lest the Lord see it, and it displease him,
and he turn wrath from him, to wit, upon thee. The^ surely, infinitely much
more damnable, was the sin of this people, in their rejoicing, not only at
the forlorn estate of our Savior; but also in being themselves the
instruments of the devil, for the procuring and furthering thereof.

But let us come to the fourth thing: that is, to the excellent speech, which
our Savior uses to the pitiful women: he having greater and more excellent
compassion over them, then they, either had, or could possibly have, over him.
To the which end, as the Evangelist Luke tells us: our SAVIOVR hearing their
weeping, and lamenting, he turns back, and partly to prevent the breaking of
his own tender heart, according to that saying of the Apostle Paul, Act:
21.13. What do ye weeping and breaking mine heart? for I am ready not only
to be bound, but also to dye at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus. But
chiefly for the instruction of these women, and therewithal, to the just rebuke
of the wicked multitude: he shows them that they had a more necessary cause
of weeping, then they were aware of: and that they ought to employ their
tears, to an other end, then they propounded to themselves. And in this sense,
he says, Daughters of Jerusalem weep not for me, but weep for your selves,
and for your children. Not that he does simply reprove their present weeping,
as if they had done ill in their so doing: but he speaks in way of
comparison, as though he should say, there is greater cause why ye should
weep for your selves, and your children and posterity, then for me. Like to
that comparatiue speech of the Prophet Joel: Rent your hearts, and not your
garments. And as the Lord says, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. But why
does our Savior Christ utter this, in way of an unequal comparison? No doubt
both because his present condition was not so uncomfortable, as they in their
natural affection conceived: and also, because their own estate was much more
fearful (yea even by reason of this extreme malice pursued against him) then
they could think of: as he does forthwith express unto them, in the words
following. For behold (says our Savior) the days will come, when men shall
say, blessed are the barren, and the wombes that never bare, and the pappes
that never gave suck, etc. In the which words our Savior describes unto
them, the days of the most heavy and woeful judgment of God, hasting to come
upon them. And he does it most significantly. For where as naturally men and
women, in times of peace and prosperity, do desire nothing more, then to
marry and have children. (For they cannot, but delight in the increase of
their own kind, more then in the increase of any other thing, unless they
would put off the affection of nature) and likewise whereas it is the singular
delight of men, to solace themselves, not only in the sweet valleys of the
earth, but also to behold the pleasant prospects, which are to be seen from
the heighte of the mountains: it must needs be that those times must be most
uncomfortable times, wherein men and women shall count the barren blessed, when
they shall see their children destroyed before their faces: wherein also, they
shall wish that the mountains would ouerwhelme them, and cover them as deep
as they are high too. And so it came to pass, within less then forty years
after that Jerusalem, and the people thereof, were most miserably besieged, and
in the siege most miserably destroyed, to the number of eleven hundredth
thousand, as Josephus himself being a Jew, writes. And the ending of the
which siege also, ninety thousand were taken prisoners, and the whole nation
of the Jews dispeopled, and scattered abroad, from being a people to this day.
To this purpose, like as the wicked multitude, which pursued our Savior,
wished the curse of his blood both upon themselves, and their children: so our
Savior tells them, that they had special cause to weep, because of the
fearful judgments, which they had provoked against themselves, and their
posterity. So that happy should they be, whosoever should by earnest
repentance and supplication, prevent that fiercenes of Gods divine wrath.
Whence also let us learn to take heed, against all such wicked and desperate
courses, either in presumptuous cursing of our selves, or any other. Thus then,
our Savior Christ by this reason, taken from an unequal comparison, does
teach these pitiful women, in what respect especially, they were to weep, to
the end they might, by the mercies of God, be preserved from that most woeful
calamity: and therwithal admonishes the cruel multitude, of that merciles
judgment, the which should certainly fall upon many of them.

The same reason, does our Savior make plain, by a familiar similitude: in
that he says. If they do these things to a green tree, what shall be done to
the dry? As though he should say, if the fire of Gods wrath, be so hot, that
it kindles the green wood which yet is more unapt to burn, then that which
is s^^e: how much more shall it utterly consume the dry wood to ashes, and
that very speedily? Our Savior Christ indeed was as wood, a fit matter in it
self for the Lords anger to burn upon (insomuch as he took upon him the
guiltines of our sins) but yet, because he was righteous in himself, and the
very true Son of the Father, that fresh and moist greennes, would not suffer
him to c^nsume, though he were laid to the stock as it were. And Go^ himself,
as it were the master of the family, seeing green wood lying to the fire,
commandet^ it to be taken away, and calls for dry wood: that is, for the
wicked, which take fire by and by. But in this, they are in worse case then
dry wood: because that burns without all sense of smart, and when it is
turned to ashes, it burns no more: but the wicked they are tormented in
burning, and they are burning evermore. The fire of Gods wrath is to them
unquenchable, and they are as an everlasting matter to cherish, and as it were
to feed the same fire.

Wherefore, let us beloved in the Lord, take our warning from this gracious
admonition of our Savior, to weep for our sins, and to seek for mercy
with God our heavenly Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ: before the
fearful day of the Lord, come upon our selves. Insomuch, as it is certain,
that the like days are coming, and the last day especially, wherein all the
wicked, whosoever have spoken or done any thing against the Lord Jesus, shall
be judged with fearful judgment: yea with so terrible a judgment, that
they s^^l with the same thing, that our Savior has spoken, concerning the
Jews: to wit, that the mountains and rocks would fall on them, to hide them
from the presence of him that sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb, as we read. Jude 14.15. and Revel: 6.16.17.

Now the fifth thing, to be considered in this part of the story, is our
Savior Christ his refusal of the potion which was offered unto him, at the
place of execution, before he was fastened to the cross. The Evangelist
Matthewe speaks of it, under the name of vinegre, mingled with gall, to
signify that it was a potion mixed with some sharp and bitter ingredience;
but the Evangelist Mark speaks more properly, calls it wine mingled with
mirrhe. It was a drink, most likely offered by some that bare good will to our
Savior, or at least according to a common commiseration of such as used to
prepare a potion for the condemned persons, fit to shorten the pains of their
death, by causing the blood, to pass more speedily out of the veins, and so
to accelerate and hasten death it self. But whatsoever the potion was, wine,
or vinegre, bittered with gall, or sweetened with mirrhe, our Savior perceiving
it to be a medicine, he would not drink of it: to declare his willingness, yea
and to perform indeed, the enduring of that whole passion and pain, which God
the Father, had in his judgment, appointed unto him for us. So perfectly
loving and pitiful toward us, in thirsting after our salvation. O therefore,
may it please thee O Lord our God and heavenly Father, even for thy holy Son
our Saviors sake, to give us grace accordingly, in some measure to love thee
and our Savior, to be truly thankful, and dutifully obedient unto thee,
through faith in his name: that is, in such a measure, as we may never securely
satisfy our s^lues, in any measure which in this life, we shall at any time
attain unto. Amen.

The last thing to be considered, in this first part of the story, concerning
the execution of the sentence of Pilate against our Savior: is the
inscription, or title, the which was set over his head, upon the cross. The
which, it is very likely, was done, together with the setting up of the cross
it self, before our Savior was fastened unto it. Wherein, we are to observe
these three things.

First, the matter of the inscription, or title, as Pilate himself gave
direction that it should be; and that, in the three principal languages of all
the world, Hebrewe, Greek, and Latin.

Secondly, the suit of the high priests, to have the title altered.

Thirdly, the constancy of Pilate in this point. The which constancy of his,
is the rather to be noted, because in all that went before, he showed himself
but a light and inconstant man; even contrary to his own conscience, seeking
by sundry devises, so long to satisfy the Jews, that at the last, he does
wholly yield unto them. What moved Pilate, in his own intent, to use so
constant a resolution in this matter: whether because he thought indeed, that
according to the answer of our Savior unto him, concerning his kingdom, it
might be, that he was appointed of God, to be king over them, in another manner
then the kings of the earth are: or for that he would therein do the Jews
that reproach, which he had pointed unto before, in that he asks them, shall
I crucify your king? As though he should have said. This must needs be to
the reproach of your whole nation, that your king should be put to so vile and
base a death, etc. Thus what the mind of Pilate was in the inscription or
title, we cannot precisely say.

Neither may we stand much in the commendation of this his constancy, as any
great virtue in him: unless we had seen better fruits of the vprightnes of
his heart. For Mark: chap: 15. verse 12. he himself speaks of this title of
our Savior with like acception as the Jews would have him write here. The
most that we can say of him, in this action, is this; that he for his part,
honored our Savior, no more by this title, then Caiphas did by his prophecy.
John 11.49 50.51.52. But the most wise, and gracious counsel, and prouide^t
hand of God, is most evidently to be seen, and acknowledged: not only in the
action it self, but also in all the circumstances thereof. First, in that
Pilate sets down the title so, that it did not directly sound to any
reproach against our Savior, but rather, as was said before: so as it might be
a just conviction of the extreme wickedness of the Jews, as the Jews
themselves saw, even according to that which our Savior himself had set
forth unto them but a little before, by that parable of the householder, who let
out his vineyard to unfaithful, and rebellious husbandmen. Mat: 21.33. etc.

Secondly, in that he commands that the title should be written, and set up
in text letters, in the three principal languages of the whole world. Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin: (the which was moreover and besides any ordinary
inscription of the crime of the condemned) as appears in that, as the
Evangelist testifies, many came even for this cause the rather, out of the
city, to see and to read it.

Now therefore, insomuch as this action of Pilate, was so evidently ordered, as
it were by the hand of God, and that he guided his pen, or the pen of the
Scriueners, or Painters, from his mouth: so as the Jews could not in any the
least jot, cause him to alter it: let us the more reuerendly consider of it,
and of the excellent purpose of God, manifested therein, for our singular
instruction and comfort.

The words of the title, are in themselves very honorable to those that
understand them aright, as all of us ought to do. For first, they are all of
them, of excellent signification: and they are also categoricall and
affirmative, in such form, as they are recorded by all the Evangelists, though
some set them down more briefly then other: as Mark. THE KING OF THE JEWS: as
Luke. THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS: as Matthew. THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE
JEWS: and as John most fully. JESUS OF NAZARETH KING OF THE JEWS. Now the
word Jesus, as we know, signifies a Savior: yea and the same concerning the
most excellent salvation both of bodies and souls for ever. Likewise the word
King, notes such a regencie, as is above all humane power and authority: as
it is further expressed, in that else where, our Savior is entitled, The King
of Kings: for he is such a King, as gives peace and protection, against those
most troublsome and terrible adversaries, which no wisdom or power of man, is
able to restrain. Moreover, seeing the promise of such a King was made to the
Jews, who were by the election of God his grace, adopt^d to be an only
peculiar people unto him, until the time of the calling home and ingrafting of
the Gentiles, into the prerogatives of the same kingdom: therefore he is called
the King of the Jews, howsoever they show themselves, at the time of his
coming to them, most rank traitors and rebels against him. And though the
word of Nazareth, sounds somewhat base in comparison of the rest, if we look
to the place it self, which was accounted an obscure place, where our Savior
was meanly brought up: yet, if we consider the counsel of God, which was,
that even from the name of the place of his education, he might be known to
be his Nazarite, set a part in special manner to a most excellent service, as
some understand the reason of that denomination: or rather that he might be
understood to be that branch, which is so honorably prophesied of, under the
name of Netsar, which the name of the city Nazareth most naturally imports as
has been declared before. Thus then, we see, that insomuch as all the words
agree, to make up a most honorable title, or inscription: and all of them, are
affirmatively ascribed to our Savior, without any indirect insinuation of
reproach, as the Jews in their malice would gladly have had it: that therefore
it was carried and disposed by the gracious hand, and government of God, above
that which P^late intended or understood.

What therefore was the holy counsel of God herein?

Verily, to declare, that howsoever the wicked Jews, yea and the wicked
Gentiles also, Herod and Pontius Pilate himself with their soldiers, made but
a mock of the kingdom of our Savior: Yet, he, in good earnest, has
appointed and ordained him to be a king, yea and also an high Priest for ever,
to rule not only in Sion, that is in the Church here below: but also in the
kingdom of heaven, and from heaven, world without end. Yea so, as they only,
who acknowledge him their King, and Prince, and Savior: and accordingly do
believe in him, love, reverence, honor and serve him: shall find true peace,
and salvation, to their souls. But the rest shall be confounded for ever, yea
both Kings and Kingdoms of people, whosoever will not submit themselves unto
him. For as it is in the 2. Psalm: he shall break them in pieces, not with a
reed as they mocked him, but with an iron bar or scepter, which God himself
has put into his hand: even in that he is the son of man, though most
vilely esteemed and abused of men.

This, does the Lord give plainly to understand, by a solemn proclamation, as
it were to the whole world, Jews, Grecians, and Romans: by this title lifted
up over the head of our Savior, in these most catholic and universal
languages. Accordingly also, as the world has had further experience of this
purpose of Gods counsel, even by the execution of it, in causing his Gospel
to be every where published, both by preaching, and writing, not only in these
principal languages, but also in many others.

Pilates inscription or title, is therefore to be understood of us, as a
glorious ensign from the Lord, of that imperial triumph, whereof the Apostle
Paul writes. 2.14 15. And putting out the hand writing of ordinances that was
against us, which was contrary to us, he even took it out of the way, and
fastened it upon the cross. He has spoiled principalities and powers, and
has made a show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in the same
cross.

Of the which triumph, there are diverse other declarations and effects, both in
the hearts of men, and also in many other insensible creatures: such as are the
conversion of the thief, the darkening of the Sun, the renting of the veil,
the quaking of the earth, the opening of the graves, and the astonishme^t of
the people: of the which we shall have occasion to consider more fully
hereafter.

To this king therefore, let us run; even to the name of our Savior, thus
published as it were from heaven: that we may find it, as a strong tower,
whereby we may be exalted, according to that we read, Prou: 18.10. when the
wicked shall fall in their resistance and rebellion against him, according to
that which our Savior himself has threatened, Mat: 21.44. And thus it is to
our singular instruction and comfort, as was touched before, that God has
armed us by this excellent title set up over our Savior, against all that
follows, concerning that stumbling, and offense, or imputation of folly to
the Gospel which otherwise would arise from the blind pride, and waywardness
of man's nature: as we have both the stubborn Jews, and also the high
conceited Gentiles, for notable and fearful examples. Yea on the contrary,
it is a most effectual inducement unto us, to conceive reuerendly and
honorably of that, which seems most base, in any part of the sufferings of
our Savior: while we carry this always in our minds, that he which
suffers, is our glorious king and Savior, and that even by the means of his
most base sufferings, he does deliver and save us, most graciously for ever:
and therefore also, to love and reverence him the more dearly and dutifully.

Hitherto, of the first part of the holy story, concerning the execution of
that sentence of condemnation, which Pilate gave against our Savior: so far
as appertains to his leading away, from the place of judgment, to the place
of crucifying: together with the things, which most likely, were done before he
was fastened to the cross.

NOw let us come to the second part of the execution of the same sentence of
judgment: that is, to the fastening of him to the cross, and to those things
which do, as most immediate and near circumstances, both former and latter,
appertain unto the same. But first, let us hear the words of the holy story
it self, and namely from the Evangelist Luke, chapter 23. verse 33, and the former
part of the 34.



And when they were come to the place, which is called Caluarie, then (says
the holy Evangelist) they crucified him, and the evil doers: on at the right
hand, and the other at the left.

Explication
34. Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them: for they know not what they do.

In these words (as was said) we have both the matter it self propounded, and
also the circumstances: which also are no light ones, but (as we may say) very
material, according to the matter it self, to be considered upon.

Of these circumstances (as was further touched) some went immediately before
the crucifying of our Savior, and some followed immediately. Let us weigh all
things in their natural course and order.

One circumstance, going immediately before the crucifying of our Savior, was
this: that the executioners stripped him out of his clothes, and made him so
naked and bare, as common honesty, and shamefastnes, would permit them. This
circumstance going before, is manifest by that which followed after: concerning
the parting of the garments, among the soldiers, and their casting of lots
upon his inmost garment: even that knit wastcoate of his, which was entire in
it self, without any sown seame. For if they had not taken his clothes off
before, they could not have taken them off at all: until they should have
taken him from the cross again, unless they should have cut them off.

An other circumstance, more immediately going before the crucifying, was that
the executioners lifted him up, or caused him to go up by some ladder or
tressel, as high as the tree, or stud of the cross was: to the end they might
at their best advantage, and ease, fasten him to the same.

The fastening, or crucifying it self, was the cruel nayling: first, of the
blessed hands of our Savior, by driving great nails through them, they being
drawn, no doubt, as wide upon the overthwart beam of the cross, as they
could well strain them.

And after this, they letting his body settle and sagge down: we may with
good reason conceive that beside the poise of the body, the executioners pulled
and stretched down his feet to the nether most stay made for the nayling of
either of the^. The which they nailed also, not on upon another, according to
the blind popish picture crucifixes: but each by it self apart, the nails
drouen through the flat and thick part of each foot, holding them down so
strained, that doubtless no part, either of a^mes, legs, or body, had any
liberty to stir themselves. To which end no doubt, there was some basis or
footestoole, as we may call it, tenanted into the stud or tree of the cross.
All which both cruel and painful nayling of the hands and feet, and
racking or taintering of the blessed body of our Savior, is plainly testified
by the prophetical witness of the prophet David, in the 22. Psalm: though
we had no historical testimony, concerning the manner of the performance
thereof. For so we read in that Psalm: verses 14.15.16.17.18. that David
speaks in the person of our Savior: I am like water powered out, and all my
bones are out of iointe: my heart is like wax: it is moulten in the midst of
my bowels. My strength is dried up like a potsheard and my tongue cleaves to
my jaws, and thou have brought me into the dust of death. For dogs have
compassed me, and the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me: they have
pierced my hands and my feet. I may tell my bones, yet they behold and look
upon me. And then it follows, They part my garments among them, and cast
lotts upon my vesture. But this casting of lots, followed after they had
fastened our Savior to the cross: and so did also, the dolorous moulting,
drought, and fainting of our Savior, hanging thus, many hours upon the
cross: as we are to observe in the places and seasons thereof. Thus then, the
prophetical testimony of David, might suffice for the manner of the
crucifying of our Savior: seeing we may be sure, that all which he foretold
by the spirit of God, took certain effect. But we have, besides this
prophetical testimony, Irenaeus lib: 2. cap. 42. Ipse habitus cru^is, fines
and summitates habet quinque, duos in longitudine, and duos in latitudine, and
vnum in mecio, vbi requ^escit, qui clauis asfigitur.
and the history of the Gospel speaking briefly of a matter vulgarly known,
we have other ancient historical testimonies, to the same end. Reason also
speaks for the distinct and separate nayling of either foot of our Savior,
as well as of either hand, though not with like expansion, or spreading abroad,
which could not be with so perpendicular and down right stretching of the body.
For if this had not been the manner of crucifying, but that one leg had
been lapped over another, and so nailed together: how could they as the manner
was, have commodiously broken the bones of either leg, as well as of either
arm? We know well indeed, that no bone of our Savior was broken, as it
follows to be considered: but this was, by special dispensation of the
divine providence of God afterward: it was not by any breach of the ordinary
course of the fastening to the cross before.

Now, the circumstances more immediately following the crucifying: were first,
that the executioners crucified the thieues, one on the right hand, and the
other on the left: and so placed our Savior in the midst, as a chief and
principal malefactor: according as they had before refused him, as one in their
malicious estimate more worthy the cross, then Barabbas, that most wicked and
seditious murderer.

The second circumstance, following the crucifying: was that our Savior Christ
prayed for his persecutors, both those that were the executioners, and such as
were his accusers, and liked of their wicked dealings against him.

Next unto this, followed the soldiers parting and casting of lotts upon the
garments of our Savior: so soon as they had their part, in their cruel
crucifying of him.

But of this, and other things succeeding, we will inquire of them in the next
part of the history, concerning the time of our Saviors continuance in his
most grievous suffering upon the cross. In the mean while, for our further
instruction touching the crucifying it self, and the most near circumstances
pertaining unto it.

First, in that our Savior Christ yielded himself to be stripped and left
naked for us: we are very sensible, and feelingly as it were, to consider.
First, what our sins have deserved; to wit, that God should bereave us of all
his blessings, both clothing, and whatsoever besides: and that the ignominy,
and shame of the sins, that is, of the nakedness of our souls, should be
manifested in the nakedness and shame of our bodies.

Secondly, we have to consider the wonderful love of our Savior, in that he
vouchsafes to be outwardly stripped, and left naked for us; that we might be
spiritually clothed, and adorned by the fulness of that grace, and righteousness,
which is to be found in him: while we by faith, put him upon us, as the Apostle
teaches Christians to do. Gal: 3.26.27. for in him are hid all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge. And in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily. And in him are all the faithful complete, Colos: 2. v. 3.9.10. etc.
yea even in him, that was naked for us. For he being rich, willingly became
poor: Yea most poor, and altogether rifled for our sakes, that he might make
us rich, 2. Cor: 8.9. And that of his fulness, we being of our selves and in our
selves, as empty vessels, yea more then empty, even very fustie casks, might
receive grace for grace: and thereby, be both seasoned, and replenished,
according to that measure of grace, which God of his infinite mercy vouchsafes
every one. Ioh: 1.16. Thus then, sin makes us naked, and ignominious in the
sight of God: as we read of the Church of Laodicia. Revel: 3.17.18. And of the
Church of Israel, Exodus: 32.25. And of Adam, from the beginning of his defection
and falling from God, Gen: 3.7.8.9.10.11. Our Savior Christ becoming naked
for us, has clothed us again: in that through his grace, and by faith in him,
we put on the new man here in this life. Ephesians. 4.24, and shall be clothed with
immortality, in the life to come, 2. Cor: 5.2.3.4.

Secondly, the lifting up of our Savior on high, upon the cross, was a
fulfilling of that which was typically given forth and pointed unto (as some
good interpreters do not improbably conjecture) by the elevation (not of the
popish host, which is a most idolatrous devise of their own) but of the right
shoulder of the peace offering, for an heave offering, by the commandment of
God: like as the breast of the same peace offering, appointed to be shaken to
and fro from the one hand to another, before the Lord: is thought to prefigure
the spreding of the hands of our Savior, upon the cross. Leuit, ch:
7.29.30.31.32.33.34. Read also, Exodus, 29. v. 26.27, 28. And again, Leuit.
9.21.22. The lifting up of our Savior upon the cross, was likewise the
fulfilling of that, which was prefigured by the lifting up of the brazen
serpent, to the view of all the people in the wilderness: as our Savior
himself interprets this point. Ioh. 3.14. And again, chapter 12. v. 32. he
foretells his death, under this circumsta^ce of his lifting up. If I were
lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me. For the Evangelist
expressly testifies, that our Savior spoke these words, concerning his lifting
up at his death, least any man should think that he spoke at that time, of his
ascension up to heaven. Here therefore, observe we a very prodigious thing:
that is, such a thing as may justly astonish us, that the Son of God should
for our sins be hanged up as an ignominious spectacle betwixt heaven and earth:
and namely, because of our pride and presumption, which is even like to that of
our first parents, most proudly aspiring from the beginning.

Thirdly, in the fastening of our Savior to the cross, in such manner as has
bin described: let us observe, that the dolor and pain which he was put unto,
and which he most willingly endured for us, upon the cross, even from his
first fastening unto it: was answerable, to the greatness of the ignominy, and
reproach. And the rather shall we see it to be so, if we duly consider, that
our Savior, being fastened to the cross to dye the cursed death thereof, did
upon the same, bear the curse of our sin: as 2. Cor. 5.21. Christ was made sin
for us. And Gal: 3.13 Christ was made a curse for us (for says the Apostle
from Moses) cursed is every one that hangs on a tree) So then, whereas the
nailing in the vainie and sine wish parts of the hands and feet, and the
racking of the ioints, veins, sinews, and ligaments of the whole body, was
exceeding painful in it self: it must needs be so much the more grievous,
the curse coming with all, which is as a most venomous corosiue, to cause the
sinews, and veins, and flesh, and all, to belt more tediously, The ground and
history of his crucifying.
and the blood to drop out of those four principal parts of the body, more
uncomfortable: yea so as the pain troubled the very soul of our Savior, eue^
from the beginning to the end: as is evident by the breaking forth of his
complaint at the last, when having concealed it a long time, he could keep it
no longer. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Of the which more
hereafter.

Fourthly, in that our Savior was crucified, as a notorious malefactor,
between two thieves: the prophecy of Isaiah, chap. 53.12. was fulfilled, in
that he says, He was counted with transgressors, etc. For so the Evangelist
Mark testifies chap. 15.27.28. where, so soon as he has made mention of the
crucifying of the two thieves, the one on the right hand, the other on the
left: Thus (says he) the Scripture was fulfilled, which says, And he was
counted among the wicked. To which purpose, our Savior himself alleges the
same words, though more generally, Luke 22.37. to advertise his Disciples of
the troubles that should fall upon him, before yet he was fallen into the hands
of the wicked. In which place of Isaiah it follows also, and he bare the
sin of many, and prayed for the trespassers.

In the fifth place therefore, we have at the crucifying of our Savior: yea
even from the first fastening of him to the Cross, the last branch of that
prophecy of Isaiah, chap. 53. fulfilled, in that he prays, Father forgive
them they know not what they do. For so says the Prophet in the last words of
that chapter, He prayed for the trespassers. From the which prayer, O how
admirably does the most pure and bright beams, of most perfect patience and
meekenes in himself, and of most perfect love toward his whole Church, shine
forth! Of this prayer therefore, let us stand here, with great admiration to
consider a while.

We have to consider in this prayer, first the petition: and then the reason.
Concerning the petition, we are first to weigh well, the matter of it: and then
to whom it is directed and made.

The matter of the petition is forgiveness, a most singular benefit: Yea that
wherein principally consists our whole comfort and blessing, according to
Psalm: 32.1.2. and Rom: 4.6.7.8.

Our Savior makes his prayer to God his heavenly father, who only has power
to forgive sins: and who for his names sake, is ready to forgive sinners. But
this is specially to be observed, that our Savior calls God father, in such
sense as no creature else can call him Father: that is to say, as being the
essential, and only begotten son of God, very true God together with the
Father. But how then, may some say, does he pray unto his Father, if he be one
God with him? We know, that the son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ is both
God and man, and so a Mediator: and in regard thereof, inferior to the
Father, as touching his humane nature. He prays therefore to God, as he is
man, and as a mediator in man's nature: but not simply as he is the second
Person. Nevertheless, in that God is his Father, even in respect of his manhood,
united in one Person to the divine nature, so as he is Father to no creature
beside: this confirms plainly, that his prayer must needs be most
effectual with God, above all that ever have prayed, or can pray. Yea so, as
no prayer, has ever been accepted from any: but as they have had, do, and
shall have respect, to the virtue and grace of his mediation and prayer. And
herein, our Savior Christ performs one special duty of his most holy
office of high Priesthood, in that he prays for sinners: as well as in that he
yielding to be fastened to the Cross, offers up himself an everlasting, and
most propitiatory sacrifice unto God, that by his blood issuing out, by the
wounds of his holy hands and feet, he might wash away the sins of all his
elect.

Let us come to the reason, which is this: For they know not what they do. Not
that ignorance excuses the offender, or that he sins not, because he
knows not that it is a sin which he commits. This is not the meaning of
our Savior Christ: for then what need was there, that he should pray so
earnestly for forgiveness: or use any prayer at all, to that end? In that
therefore, he prays, yea seeing he prays so earnestly, that they may be
forgiven, though they did not know what they did: it is evident, that their
sin was grievous in the sight of God, though they sinned of ignorance. And so
we read, that God in his law, appointed sacrifices to be offered for sins
done of ignorance; he giving therein plainly to understand, that ignorance
excuses not, seeing every one might have knowledge, if the fault were not in
our own negligence: but contrariwise, that sins done of ignorance, are
damnable, if they be not pardoned for Christ's sake, unto whom all the
sacrifices pointed. Read Leuit. chap. 4. the whole chapter.

What was the meaning of our Savior then in this reason which he uses? No
doubt, his meaning is, to give to understand, that there is a great difference
betwixt sins committed of ignorance, and those that are committed of
presumption and malice, against knowledge and conscience: yea betwixt one and
the same sin, committed in so diverse a manner, and from so differing a
ground and original. For that done of ignorance must needs be sinful in a
less degree, then the other: and accordingly pardoned more easily, or with
less difficulty as one may say.

Our Savior therefore, in using this reason, would leave some special ground of
comfort, for those of his persecutors, whosoever should afterward come to the
conscience of their sin, when their consciences should bear witness with
them, that they did, they knew not what, and so were within the compass of the
prayer of our Savior: when as on the contrary, he would exclude all such from
the comfort of it, whosoever sinned of malice, and against their knowledge,
with a high and presumptuous hand, as some of his persecutors did: as may
appear by his doctrine, concerning the sin against the holy Ghost, delivered
against them. Matthew. 12.31.32.

And as Stephen, the holy Protomartyr next after our Sa: Christ, does plainly
declare, Act. 7.51. in that he charge them to have resisted the holy Ghost.
Concerning all which, the Apostle Peter says, that our Savior committed his
cause, to him that judges righteously. 1. Epist. 2.23.

But how may it be said, that any of those that persecuted our Savior Christ,
and did execution upon him, were ignorant of that sin which they committed:
seeing they knew no cause against him, why they should so deal as they did?
For no man can be ignorant of this, that it is a sin, to do violence against
any man, without cause. It is very true. Nevertheless, in this case, our
Savior may justly say, that a number of them knew not what they did. For their
sin was greater, then they were ware of; yea though they had been convicted
in their consciences, to have dealt unjustly and cruelly, against a righteous
man. For they knew not that this righteous man, was the Lord our righteousness:
they knew not that he was the Son of God, the Lord of life and glory, etc.
For then surely, as it is testified of those whom our Savior prays for, they
would not have crucified him. According as we read Act. 3.13.14.15.17.18.19.
And chap. 13.27.28. And 1. Cor. 2.7.8. We speak the wisdom of God in a
mystery, etc. which none of the Princes of this world have known: for had
they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. Note. It is
not only ignorance, for a man not to know a thought or action to be a si^ne,
but also not to know how great and gr^euous a sin that is, which his con^cience
tells him, though l^^^ n^ly that it is a (...).


But to conclude the interpretation of this reason of our Saviors prayer: did
he only pray for the forgiveness of those, that sinned of mere simple
ignorance? No doubt, our Savior, being most abundant in pity and compassion,
did understand ignorance in as large a signification, as it might possibly be
extended unto. Yea so far, as if malice were of ignorance, or that ignorance
was more then malice: we are not to account any such, whosoever were of the
elect of God, to be excluded, or excepted by our Savior. The which affection,
he carries still toward all other, that belong unto God, even to this day;
whosoever sin in the like manner against him, in persecuting of his servants
for his Gospels sake, or in resisting his holy word and ordinances, though none
can now so directly injury his most holy and glorified humanity as these did.

The use of all, is briefly this, that insomuch as by ignorance, men are
carried headlong to rush into so great sin as they are not ware of: therefore,
The ground and history of his crucifying.
it is the duty of all, to seek after true knowledge and judgment, from the
word of God: that by the light and direction thereof, they may not only avoid
sins of ignorance, to do they cannot tell how great evil: but that they may
be wise to obey God, and in obedience unto him, to do more and greater good,
then they can see or understand of: as doubtless, every one does, that walks
faithfully in his calling, as in the sight and presence of God. But of the uses
both for duty, and also for comforts, we shall by the grace of God, inquire and
consider more fully afterward. Now the course of the holy story requires, that
we come to the third part, of the execution of the sentence of Pilate, against
our Savior: with the sufferings, and other worthy matters, appertaining unto
it.

This third part of the holy History of the execution, as was observed,
contains the time, of the continuance of our Savior, upon the Cross. The
which time, we may not unfitly distribute or distinguish, into these three
parts, or spaces and d^mensions as it were. First, from the third hour of the
day unto the sixth.

Secondly, from the sixth hour, to the ninth: thirdly, from thence, until the
time, that our Savior was taken down from the Cross.

This distribution of the time, is most fully mentioned by the Evangelist Mark.
For though Matthew and Luke mention the sixth and the ninth hour: yet they
speak not of the third. And John mentions only the sixth, as we have it
commonly translated, and that also to note the time of the condemnation of our
Savior. But how that is to be understood, and may best agree with the rest of
the Evangelists, we have as diligently as we could, considered and set down
before.

Let us therefore, for the more full distribution of the time, look to the
testimony of the Evangelist Mark: yet so, as we do make a supply, from the
other three, of whatsoever we find recorded by them, which is omitted, or
more briefly set down, by him.

And first, concerning the third hour, which was the time of the crucifying;
that is, of the first fastening of our Savior to the Cross, thus we read.
Mark, chap. 15. ver. 25. And it was the third hour, when they crucified him.
And of the sixth and ninth hours, we read verses. 33.34 in these words: Now
when the sixth hour was come darkness arose over all the land, until the ninth
hour. And at the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eloi,
Eloi, etc. And concerning the time of the taking down of the body of our
Savior from the Cross, we read further, ver. 42. that it was when night was
come: or as Matthew says, cha. 27. ver. 57. When the even was come, that is,
when it drew toward night.

Now therefore, let us henceforth, consider of the third part of the holy Story,
concerning the execution of the sentence of Pilat against our Savior: and
therein, of the sufferings, and other most memorable things, that fell out by the
holy providence of God: according to the former distribution of the time, into
three distinct spaces for order sake, and for some help to our understanding
and memory.

And first, from the third hour, which was about our ninth: I mean from the
time, after they had fastened our Savior to the Cross, and after they had
likewise fastened the two thieues, one on the right hand, and the other on the
left: we have from thence, until the sixth hour (besides the continual dolor
that the nails driven through his hands and feet, and also the straining of
his ioints, did put him unto for our sins the full burden whereof he did
bear) these things, diligently, and reuerendly, to weigh and consider.

1 The parting of his garments, by those 4 soldiers which nailed him to the
cross.

Secondly, his loving remembrance, and care which he had of Mary his natural
mother, notwithstanding all the dolours of his passion, which he was in.

Thirdly, the railings, which all sorts of the beholders cast out against him.

The miraculous conversion of one thief, crucified with our Savior.

Of these things: the foremost, the parting of the garments of our Sa: is fully
recorded by S. John, Then the soldiers, when they had crucified him, took his
garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part, and his coat: and
the coat was without seame, wouen from the top throughout.

24 Therefore they said one to another, Let us not divide it, but cast lots for
it, whose it shall be. -- This (says the Evangelist) was that the Scripture
might be fulfilled, which says, They parted my garments among them, and on my
coat they did cast ^ots. So the soldiers did these things indeed.

Explication.
We have seen before, how our Savior was stripped by the soldiers, and nailed
naked upon the Cross, so far as common honesty would permit. Now the
Evangelist John shows us, what became of his clothes. And he tells us, that
they were made the fees of those four soldiers, who were the special
executioners of him. The manner of the parting and distributing whereof, he does
also describe unto us: and that was thus. They divided the vpmost garments into
four parts, to every man his equal part: but beside these equal parts, there
was remaining one coat without seame, the which was likely a knit wastcoate,
which he did wear next his shirt., The which because it was a remainder of the
former division, and could not it self be divided, without the marring of the
whole: therefore they cast lots, who should have the whole: wherein we are to
consider two things. First, the mind of the soldiers in this their doing:
secondly, the divine counsel, and providence of God.

The minds of the soldiers, were altogether profane, and bent upon the
spoil: every one couetously desiring, to make his part more gainefull to him
self, then any of his fellows. To this purpose, they use the lot, not with
any religious regard of the providence of God, to whose disposition the lot
apperteineth: as it is in the holy Proverb: and therefore ought not to be
used, without a reverend respect and attendance thereunto: but every one,
desiring that the chance of the die, (much in use among the idle soldiers) or
whatsoever other lot they used, might by good luck or fortune, chance unto
him, rather then to any other. So that well may we conceive by the way, that
the apparel of our Savior was of some value, though he went not clothed,
after the manner of those, that be in Princes Courts: as he spoke in the
commendation of John the Baptist for his sobriety this way. And in this, we
have a lively representation of the common practice which is in this world,
wheresoever the contempt of God and godliness, of Christ and his Gospel
reigns. For every one flies upon the good benefits of God, and gets a
share by one means or other to himself: the which they consume upon their
lusts, and altogether to the dishonor of God: rejoicing as it were in the
spoil of him, as these soldiers no doubt for their parts did at this time.
And as our popish riflers, and other heretics, catch what they can from
Christ, and care not what they derogate from his most holy office, so as they
may enlarge their own gain, by their false doctrine, and by the merchandise
of Popes pardons and indulgences, and of buying souls out of Purgatory, etc.
Thus much concerning the mind of the soldiers, who when they had done their
sport, they sit down securely, and without all conscience, or remorse of that
grievous sin, wherein they, together with all that had any hand in this
unjust and cruel action, were deeply engaged and defiled with all: for they
sat down and watched him there: as the Evangelist Matthew observes. chap.
27.36. Such also is, and has bin always, the common security of the wicked,
in their most wicked proceedings against Christ and his servants, the true
professors of his Gospel: until God, in his due time, do awaken their
consciences, and call them to an account.

But the counsel and providence of God, is in the ordering of this matter, and
all other, most holy and reverend. And namely, in this dividing of the former
sort of the garments by these soldiers, and in their casting of lots upon the
seame^esse coat, he used their covetous and wanton affection and practice, to
the fulfilling of that holy prophecy, which was given forth by David,
concerning this matter: well near 1000. years before it came to pass. The
which prophecy, beside other things foretold, concerning the sufferings of our
Savior, as we have seen, is plainly extant in the 22. Ps. verse 18. They part
my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture. And all to this most
grave and comfortable end: that every one that waited for the Messiah
promised, and all Christians also, to this day, might be confirmed, from the
evident fulfilling of this, and all other prophesies given forth by the Spirit
of God: that this is the very true Messiah, without all lingering after any
other.

THese things observed, concerning the first point: which was the dividing of
the garments of our Savior before his face: we come to the second, that is to
say, the most loving and careful remembrance, which our Savior had of his
Mother, in this time of his bitter suffering upon the Cross: as it follows
in the Evangelist John, verse: 25.26.27.



(His words are these) Then stood by the Cross of Jesus, his Mother, and his
Mothers sister, Marie of Cleophas, and Marie Magdalene.

26 And when Jesus saw his Mother, and the Disciple standing by, whom he
loved, he said unto his Mother, Woman, behold thy Son.

17 Then he said to the Disciple, Behold thy Mother: and from that hour, the
Disciple took her home unto him.

Explication
Here we have a most excellent testimony of the perfect righteousness of our
Savior Christ, above all exception: in that, together, with the most patie^t
enduring of the bitter grief and dolor of the Cross, under the burden of
our sins, laid upon his holy soul, by the hand of his heavenly Father: he
upon the sight of his natural Mother, shows himself most kindly and
naturally affected toward her, to the breaking off, of the extremity of her
sorrow, wherewith her soul (no doubt) was pierced, as with a sword, in the
beholding of this calamity fallen upon her most dear and only Son:
according to that which Simeon had told her, by the Spirit of Prophecy, 33.
years before. And in this declaration, of his most kind and natural
affection, he shows himself, to have a most tender care, that she should be
comfortablie maintained, in this latter part of her life, wherein she was now
growing to be of good years: and therefore shows her, whom he had appointed,
to be a special stay and comfort unto her, as a most dutiful Son: in stead
of him: directing her to John, (for he is the Disciple described to be he whom
Christ loved: for so John describes himself, of singular thankfulness to
Christ, for the same his special affection toward him.) And the^, he
commands John, to have a dutiful care of her, for his sake, eue^ as if she
were his natural Mother. Thus our Savior is upon the Cross, an eminent and
famous mirror of all holy obedience, to the first table, and also to the 2. of
the righteous law of God, by these two notable instances, of Patience under the
hand of his heavenly Father, and of love, to his natural Mother here on earth.
And thus also, he shows himself, to be a meet Person to offer vphimselfe to
God a meet Sacrifice of Propitiation, for our sins, both against God and Man.

And herewithall likewise, the singular wisdom of our Savior is to be
diligently observed of us, in the manner of his speaking to her: and in the
whole order which he takes in committing her to the care of his beloved
Disciple. For in that he calls her Woman, and not Mother, and substituting
John as a Son, in his stead unto her, and accordingly wills her to transfer
her Motherly affection toward him: he gives her to understand, that she is to
bend her mind, to conceive of him far otherwise, in these his sufferings, then
of her natural Son: that is, that hereby, he does the office of an high
Priest unto God, and of a Savior of her and all other of his elect: and that
he was by these his ignominious sufferings, to enter into his divine glory, and
to p^oare a heavenly ma^sion place for her, together with him. These things, no
doubt, would our Savior give Marie to understand now, according to that she
had learned and professed of him long before, even while he was yet in her
womb, Lu: 1.31. and 38. and ver: 46. etc. that thus he might moderate and
rectify all disorder, or confusion of natural affection, that might assail
her, by occasion of his so rufull a spectacle, as his hanging, and continuance
upon the Cross, must needs be in her natural view. This manner of the speech,
and order which our Savior took, and uttered to his Mother, on her behalf,
at this time: as also all other the like moderate mention made of her, in the
holy Scriptures: as John. 2.4. Matthew: 12.48.49.50. Luke. 11.27.28. Acts 1.14.
is the rather to be well pondered and weighed of us, to the end we may see the
difference, yea the contrariety of the mind and will of our Savior Christ,
concerning his Mother: and the doting of our superstitious and Idolatrous
Papists, in that against all order, they ordain the Mother of our Savior to
be the co^mander of her Son, and so pray to her, etc: knowing no measure of
estimation or honor, no nor abstaining from any blasphemous derogation against
our Savior, to the end they may fulfill their own deluded fancy, to the
advancing of her.

Nevertheless, the most excellent virtues of the Virgin Marie the Mother of
our Lord, are not to be neglected of us, touching that measure of grace
wherewith she was by the gift of God endued: though not in all full perfection,
or without all sin, as they dream.

And namely, herein appears an excellent Spirit to be in her, in that no
discomfort of the outward calamity of her Son, could daunt her, so that she
should not let him have the comfort of her presence, nor that she should not
declare her love toward him, yea and in that there was in her a seed of Hope,
concerning a blessed issue, against all outward discomfort.

The like is to be observed, concerning the other two Mary's: the one, the
Sister or Kinswoman of the Virgin-Marie, the other being Marie Magdalene, who
could not forget the great mercy of our Savior, in that he cast seven Devils
out of her. So here are three Mary's, notable patterns for the imitation of
all Christian women, of what name soever they be, to learn from them, not to
be ashamed of Christ, no not of Christ crucified: and so much the rather,
because Christ that was at this time hanging on the Cross, is long since
glorified, and triumphant in heaven: from whence he shall come in glory, to
judge all the world.

Moreover, the obedience of John, is to be marked of us: not only for his
commendation, but much rather for our imitation, touching the willing care over
any worthy person, or thing, which for the Lords sake, shall be in his name
committed unto us. Likewise, the love of John, and his constancy, in abiding
by our Savior: is to be preferred before the rest of the Disciples, who hid
themselves from him. Yet so as both John, and every Marie, is altogether
silent, and feel their great weakness no doubt, in the beholding of this
great work, which was to be wrought, and was indeed performed, by our Savior
alone: he bearing the whole burden of it entirely in himself: and therefore
is to have from us, and all his redeemed, the whole glory and praise thereof.
These are briefly, the excellent things to be observed in this text,
concerning the care which our Savior had of his Mother, while he did hang
still upon the Cross.

THe third thing is now to be considered of us: to wit, the railing and
scornful reproaches, of all sorts of the beholders, against our Savior.

Of the which, there were five sorts.

1. First, the rulers, that is to say, the high Priests, with the Scribes, and
Elders, and Pharisees.

2. The people of the Jews.

3. Thirdly, the Soldiers that attended the execution, not only those four
that fastened him to the Cross, but the rest also that were there, with the
Centurion: that is, with the Captain of an hundredth soldiers, mentioned in
this Story, after the death of our Savior.

4. Fourthlie, the Passengers, who passing by, came and stayed at their
pleasure, to see what the matter was.

5. Fiftlie, the Thieues that were crucified with our Savior: specially one
of them, and as it seems, both of them at the beginning, though one of them
was afterward converted, as we are to observe hereafter.

Of these several sorts of railers, and scoffers against our Lord and
Savior: let us hear, what the holy Evangelists do report unto us. The ground
and history of his leading to be crucified.


And first, of the three former: that is, of the rulers, common people, and
Soldiers. And insomuch as S. Luke does most orderly rehearse them, let us
hear what he writes of them. What are his words?

In the 23. chap. verses 35.36, 37. thus he writes.

And the people stood, and beheld: and the Rulers mocked him with them, saying,
He saved others: let him save himself, if he be the Christ the chosen of God.

36. The Soldiers also mocked him, and came and offered him vinegar.

37. And said, if thou be the King of the Jews, save thy self.

Who the Rulers were, who mocked our Savior, S. Matthew does most fully
express, chap. 27.41. to wit: The high Priests, with the Scribes, and Elders,
and Pharisees, Explication
as was rehearsed before.

And he does rehearse their scoffing words, morefully then S. Luke: as it
follows verses 42.43. He saved others, but he cannot save himself: if he be
the King of Israel, let him come down from the cross, and we will believe him.

He trusted in God, let him deliver him now, if he will have him; for he said,
I am the Son of God.

Likewise also, does S. Mark report their words, chap. 15.31.32. He saved
other men, himself he cannot save. Let Christ the King of Israel now come
down from the Cross, that we may see and believe.

Moreover, as touching the fourth sort of scorners; only the same Evangelists,
Matthew and Mark, do tell us of them: though as it may seem, in respect of
time, something out of order, in that they begin with them: but not without
good reason, in some other respect: insomuch as, very likely, they coming as
strangers, and being possessed freshly with the matter, and willing to gratify
those, that were ready to make the most odious report that they could unto
them: were the most clamorous mockers among the rest, as their words personally
cast out against our Savior do declare. Whereas the Rulers did not so
directly utter their taunts to our Savior, but spoke them among themselves, as
the Evangelist Mark testifies: though like enough, so as he might hear them,
to the increase of his grief. The words, and also the gesture of these fresh
mockers, are set down, both by S. Matthew, and also by S. Mark.

Matthew first report them?

In the 27. chap. verses 39.40. thus we read:

39. And they that passed by, reviled him, wagging their heads.

40. And saying, Thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three
days, save thy self: if thou be the son of God, come down from the Cross.

29. And the words of the Evangelist Mark, are like to these. Cha. 15. verses
29, 30. And they that went by (says he) railed on him, wagging their heads,
and saying, Hey, thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three
days.

30. Save thy self, and come down from the Cross.

Explication.
These are then the fourth sort of mockers, and such as have been now
rehearsed, were their m^^king words.

And touching the thieues crucified with our Savior, who were numbered for the
fifth sort, the same Evangelists testify likewise, that they also reviled him.
As we read Mark 15.32. And Matthew 27.44. The same also (says he) to wit the
same mocking words, which the Rulers used) the thieues which were crucified
with him, cast in his teeth. But as it appears by S. Luke, one of them was
soon weary of his part: and therefore does not stand to note him for a
railer, seeing his notable repentance did, as it were blot out the beginnings
of his unadvised misdemeanour. And therefore he writes thus of one only, chap.
23.^9. And one of the evil doers, which were hanged, railed on him, saying, If
thou be the Christ, save thy self and us.

Of these several sorts of mockers and scorners, let us stand a while to
consider, for our instruction, and warning, and comfort. And first, to speak
generally, let us well observe, that all of them did sin very hainouslie, in
that they do thus sport themselves, and take their pleasure in the beholding
of a man in outward distress, according as the Spirit of of Prophecy gives
us to understand, Psalm: 22.17. The ground and history of his crucifying.
They pierced my hands and my ^eete, I may tell all my bones, yet they behold
and look upon me.

If our Savior Christ had been any other then he was, yea a malefactor,
(which God forbid we should once think) it had been an inhumane practice at
the least. But seeing he was unjustly, on their parts crucified: their sin
was the greater, according to that of the Prophet Obadiah, verses, 11.12. (For
many of them in whose afflictions the Edomites rejoiced, were more righteous
then they.) But in so much as our Savior Christ, was the most righteous of all
men, yea even the Son of God: their sin was so much the more heinous and
devilish. For is it not a strange thing, and evidently the special work and
instigation of the devil, working in them, that of common humanity, they
spare the thieues, as touching any reproching of them: but neither religion,
nor ordinary course of justice, could restrain them, from extremity of
outrage against our Savior. For it may justly be noted against them, that they
deal unjustly, in that they exceed the judgment or sentence of Pilate: who
though he condemned him to be Crucified, and so to continue till he should be
dead: yet he did not give any commandment, that he should be thus mocked,
while he should abide on the Cross. Moreover, let it be observed in general,
concerning these mockings, that all were not cast forth at once, or at one
instant: but they continued thus mocking, one or other of them, the greatest
part of the first three hours. Finally, this ready consent of all sorts, in
mocking and reproching our most blessed and Reverend Savior, evidently
shows, how apt our wicked nature is to scorn religion and godliness, (yea
even God and Christ himself the author of religion and fountain of all
godliness) if we should be left to our selves, and to the power of the Devil
but a while, as these people were. And therefore it is, that for a most
necessary admonition against this grievous sin, it is set down in the very
forefront and entrance into the holy book of Psalms, that he is a blessed
man, whom God of his mercy, delivers, and by his grace, preserves from the
seat of the scornful. Read also, Acts 2.13. and chapt: 13. verses 40.41. and
Isai. 28.22. 2. Chron: 30.10. and chapt: 36.16. Thus much more generally,
concerning the reproaches done against our Savior, hanging on the Cross.

But let us come to the consideration of the particular sorts of the scorners:
and of their several scornings.

And first, to begin with those, who, as they were chief in outward power,
and authority, were likewise chief in the sin, even ringleaders as we may
say, or rather Lords of the mis-rule, unto all the rest: they were as the
Evangelist Matthew rehearses them, of four sorts. First, the chief Priests,
even those, that by their office, being exercised in the offering up of all
sorts of figurative oblations and Sacrifices to God, which according to the
instructions of his Ceremonial law, pointed them to Christ, the true
Sacrifice: ought even now, beholding him to be in sacrificing of himself to
God, to have better be thought themselves, howsoever they had been blinded
before.

Secondly, the Scribes, that is to say, such as took upon them to be
interpreters of the law, in a most Clarklie manner, as a man may say.

Thirdly, the Elders, who were men of special estimate among the rest of the
people, for wisdom and gravity, fit to be assistant with the rest, in
matters of government and counsel.

Fourthlie, the Pharisees, who were a sect, pretending a more exact course of a
just and holy life, in observing of many traditions, which tract of time had
by custom authorized among all the Jews: beside that they also boasted of a
Doctorlie or Rabbin^call knowledge of the law. All these, join all their
authorities and credits together, still to deface our Savior, as if they would
blot out all honorable remembrance of him, among the people of God, even for
ever and ever.

Wherein, let us behold a strange thing: yea a thing altogether monstrous, that
all these sorts of wise and learned men, should consent in most extreme folly
and outrage, giantlike to make war as it were against God: in turning light
into darkness, truth into error, good into evil, etc. Yet so it is, as we see
through the just judgment of God, because they did not in truth seek to know
the truth, and to apprehend and cherish the love of it in their hearts, but
only to serve their own turn, so far forth as might stand with their own
vain glory and gain: according to that we read Isaiah, chap. 28.14, 15, etc.
and chapter 29 9, 10, etc. compared with Matt. 15.7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14. And chapter 13.
verse 13, 14, 15. And again, John chap. 12.37, 38, 39, 4^, 41. And chap. 5.44.

The like heavy judgment of God, we see evidently upon the Antichristian
Rulers in the Romish Church: who having put out their own eyes, as it were,
touching all sound and enti^e truth of doctrine, know nothing beside their own
devises and blind devotions, serving to their proud pomp and filthy lucre and
gain.

Let us therefore take diligent heed, that we take a better course, that we
may be in the number of those, whom God teaches: that is, of such as do
unfeignedly humble our selves to learn and obey the truth from him: insomuch as
himself professes, that he will give wisdom to the simple, and babes, and
hide it from such as are wise in their own eyes: according as our Lord Jesus
Christ has testified, and thankfully confessed to God, Matthew. 11.25. and as we
read in diverse other places of holy Scripture.

But let us come to the reproaches and mockes of the Jewish Rulers. They are
three in number. The first against his name or title of Jesus. The second
against the title King, ascribed unto him. The third against the title Son of
God. All which notwithstanding they do most truly and properly, and in the
highest degree belong unto him: yet do they go about most wickedly,
ignorantly, and blasphemously, to disgrace him in them all: yea and after a
sort, as much as lay in them, to degrade him from them all. But all in vain:
for as he received not these honors and dignities from them, or any other
creature: so could neither they, nor any other take them away from him.
Contrary to all endeavors of all the wicked, he remains the Son of God, a
King, yea our King and Savior, to be blessed and praised for ever. Let us a
little consider of their blasphemous ignorance. First, say they, He saved
others: Not minding to acknowledge the truth of his mighty and saving miracles,
in that he delivered all sorts of diseased and distressed poor souls: but
rather to traduce, and weaken the credit of them, as the words next following
do declare: he cannot save himself. As though they should say, Hence it
appears how vain all his former works were, in that, if he had divine power
indeed, he would now especially declare it in his own deliverance from this
his misery: that is, from this his Cross, as afterward they do further
express their minds. So then, it is plain, that they speak here, with like
mind, as they are recorded to have spoken, Matthew. chap. 12. verses: 4, etc.
But as touching their reason, take it in the best sense that may be, and it
carries no force in it, as every mean scholar in the school of Christ can
easily conceive. Christ does it not, therefore he cannot do it. What a reason
is this? Nay rather, though he could have done it, as all his works before
have plentifully declared, and even in the entrance into the p^ssion, when in
the garden (as we have already seen) he caused all that came to app^ehend
him, to fall backward at the majesty of one word speaking, when he said nothing
but, whom seek yee^ and, I am he Ioh. 18 4, 5, 6. And again, in that he
presently heals the ear of Malchus, which Peter struck off with his sword,
immediately after the same: though therefore (as we were about to say) he
could as easily have caused the nails to have sprung out of his hands and
feet, and immediately have healed them again: yet he would not, because by
continuing upon the Cross, he had a more miraculous work to do, that is to
deliue^ the bodies and souls of all the thousands of Gods elect, from eternal
destruction and the everlasting wrath of God, and to purchase for them,
eternal life: the which, these deep learned men, were willingly ignorant of.

Their second reproach is like to the former, but increased by some further
amplication: If he be the King of Israel, (taking this their taunt, from the
superscription over his head, as also from the same words attributed to him in
the holy Scriptures) let him now come down from the Cross, and we will
believe him. In the which their reproach, all the amplification that is in it,
is nothing else but a further discovery of their profane ignorance and malice,
to their own further shame. For their reason, implies a most manifest
contradiction. For it is so far of, that our Savior should come down from
the Cross, to declare himself to be the King of Israel, that he could not
better confirm himself to be so, then by continuing still upon it, to make
his full conquest thereupon, over all the enemies of himself, and every one of
his faithful subjects. For by the shedding of his bloood, which by his
continuance upon the cross, still more and more issued out of his body, by
those four passages which the nails had opened in his holy hands and feet,
our salvation was to be purchased, and the covenant thereof to be
everlastingly sealed: according to that Zech. 9. verses 9, 10, 11. Heb. 13.20.
and in many other places.

Neither when these scorners say, And we will believe him: do they mean good
soothe: for though he had come down, they would have been ready to say, that
he did it by the power of the devil, or at the least, would have doubted of
the truth of the miracle. Only their purpose was, to justify their own
infidelity, wherein they were already obstinately confirmed, by an imagination
of the impossibility which they mention: as appears plainly in this: that
notwithstanding our Savior Christ does within a while after, work a greater
miracle then this which they speak of, when he rose from the dead: yet they
would not believe in him.

The third reproach is this, He trusts in God, let him deliver him now if he
will have him for he said, I am the Son of God. This reproach therefore,
stands in a maligning of this title the Son of God, as unmeet for our
Savior to take unto him. But be it that Christ were not the Son of God,
(which God forbid we should once think (insomuch as God himself having
testified that he is so: and the witness of our Savior is true concerning the
same) yet admit I say, that it were not so, as they make themselves believe:
what should move them to traduce the name of God as to say, Let him deliver him
now if he will have him? For this is most presumptuously, and blasphemously, to
challenge the Lord himself: and to run wilfully into that sin, whereof they
were expressly forewarned, as we read in the 22. Psalm. And what reason have
they, to tie God unto their Now, as if he must work his works at their
pleasure: or else they will deny the gracious hand and power of God to be in
them? God has all times and seasons in his hand, to deliver those that be his,
both when, and how he will. And as it is the duty of all the children of God,
to put their trust in him constantly, and to wait upon him, until it please him
in his due season to deliver them: so that their reproching of our Savior, for
that he trusted in God, is very wicked and ungodly.

The second sort were the people of whom we need say nothing in particular,
because their mocking was the same with the mocking of their Rulers: whose
example they followed, and in whose footsteps they trod, and being blind, were
most dangerously led by the blind, into one and the same most deep and
perilous ditch.

Let us come to the third sort, that is, to the mocking Soldiers. Their
mockery was partly in action or deed, and partly by word of mouth. Their
mocking words were like to those of the Rulers: as if, like apt and teachable
scholars, they had learned their lesson of them. If thou be the King of the
Jews, save thy self. Their meaning is not, that the matter should be put upon
this trial, for they scorned it altogether: but it is as much as they should
say, thou art no more likely to be the king of the Jews, the^ that thou being
surely nailed to the Cross, should deliver thy self from this thy
punishment.

Their mockery by action and deed, was with like bitter contempt and disdain.
For as the Evangelist Luke says, They did in this their mocking mood, offer
him vinegar: as though they should have said, will you drink Sir? it is like
you are by this time very dry, and in a hot fit, etc. O most wretched and
devilish despisers!

The Passengers were reckoned in the fourth place, for the fourth sort of
mockers and scorners of our blessed Savior: that is to say, such, as
travailing to some other place, espied a far of, the business of this
execution, and so came to see what the matter was: or such as were coming to
Jerusalem, against this time of the solemnity of the feast of the Passover,
made this in their way to go to the City. And we know also, that usually the
places of execution of malefactors, is near to some great road or other. Let
us therefore come now to consider, what their mockes and scornings were.

These likewise, had not only their mocking and reproachful speeches: but also
their disdainful gestures, answerable thereunto. And in either of these, they
were singular, and as was said clamorous, above the rest; coming fresh upon
the matter, and inflamed as it were, with a new heat of the spirit of Satan:
so that not without cause, (in this respect) as was also observed, do the
Evangelists Matthew and Mark, rehearse them in the first place, though in
order we cannot think they were so,

The contemptuous and reproachful, or disdainful gesture of these Passengers,
as that they in their reuiling of him, wagged their heads malap^rtly: according
to that whereof the Prophet complains prophetical, Psalm. ^^.6.7. I am a
worm, and not a man: a shame of men, and the contempt of the people. All they
that see me have me in derision: they make a mow, and nod the head, etc.
Concerni^g the which bitter kind of gesture, in expressing derision, read
also Psalm 44 14. where the Church complains of it. And 2. King. 19.21. the
like gesture joined with derision, though ascribed to the Church against the
presumptuous pride of the King of Ashur, by some good interpreters.

The contemptuous speeches, being in themselves very bitter and taunting, were
uttered with great vehemence, as also it appears by the interiection of
contemptuous insulting, or rei^ycing against our Savior, which the Evangelist
Mark expresses, Hey, say they, etc. The speeches which they used to the
reproching of our Savior, were of two sorts. The one was an vpbraiding of him,
by a false imputation of misconstrued words, which he should have spoken, as we
have already seen, three years before. These words they use as a skornefull
description, or nicknaming of our Savior Christ: Thou (say they) that
destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days: and then they reproach
him, as not being able to save himself, and therefore altogether unlike to be
a Savior of others. This is their first reproach, as touching the title Savior
belonging to Christ, like as the Rulers had reproched him before: so that it
appears, they were all scholars taught in one school, and having like
Master, were like scholars, etc. The same also, is to be considered concerning
their second branch of reproach, which was against the title of Son of God: in
that they say, If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross: as though
they should say, hereby ^t appears well, that thou do falsely boast thy self
to be the Son of God, and to have a divine power, because a few nails are able
to hold thee to the cross, that thou art not able to stir either hand or foot,
for the relief of thy self.

Thus did the Passengers of the Jews, coming upon the occasion of the
execution, most profanely and contumeliously mock and deride our Savior: so
that, what they were behind in time, that they supplied by their intemp^rate
zeal, and so made themselves companions with the rest, in the outrage o^ their
sin.

Now the last sort of the reprochers and reuilers of our Savior, were the
thieves, which were crucified with him.

The which yet, we are from that which the Evangelist Luke writes, compared
with Matthew and Mark, to understand as we must put a great difference betwixt
the one of the thieues and the other. For although it behooves us to conceive
from that which Saint Matthew and Saint Mark do write, that at the first, both
the thieues were a like wickedly minded: yet within a while, the one of them,
was altogether made another man by the wonderful mercy and miraculous working
of the Spirit of God and our Savior Christ in the heart of the poor miserable
and sinful man: of a miserable sinful and damnable wretch, that is, of one
worthy to have been condemned for ever to hell, made a most blessed and happy
child of God, adopted to be an inheritor of eternal salvation. And therefore
it is, that the Evangelist Luke does absolutely report, and as it were brand
the one of them only for a railer. If we would know what the railings of both
the thieues were in the beginning, the Evangelists Matthew and Luke tell us,
that they were the same whereby the Rulers of the Jews mocked him. And
indeed, as was observed in the beginning, they were as the ring leaders, or
lords of the misrule to all the rest, and so the authors of this heinous sin
of mocking, even as they were of the crucifying it self. All these reuilings
were no doubt grievous unto our Souiour, and increased the dolours of his
soul. For seeing Lot vexed his righteous soul to see and hear the unlawful
deeds of the Sodomites. 2. Pet. 28. much more was the righteous soul of our
Savior Christ, to see and hear these blasphemies of the wicked Jews:
according to that we read Psalm. 22. and Psalm. 69. Seeing also it was as the
breaking of David's bones, when they said to him, where is thy God? and Ps. 42.
The same no doubt was much more grievous to our Savior Christ, etc.

But now touching this part of the holy story, let us consider of it
furthermore, from the report of the Evangelist Luke: I mean first, touching
the obstinate continuance of the impenitent and obdurate thief, in his
railing: and then also concerning the miraculous, and most gracious conversion
of the other: which as we may remember, was reckoned to be the fourth thing
worthy to be diligently marked of us, within the space of the first three
hours, wherein our Savior Christ continued upon the Cross. To this end
therefore, let us hear the words of the holy Evangelist.



His words are these, chap. 23. verses 39 40, 41.

39 And one of the evil doers, which were hanged, railed on him, saying, If
thou be the Christ, save thy self and us.

4^ But the other answered, and rebuked him: saying, Fear not thou God,
seeing thou art in the same condemnation?

41 We are indeed righteously here: for we receive things worthy of that we
have done: but this man has done nothing amiss.

42 And he said unto Jesus, Lord remember me when thou come into thy
kingdom.

43 Then Jesus said unto him, verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with
me in Paradise.

Explication
In these words of the holy Evangelist, we have laid before our eyes: first, the
obstinacy of the one thief, continuing in his railing: and then the repentance
of the other; with the fruit and benefit thereof, even eternal happiness and
salvation, assured unto him by our Savior Christ.

First therefore, from the evil practice of the impenitent thief, let us
conclude the third point of the second part of the story, concerning the
execution of our Savior: to wit, the railings and mockings of all sorts
against him: and so come to the fourth point, to be considered therein.

In this wicked and impenitent thief, we are to observe the greatness of his
sin, in railing against our Savior: not only from his speech, but also from
some other circumstances, not to be neglected of us, for our own admonition.
And first, because he gives himself to railing, at such time as there being
but a step (as we may say) betwixt him and death he ought now at the last, to
have lamented and bewailed his own damnable life: And though he could not have
apprehended Christ now crucified with him, to be that very Christ, the only
Savior of sinners: yet he ought most humbly to have craved mercy and
forgiveness of his sins, at the hands of God, for his Christ's sake, according
to his promise, whosoever he should be. This at the least, he ought now at the
last to have done, death so near approaching. The which because he minds
not, but contrariwise adds sin to sin, as it were drunkenness to thirst,
as the Scripture speaks: yea seeing he does that, which being duly weighed,
shall be found more grievous then any other of his former sins: this of it
self is sufficient, to argue the exceeding greatness of his wickedness.

But besides this, his sin may be discerned to be yet so much the greater,
because he raileth at him, who never gave him any occasion, whereby he should be
provoked to take stomach against him: as the Rulers of the Jews might have
pretended, though altogether unjustly: insomuch as he did most earnestly
reprove them for their great and grievous sins, of hypocrisy, ambition,
covetousness, false interpreting of the holy Scriptures, etc. And also, because
this thief does it then, when it cannot be thought, that he should have any
way to benefit himself, by flattering of the Ruler: insomuch as he had his
judgment and execution already. So that it must needs be judged to be of
extreme, and sheere devilish malice, rather then it he had done it only
before he was condemned, or while he had not yet been nailed to the Cross: as
we shall have occasion to note further, from the rebuke which the peniten^
thief gives him, speaking by the Spirit of God, afterward. Thus the
circumstances do amplify the sin of this most miserable man.

The manner of his railing speech does in it self, and as it were from the
own bosom, likewise sufficiently bewray it self. For in that he says, If
thou be the Christ, save thy self and us: he does not with an humble heart,
and of simplicity desire our Savior to show by such a token, that he is the
true Christ, that he might be moved thereby to believe in him. No, nothing
less: but his meaning is flatly to renounce him, as not being the Christ:
because he accounts him unable either to save them or himself. Or at the
least, his meaning is flatly, and contemptuously to renounce him, as not being
the Christ: unless he may see and find him to work that work, which he
presumptuously and temptingly prescribes unto him. Now therefore, what man
among our selves, must not needs take in very evil part, the request of such
a proud beggar, as should profess unto us, that if we will not give him that
which he demands, he will not account us to be any good or honest men? but
that we are unmerciful and cruel persons, etc. So then, both the speech of
this railer in it self, as also all circumstances going therewithal, do
evidently show, that the sin of this man in this his railing, was exceeding
heinous. A fearful example, to admonish us all, to take heed of entering
into any evil course of life, presuming of repentance at the last: for we may
see, how easy it is for a man to be deceived in such a conceit: yea how easy
a thing it is, for a man to be hardened more and more to his dying day, yea to
the last hour and moment he has to draw his breath: though he have never so
mighty occasions to move him to repent, as we see this thief had. For he
falls to railing, notwithstanding he has a most excellent pattern of
patience in our Savior: neither does he come to any remorse, notwithstanding
he is rebuked most wisely, and persuaded withal by him, that was his fellow
thief: whose example of repentance is also most notably laid before him.

But to conclude this third point, of our second part of the most holy Story
of the sufferings of our Savior Christ, in the time that he was executed; that
we may rightly understand it to our full instruction and comfort: we must not
only, no nor principally, consider the malice of all sorts of these mockers
and scorners of our Savior (who for their parts did nothing therein, but
increase their own damnation, unless happily it pleased God, The ground and
history of his leading to be crucified.
to magnify his mercy, in showing them their sin, and giving them true
repentance: (as we doubt not he did of his infinite goodness to some of them, as
appears in the continuing of the Story in the Acts of the Apostles:) but we
are chiefly to look unto the most holy and pure justice of God, in all the
reproach cast upon our Savior for our sake, to the end he might in the willing
and patient enduring of it, satisfy Gods justice, in bearing the shame and
reproach which was due to us for ever, for our damnable pride, and all other
our grievous sins, and sinfulnes, against the majesty of God; and that he
might bring us into his favor again. For to this end no doubt and not
otherwise, did our Savior Christ bear the sorrow of all these things, which
were certainly very grievous and bitter unto his most holy and righteous soul,
in seeing and hearing the wicked misdemeanour of all sorts of his beholders, so
deeply enraged by the devil: beside that we cannot but understand, that his
hanging upon the Cross, by the stay of his sore wounded hands and feet, must
needs be dolorous to his holy body. So that both inwardly and outwardly, he is
a man of sorrows for us: as the Prophet Isaiah said of him, long before: ch:
53. of his holy prophecy.

These things thus considered: now we come to the fourth point of the second
part of his execution: that is, concerning the miraculous conversion of the
other thief, within the space of the first three hours, wherein our Savior
continued upon the Cross.

And herein, we are to observe the exceeding great goodness and mercy of God,
and our Savior Christ, even as before we observed the exceeding great sin
and obstinacy of the unrepentant thief. For undoubtedly it was the divine
purpose of God, to give special glory to his son our Savior, even in that,
whereby his persecutors sought his disgrace, to the uttermost that they could.
They crucified him in the midst of two thieues; accounting him, and desiring
that he should for ever be accounted, more vilie off, then any common
malefactor. But God so disposes of the matter, that according, as by the title
set up over the head of our Savior, he proclaims him to be the King of his
Church, and a Prince of the salvation of his people; so by this most gracious
effect, he does really confirm the same, both in that he does most
miraculously and graciously turn the heart of this thief by the spirit of his
Son (the whole Trinity consenting and coniointly working this work) for a
mirror of his grace, and to manifest the admirable efficacy of the sufferings
of our Savior before God, even while he was at this time, in the enduring of
them: and also, in that according to the request of the repe^ting thief, who
desired our Savior to remember him in his kingdom, he does by his own
absolute power and princely authority, grant and assure him to be a partaker
of the happiness, and joys thereof: as we shall see more fully, when we come
to the words of the promise, the which our Savior made unto him, even while
yet he was hanging upon the Cross.

For in this part of our text, we have to consider these two things. First, the
conversion of the thief: and then the fruit or benefit thereof: either of them
proceeding of the most free and bounteous grace of God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

In the first place therefore, to the end we may see more fully into the most
gracious and admirable work of God, in the conversion of the thief: we are to
consider certain circumstances first, and then the manifold and excellent
graces, whereby his conversion was manifested.

The circumstances, which do argue the wonderful mercy of God, were these.
First, because the party converted, was one that had been accustomed to sin,
yea and grown to a great height in it: and therefore was it more hard for him,
to turn his heart unfeignedly to God: as we may perceive by that of the Prophet
Jeremiah: chap: 13.23. Can the black More (says the Prophet) change his skin?
or the shee-Leopard her spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to
do evil. We are by nature prone to sin; but custom is another nature, which
makes us, as we may say, twofold more the children, The ground and history
of his crucifying.
or rather the servants and sl^ues of sin, then we were before.

Secondly, the thief was converted even at an instant, above all that could be
expected: so that herein was fulfilled in one excellent example, and that after
a rare manner, that saying of our Savior Christ. John. 2.8 The wind blows
where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence
it comes, nor whether it goes: so is every man that is borne of the spirit.
It is a work above all that reason can see into. We can perceive, when our
hearts are once converted, that God has wrought a new work in us, because we
are otherwise minded now, then before: we delight in the word, in prayer, in
the company of the children of God, etc. Which we had no delight in before: but
they were of no reckoning with us, nay they were tedious and irksom unto us.
But the conversion it self, is a work above the comprehension of reason. And
specially, such a sudden and effectual conversion, or regeneration, as this
of the thief was.

And the rather also, because as we are to observe in the third place, he was
converted without ordinary means. For our Savior spoke nothing unto him, to
inform him in the ways of God, by outward sound of voice, and to the hearing
of the ear, which is the ordinary means of conversion. For faith comes by
he^ring. Neither did any of the Rulers, either Priest, or Scribe, or Pharisie
there present, the office of a Preacher, to instruct and exhort him to
repentance. No, no: they were so addicted to mock and reproach our Savior,
that they cared not what became of the souls of either of the poor sinners:
no more then they had before, of Judas, when they saw his soul in distress,
for his most wicked treason committed against his Lord and Master. Math. 27.4.
What is that to us say they? see thou to it. So heer^, none of them all, make
it any part of their care. Such careless and unconscionable Pastors and Guides
were they. Nay rather, as the other thief was made worse by their example, in
mocking our Savior: so had this poor soul also, if the Lord had not mightily
succored him, against all contrary means, and occasions of perdition.

Thus then, the circumstances of this work, do seru^ notably, to magnify the
greatness of it. But the mani^old and excellent graces themselves, whereby it was
manifested, are a more full illustration of it. Of these, let us now consider.

The excellent graces, wherewith the thief converted, was immediately endued,
and furnished, were many: but they may be considered, all of the^, from these
4. branches of the text. First, from that which shows what his reproof was,
to his fellow, in rebuking his railing. Secondly, from that which contains
his confession, both of his own sins, and the sins of his fellow: together with
his acknowledgement of their just desert, touching the punishment which was
inflicted upon them, by the sentence of the Magistrate. Thirdly, from that
which shows how he justified our Savior Christ. Fourthly, from that which
sets forth his prayer which he made to our Savior.

The words of the reproof, whereby he rebuked the railing of his fellow, were
these, Fear thou not God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? that is,
in the condemnation which Pilate pronounced against either of us, as well as
against him: or, seeing thou art en to au to crimat^: that is, in the
condemnation it self, or present condemnation, as M Calvin interprets it I^
the which reproof, first of all, it appears evidently, that this repenting
thief, was effectually touched with the true fear of God: and that also from
the conscience of his sin by occasion of that heavy punishment which he now
saw, and felt, by the just hand of God, to be cast upon him, for the same. For
if he had not been truly taught by the Spirit of God, to make the right use of
his own affliction, he could not in such manner, as he does, reprove his
fellow, in who^ he saw these graces wanting. And further, from this his
gracious and earnest reproof, it is likewise evident, that he was inflamed
with a holy zeal to the glory of God, grieuing to hear our Savior Christ so
blasphemed, and railed upon: and also with love and compassion toward his
companion, whom he saw to offend so grievously this way, above all his other
sins: and therefore if it might have been, desired to have moved him to
repentance, even as he himself, through the rich and tender mercy of God in
Jesus Christ, was. Wherefore from this part of the speech of this notable
convert: beside the singular graces which God had wrought in his heart, let us
diligently observe these two excellent instructions. First, what is the cause,
that men do run into all licentiousnes and disorder of life, in whoring,
robbing, etc. to wit, even because the fear of God is not before their eyes.
For where that is, it is a holy bridle to restrain and hold them in: according
to the holy Proverb, That by the fear of God, we depart from evil. But where
it is wanting, there is no care of shunning any sin: as we may perceive by
that which we read Genesis chapter 20.11. and Romans chapter 3.9, 10, etc. 18. Secondly, we
are to observe, what ought to be, and is unto the children of God, the right
use of all afflictions: whether they be such, as God by his own hand, does
more immediately cast upon us, or by the ministry of those his honorable
officers and Magistrates, into whose hands, he has put the sword of justice,
to take vengance of evil doers. Not only to the end that evil might be taken
out of the way, and other learn to fear: but also, that the parties
themselves, might be brought to repentance by punishment at the last, who would
not by any other means be reclaimed, so long as they escaped. For to this end,
the speech of the converted thief is notable: as though he should have said
thus to his fellow, Howsoever, when we had liberty to do what we list, and
tyrannized at our pleasure over poor travelers, which fell into our hands, in
the woods or desert places, as if we had been Lords and Kings over them: yet
now has God brought our wickedness to light, and armed the sword of his
Magistrate against us: and we are presently under the sentence of our temporal
condemnation: we ought now, all desperate obstinacy laid asid, to call our
sins to mind, to lament and bewail them, and to seek to God for mercy, that
we may happily prevent his eternal damnation. And thus it is evident, from the
effects, even in the first part of the speech of this man: that God had wrought
a most gracious conversion, and change in his heart: seeing he does no other
thing, but that which God, does in his holy scriptures, command all his
servants to do, and whereunto he persuades us by many holy reasons, both in
regard of that zeal we ought to have of his glory, and also for that love and
co^passio^ which we owe to miserable sinners, if happily we may cover a
multitude of sins, and to be the blessed instruments of God, to the saving of
their souls. Leu. 19.17. Ia. 5.19.20. and Jude. ver. 20, 21, etc.

But let us now come to the words of the confession, both of his own sins, and
also of the sins of his fellow thief. Wherein he prosecuteth the former motive,
touching the desired repentance of his fellow, and for the profession and
declaration of his own, as it follows: We are indeed righteously here: for
we receive things worthy of that we have done. Wherein, we have to consider two
other excellent graces, as testimonies of the notable repentance of this man.
First, in that he does not go about to excuse or lessen his sin, as
hypocrites do: but he acknowledges it to the full, by a simple and plain
confession, and that no doubt with godly sorrow for the same: like as Achan
does, upon the holy and fatherly exhortation of Joshua the Magistrate of God.
Josh. 7.19, 20, 21. And David Psalm. 51. and Paul 1. Tim. 1.13, 14, 15, 16.

Secondly, (as a consequent of the former) we have this further testimony, of
the unfeigned repentance of the converted thief, that he does acknowledge the
punishment to be just that was inflicted upon him, and his fellow: yea though
it was a very grievous and sharp one. Whereby also, the truth of the former
point is argued, touching his acknowledgement of the greatness of their sin:
which was, no petty pilfering, but cruel robbing, etc.

Thus much briefly, of the second branch of his speech.

The third branch, co^teineth the testimony, which he gave of the inocency and
righteousness of our Savior, in these words: But this man has done nothing
amiss. From which words, we may justly conceive, that he was enlightened by the
holy Ghost, rightly to know and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, not only as
being righteous in himself, but to be righteous for him, and for so many as
should believe in him, according to that of the Prophet Jeremiah, chapter 23.6.
They shall call him the Lord our righteousness. A further confirmation of this
his faith, is his prayer, which follows in the last branch of his speech: as
we shall see by and by, when we come to it. In the mean season, this is
singularly to be noted, that our Lord Jesus Christ, being silent himself at
all the reproaches of the wicked: does nevertheless by this man (thus wonderfully
converted, and graced) as it were by a mighty and zealous preacher, or martyr,
reprove, and reuerse the unjust sentence, both of the Jews and Pontius Pilate,
as well as the unjust railing of the wicked and obstinate thief. This verily
was a wonderful work of God, that he should give so great a grace to this
poor crucified man, that when his choice Disciples fled from him: and Peter
for all his courage, was utterly daunted for the time: and though John were
present and near to the cross of Christ, yet was as mute as a fish (as we say
in the common Proverb) that he should from the cross, as it were from a high
pulpet, give an open and loud testimony of our Savior Christ his innocence.

It was, no doubt, a testimony of a clear revelation given unto him by the
Spirit of God, and of our Savior Christ: as also proceeding of a lively faith,
by the gift of the same Spirit. This, as was said even now, is very manifest,
from the last part of the speech of this converted man: that is to say, by his
prayer, which is a lively fruit of his lively faith, as it follows reported
by the Evangelist Luke, in this manner. And he said unto Jesus, Lord remember
me when thou come into thy Kingdom. Hinc persp^^imus (inquit Calui^us) quam
perspicaces et fuerint mentis oculi, quibut vita^ in morte, celsitudinem in
ruina, gloriam inprobro, victoriam in exitio, regnum in seruitute intuitus est.
In Harm. Euang. Where he writes excellently of this wonderful conversion, as
of the most rare and memorable example, extant from the beginning of the world.
For if he had not bin enlightened with a true and lively says, he could never
had a heart to have prayed thus. It is above all reason, that he should,
without a rare faith, look unto Christ, hanging upon the cross, with a torn
and bloody body, now near to death, and on all hands, as we may see, reviled
and mocked: and yet for all that, to acknowledge him the Lord of life and
glory, and the King and Prince of the salvation of all the elect of God: and
that he had power and authority, according to the pleasure of his will, to
dispose of his kingdom, and to grant remission of sins, and everlasting life
and salvation, to who^ he would. But thus we see he does, if we do duly
consider the words of the prayer, which he uses. For he calls him Lord, not
as he should speak to one, by using a title of common courtesy, or ciuility,
etc. as though he should have said, Sir: but he does it of religious subjection
and reverence, and by humble supplication, in regard of a divine and sovereign
power, which he now by the eyes of faith, saw him to have. Neither would he
have ascribed a kingdom unto him, unless he had bin persuaded that he was a
king indeed, (according to his title upon the cross: yea, according to the
most holy anointing of God) and that he should ascend up to the heavenly
throne of the Majesty thereof. Neither could he otherwise, with any
comfortable hope of remission of sins, and of the inheritance of his heavenly
kingdom, among the rest of his Saints, desire our Savior to remember him:
that is, to show him so great and grievous a sinner, when he should take the
possession or sit down in the throne of his kingdom. And thus we may
plentifully perceive, by these so manifold and excellent graces, wrought so
speedily, and without all means, yea against all outward lets and hindrances,
object to his senses by the reproaches of the wicked against our Savior, and
notwithstanding the troublesome pains of his own cross: that his conversion
was most extraordinary and admirable: and therefore, a most evident and
eminent declaration of the mighty grace and virtue, and merit of the sufferings
of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of his father, to reconcile poor
sinners, yea even most great and grievous sinners unto him: whosoever shall
find grace, truly to believe in his name, and unfeignedly to repent of his
sins, as this great sinner did.

And hereunto we are to add, for the conclusion of this point, and for a
perfect confirmation of all that has been observed, concerning this rare
conversion: the most gracious answer of our Savior Christ to the suppliant
and repenting thief: the which we read in these most sweet, and comfortable
words, as the Evangelist Luke does likewise rehearse them: Then said Jesus unto
him, Verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

O admirable effect of mercy, answerable to the former admirable cause of
mercy. I mean that gift of mercy, in the conversion of this so miserable a
sinner, of the most free grace and mercy of God our heavenly father, whose
only favor, is both the cause, and also the effect of all mercy: he crowning,
and rewarding nothing in any of his elect children, but those gifts and graces,
which he has first given them.

The greatness of this grace of our Savior, is to be considered from his own
words, the faithful interpreter of his gracious mind: and therefore let us
stand a little, to ponder and weigh them.

Verily (says our Savior) even he that is the truth affirms it in truth,
and with his holy and grave affirmation, usual to him in the affirmation of
great and weighty points, worthy all credit: to the end he might raise up the
minds of those to whom he spoke, to the more firm and undoubted faith of
them: thus he speaks to the converted thief, of a profane thief, being now
changed to be a believing and holy Christian. And it is to great purpose, that
it be observed, that he who is thus the truth and the true Savior, speaks
it: because whosoeu r else had spoken it, it should have been a vain speech
Yea it is singularly to be observed, that Christ crucified speaks it, because
it is by the virtue of his sufferings upon the cross, that he saves both him
and all of us. And therefore to magnify the benefit of his cross, he is thus
gracious and earnest, in giving assurance of remission of sins, and eternal
life, to a very great and grievous sinner.

Neither does our Savior hold him in any long suspense, by making him a
promise, for a long time to come: but he assures him of the experience of his
mercy and salvation, even the same day: the day also, being now half spent: to
the end, that the poor soul, might be comforted more and more, with the
assured hope of a blessed life, against the discomfort of the natural death,
every minute of the hour, more and more hasting and approaching.

Yea, and he does not assure him of a small blessing, and favor: but that he
shall be with him: that is, that his soul shall be with the soul of our
Savior. Where? Even in Paradise; that is, in heaven. According to that
similitude, whereby the holy Scriptures, do sundry times use to signify the
same: as 2. Cor. 12.4. and Revel: 2.7. And even to this end, that the holy
delight, and spiritual pleasure, and joy of heaven, might be familiarly
shadowed out from the Hebrewe word Pardes: which signifies a pleasant and
delightful garden or orchyard; principally alluding to that garden of Eden,
wherein Adam was placed at the first, in a very blessed and comfortable estate
and condition. To the which end also, our Savior joins these two together,
(with me, in paradise) meaning, in the like happy estate and condition for
ever (though not in the same degree, of honor, and glory, which is not meet
for any creature) according to the most holy prayer of our Savior. John,
17.20.21.22.23.24. Such is the most gracious promise, and answer, which he
makes the repenting sinner: he himself, as well as the thief, hanging yet
fastened to the cross. Wherein notwithstanding, we see how he begins his
most glorious triumph. The which words of our Savior, were noe doubt, not
only comfortable to the thief that was (though now noe thief, but a Saint
clothed with the righteousness of Christ by a true and lively faith) but also to
Marie the mother of our Savior, and to the other Mary's, mentioned before: and
to John his beloved Disciple, who no doubt marked these things, and laid them
up in their hearts. And they may also be exceedingly comfortable to us, and to
all true believing Christians: as we are diligently to observe in our course
and order, among the rest of the comforts.

Hitherto of the first part, or space of time, and the memorable things falling
out therein, which we propounded to our selves to consider of: concerning the
third, that is to say, the last part of the execution of our Savior. The first
part, or space of time, as we have seen, reached from the fastening of our
Savior to the cross, which was a little after the third hour, to the sixth
hour of the day, which was with them about high noone.

THe second space of time, which we, according to the course of the holy
story, have propounded to consider of, as i^ were in another division, or
several treatise: is from the sixth hour to the ninth, touching those other
like worthy and memorable things, which fell out in that time. Of this part of
the story, let us therefore henceforth set our minds, with like reverence and
diligence, earnestly to inquire. But this we are to do, from the ground and
testimony of the holy story. Which therefore are the words thereof?

44. It follows thus in the Evangelist Luke, ch: 23. v. 44.45. And it was
about the sixth hour: and there was darkness over all the land, until the
ninth hour.

45. And the Sun was darkened, and the veil of the Temple rent through the
midst. The holy Evangelist, having described unto us, the notable conversion
of one of the thieues, and the gracious acceptance which our Savior
vouchsafed him: he tells us now, about what time, this gracious work was
accomplished: to wit, about the sixth hour. The which being little regarded of
the scornful beholders (though indeed it was a very wonderful and miraculous
work) the Evangelist declares further, that it pleased God to take an other
kind of course to reprove this wicked people then by his insensible creatures.
Of the which sort, the Evangelist rehearses two in our present text. The
first, that from the sixth hour to the ninth, God had as it were put out the
light among the people: the reason whereof was, that he had taken away the
light from the Sun, which had bin from the fourth day of the creation, until
that time, and so ever since, the ordinary instrument and lamp thereof. The
second reproof by insensible creatures, was the miraculous rending of the
veil of the Temple through the midst. But as touching the rending of the
veil, in so much as it seems that Matthew and Mark do rehearse it in the
more orderly course, together with a more full narration of other things of
like nature: we will defer to speak of it, till we come to them. In the mean
season, let us diligently consider of this one wonderful and fearful work
of God, in casting darkness upon the face of the earth. Whereby, no doubt, the
Lord God from heaven, would make manifest to the reproof both of Jew and
Gentile (but specially of the most unthankful, wicked and blasphemous Jew)
these four things. First, the greatness and grieuousnes of their sin in the own
nature, insomuch as most gross ignorance was joined with most extreme
impiety: the which the Sun was (as we may say) ashamed to behold any longer,
or to cast forth her beams, that any should continue their contumelious gazing
upon this spectacle, most unworthy their beholding.

Secondly, God does hereby declare, how grievous and displeasing unto him,
t^eir sinful dealing was for their parts, against our Savior to be blessed
and adored for ever.

Thirdly, as a further consequent thereof, that his most heavy and terrible
punishment, should in due time (as it came also to pass within a few years
after) fall upon the^, together with gross blindness of their understanding, as
appears to this day. For darkness was a most fit sign, to threaten and
portend such a grievous calamity in either respect: insomuch as ignorance, and
all kind of adversity, and the trouble or vexation thereof, is in the holy
Scriptures usually termed by the name of darkness: as on the contrary, true
knowledge, prosperity, and comfort, is by light, according to that Isay, ch:
5.30. and ch: 8.22. and 9.1.^. and ch: 6^.1.2.3. Lament: ^.1.2. Ezekiel: 37.7.8.
Amos 5.18.19.20. Micah: 3.6. and in many other places. Read also, 2. Cor:
3.14.15.

Fourthly, God did by this darkness, plainly give to understand, that the
crucifying of the Son of God, so vilely accounted of among these crucifiers: is
a matter of most worthy and memorable note, and of the greatest both precedence
and consequence (as one may say) that ever has bin, or shall be, from the
beginning of the world, to the end of the same. For to this end, he has by
this sha^ge darkness, made this time of special note, not only by holy
Scriptures, but also by many testimonies of heathen records.

The strangenes of this miraculous darkness, is to be observed in three things.
The ground and history of his leading to be crucified.
First in the cause of it, which was noe natural eclipse, or defect of light,
by the interposition of the Moon, as it comes to pass in our ordinary
eclipses, much less by the shadow of any dark cloudie weather: but as the
Evangelist Luke reports by the defect of light in the Sun it self, and
that also in the time, when it should have bin) as we make reckoning) in the
full strength and brightness of it. For as he writes (guided by the Spirit of
truth) about the sixth hour, that is about high noone, The Sun was darkened.
And that it was no ordinary eclipse, by the interposition of the Moon: the
time of the month, when this darkness was upon the earth, does of it self
declare: insomuch as it was at the full, and not in the new of the Moon, that
the Passover was celebrated by the ordinance of God, as well as by the constant
practice and custom of the Jews themselves. This therefore, does first of all
show, that this darkness was most extraordinary and miraculous, like unto that
darkness which God cast upon the Egyptians, as a punishment for their
cruelty against the Israelites, though it continued not so long: and of the
like nature, with that blindness which the Angel cast upon the Sodomites, who
made their more then beastly assault against the house of Lot.

Secondly, the continuance of it, in one equal degree of darkness, yea of
gross and uncomfortable darkness no doubt, by the space of three whole hours,
shows that it was no ordinary eclipse.

Thirdly, in that although the natural cause of the darkness, was a most
extraordinary defect of light in the Sun it self, to all the land of
Israel: and by all likelihood, an obscuring of the air over that part of the
world, insomuch as the cause of darkness was in the failing of the Sun it
self: yet God so ordered the matter, that from no record it is alleged
hitherto, that it was so palpable in any place as it was in Israel. As if the
Lord minded to promise light, and peace, to the Gentiles though he threatened
war and misery, against the obstinate Jews. So that in this respect, he
took a contrary course, to that of the darkness of Egypt, which threatened
desolation to the Egyptians: when as light at the same season, shined only to
the Israelites in Goshen, where they dwelt in portion of the land of Egypt, as
a promise of comfortable deliverance unto them. Exodus: 10.21.22.23.

And thus, this three hours darkness, which was (as three Evangelists,
Matthewe, Mark, and Luke do testify) continued from the sixth hour to the
ninth: it was a doleful Sermon of three hours long, to a most lightsome and
vehement reproof, and condemnation, of the most blind ignorance, and most
deadly malice of the persecutors of the glorious Son of God our blessed
Savior. Thus much briefly, concerning the second space of time, belonging to
the last part of the execution of our Savior.

THe third space, which is the last of the third part of the story of the
execution, is now to be henceforth weighed, and pondered of us: to wit, from
the ninth hour, to the taking down of the body of our Savior from the
cross. Wherein, many things of most grave moment, will offer themselves to us,
as being most worthy our best considerations: as the text it self, will most
faithfully lay before us. Let us therefore first of all look unto that.



The Evangelists, Matthew, and Mark are most large in the most points: and the
Evangelist John in some other, Nevertheless, though the Evangelist Luke is most
brief, yet he reports some thing which all the rest omit.

It is very true. And therefore it is our parts to inquire what every witness
says of his certain knowledge, in every point. Let us begin with the
Evangelists Matthewe, and Mark.



46. And about the ninth hour (says the Evangelist Matthewe (chap: 27.46. The
ground and history of his ^gon^^ upon the Cross.
etc. that is (according to the Evangelist Mark, chap: 15, 34 etc.) At the
ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi,
lammasabachthani? which is by interpretation. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Or as in Matthewe, Eli, Eli, etc.

47. And some of them that stood there, when they heard it, said, this man
calls Elias.

48. And strait way one of them ran, and took a sponge and filled it with
vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink.

49. Other said, let be: let us see if Elias will come and save him.

35. In Mark, thus. And some of them that stood by, when they heard it said,
Behold he calls Elias.

36. And one ran and filled a sponge full of vinegar, and gave him to drink,
saying, Let him alone: let us see if Elias will come and take him down.

Thus indeed, do Matthew and Mark set down these two points, first, the
lamentable complaint of our Savior, having continued now about six hours, in
great dolor, and most bitter grief, both of body and soul upon the cross,
together with the mockings of some that stood by: and then, the reaching of
vinegar to our Savior. But this last point, is more fully laid forth by the
Evangelist John: and therefore let us hear it from him.



In the 19. chap: verses 28.29.30. thus he writes thereof.

28. After, when Jesus knew that all things were performed, that the Scriptures
might be fulfilled, he said, I thirst.

29. And there was set a vessel full of vinegar, and they filled a sponge with
vinegar, and put it about an hyssope stalk, and put it to his mouth.

30. Now when Jesus had received of the vinegar, he said, It is finished, and
bowed down his head, and gave up the Ghost.

Explication.
This is the more full report of the Evangelist John, touching that point. But
yet again, before this our Saviors giving up of the Ghost: Matthewe and Mark
testify further, that our Savior in giving up the Ghost, cried again with a
loud voice, chap. 27.50. and chap. 15.37. Yea and the Evangelist Luke, chap.
23. verse 46. testifies in this point, more then all the rest: setting down
the words, which he used in this latter cry. For as he writes, our Savior
cried with a loud voice, and said, Father into thine hands I commend my Spirit.
And when he had thus said, he gave up the Ghost.

These then are part of the most memorable things, to be diligently weighed of
us, in the last space of the time, of the execution of our Savior: from the
ninth hour, to the time that he was taken down from the Cross. The rest do
follow: for the report whereof, we will first return to the Evangelist
Matthew,

And behold (says the Evangelist) the veil of the Temple was rent in twain,
from the top to the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the stones were
cloven.

52 And the graves did open themselves, and many of the bodies of the Saints
which slept; drose,

53 And came out of the graves after his resurrection and went into the holy
City, and appeared to many.

54 When the Centurion, and they that were with him watching Jesus, saw the
earthquake and the things that were done: they feared greatly, saying, Truly
this was the Son of God.

55 And many women were there, beholding him a far off, which had followed
Jesus from Galile ministering unto him.

5^ Among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Ioses, and
the mother of Zebedeus sons.

Hitherto, out of the Evangelist Matthew, from the 51. verse of this 27. chap.
mentioned above, even to the 57. verse of the same. The testimony of the
Evangelist Mark, chap. 15. verses 38, 3^, ^0 41. is the same: though not so
full in the former two verse^, as the Evangelist Matthew writes.

But in the latter two, Mark is something more then he, as we read thus: The
ground and history of his leading to be crucified.
There were also women, who beheld a far off, among whom was Mary Magdalene,
and Mary (the mother of James the less, and of Ioses) and Salome. Who also
when he was in Gatile followed him, and ministered unto him, and many other
women which came to with him unto Jerusalem. Thus is Mark a little more large
here, then Matthew. And Saint Luke (though in the rest more silent) yet both in
this testimony concerning those that were the best sort of the beholders of
our Savior, and also concerning the Centurion: he remembers something more,
then either of them do, ch: 23. verses 47.48.49.



Now (says S. Luke) when the Centurion saw what was done, he glorified God,
saying, Of a suertie this man was just.

48. And all the people which came together to that sight, beholding the things
which were done smote their breasts and returned.

49. And all his acquaintance stood a far off, and the women that followed
him from Galile, beholding these things.

Explication.
Here we see then, that (as was said) S. Luke adds some thing in these points,
above Saint Matthewe and Mark: though in other things again, they are more
full then he. And so we perceive that it is to very good use, that we
diligently compare all the Evangelists together, that we may lay up, not only
their several instructions a part, but also one entire instruction from them
all, in the treasury and record of our hearts.

And now again, before we come to the time of the taking down of the body of
our Savior, from the cross: the holy Evangelist John, reports at large,
other things of very worthy note, which none of the other Evangelists write
any word of.

Let us therefore, here join his further supply unto the former. And so shall
we have all things gathered together and laid before us, the which are
worthily to be observed for ever, concerning the last space of the time, that
our Savior continued upon the Cross: that is to say, from the ninth hour
until the time that his body was taken down. Which was not (as we shall see
afterward) long before the evening.

John?

In the 19. chapter thus we read, from the 31. verse, to the 38.

31 The Jews then (because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not
remain upon the Cross on the Sabbath day, for that Sabbath was an high day)
besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken
down.

32 Then came the soldiers and brake the legs of the first, and of the other
which was crucified with him.

33 But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake
not his legs.

34 But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith
there came blood and water.

35 And he that saw it does bear record, and his record is true: and he
knows that he says true, that ye might believe it.

Exodus 12.46. Numb. 9.12.
36 For these things were done, that the Scriptures should be fulfilled, Not a
bone of him shall be broken.

Zech. 12.10.
37 And again, another Scripture says, They shall see him whom they have
thrust through.

Explication
Hitherto, the report of the Evangelist John, is in this narration singular
above the rest. And thus we have now before us, in this collection, the whole
history of the last space of time, wherein our Savior continued upon the
Cross, and in the which, the execution of Pilates sentence of condemnation
given against him, was perfited: or rather, the sentence of Gods divine
judgment, and condemnation upon him, for a time, for us, and all his elect:
that we might for ever be acquitted, and saved from our sins, and the eternal
wrath of God by him.

In which part of the holy story, concerning this last space of time: The
ground and history of his agony upon the cross.
we have many, most memorable, and worthy things to consider of. Let us briefly
lay them together, so as we may inquire of them, in some commodious course and
order, for our better understanding and remembrance of them.



I have heard you say, that we may well consider of them all: First, under this
division or distribution of the things: either as they fell out before the
death of our Savior, now very nearly approaching: or together with his death,
and immediately after: and so forth, till he was to be taken from the Cross.

It is not amiss, if we do so. Let this therefore be agreed upon. But yet
so, as we do in no case lightly pass over the death it self: which is as
weighty a point, as any thing else: So that we may (for the avoiding of this
so unworthy an escape) ad it as a third member, though reckoning it in the
second place after this manner: considering first of the things as they fell out
before his death, now very nearly approaching: secondly, of the death it self:
thirdly, of those things which fell out, immediately with, or after his death:
and so forth till the time of his taking down from the cross.



Beside the renewing of the light of the Sun, at the ninth hour. We have on
the one side four most grave speeches of our Savior, to be weighed of us: the
instruction and comfort whereof is greater then is the light of the Sun when
it shines most comfortably upon us. And on the other side, we have recorded
unto us, the renewed mocking of some most profane and contemptuous wretches
against our Savior, in deriding the first of his speeches.

These things indeed, are evidently recorded, as we may easily see by laying
the sundry testimonies of the holy Evangelists together.

ANd first, as touching the four speeches of our Savior, a little before his
death (which we may account the last words of his last will and Testament,
and as the ratifying of all that ever he spoke, or did, or suffered for us)
they are (after the silence of two or three hours of darkness upon the land,
and of the continuance of extreme doloures unto the soul of our Savior) as
the breaking forth of light out of darkness, much more comfortable to our
souls, then the natural light of the Sun is to our bodies: as it will, by
the grace of GOD appear, in the opening of them.



The first was in these words. Eli, Eli, lamasabachthani? which (as the
Evangelists Matthewe and Mark say) is by interpretation, My God, My God, why
have thou forsaken me? Mat: 27.46. and Mar: 15, 34.

The second speech was this, I thirst John 19.28.

The third, It is finished, John, 19.30.

The Fourth, Father into thine hands I commend my Spirit. Luke chapter 23.46.

Explication
The first of these most holy and memorable speeches of our Savior, was (as of
it self, it is clear and evident) a most doleful complaint, and effect, of
his long continuance under the heavy sense of the wrath of God: and namely, in
the last three hours of darkness, which were no doubt unto him a
representation of Hell, the place of utter darkness, answerable to the nature
of his anguish and torment which was very hellish, so far forth as for the
time might be endured of him: as uncomfortable (out of all question) to him in
his natural sense, as they are spiritually comfortable to us, in regard of the
most sweet fruits and effects thereof, to the souls and consciences of all
true believers: whosoever have learned most earnestly, to discern the
extremity of their eternal misery, without Jesus Christ, by reason of their
sin.

But to the end we may rightly understand the mind of our Savior: we must
take heed, first that we do in no wise take them, as if our Savior did utter
them either of impatience, and in way of expostulating, as if he were over
hardly dealt withal at the hands of God: or as one in despair, or pretending
a thing that was not in truth felt of him: or as if his humanity were simply
forsaken of the deity, and so the union of both natures, humane and divine,
were dissolved from being one Person of the mediator: or that the father were
utterly estranged from him, and had reprobated and rejected him, etc. We must,
I say take great heed, that we do in no wise, conceive any of these things.
For it is impossible, that any of them, should befall our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Lord our righteousness, who never knew any sin, neither was guile at any
time found in his mouth: and who (being the natural Son of the Father, and
perpetually loved of him, yea even in that he is man) remains an high Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedech, one true, eternal, and everlasting
God, with the Father and the holy Ghost, in the unity of one and the same
divine nature: as we have seen at large heretofore. For how possibly, should
the unity of the Godhead, be at any instant, for one moment, divided? How
could the inseparable union of the Person of Christ be dissolved? How could he
that was most sincere and void of all guile in his whole life, dissemble, or
pretend that which was not in truth, at the point of his death: when truth
especially is required, and wherein God is is especially most near to judge
and try the heart? How could he that was perfectly righteous, sin through any
impatie^ce, or by charging God with any unrighteousness: as if the most dutiful
Son, should disgrace his most honorable Father? Finally, how should he that
calls God his God, yea most earnestly, and with a loud voice calls him so,
and that in the hearing of all: yea who insisteth in it, with an instant
repetition, O my God, my God: Yea and acknowledges him the almighty God, able
as well as willing to succor and deliver out of the deepest and most dangerous
gulf of distress that may be (for so the word Eli signifies: as if he should
have said in our language, O my mighty God, my mighty God) how therefore, I say,
should we think, that he should despair: yea that he should have any the least
distrust, either in the good will of god toward him, (whom he calls in most
special manner his God) or in his power, whom he acknowledges to be almighty?
God forbid, that we should, either to the dishonor of our Savior himself,
imagine any such thing against him: or to the weakening and destroying of our
own faith. For if he were not perfitly righteous, even to the death: how would
we be justified by him in the sight of God? And if he had not been God in our
nature without separation, how should he have prevailed against the most heavy
wrath of God, which for the time, had overwhelmed him for our infinite and most
heinous sins, and for the sins of all the elect: How then (may it be said)
are we to understand the words of our Savior: who though he calls God his
God, says nevertheless, Why have thou forsaken me?



We are to understand them, as a most humble and dutiful supplication, to God
his heavenly Father, bewailing and lamenting the extremity of that dolor and
torment, both of soul and body, which he had now continued in a long time for
the sins of his redeemed people: maruailing withal, through humane
infirmity, though without all sinful passion of mind, (the Deity of his
Person also hiding as it were, and withdrawing it self from the humanity as
touching the comfort thereof, though never separated in respect of the secret
and effectual power and presence of it) that he having in nothing offended
God, nay in all things having been most perfectly obedient to him, yea both in
nature and will, most nearely knit unto him: should, all this notwithstanding,
remain still thus long void of all comfort, yea full of all humane confusion
and torment, as if he had been one utterly rejected and cast off by God, into
the state and condition of the damned in hell: though therewithal he knew,
that it was impossible, that he should finally, and for ever, remain and abide
so.

This was indeed (so far as we in our shallowe conceits can comprehend)
the mind of our Savior: though no doubt, he apprehended more in the v^tering
of these words (both touching the infinite wrath of God, cast upon him for our
sins, and also touching the infinite mercy of God, in minding, for his sake,
to forgive them unto us, Explication.
together with the punishment of them) then we can reach unto. He meruailed,
not that the wicked should so so molest him: but that God himself should so
long delay his help, and remain as it were an adversary against him. Yet so
does our Savior marvel and complain, as he has in nothing more notably
declared the perfection of his most holy obedience, and the perfect union of
the divine nature with the humane, then in this, that notwithstanding he was,
and had continued, in this most doleful and lamentable estate so long a time,
as was above all humane strength to have endured: yet he bears it most
patiently in respect of our sins, for whom he suffered: only bewayling,
and as we may say, bemoaning his pitiful estate, as it were into the bosom
of God: nothing doubting, but his own innocence and righteousness together,
with his most holy prayer and sufferings, should now at the last in due time,
be in due sort; that is, most graciously regarded of him: not only on his own
behalf, but also for the eternal benefit of all the elect.

This most excellent mind of our blessed Savior: insomuch as it is notably
expressed, by the faithful servant of God, M Beza, whom he has made wise,
among many other, to be an excellent interpreter and teacher of his will: I will
for a further declaration of the mind of our Savior in these words, allege
that which he has publicly preached, and written to the s^m^ end. The words
of this faithful servant of our Savior Christ, are these: In primis (inquit)
hoc positum esto, vocibus istis, non exprobrationem, non iudignants, animi
auersationem, contineri: quasi Jesus Christus cum Patre contenderet, and
rationem huius tractationis exposceret (nec enim ad eum vt Deum suum, and
quidem iterata voce Dei sui, se conuertere^): sed lamentabilem esse vocem
animi, in summis angustij^ posi^^ and quidem filij ad Patris omnia iussa
obsequentissimi, sed qui seipsum in hoc agone ^um in tuctur, putat, nisi
aliunde sibi auxilium feratur, fore prorsus imparem tanto ferendo oneri, and
quae sibi essent imposita perficiendi and ad optatum finem deducendi, quasi
Patrem his vocibus compellaret, Euge Pater, ad sum and quidem volens in eo
statis in quo esse me voluisti, sed furoris tui sensus hos gemitus extorquet,
dum miror qui fieri posit, vt nullum sentiam tui fauot is and virtutis
praesentiam, sine qua tamen quod tu in me vis efficere, and ego volens and
sponte in omnibus tibi parere cu^io, nunquam suum sortiri possit e^itum.

Ab hoc igitur puro and integro sonte querela ista manauit, iam olim a Dauide
totidem verbis dictata, de seipso etiam in maximis suis angustijs verba
faciente Psalm. 22. sed tanquam Jesus Christi figura, quod ex Psalmi reliqua
part fit conspicuum. Obiter autem, ma^na inaequalitas hac in part, inter
figuram et veritatem, est obseruanda. Nam Dauidis hunc Psalmum scribentis,
afflictissimus and calamito sissimus status, infini^^s partibus erat inferior
passionibus quas in cruce Christus patiebatur: sieve causam, sieve mensuram, sieve
etiam effecta consideremus. Prae^erea, licet David non sine fide and spe pr^ces
illas fuderit, tamen quod in perfectissimorum etiam Deifiliorum optimis
operibus contin it, humanum aliquid passui est, ac proinde reliquiae
superfuerunt vitiositatis, quum fides nostra semper incredulitate mixta sit,
and spes aliquo ^effidentiae gradu. At in Christo, qui sine vitio pas^iones
omnes nostras animales inanerat, sine vitio and imperfectione, ista, sicut and
reliqua ipsius tum dicta tum facta, fuerunt.

Homil. 32. in Historiam Passionis. That is, first of all (says he) let this
be agreed upon, that these words contain not in them any waywardness of an
vpbrayding, or angry mind: as though Jesus Christ should contend with his
Father, and urge him to give an account why he should thus deal with him (for
then he would not have betaken himself unto him as to his God, and that by
doubling of the word his God) but that they are a doleful speech, of a mind
most deeply distressed, yea even of a Son most obedient to all the
commandments of his Father. Yet so, as while he considers himself being in
this agony, he thinks that unless some help be yielded unto him, more then
his own: that he shall be altogether unable to bear so great a burden, and to
perfect those things which were imposed upon him, and to bring them to their
desired issue: as though he should speak to his Father in these words; Behold
O Father, I am here: yea even willingly, in that estate wherein it is thy good
pleasure that I should be: but the sense and feeling of thy exceeding great
anger, does forcibly draw from me these complaints, insomuch as I cannot but
marvel, how it should come to passed, that I should perceive no presence of
thy favor and assistance: and the rather, because without it, that, which it
is thy will to work by me, and whereunto also I am willing and desirous
readily to obey thee in all things, can never attain the kindly issue of it.

So then, from this pure and entire fountain, has issued the present
compla^nt, which long since was uttered by David in the same words, he speaking
of himself, in respect of those exceeding great straites which he was in:
Psalm. 22.1. Yet as a type of Jesus Christ, as it is manifest from the rest of
the Psalm. Wherein notwithstanding, we are to observe by the way, that there
is a great inequality between the figure and the truth it self. For the state
of David who wrote this Psalm, though being very full of affliction and
calamity, yet was it by infinite degrees less then those sufferings which
Christ endured upon the Cross: whether we consider the cause, or the measure,
or the effect thereof. And beside, Albeit David did not power forth those his
prayers without faith and hope, yet as it falls out in the best works of the
most perfect among the children of God, he made some humane failing or slip,
so that there might easily be some remainder of fault, seeing our faith is
always mixed with unbelief, and our hope with some spice of doubting.

But in Christ, who took upon him all our humane passions without sin, these
things we^e without all sin and imperfection, as all other of his speeches and
actions were.

Hitherto Beza in his 32. Homily, upon the History of the Passion of our
Savior Christ.

And thus it may be evident unto us, how infinitely great and grievous the
sufferings of our Savior were: even from the beginning in the Garden, and
before, to the very end of the same, though not in every moment in like degree:
so that well might the same worthy servant of our Lord Jesus Christ, both
preach and write, as he has done in the beginning of the same Homily: that it
is not enough for us to know and believe, that Jesus Christ suffered for us
unto the death, as it is only the separation of the body and the soul,
unless we do consider this death of his, after a special manner, without
which, the death of Christ could not be our life. And therefore, as he says
further, they are exceedingly deceived, and do still continue in error, who
look no further then upon those griefs which be bodily, sensual, and
natural, in these sufferings of Christ, and namely in this his death, etc. And
a little after; The death of Christ (says he) was such as our sins do
deserve: and therefore it behooved our surety and pledge, to suffer not only
the dolours and vexations which are common to soul and body, even to the last
breath: but that unto these, should come also, that which is the greatest of
all other: to wit, the feeling of that horrible wrath of God, even in the soul
it self, the which the sins of all the elect, which are, have been, and
shall be to the end of the world, did deserve.

Moreover, whereas we are by our sins, made debtors, not only to the first
death, which is a separation of the body from the soul: but also to the second
death, which beside the torment of the soul for a time, is a renewed coupling
of the body and the soul, accompanied with the perpetual curse of God, and
all unutterable torments to endure for ever. He says further, that our Savior
Christ our surety, that he might deliver us from both, has suffered the first
death, accompanied with all the apprehensions and terrors of the anger of God,
whereby the unbelieving that die, pass from the first death to the second. But
insomuch as he willingly endured the sorrows of the first death, joined with
the apprehensions and terrors of the second, and that also with a willing, and
most holy, and most perfect obedience, clean contrary to the rebellion of our
first parents: therefore he was freed from the corruption of the body, an
effect of the first death; and much rather from the eternal punishments of the
second. Nay contrariwise, by the first death, he has made a way to the glory
of the true and perfect life, both for himself, and also for all those whom
the Father have given him, etc. So then he has most mightily and valiantly
vanquished, as well the first death, as the terrors and apprehensions of the
second: and he has appeased the wrath of God toward all his elect, the true
believers in his Son our Lord Jesus Christ. This virtue flowing from the head
to the members, not without an exceeding great wrestling of the humanity: out
of the which, he himself, though he was most just, and had received the
Spirit without measure, could never have gotten forth, unless his Godhead had
vpheld our nature in him, that it should not be overcome.

And in the same Homily, speaking of that dereliction or forsaking, which our
Savior complains of: we affirm (says he) that this word is to be
understood in such sort, as God oftentimes is said, either to come to us, or to
depart from us: to know us, or not to know us: to wit, in respect of his
special favor and presence. Wherefore we will not doubt to say, that in this
combat, our nature remained in the Person of Jesus Christ, and shall remain
for ever, without any separation from the Father and the holy Ghost: but as
touching the sensible favor and special presence of the Deity, whereby he
should be released from the horrible and astonishable feeling of the anger of
God against our sins, the which his justice must revenge by most bitter
punishments upon our Surety: it was behouefull, yea necessary, that it should
for a time be left destitute of all favor and present help of the Deity,
except only so far forth as was necessary, least it should fail in this
encounter. And of this very same thing, have the ancient spoken exceeding well,
and very fitly, concerning this satisfaction for sin: that the Deity did as
it were rest it self: that is, did not put forth the own operation and
working, for the causes already alleged. The which thing, we have also
experience of in our selves: insomuch as, though the body be a sleep after a
sort, yet the soul is not essentially separated from it, howsoever it does not
exercise the actions thereof, as when the body is waking, save only that it
maintains the natural life: in the which point lies the d^fference betwixt
a living body soundly brought a sleep, and a dead carcass.

To the same purpose, writes the same servant of Christ, a faithful and
learned Preacher of his Gospel: concerning the trouble of the soul of our
Savior in the garden. Homily 5. to show, that how great soever and perplexed
his sorrow was, yet it was without all sin. Understand ye further (says he)
a certain point, most necessarily to be known: to wit, that like as the
humane nature of Jesus Christ was very natural, and yet void of sin; so
also were his terrors without all spot of sin: howsoever the affections of
our nature, which is altogether corrupt in it self (yea even when they seem
to be worthy some praise, insomuch as there is remaining some natural
discerning betwixt vice and virtue) they are no other, then corrupt fruits,
from a corrupt tree, etc. Finally, that I may couch all in few words, all the
humane affections of the humanity of our Savior Christ: the which in the most
regenerate men, are always mingled with some frowardnes, distrust, or
despair: they were in him, naturally pure, and therefore defiled with no blot.
And as the cause of all these things were in us, and not in him, but only upon
him as upon our surety, in that he set himself to answer for us: so likewise,
the punishment was in him, that it might not be in us. O the unmeasurable
goodness, and more then incomprehensible wisdom of God: that the Son of God,
should so far abase himself, that he should be plunged into the gulf of
hell for us, to the end that he obtaining the victory over our enemies, should
therewithal lift us up above all heavens?

And a while after, to make it clear how our Savior should be thus
exceedingly troubled and perplexed in his humane nature, seeing he was also
very true God (he says further) like as we rehearsed before: We must add,
that which is not unfitly observed by one of the Fathers, concerning this
mystery of our redemption imposed on the Person of the Son: that it was
necessary that our nature in the which he was to suffer, should perfectly
feel the horror of that curse of God, which we had deserved: and that he
should for a season behold no other thing in the Person of the Father, but that
horrible, and every way terrible, rage of the divine wrath, the which he must
for our cause go under, and swallowe up. And as touching the Godhead of the
Person of the Son it self, it rested for the while, and did not put forth
the virtue thereof, reposing it self quietly, as it were in the decree of God
the Father. The same are we to judge concerning the Person of the holy Ghost,
who sustained the humane nature being in so great distress: only so far
forth, that it should not be altogether swallowed up of the divine wrath. O
unmeasurable and incomprehensible wisdom of God, revealed unto us for our
singular benefit! yea made so plain, that it may be felt, when as yet, the
Angels desire to see and search more thoroughly into it. 1. Pet. 1.12.

Neither will I neglect in this place, to set down the words of this learned
Preacher and Writer, which we read in his shorter notes, both upon Matthew
chap. 27. verse 39. etc. Christ (says he) that he might make a full
satisfaction for us, suffered and overcame, not only the extreme vexations of
the body, but also of the soul. And upon the 12. verse, etc. The heaven it
self is darkened through horror, and Jesus cries out overwhelmed, as in the
gulf of Hell, and in the mean while is scorned. And upon Mark, 15. verse,
34. Christ mightily incountering with Satan, with sins, and finally with
death, all armed with that horrible curse of God, his body hanging upon the
Cross, oppressed with exceeding dolor, his soul overwhelmed in the gulf of
hell, he does for all that, get out crying with a loud voice. And although
death having wounded him, he is bereaved of life for a time; he shaking al^
things, both high and low, the veil of the Temple being rent asunder, and
with an enforced testimony from his executioners; he gives to understand,
that he himself shall shortly be declared the Conqueror and Lord of all,
though the rest of his adversaries remained obstinate in their scornings.

To conclude. If we would see this great point of the extreme sufferings, and
inward perplexed distresses, and dolours of the soul of our Savior Christ,
both in the garden and upon the Cross, opened with great dexterity, and all
contrary scruples removed: let us read his large annotations upon the 7. verse
of the 5. chap. to the Heb. The which also, I will in a chief part set down
in english, for their sakes that could not otherwise understand what he
writes. But (says he) there are some also, who cry out, that we bereave
Christ of his Deity if we admit this interpretation that Christ feared, left
he being overwhelmed with adversity, should be overcome, or swallowed up of
death. But I demand, has not Christ not only taken the nature, but also all
the affections of man, how base and weak so ever sin only excepted?
Certainly he that denies this, is no Christian. Wherefore if it be so, I
demand how it should not agree to Christ to fear, yea to fear greatly, and to
be sore abashed: seeing he sticks not to acknowledge himself, in that he is
man, to be ignorant of the secret counsels of God. Mark 13.32. And truly,
unless our high Priest, had been tried this way also, yet without sin: how
should he have delivered us from this evil, which is one of the chief: to
wit, from that inmost sense of the wrath of God, from the trembling fear, and
affrighting of the mind, while it should be thinking of that most severe
judgment of the wrath of God? For whence was that invincible constancy of
Martyrs, but from this, that Christ who felt those terrors, being heard out of
them, did answerably take pity upon them? For that is of purpose repeated in
many places of the same Epistle. But in this point, many things seem to have
deceived some. First, because they have not distinguished what is to be
attributed to whole Christ: that is, agreeable to either nature conioyntly, or
in that he is both God and man in one Person: and again, what is to be
attributed to the same Christ in the abstracts agreeable to either of the
natures apart: that is, either to his humanity, or to his Dietie. Furthermore,
this has deceived them: that they have not considered, that there is a
peculiar respect to be had, of that time wherein it behooved that man should be
altogether, after a sort forsaken of God, as he himself cries out upon the
Cross. Not so indeed, as though God were separated from man (for if that had
been so, he could not have been our Savior by death) but so far forth,
that he did not exercise that his power in man for the time: insomuch as
otherwise, the satisfaction could not have been sufficient, unless man had felt
God in very truth most wroth, not properly or simply against him, but against
our sins. In the last place, this has deceived them, because they have
thought, that the affection of fear, and of this astonishment, whereby he
feared lest being ouer-whelmed with evils, he should sink under them, or
should be swallowed up of death: could not arise from any other thing then from
distrust, and therefore that it could not be incident to Christ. But I demand
of them, what then they do think that Christ feared? was it the torment of
the body? verily that is something: for he was man, and nature abhors
anguish. But we would be ashamed, I think, to find that constancy wanting in
Christ, which is evident to be seen in so many thousand of Martyrs. Anaisthesia
For I say nothing of the sottishnes of profane men, nor of the hypocrisy or
madness of any. Wherefore it must needs be some other thing, that (I do not
say) affected Christ: but which did so strike him, as we have no where, at any
time, such an example extent, of such a commotion. For he is not only said to
fear greatly ecthambesai, and to be grievously distressed, ademonesai, (which
signifies to be in a perplexed estate, Vocabulum ademonem significat ^rae,
maerore concidere animo, and inopem consilij esse. vt idem Beza Hom ^. in Hist.
Passionis.
and not to know what to do, perplexum and inopem consilij haerere, Mark:
14.32,) but also, now (says he) my soul is troubled: and what shall I say?
Father, save thou me from this hour. And what means that thrice repeated
saying, Father, let this cup pass from me? What this, that he sweateth drops
of blood, falling down even to the ground? What, that he cries out with so
earnest a cry, that he was forsaken? What example of amazednes shall we find
like to this, I pray you? wherefore it is some other thing that urges him so
exceedingly: that is he beholds that horrible and more then infinite ways
terrible judgment, of the Father being angry. He being one man, frail,
mortal, and weak, bears not some sins of one man, but all of all the
elect. And do we marvel that he is greatly afraid, that he is amazed, that
he is troubled, that he weepeth, that he cries out, that he does after a
sort entreat those things which cannot well stand together, that he sweateth
blood, that he cries out that he is forsaken? But for all that he never
distrusted. Be it so, who doubts of this? But then, feared he not to sink
under the burden, and lest he should be swallowed up of death? This I do
earnestly deny. Upon what ground I do it, it shall from hence be easy to
discern. If you look unto the words, he does not pray that his mind may be
strengthened, but that he may be delivered out of a danger, Father (says he)
save me from this hour. And last of all, he says not, O my God, do not
forsake me, (for he must after a sort be forsaken for a time, that he might be
received) but he says, O my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And are
not these the words of a man, thinking himself to be at the last cast, unless
he be delivered out of this present danger? And are not these the words of a
man crying out as if he had already perished in the gulf it self? Truly we
cannot justly deny this, but the matter it self will reprove us. What then? Is
he altogether out of heart? Did the author of our hope despair? Far be it
from us so to think, but even here we have a most perfect description of the
ground of our consolation. For by how much we do see the eternal Son of God
made the more abased, and abject for our sake, (sin still excepted) we can so
much the less doubt either of the goodwill of the Father, or of the
satisfaction made for us by the Son. Now the state of the matter is this: In
every vehement commotion or perturbation of the mind (of the which sort, this
no doubt was, if any other were ever in any man) the mind is so wholly taken
up and busied, that the speedy proceeding of the powers of the mind is greatly
hindered, insomuch as every power holds the whole matter in longer suspense.
For examples sake, if our minds, being at liberty from every other thought,
we shall touch any thing which may gently affect us, even in one moment of
time, the external sense which is affected carries the whole matter to the
common sense, and from thence to the judgment: and the judgment forthwith
dete^mineth, that it is this or that which we have touched, neither can any
motion be comprehended of us in our mind more quick then this. But if so be,
we shall touch any thing extremely hot or cold: the whole mind is so taken
up with grief, that er while, either we do not inquire what it is, or else we
are feign to ask of other, or else to take counsel from our other senses: and
that happens not only to those that are not aware, but also to those that
have well bethought themselves: both because of the weakness of our nature, and
also because of that most near mutual affection of all the faculties or
powers among themselves, the which no doubt is the cause, that forgetting their
own proper office, do run hastily together for their mutual succor.

Hence come those perturbations upon sudden motions: of the which the mind
once quieted and every power doing his office, it does so repent us that we
wonder at our selves, that we should come to be at this point. Now it is
necessary that we should consider this natural proceeding in Christ, if so be
we mind to acknowledge him to be very true man, not such a one as he is now
(as touching the infirmities of the flesh, all which he has now laid away) but
such a one as he was then especially, when he came to the last offering up of
that his sacrifice. This only shall be found differing, that all his
affections were altogether void of sin, when in ours there is always
something amiss. Wherefore when he says, Father what shall I say? Let us
suppose, that his mind was so fixed upon that thought of the enduring of an
infinite wrath, that no power did discern any thing particularly by it self,
but was as it were fl^tting, or at uncertain, by reason that the general
proceeding of the powers of the mind was interrupted. Moreover, when he
desires to be saved from this hour, when he prays that this cup may pass:
let us understand, that his mind speaks it, being so held in that very
cogitation, that altogether it inclining to the one part, he is well near
persuaded in himself, that there is no hope left, and that it could not be
that he should stand under so great a burden. Last of all, when he cries
out that he is forsaken: let us suppose that his mind is not now altogether
taken up in the thought and fear of the evil approaching, but as being
buried in a deep gulf of extreme misery wrestling with great difficulty,
how it might get forth of the same.

God the Son, who suffered under Pontius Pilate.
But in all these things, let us hold these two points: to wit, The ground and
history of his crucifying.
that they did not proceed from any distrust, but from the most vehement sense
of grief: and then, that this whole action, is so to be considered in the
several parts thereof, that we esteem of the whole, according to the end and
scope thereof. For he did not so continue in that thought (the which
nevertheless, as I said, was in it self void of all sin and fault) but
incontinently invincible hope rea^ed him up. For he, the same that being
stricken, says, what shall I say? save me from this hour: he adds, as it
were in one tenor. But therefore came I into this hour. He that prays
thrice, Father remove this cup from me: he adds, Thy will be done. He that
cries out, that he was forsaken; does nevertheless, call God his God. But to
what end is all this discourse? Because, by how much we understand these things
the more truly, are by so much the more certain of our salvation. And if any
man do say, that these are curious or nice points, let him blame the
Evangelists, who have laid them forth so plenteously, as those things, without
the which it cannot be, that we should understand, either the greatness of our
sins, or the fatherly good will of our God. But of these things, thus far: so
as you add this one thing, to wit, that Christ, in that he was man, did in such
wise greatly fear that terrible countenance of the Father being angry, that
this notwithstanding, he did know with all, that he was not simply angry
against him, who was guiltless of all sin, and in this respect did cheer up
himself: yet when he considered that he had set himself in the stead of
sinners, he was so stricken with the horror of Gods judgment (and that not
without cause) as there is not exta^t, neither can there be the like example;
insomuch as indeed, he has borne the punishments due to all our sins.

Thus much out of the writings of this learned and godly interpreter: whose
labors are a worthy help, to the clearing of this deep and difficult point
of holy doctrine, most necessary to be truly understood, and believed, of
every Christian. Wherein he accords with M. Calvin another like excellent
instrument of God, a worthy light in the Church of Christ, who was in the
Gospel before him, and as a Father unto him. Whose words I will also set
down upon good occasion as I trust, that we may see their blessed consent,
and thereby also the doctrine it self so much the better.

And first, concerning the trouble of our Savior: a part of that which he
writes, in his Harmony of the Gospel. Matthew. 26.37. may be translated into
our language thus. Albeit God has already exercised his Son with certain
preparations, yet at this time (says M. Caluins) he wounds him more
deeply, by striking an unwonted terror into him, by a more near insight of
death. The which, insomuch as it seems to be unbeseeming the divine glory of
Christ, that he should be stricken with great fear and heaviness, many
interpreters have toyled themselves in seeking out euasions. But their labor
has been unadvised, and to little profit: for if we shall be ashamed of his
fear and heaviness our redemption will fail us, and come to nothing. For truly
(says Ambrose) I do not only think that this needs no excuse, but also I
do in nothing more admire his godliness and majesty. For he should have stood
me in little stead, unless he had taken upon him my affection. So then, he
sorrowed for me, who had no cause of sorrow in respect of himself, and he
being bereaved of the comfort of the eternal deity, my infirmity is made
irksome unto him. Boldly therefore do I name heaviness, because the Cross is
that which I preach. Neither did he take our flesh in appearance, but even in
truth. It was meet therefore, that he should take upon him sorrow, that he
might overcome grief, and not refuse to have experience of it. Neither does
the praise of fortitude belong to them, who have rather endured the
benummednes, then the smart of the wounds. Hitherto Ambrose. Truly, they that
do imagine the Son of God to be void of humane passions, they do not
truly, and in good earnest acknowledge him to be man. Nay rather, when we say
that the divine power of Christ ceased, and was as it were hidden for a time,
to the end he should by his sufferings perform the parts of a Mediator: The
ground and history of his agony upon the Cross,
it is so far off from all absurdity, Belief in God the Son, who suffered
under Pontius Pilate
that the mystery of our Salvation, could not otherwise have been fulfilled.
In which respect, well says Cyrill, That the passion of Christ upon the
Cross, was after a sort not standing with his will, and yet very willing for
the wills sake of the Father, and to the end we might be saved: thou may
easily perceive by his prayer, Father if it be possible, let this cup pass
from me. Now in that the word of God was God, and naturally life it self, no
man will doubt that he feared death any whit: nevertheless, in that he was
made flesh, he permits the flesh to suffer that which belonged unto it.
Whereupon, as he was very man, he greatly fears death, now being present at
the very door, and he says, Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from
me. But because it is not possible, thy will be done, and not mine. Thou see
how the humane nature, even in Christ himself, suffers and fears that
which is natural unto it: but by the word which is joined with it, it is
settled in that strong resolution, which beseems him that is God. And at the
length (says Calvin) he concludes thus. Thou see evidently, that death was
not according to the will of Christ, in respect of the flesh. And yet again,
that it was according to his will: insomuch as for the sake of it, agreeable to
the will of the Father, salvation and life is given to men. Hitherto Cyril. To
which end and purpose, Calvin adds further, that the infi^mity of the flesh,
which Christ took, is to be accounted, as it is indeed, greatly differing
from that which is in us. For in us, not one of our affections, is free from
sin, insomuch as all of them, do exceed measure, and be not rightly
qualified: but Christ was so troubled with heaviness and fear, that yet he did
not lift himself up against God, but kept himself in good temper, and within
the compass of true moderation. Neither is it strange, that pure and clear
affections, should flow from him, seeing he was entire and free from all spot
of sin: howsoever they were such, as did declare that there was humane
weakness in him: and on the contrary, that from the nature of man corrupted,
nothing should come, but that which is as it were rored, and sauouring of the
dregs. Wherefore let this difference be observed, that Christ, though he
felt weakness in his fear and heaviness, yet was free from all sin: but that
our affections are sinful, because they break forth into excess. Now the
manner of the affections, wherewith Christ was tempted, is to be noted of us.
Matthew says, he was stricken with heaviness and sorrow, or distressednes.
Luke* that he was held with anguish. Mark adds, that he feared greatly. But
whence was that his sorrow, and distress, and fear, but that he apprehended
in his mind, some more heavy and horrible thing, in death, then is the
separation of the soul and the body? And certainly, he died not only that he
might go from earth to heaven, but ^ather that he taking upon him that curse
whereunto we were subject, might set us free from the same. So then, death was
not simply, as it is a departure out of the world, a horrible thing unto him:
but because the terrible judgment seat of God was before his eyes, and the
judge himself armed with revenge, above that we can conceive: and because our
sins, the burden whereof was laid upon him, did as a huge weight lie sore
upon him. And therefore no marvel, though the bottomless gulf of horrible
destruction, did grievously torment him with fear and great distress.

Likewise, upon the next verse: Here again (says Calvin) the cause of so
great sorrow, ought to be remembered of us. For death it self could not in such
wise have tormented the mind of the Son of GOD, unless it had been well
known to him, that he had to deal with the judgment of God.

And upon the next verse, concerning the prayer of our Savior Christ, and the
gesture which he used in prayer, being in the ga^den: Although (says Calvin)
the bowing of the knee is commonly wont to be used in prayer, for a sign of
honor and reverence: yet Christ lying down upon the ground, to make his
supplication, disposed of himself after a very pitiful manner, answerable to
the greatness of his dolor. O my Father (says he) if it be possible, etc.

Here some do put themselves to business in vain, to show that here is no
prayer described, but only a complaint. But as touching my self, albeit I
confess, that it was a desire upon a sudden, yet I am out of doubt that
Christ conceived a prayer. Neither is it against this, that he desires such a
thing to be granted him, as was impossible: for the prayers of the faithful,
do not always hold on in one continued course to the end: they do not
always keep one even measure: they are not at all times framed in an exact
order: nay rather they being er while intricate and perplexed, they either
seem not well to agree one petition with another, or else they are broken off
in the mid way: like as a Ship tossed by tempests, howsoever it is bound
toward the haven, yet it cannot hold on in so strait and even a course, as if
the Seas were calm.

It is true, as I said before, that we must hold, that the affections of
Christ were not disordered, so that (as it falls out often with us) they
should drive away that due moderation, which ought to have been in his mind:
but so far only as might stand with the soundnes and integrity of the
humane nature, he was greatly stricken with fear, and held so perplexed, that
he could not but stagger, being as it were in the midst of a violent flood
of tentations, when he made one request after another. And this is the reason,
why he having prayed against death, does by and by restrain himself, and
submitting himself to the government of his Father, corrects and calls
back that desire, which had upon the sudden fallen from him.

But it is demanded, how he might desire, that the eternal decree of the
Father, should be cancelled, seeing he was not ignorant of it. For albeit he
interposeth a condition, If it be possible: yet this seems unreasonable that
he should speak, as if the decree of God might be altered. For this we ought
to set down without all question, that it is impossible that God should call
back, that which he has decreed. And yet, as it is in Mark, Christ seems
to oppose the power of God to his decree saying, All things are possible unto
thee. Nevertheless, it is a mis-alledging of the power of God, if any would
hereby, make it uncertain and changeable, to the weakening of his truth.

I answer, that it is no absurdity at all, though Christ, after the usual
manner of the godly, do lay down his desire, wherewith he was vehemently
affected, into the bosom of his Father, not looking to his divine counsel.
For so it is, that the faithful, being guided by the wisdom and direction of
the Spirit of God, do not always, when they pour forth their prayers, lift up
their minds so high, as to pry into the secrets of God: neither do they as it
were at their leisure, thoroughly consider, what is possible to be done: but er
while, they are carried more speedily, through feruencie of their requests. So
Exodus chapter 32. verse 32. Moses requesteth to be blotted out of the book of
life: the words are these, Therefore now if thou pardon their sin, thy
mercy shall appear: but if thou will not, I pray thee, raze me out of thy
book, which thou have written. So Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, chapter
9. verse 3. wished to be made anathema: the words of the text are these, For
I would wish my self to be separate from Christ, for my brethren that are my
kinsmen according to the flesh.

Neither was this request of Christ, a prayer deliberated upon: but the force
and vehemency of the dolor, drew this speech from him on a sudden, the which
he by and by corrected.

The same vehemency, did for the present, bereave him of the remembrance of
the heavenly decree: so that at the instant, he did not consider that he was,
on this condition, sent to be the redeemer of mankind: like as it falls out
oftentimes, that great anguish does cast such a dimnesse upon the judgment,
that all things cannot come at once to mind. At a word, it is no absurdity
at all, though a present minding of all things, do not always meet in
prayer, to the disposing of things in set order.

And as touching that which Christ says in Mark, That all things are possible
with God: it tends not to this end, that he should set his power, and the
unchangeableness of his truth and constancy, at any ^arre betwixt themselves:
but insomuch as he could have no hope otherwise (as it is usual in great
distresses) he casts himself upon the power of God. Under the name of the
pot or cup, it was said elsewhere, that the providence of God is meant, which
disposes to every one, his measure of the cross and afflictions: like as the
Father of the family, does appoint every servant his allowance, and
distributeth to every child his portion. And in these words, Nevertheless not
as I will: we see how Christ immediately even from the first beginning, does
moderate his affections and keeps himself in very good order. But here it
may first be asked, how his will could be pure from all fault, seeing it did
not agree with the will of God. For insomuch as the will of God is the only
rule of that which is good and equal: it follows that all affections are
^aultie, which do dissent from it. I answer, that albeit this is the true
vprightenes, to frame all our affections, according to Gods will: yet there is
a certain indirect dislenting in appea^ance, which deserves not blame, nor is
to be accounted for a sin: as put the case, a man desires the peaceable and
prosperous estate of the Church, he wishes that the children of God were
delivered out of their distress, that all s^perstitions were utterly taken
away, that the rage of the wicked might be so restrained, that they should be
able to do no hurt at all. These things, insomuch as in themselves they are
right and good, the faithful may lawfully desire them, though it be the
pleasure of God to dispose otherwise: who will have his Son reign among his
enemies, his children to be exercised under the Cross, the victory of their
faith, and of the Gospel, to be made the more glorious by reason of the
contrary crafty devises of Sat^n.

We see then, how these desires are godly, though in appearance they dissent
from the will of God. The reason is, for that God wills not, that we should
always exactly, or scrupulously inquire, what he has determined: but he
gives us leave, to ask that of him, which is meet for us to ask, so far
as we are able to discern. But the question is not fully answered. For
insomuch (as it is said a while since) that all the affections of Christ were
well ordered, how comes it to pass, that he does now correct himself? For
he does in such sort subdue his affection to the obedience of God, as if he had
passed measure before. Certes, in the first request, that quiet moderation,
which I speak of, is not so evident: in that he seems, as much as in him
lies, to withdraw himself, and to be unwilling to do the office of the
Mediator. I answer, that he fau^ted nothing at all herein, because the terror
of death, being suddenly cast upon him; there fell upon him therewithal such
an astonishment, that he could not, but, (all other thoughts laid aside) betake
himself to this request. Neither is it necess^rie, that we should curiously
dispute here, whether the forgetfulness of our sa^uation, could privily creep
into him: for this alone ought to satisfy us, that at the time when he brake
forth into this request against death, none of those things came into his mind,
which would hinder and stop the same. Now, if any man shall take exception, that
the first motion was not so well ordered, as was meet, seeing it should have bin
restraind, or ever it had run out so far: I answer, that we cannot perceive in
our nature, as it is corrupted, such an ernestnes of affection, God the Son,
who suffered under Pontius Pilate.
accompanied with such moderation, as was in Christ: but we are to give this
honor to the Son of God, that we do not measure him by our selves. For so
do all carnal affections boil in us, that they do easily break forth into
a stubborn wilfulnes, or at the least, they have some scumme mixed with them.
But Christ was in such sort inflamed, through the feruencie of his anguish, and
fear, that he did nevertheless contain himself (...) his measure. Yea
rather, like as diverse sounds, differing one from another are so far from
vntuneablenes, that they do make so much the more pleasant and sweet melody:
so in Christ, we have the most notable pattern of the mutual proportion of the
wills of God and man: so as the one may differ from the other, and yet be
without all contrariety or ^arre. This place also does plainly teach, that
the old Heretics called Monethelites, were exceeding sottish, in that they
imagined Christ to have had only one will. Indeed, in that he was God, he
willed no other thing at all, then that which the Father willed: wherefore it
remains, that it was his humane soul, which had his affections differing
from the hidden counsel of God.

Now then, seeing it behooued, that Christ should captiuate his will, and make
it subject to the authority and government of God, although it was of it self
well moderated: O how carefully ought we to restrain the licentious liberty
of our affections, the which are continually both carried with a rash and
unadvised headines, and are also full of wilful sturdines! But be it, that the
Spirit of God do govern us, that we desire nothing but that which stands
with good reason: yet do we owe this obedience to God, that we do take it
patiently, though our requests take no good success. For this modesty
beseems faith, that we be content, though God do otherwise determine, then
we do desire. And then especially, we are to go by this rule, that we ask
nothing, but under this condition, that God may fulfill that which he has
decreed; in such cases, as we have no certain and special promise made unto
us. But this cannot be, unless we do submit our requests unto him. Now it is
demanded, what Christ obtained by this prayer? The Apostle to the Hebrews
chap. 5.7. says, that he was heard in that which he feared. For so ought that
place to be expounded; and not as we commonly read it, for his reverence.
Neither would that fitly agree, if Christ had feared death simply considered:
insomuch as he was not delivered from that.

Whereupon it follows, that he was driven to pray against death, through
fear of a greater evil. That is to say, when he saw the wrath of God bent
against him, in that he presented himself before his judgment seat, laden
with the sins of all the world, it could not be, but he must greatly fear
the deep gulf of death. Wherefore, though he endured death, yet, seeing the
sorrows of death being loosed, (as Peter teaches Acts 2.24.) he gat the
upper hand in the combat: the Apostle says, worthily that he was heard in
that which he feared. Here do the unlearned buskell themselves, and cry out,
that it is a thing unbeseeming Christ, that he should fear, lest he should be
swallowed up of death. But I would have them tell me, what kind of fear they
think it to have been, which drew drops of blood from Christ. For never
would that deadly sweat have flowed from him, unless he had been in a direful
and strange horror? If any at this day, should sweat blood, and that also so
plentifully, that the drops should fall down upon the earth, it should be as
a thing monstrous and incredible: and if it should happen through fear of
death, we would say such a one to be very effeminate, and to have small
courage in him. They therefore, that do deny Christ to have prayed: that the
Father would deliver him from the gulf of death: they do impute that faint
heartednes unto him, which were unbeseeming an ordinary man. If any shall
object, that the fear which I speak of, should proceed of infidelity. The
answer is ready: that Christ, so soon as he was stricken with the horror of
the curse of God, Belief in God the Son, who suffered under Pontius Pilate
was in such sort touched in the sense and feeling of flesh, that his faith
remained safe, and without all hurt. For the integrity of his nature, caused
that vnwoundedly he felt the same tentations, which do wound us by the
stingings thereof. And in the mean while, they do foolishly imagine, that he
was a conqueror without the fight, whosoever do exempt him, as having no
feeling of the tentation. Neither is it lawful for us to think, that he used
any counterfetting, while he complained of the heaviness of his soul unto
death: neither have the Evangelists set down an untruth, in that they have
reported, that he was suddenly taken with heaviness, and to have been in great
fear. Thus much out of Master Calvin in his Harmony of the three Evangelists
Matthew, Mark, and Luke: upon the 37, 38, and 39. verses of the 26. chapter of
Saint Matthew.

And after all this, upon the 40. verse of the 27. chapter of the same
Evangelist, he says that the Son of God would abide fastened to the Cross
for our saluations sake: until he had fully endured, both most raging
torments of the flesh, and also horrible distress of soul, even to the death
it self.

But let us come to that which he writes in the same his Commentaries,
concerning the doleful complaint of our Savior upon the Cross: 46. verse of
the same chapter. Albeit (says this excellent interpreter) there appeared more
then humane strength in the cry of Christ, yet it is certain that the
vehemency of his dolor, did wring it from him. And truly this was a chief
conflict, yea more grievous then all other torments: insomuch as he was so
far from being relieved in his distress, by the aid or favor of the
Father, that he found him after a sort estraunged from him. Neither did he
offer up his body only for the price of our reconciliation with God: but he
suffered in his soul also, the punishments due unto us, and so was made a man
of sorrows indeed, as Isaiah speaks chap. 53.3. And truly, very sottish are
they, who setting aside this part of our redemption, do stay only upon the
external punishment of the flesh.

Now nothing is more horrible then to feel God to be our Judge, whose wrath is
greater then all deaths. And therefore so soon as this tentation, was after a
sort cast upon Christ, as if God were his adversary, and that he was appointed
to destruction: he was suddenly taken with such an horror, as would have
swallowed up all mortal men a hundredth times, but he escaped and prevailed by
the wonderful power of the Spirit. Neither does he complain fainedly, or
after the manner of one that plaieth his part in an interlude, that he was
forsaken of God. Likewise, that which many pretend, as if he had spoken
according to that which the people conceived, it is a sottish cavil. For very
inward heaviness of mind, even by reason of the force and vehemency thereof,
did enforce him to break forth into that complaint. Neither was that
redemption which he wrought, only outward to the eyes, as I said not long
since, but even as he offered up himself a surety for us, so would he in our
stead, endure the very judgment of God. But it seems absurd, that a speech
of despair should fall from Christ. The answer is easy, seeing though in the
sense of the flesh, he did apprehend destruction: yet faith abode firm in his
heart, by the which he beheld God present, concerning whose absence he does
complain. We have declared elsewhere, after what manner the deity gave place
to the weakness of the flesh, so far as was behoouefull for our salvation, to
the end Christ might perform every part of a perfect redeemer. We have also
noted the difference betwixt the sense of nature, and the knowledge of faith.
So that nothing lets, why Christ should not conceive in his mind, that GOD
was estraunged, as his feeling gave him: and yet therewithal, by faith to
hold that GOD was favorable to him. As it is evident and plain, from the two
branches of the complaint. For before he does mention the tentation, he
shows that he makes his ref^ge to God, as unto his God: and so by the shield
of Faith, forciblie beats back that appearance of forsaking, which did on
the contrary part, thrust in it self.

To conclude, Diro cruciaecu.
the faith of Christ was so untouched in this reuengefull torment, that he
bewailing that he was forsaken, did for all that, assured he trust, that the
assistance of God was near at hand.

Moreover, that this was a speech worthy to be in singular manner observed,
hence it appears: in that the holy Ghost, to the end he might ingraue it the
better, in the remembrance of men, he would have it set down in the Syrian
language. For this is as if he should bring in Christ conti^uallie repeating
the self same words, which then he uttered with his own mouth. So that the
sottishnes of them is the more shameful, who pass by the great heaviness of
Christ, and so horrible fear, lightly, and as it were in sport. But
whosoever shall consider that Christ rooke upon him the Person of a Mediator,
on that condition that he should take upon him our guiltines, as well in soul
as in body: he will not marvel, that he should have to encounter with the
sorrows of of death, as if he had been in the di^pleasure of God, cast out
into a labyrinth of all misery.

The same point, does he notably lay forth, from the words of our Savior,
John chapt: 12.27. in his Commentary upon that Gospel, wherein that our
Savior complains that his soul was troubled, he notes that it is no
maru^ll, though scoffing persons make all but a matter of laughing: in so much
as none can understand what the horrible grieuousnes of the sufferings of
Christ means: but such as are humbled with some experience in themselves. And
then also, he shows that it was not only behoosfull, but also necessary,
that the Son of God should be so affected as he was: seeing by his death he
was to make satisfaction to God, and to appease his anger, and curse, by taking
our guiltines upon himself, etc. Neither (as he says) was it without reason,
that the Son of God should be so troubled, seeing the Deity hid it se fe,
neither showed forth the virtue thereof, but rested after a sort, that he might
make way unto the satisfaction, etc. And upon those words, What shall I say?
Father, save me from this hour: but therefore came I unto this hour: he
shows that there are fi^e degrees to be noted. First, a complainte, the which
brake forth from unmeasurable dolor. Secondly, he perceives that he has
need of succor, and therefore lest he should be oppressed with fear, he
i^q^ireth in himself, what he should do! Thirdly, he betaketh himself to
his Father, an^ imploreth the aid of him, as of his deliverer. Fourthly, he
calls back the request, which he acknowledges, would not stand with his
calling: and wishes to suffer any thing, rather then not to fulfill that
which was enjoined him by his Father.

And last of all, preferring the glory of God alone, he forgets all other
things: and m^keth no reckoning of them. The which points, the interpreter
does notably open and clear, against such cauills and scruples, as flesh and
blood raises against them. But because the same in effect is translated
before, we will rest in that which we have already seen.

He uses also the like dexterity in clearing the words of the Apostle,
concerning the same matter, Hebrews, chapt: 5. verses. 7 8. where among the
rest, he answers to this question, How was Christ heard out of his fear,
seeing he endured death which he feared?

The which answer only, I will here set down. I answer therefore (says he)
that we must consider what the scope of his fear was. For why did he shun
death, but because he beheld in it, the curse of God: and because he was to
encounter with the guiltiness of all sins, and even with hell it self?
Hence was his trembling, and anguishe, in so much as the judgment of God is
more th^n fearful.

So then, he obtained that which he would: to wit, that he might prevail and
get out of the sorrows of death, that he might be supported by the saving
hand of his Father, that after a short time of combat, he might get a glorious
triumph over Satan, sin, and hell. And in like manner, it comes often to
pass, that we desire this or that, but to another end. And God, denying us
that which we have asked, yet finds out a way to relieve us.

This excellent, and most necessary doctrine, concerning the exceeding and
incomprehensible greatness of the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, to make
satisfaction to the divine, (that is the infinite justice of God for our
sins) being thus set down, in diverse places of the learned Commentaries of
this faithful and learned instrument, (a Scribe spiritually taught of God) it
is by himself, exactly set down and notably couched together in his
Institutions. 2. Book. chap: 16. Sections 10.11.12. and we have it already
translated into our language. Nevertheless, it shall be to good purpose, that
we desire the Printer to take the pains to set it down here also: and the
rather, because he truly disputes, to the reproof of all ignorant, or nice
and partial interpreters of this deep mystery, that the sufferings of our
Savior, were so great, that they may justly be said to be a kind of
Descension to Hell: that is to say, to have been so great, that they may
without any hyperbolicall, or excessive speech, be called very hellish
torments, or sufferings.

In that place of his Institutions therefore: Concerning Christ's going down
to hell (says Calvin) beside the consideration of the Creed, we must seek
for a more certain exposition: and we assuredly have such a one out of the
word of God, as is not only holy and godly, but also full of singular comfort.
Christ's death had been to no effect, if he had suffered only a corporal
death: but it behooved also that he should feel the ^igour of Gods vengeance:
that he might both appease his wrath, and satisfy his just judgment. For
which cause also, it behooved, that he should, as it were hand to hand, wrestle
with the armies of hell, and the horrors of eternal death, we have even now
alleged out of the Prophet, that the chast^sement of our peace was laid upon
him: Isai. 53.5.
that he was stricken of the Father for ou^ sins, and bruised for our
infirmities. Whereby is meant, that he was put in the stead of wicked doers, as
a surety and pledge, yea and as the very guilty person himself, to abide and
suffer all the punishments, that should have been laid upon them: this one
thing excepted, Act. 2.24.
that he could not be holden still of the sorrows of death. Therefore it is no
marvel, if it be said, that he went down to hell: seeing he s^ffered that
death wherewith God in his wrath strikes wicked doers. For not only the body
of Christ, was given to be the price of our redemption, but there was another
greater, and more excellent price paid, in that he suffered in his soul the
te^rible torments of a damned and forsaken man.

According to this meaning, does Peter say, that Christ arose again, having
loosed the sorrows of death, Act. 2.24.
of which it was impossible that he should be holden or overcome. He does not
make it simply death: but he expresses, that the Son of God was wrapped in
the sorrows of death, which proceed from the curse and wrath of God, which is
the original of death. For how small a matter had it been, carelessly, and as
it were in sport, to come forth to suffer death? But this was a true proof of
his infinite mercy toward us, not to shun that death, which he in himself
so sore trembled at. And there is no doubt, but it is the Apostles meaning, to
teach the same thing, Heb. 5.7.
in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where he writes, that Christ was heard out
of his fear: some translate it reverence or piety, but how unfitly, the
matter it self, and the very manner of speaking proves it. Christ therefore,
praying with tears, and with a mighty cry, was heard out of his fear: not to
be free from death, but not to be swallowed up of death, as a sinner: because
in that place, he had put our person upon him. And truly, there can be imagined
no more dreadful bottomless depth, then for a man to feel himself forsaken
and estranged from God, and not to be heard, when he calls upon him, even as
God himself had conspired to his destruction. And even so far we see, that
Christ was thrown down, that by inforcement of distress, he was compelled to
cry out, My God, my God, Psalm. 22.2. Math. 27.46.
why have thou forsaken me? For whereas some would have it taken, that he so
spoke, rather according to the opinions of others, then as he felt in
himself: that is no cause probable: for as much as it is evident, that this
saying proceeded of anguish, even from the bottom of his heart. Yet do we not
mean thereby, that God was at any time his enemy, or angry with him. Vid^
Cyril. lib. 2. ae rec. fide ad Regi.
For how could he be angry with his beloved Son, upon whom his mind
rested? Or how could Christ, by his interces^ion, appease his Fathers wrath
toward others, having him hatefully bent against himself? But this is our
meaning, that he s^ffered the grieuousnes of Gods severity, for that he
being stricken and tormented with the hand of God, did feel all the tokens of
Gods displeasure, when he is angry and punishes. Whereupon, Hilarie argues
thus, Lib. 4. d^ Trinit. Lib. 2. Lib. 3.
that by his going down, we have obtained this, that death is slain. And in
another place, he agrees with our judgment, as where he says, The Cross,
death, and hell, are our life. Again in another place: The Son of God is in
hell: but man is carried up to heaven. But why do I allege the testimony of a
private man, when the Apostle affirms the same, rehearsing this for a fruit
of his victory, that they were delivered, who were by fear of death, all
their life long, subject to bondage? It behooves therefore, that he should
overcome that fear, which naturally does continually torment, and oppress all
mortal men: which could not be done, but by fighting with it. Moreover, that
his fear, was no common fear, or conceived upon a slender cause, it shall by
and by, more plainly appear. So by fighting hand to hand, with the power of
the devil, with the horror of death, with the pains of hell, it came to
pass, that he both had the victory of them, and triumphed over them, that we
now, in death, should no more fear those things, which our Prince has
swallowed up.

Here, some lewd disposed persons, though unlearned, yet rather moved by
malice, then by ignorance: Cry out, that I do a heinous wrong to Christ,
because it is against conueniencie of reason, that he should be fearful
concerning the salvation of his soul. And then they do more hardly enforce
this cauillation: saying, that I ascribe to the Son of God, desperation,
which is contrary to faith. First, they do but maliciously, move controversy
about Christ's fear and trembling, which the Evangelists do so plainly
report. For a little before that the time of his death approached, he was
troubled in spirit, and stricken with heaviness; and at his very meeting with it,
he began more vehemently to tremble for fear. If they say, that he did but
counterfeit it, that is too foul a shift. We must therefore, (as Ambrose truly
teaches) boldly confess the sorrowfulne^ of Christ, unless we be ashamed of
his Cross. And truly, if his soul had not been partaker of pain, he had
been only a redeemer of bodies. But it behooued that he should wrestle, that
he might raise up them that lay down.

And his heavenly glory is in such sort nothing at all impaired thereby, that
even herein gloriously shines his goodness, which can never be sufficiently
praised: in that he refused not, to take our weakness upon him. From whence
also is that comfort of our anguishes and sorrows, which the Apostle sets
before us: that this mediator did feel our infirmities, that he might be the
more earnestly bent to succor us, being in misery. They say, that that thing
which is evil of it self, is unworthily ascribed unto Christ. As though they
were wiser then the Spirit of God, which joins these two things together,
that Christ was in all things tempted as we are, and yet that he was without
sin. Therefore there is no cause, that the weakness of Christ, should make us
afr^ide, whereunto he was not by violence or necessity compelled: but of mere
love to us, and of mercy, was moved to submit him^^fe. And whatsoever he of
his own will suffered for us, Heb. 4.15.
deminisheth nothing of his power. But in this one point, are these backbiters
deceived, that they do not perceiu^ in Christ, such an infi^mity as is clean
and ^ree from all f^lt and spot, because he kept himself within the bounds of
obedience. For whereas there can be found no moderation in our corrupt nature,
wherein all our affections, do with troublesome violence exceed all measure,
they do wrong to measure the Son of God by that standard. But when man was
in his uncorrupted estate, then there was a moderation bearing swaye in all his
affections, to restrain excess W^erby it might well be, that he was like
unto us in sorrow, dread and fearfulnes, and yet that by this mark he
differed from us.

Being so confuted, they leap to another cauill^tion, that though Christ feared
death, yet he feared not the curse and wrath of God, from which he knew
himself to be in safety. But let the godly readers weigh, how honorable
this is for Christ, that he should be more tender and more fearful; then the
most of the base sort of men are. Thieves, and other evil doers, do wilfully
have to death, many do with hautie courage despise it, some other do mild^lie
suffer it. But what resolution or fortitude were in this, that the Son of God
should be dau^ted with horror, and well near altogether astonished with it?
For even that which among the common sort, might be accounted exceeding
strange, is reported of him, through vehemency of grief, very drops of
blood did trickell down from his face Neither did he this, to make a show to
the view of other, seeing he sent up his groans unto his Father, out of
company in a secret corner. And this puts it out of all doubt, in so much
as it was needful, that Angels should come down from heaven to relieve him,
in an unwonted manner of comforting.

How sh^mefull, (as I say) should this have been, to be so far tormented for
fear of common death that he should melt with bloody sweat, and not be able
to be comfort^d, but by the sight of Angels? wha^? does no^ that prayer thrice
repeated (Father, if it be possib^e, let this cup depart from me) proceeding
from an incredible bitterness of heart, show that Christ had a sh^rper and a
ha^der battle then with ordinary death? And hence it appears, that those
^r^flers, against whom I now dispute, do boldly babble of things, which they
know not what they mean: for that they never considered, what it is, or of ho^
great importance, that we are redeemed from the judgment seat of God. But
this is our wisdom, w^ll to understand, how dearly our salua ion did cost
the Son of God. Now if any man do ask me, whether Christ went then down to
hell, when he prayed to escape death: I answer, that then was the beginning of
it, whe^by may be gathered, how grievous and terrible torments he suffered,
when he knew that he stood araigned for our cause, before the judgment seat of
God. But although for a moment of time, the divine power of the Spirit, did
hide it self, that it might leave the flesh to have experience of the own
weakness: Yet it is meet, that w^e know that such was the tentation, through
the feeling of sorrow and fear, that it was not against faith. And thus, was
that fulfilled, which is in the Sermon of Saint Peter, Acts 2.24. that he
could not be held of the sorrows of death, because when he felt himself,
as it were, forsaken of God, yet he did nothing at all depart from trust in
his goodness. And this does that his notable calling upon God declare, wherein,
even for extremity of pain, he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me?

For although his anguish was above measure, yet he cease not to call ^im his
GOD, of whom he cries out that he was forsaken.

Moreover, hereby is confuted, as well the error of Apollinaris, as theirs that
were called Monothelites. Apollinaris fained, that the eternal spirit was in
stead of a soul to Christ, as if he had been but a half a man. And as who
should say that he could cleanse our sins some other way, then by obeying his
Father. For where is the affection, or desire, and will to be obedient, but in
the soul? And even therefore, as we know, was his soul troubled, that ours
might obtain peace, and quietness, all fear being driven away.

And further, we see, contrary to the opinion of the Monothelites, how at this
time, he willed not that thing as he was man, the which he willed in respect of
his divine nature. I omit to speak how he did subdue the aforesaid fear, with
a contrary affection. Neither is the show of contrariety hard to discern in
this, Father deliver me from this hour: but therefore came I into this hour.
Father glorify thy name. In which perplexity notwithstanding, there was no
such distemper in him, such as is seen in us, even then when we most of al
endeavor to subdue our selves.

Here also, because the judgment of our good and faithful brother Master
Perkins (now in heaven) is very circumspect and exquisite, I suppose it will be
well liked of all of sound judgment, that I borrow his words from his
exposition of the Creed, for a third witness: first, when he writes of the
death of our Savior, and after of his descension.

Of his death thus: As Christ's death was voluntary, so was it also an accursed
death, and therefore it is called, the death of the cross. And it contains
the first and the second death: the first is the separation of the body from
the soul: the second is the separation of body and soul from God: and both
were in Christ: for beside the bodily death, he did in soul apprehend the
wrath of God due to man for sin: and that made him cry, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me?

And here (says he further) we must not omit a necessary point: namely, how
far forth Christ suffered death. Answer: Some think that he suffered only a
bodily death, and such pains as follow the dissolution of nature: but they no
doubt, come too short; for why should Christ have feared death so greatly, if
it had been nothing, but the dissolution of nature? Some again think that he
died not only the first, but also the second death: but it may be, they go too
far; for if to dye the first death, be to suffer a total separation of body
and soul, then also to dye the second death, is wholly and every way, to be
severed from all favor of God, and at the least, for a time to be oppressed of
the same death, as the damned are. Now this never befell Christ, no not in the
midst of his sufferings, considering that even then he was able to call God
his God. Therefore the safest course is, to follow the mean: namely, that
Christ died the first death, in that his body and soul were really and wholly
severed, yet without suffering any corruption in his body, which is the effect
and fruit of the same: and that withal, he further suffered the extreme horror
and pangs of the second death, not dying the same death, nor being forsaken of
God, more then in his own apprehension and feeling. For in the very midst of
his sufferings, the Father was well pleased with him.

And this which I say, does not any whit lessen the sufficiency of the merit
of Christ: for whereas he suffered very truly the wrath of God, and the very
torments of the damned in his soul, it is as much as if all the men in the
world had died the second death, and been wholly cut off from God, for ever
and ever. And no doubt, Christ died the first death, only suffering the pangs
of the second, that the first death, might be an entrance, not to the second
death which is eternal damnation, but a passage to life eternal. Thus much
writes this good servant of God, concerning the extremity of Christ's
sufferings, in dying the death, with such limitation only, as was necessary,
considering the most high and divine excellency of him that suffered: in whom
was no sin, and who could not possibly abide long under the curse and torment,
though eternally due to us for our sins.

And again, upon the descension, thus he (disputing that question with like
good judgment and faithfulness.) Others there be (says he) which expound it
thus. He descended into Hell; that is, Christ Jesus, when he was dying upon the
cross, felt and suffered the panges of Hell, and the full wrath of God seazing
upon his son. This exposition has his warrant in Gods word, where Hell often
signifies the sorrows and pains of Hell, as Hanna in her song unto the Lord,
says: The Lord kills and makes alive, he brings down to Hell, and
raises up; that is he makes men feel woe and misery in their souls, even
the panges of hell, and after restores them. And David says, the sorrows of
death compassed me, and the terrors of Hell laid hold on me. This is an usual
exposition, received of the church: and they which expound this Article thus,
give this reason thereof: The former words, was crucified, dead, and buried,
do continue (say they) the outward sufferings of Christ: now because he
suffered not only outwardly in body, but also inwardly in soul, therefore
these words, he descended into Hell, do set forth unto us his inward
sufferings in soul, and when he felt upon the cross, the full wrath of God
upon him. This exposition is good and true.

Such is the excellent and sound interpretation of these three faithful
witnesses, concerning the greatness and grieuousnes of the sufferings of our
Lord Jesus Christ: whose testimonies may worthily be mentioned in stead of
many, who both before and since, have with like faithfulness witnessed the same,
and may stand us in special good stead to help against both the defective
expositions of some hucksters, who go about to deceive us with their nine
penny harps in stead of whole and true current shillings, and with gold
wanting so many grains, as may justly be refused without further allowance,
though we do not charge them with the false coin of brass and copper: as
also against their carnal and unsavory cauills, unjust imputations, and
causeles confutations, to the discredit of this most holy doctrine. For
whatsoever may be pretended to the contrary, by such as in this case (as has
been truly affirmed) babble out that which they know not, because they never
earnestly considered what it is, nor of how great importance, that we are
redeemed from the judgment of God: let us as the truth it self requires, be
resolved of this, that the sufferings of our Savior, were every way so great
for us, that we cannot possibly err in conceiving of them, to be greater then
they were, but rather that we shall always come short of the full
comprehension of the grieuousnes of them. And therefore no doubt did our
Savior himself, upon the cross, so mightily and plainly publish them, by
sound of voice, above humane strength: that he might not only pierce the high
heavens, that his complainte might come up before God, but also to pierce
deep, not into the ears alone of the hearers, but even into the deepest
ground of their hearts, to awake them both at that time, and us to this day, by
the preaching thereof, to think most seriously of them, as being far above
all our thought. For seeing they amazed our Savior himself, yea even from the
beginning of them, that he was at a stamme, what to say: and now at the end,
is after a sort confounded to feel himself, as one for the time, forsaken of
God, not only for want of comfort, but also for extremity of anguish, both in
body and soul: how should we think, that we are able to attain to the full
and perfect knowledge of the measure of them, but only so far forth, that we
know and believe, that they were to us infinite, and above the measure of our
knowledge, and known to Christ himself alone, in the infinite wisdom aed
commiseration of the divine nature. Away therefore, all nice mincing, and
carnal interpreters, of this high misery, which under a a pretense of
singular holiness and favor to Christ do deeply dishonor and profane both it
and him, and suffer themselves rather to be led by the spirit of Satan, who
secretly bewitcheth them, then by the spirit of Christ, who has thus loud and
openly, with strong and mighty voice, uttered the exceeding greatness of his
own most deep misery: and all for us, that he might deliver us from infinite
and perpetual calamity, and make us partakers of eternal glory. To him
therefore be the full, infinite and endless glory of all his sufferings,
infinite in measure and valewe, though finite in time, by the infinite power
and grace of his deity, which must of necessity swallowe up all torment, with
death, and hell it self, in full and perfect victory. Amen.

Hitherto of the first of the four speeches of our Savior, more immediately
before his death nearely approaching: and by occasion thereof, a general
rehearsal of the whole doctrine of the Gospel, concerning the
incomprehensible greatness and grieuousnes of his sufferings, for our infinite
and most heinous sins, both for ours, and for all the elect.

Hereunto, before we proceed to the second, we are to add in the order of the
holy story, the consideration of that most wicked and profane mockery which
some of the hearers make at this most grave and doleful lamentation of our
Savior. For say they by and by, This man calls Elias.

And other said, Let be, let us see if Elias will come and save him. Or as the
Evangelist Mark says in the same sense, If Elias will come and take him
down. O most profane and licentious impiety! Who would have thought, that the
fearful and strange darkness of three hours long before, which no doubt,
damped them a^l, and put them to silence, could no more prevail with them,
then that immediately upon the renewing of the light, they should return to
the like wickedness again? But herein, the holy proverb is true, chap: 27,22.
Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar among wheat brayed with a
pestell, yet will not his foolishnes depart from him. And we may e^idently see
in these, the nature of all such as be void of the true grace and fear of
God, who, although they cannot but for the present be stricken with the
special declaration of Gods divine power and anger: yet so soon as God takes
away the tokens of his wrath, they make but a mock of his judgment: as
Pharaoh and his people did sondrie times, until at the length he brought a
most fearful destruction upon them: even as these Jews also and other wicked
people did, not long after this their contempt of his fearful threatening, by
this extraordinary darkness which he sent. And would to God, we our selves did
not too lightly and forgetfully pass by the admonitions, which God has sent
unto us, by earthquakes, etc. the which for a time, have something affected us.

But let us come to consider a little what their mockery was. Behold, he
calls Elias, say they. A thing which they could not easily have spoken of,
further from the mind of our Savior, who knowing and feeling that he had
immediately to do with the majesty of God, yea so as no Angel, or any
creature could comfort him (and therefore in the garden, minded not the Angel
that came to offer his service unto him, but being in an agony prayed the more
earnestly to God who alone must be his comfort) there is no doubt but that he
little regarded to seek to Elias for help at this time. Neither did these think
as they spoke, but only through contempt, they draw the most grave and
doleful words of our Savior Christ, into a most ridiculous and unsavory
jest. For by occasion that our Savior, speaking in the holy language, or in
the Syrian tongue of near affinity with it, calls him Eli, that is my God,
and doubleth his speech: see say they, he calls for Elias: and so they toss
this speech one to another, as though they should say, he calls upon God, but
he may as well look for help from Elias, as think to find help with God.
The name of Elias, is indeed a word that signifies God, yea the Lord my God:
the which no doubt was given unto him, as a profession of the faith of his
parents, according to the covenant which God made with his people to be the
Lord their God: Elijah, The Lord is my God. And our Savior does in his words,
in special manner look to the promises of God made to him, as the ground of his
covenant toward his people, but nothing at all to the person of Elijah. If it
had bin his pleasure to have come down from the cross, he would have done it
without the help of Elijah. Let us therefore leave these scorners, branded for
ever with their own just reproach, for this petulancy and wanton mockery in
so grave a matter as this was, above all other that they had to deal with.

And let us by beholding their shame, take warning, that we do never think or
speak lightly, of any of the grave matters and mysteries of God: but clean
contrariwise, let us by all means, both by thought, word, and deed, give all
the honor and glory that we can, unto them; and specially, in respect of those
things, which do concern our most reverend and blessed redemption.

NOw let us come to the second speech of our blessed Lord and Savior, which
was this, I thirst. A short speech indeed: but that which contains matter of
great and large moment: as we may perceive by that report which the Evangelist
John makes of it, as has been rehearsed before. Let us therefore, from his
report, consider of it. We cannot deny, but the vinegar was given to our
Savior in mockery, rather then of good will to quench his thirst, answerable
to their deriding speeches at the same time, as we have already seen. And
like enough, that they might even of purpose, offer him, their vntooth some
potion to drink, oftener then once, to molest and trouble him therwithall. But
seeing we have already taken our leave to leave them, with their wicked
scoffings: let us now look only unto the most grave and holy mind of our
Savior in these words, I thirst, according to that (as was said) which the
Evangelist John makes report of them, unto us. He therefore gives us plainly
to understand, that although our Savior Christ could not but thirst: and that
from a most vehement and continued drought: (more vehement then that of
Sampson: Judges ch: 15. verse 18. or then David's thirst, 2. Sam: 23. verse 15.
he having passed through many most hot and tedious brunts for so many hours,
both on the cross, and before his fastening thereunto: yet, that he might in
complaining of his most natural and vehement thirst, make it manifest, that he
thirsted more, to do the will of God, and to procure our salvation, then to
take any bodily refreshing: the Evangelist John tells us that he spoke of his
thirst, to the end that the Scripture might be fulfilled in this behalf. And
that for the same cause, he did now taste of this unpleasant drink, though he
had refused before to taste of it. So then it appears plainly, that our
Savior was most willing to endure the utmost of that cross, which was laid
upon himself, and whereunto he was afterward fastened; to the end he might
make a full satisfaction for our sins, that there might be no after
reckoning, no not so much as for one farthing, as we may say unpaid, rather
then in the least thing to seek his own private and natural relief. And
this is a very weighty, and worthy matter for us all, very diligently and
thankefully to muse and meditate upon, as we shall have occasion, in the
comforts and duties to call to mind again.

But in the mean while, for the clearing of this point: let us not neglect the
divine providence of God, whereby it came to pass, that these scorners, in
using their diligence, though mockingly to reach our Savior vinegar, did
fulfill that which was foretold almost a thousand years before, by the spirit
of prophecy, as we read, Psalm: 6^.20.21. Rebuke has broken my heart, and I am
full of heaviness, and I looked for some to have pity on me, but there was
none: and for comforters but I found none. For they gave me gall in my meat,
and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. This was endured of David (to
speak metaphorically and typically) for he found a hard diet from the hand of
his persecutors: but it was really, and properly, fulfilled in our Savior
Christ.

Thus much for the interpretation of the second speech.

THe third followed immediate after that he had received: that is, after that
he had drunk the vinegar, that was reached unto him by a sponge put upon an
hyssop (or as some do think rather upon a Rosemarie stalk) lengthened as
Matthewe and Mark declare by a reed, Piscator in Ioh: cap: 19.27. in Scholijs.
(a cane reed as it is like) whereunto the end of the stalk was put, that it
might be long enough to reach up to the mouth of our Savior upon the cross.
The speech of our Savior was this, It is finished. A short speech like to the
former, and of the like weight; of a more large and general extent, as we are
now to consider. For it contains a most large and holy testimony, even from
the sacred mouth of our Savior, who is the truth it self, that all things
appointed of God, to be endured of him in his passion, were now at the last
point, yea that all whatsoever was either foretold by the holy Prophets, or
prefigured in the law, were now fulfilled even unto the point of death. So
that nothing remained at this instant, for the perfecting of the most holy
sacrifice which he was to offer up, for the satisfaction of Gods justice and
for the eternal redemption, justification, and sanctification of all the elect
of God, but even the last act as we may say, of the passion, which was death it
self, and therein, the surrendering up of his soul into the hands of his
Father. So that here we have a most full and perfect ground to prove the
absolute perfection of the sacrifice of our Savior Christ: in that he offered
up himself to be a propitiation for our sins and for the sins of all the
elect, from the beginning of the world to the end thereof, when once he had
died the death. For now there was nothing else remaining, as we may say, but
the actual passion of death it self. But the consideration of this perfection
of the sacrifice, we will defer till we come to the death it self:
following the course of the holy story. Only let us from hence bear in mind,
that we have from the most grave and testamentary witness of our Savior
himself, a most undoubted and sure ground of the full and absolute perfection
of it, to all purposes, for the which it pleased him to taste of death, as the
holy Apostle speaks.

THis interim observed, and laid up in our minds, let us now come to the
last, and most immediate speech of our Savior, next the some his most holy and
propitiatory death. That was this, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit.
A speech likewise of very great importance, full of excellent direction, both
for the ground and comfort of a lively faith, as also for direction in sondrie
duties, concerning the right manner of a Christian death. And to note the
importance of them, it is to singular good purpose, that the Evangelists both
Matthewe, Mark, and L^ke, do all report unto us, that our Savior Christ,
uttered these his last words with a loud and mighty voice, as he had done
the fo^mer, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? For whereas the
Evangelist Matthew says, that he cried again with a loud voice: the
Evangelist Luke tells us, that those above mentioned. Father into thy hands I
commend my Spirit, were the words which he spoke the second time with so loud
a voice. The loudenes of the voice therefore, gives plainly to understand,
that as our Savior would have all most audibly to hear them, being there
present, and all other to hear of the^, by the preaching of his Gospel,
according to the faithful record of the holy Evangelists: so, no doubt, that
he would stir up all by this so loud sounding a voice, to consider diligently
of them; according to the like practice of our Savior, to the same purpose.
John: chap: 7.28, Then cried Jesus in the Temple as he taught. etc. And verses
37.38. In the last and great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying.
If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink, etc. And chap: 11, 43. He
cried with a loud voice, Laz^rus come forth. And chap: 12.44. And Jesus cried
and said, he that believes in me, believes not in me, but in him that sent
me, etc.

Concerning these words therefore, let us first consider the reasons, why our
Savior uttered them with so loud a voice, and then the meaning of the words
themselves.

Touching the loudnes and strength of the voice, our Savior being now at the
point of death, would give to understand that he died not as other men, by a
mere necessary fain^ing and feebling of the spirits of the natural life, but
most voluntarily, to most singular ends and purposes, above the death of any
other man, according to that which he had said before of himself. John
10.17.18. Therefore does my Father love me because I lay down my life, that I
might take it again. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down, and I have
power to take it again: this commendement have I received of my Father. The
which words notwithstanding, we are so to understand, that we do in no wise
deny the truth of his natural death, and of his humane infirmity and passion
therein, though by his divine power he ouerruled all, so that notwithstanding
(as the Apostle Peter says) He was put to death concerning the flesh, yet he
was quickened in the spirit, and had the power of life and death in his own
hand according to the decree and determination of God, and was not left to the
will and pleasure of wicked men, Jesus Crucifixus, sic ex causa natural
efflauit animam, nimirum ex violentia and cruciatibus, quos in tam crudeli
supplicio passus erat, vt tamen separatio animae a suo corpore procederet a
pura ipsius voluntate. Beza. Hom: in hist: pass. 32. And to the same end did
our Savior lay down his life sooner then was ordinary in that kind of
execution, which caused Pilat to mar^el, as we read Mark, 15, 44, And the
Centurion before him, verse 39.

Secondly, our Savior Christ uttered these last words; Father into thy hands I
commend my spirit, with like loud voice, as he did those, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? that it might evidently appear, that he continued yet
in the same dolor and distress. Nevertheless, in the third place, he would
make it known undoubtedly in his church, to all believing Christians, that
howsoever his sufferings were exceeding great, yet he did nothing doubt of his
prevailing against them, nor of his dying in peace. So that (I say) even for
this cause also, we may well conceive that our Savior Christ to put the matter
out of all doubt, would the rather as mightily utter these words, which are
most clear words of a most perfect and lively faith, Father into thy hands I
commend my spirit: as those former words, My God, my God, etc. according to
that saying of our Savior. John 11.41.42. Father, etc. I know thou hear me
always: but because of the people that stand by, I said it, that they may
believe that thou have sent me.

And to the same purpose, let us now after the reasons of the loudnes of the
voice, come in the next place, to consider of the meaning of the words
themselves.

And herein, that which is in the first place, is worthy to be principally
weighed of us: that as our Savior Christ called God his Father, at his heavy
entrance into his sufferings, Father if it be possible, let this cup pass
from me. And in the midst of them. Father forgive them, for they know not
what they do. So he does now in the conclusion of them, call God his Father,
Father (says he) into thy hand^ I commend my spirit. Neither does he call him
so, either then, or now, in respect of the unity of the Godhead, and because
he is the natural and eternal Son of the Father only; but rather in regard of
that love and favor which he is assured of from him, on our behalf, even in
respect of this that he is the natural Son of frail man having taken our
nature, to his divine nature, in the unity of one Person of a mediator, and
therein has fulfilled all righteousness, and now at the point of death,
uttering these his last words had even perfited his sufferings for our sins, to
the full satisfaction of the divine justice, and to the reconciling and
reducing of us into the most gracious and blessed favor of God. In these
respect (I say) does he with most full and perfect assurance of the most full
and perfect love of God, both toward himself, and for his sake, toward all
whom he had redeemed and reconciled, call him by the name of Father.

And in the same assurance, does he commend his spirit: that is to say, his
soul (for so^s the word Spirit used often as 1. Cor. 6.20. Act. 7.59. Gal:
6.18. etc. 2. Tim: 4.22. Heb: 12.9. andv. 23. James 2.16. 1. Pet: 3.19.) which
is the principal and chief part of h^s humanity, into the hands: that is, to
the safe custody and blessed tuition of his Father, as a special treasure or
Jewel most charily and tenderly to be preserved and kept: to wit, until the
third day, when it was again to return to the body, at the resurrection
thereof: as he knew certainly, that his Father would do it.

Not as one laying it aside, but always keeping it in his sight, yea wearing
it as it were a signet on his right hand: according to that promise, which for
our Saviors sake, he makes to his Church, and therefore will much rather
perform it to Christ himself, in whom all the promises of God, are yea, and
Amen: Isai: 49.16. Behold I have graven thee upon the palm of mine hands: thy
walls are ever in my sight. And as the church prays, Song of Songs chap: 8.6,
Set me as a signet upon thine arm. But what? may some say; Has Christ no care
of his body, that he mentions his soul only? There is no doubt, but he
committed his body also into the hands of the same most trusty keeper, seeing
the soul was shortly to return to it again, as was said even now: according
to that, Ps. 16.9. My flesh shall rest in hope. For thou will not leave my
soul in the grave, neither wilt those suffer thine holy one to see corruption:
but this as the less principal, is comprehended under the other, a part being
put for the whole. And again, where it may be further demanded, why our
Savior should commit his soul into the hands of the Father, seeing he was
able to keep and preserve it safe himself? we are to answer, that howsoever
he was able indeed, in that he himself was very true and almighty God with
the Father, yet we are to consider that he was now in the time of the
infirmity and abasement of his humane nature; and in such a service, as to the
performance whereof, he was to take upon him the form, and to do indeed the
duty of a servant, yea even the duty of a servant of servants, as we may say
in suffering for our sins, etc. And therefore as a mediator betwixt God and
man, he prays to God the Father, both for us, and also for himself.

These words, which our Savior thus uses, seem to be taken by him from the
5. verse of the 31. Psalm, where they were the words of David, in the time of
his great affliction and distress. But our Savior Christ uses them, with
some difference as might most fitly agree to his person, and also to his
estate. In either of which respects, the words of David, would not so fitly
agree unto him. Into thine hand I commend my spirit (says David) for thou have
redeemed me, O Lord God of truth. Our Savior Christ, in stead of the names or
titles of Lord God of truth; he does use in this place, the title Father: and
then, he omitteth these words: for thou have redeemed me. The reason why he
does in this place use the title Father, was declared before. And now, that he
should not ascribe any redemption to God in respect of himself, as David
justly did; the reason is, because our Savior himself is sent to be the
redeemer, not only of David, who by faith looked forward to him, but also of
all other, both before his coming and since: whosoever have any part in the
redemption of the Lord our God.

Thus much, for the interpretation of the last speech of our Savior, next and
immediately before his death: not upon his death bed, but upon the cross
whereon he died: the which ought to provoke us, so much the rather, to consider
of it the more earnestly, as of a notable ground, both for the comfort of
faith, and also for direction of life, yea even to the point, and shutting up
of our own life, in such sort, that death may through our Lord Jesus Christ be
an entrance into a more blessed life, as it was unto our Savior himself. But
of the comforts, and duties, we shall have occasion to speak afterward, in
their places by our order assigned unto them.

IN the mean season, following the course and narration of the holy story: we
are come now to consider of the death of our Savior, the which is the full
conclusion, and as it were the sealing and ratifying of all his sufferings
going before, according to that of the Apostle Paul. Philip: 2, 6.7.8. Christ
Jesus being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God.
But be made himself of no reputation and took on him the form of a servant,
and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man. He humbled
himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross. In
which words of the holy Apostle, we see plainly that he makes the death of
our Savior, as it were the period, The ground and history of his death.
and full point, or perfiting of his whole obedience and humiliation in the
flesh. And so it was indeed. For all that follows after: to wit, his
resurrection, his ascension, etc. are the manifestation and proceeding of his
glorious conquest in himself, to the performing and establishing of all the
fruits and effects of his whole humiliation, which he yielded himself m^st
willingly unto, even to very death, the death of the cross (as the Apostle
says) for us. Read also, Heb: 5.9.10. The full and perfect sanctification of
our Savior Christ to the finishing or the work of our redemption and
salvation, consisted in those his last sufferings, even unto death: for seeing
our sins deserved death, they could by no less punishment be satisfied for, to
the contentment of the divine justice of God.

But that we may the more orderly proceed in this point, let us first call to
mind the words of the holy story which report it unto us:



The Evangelist Luke immediately after the former words of our Savior,
uttered with a loud voice, Father into thine hands I commend my spirit: he
writes thus, And when he had thus said, Exe^nense.
He gave up the Ghost.

Explicatio
So indeed it follows in Saint Luke: and he does most fully report this
conclusion, and sh^^ting up of the sufferings of our Savior: and that also in
the natural course and order, as it may appear, first by Matthew, who
testifies that he gave up ^he spirit, a ph^ce to pneuma.
immediately after his second lifting up of his voice, ch: 27.5^. Then Jesus
cried again with a loud voice, and yielded up the Ghost. And afterward it may
appear likewise, by the Evangelist John, who to express the death of our
Savior, says that he bowed his head: and thereby declaring the departure of
all natural strength and life of the body, Paredoce to pucuma.
he therewithal gave up and delivered the spirit.

To w^om? Into the hands of his Father, uttering his mind in these very words
and that with a loud voice, as the Euangel^st Luke has delivered.

Now therefore that we see the ground and course of the holy story, concerning
this great point of the death of our Savior: we must remember that which was
du^y purposed, (by occasion of the former words of our Savior, wherein he
testifi^d that all was finished, even to the death) that is to say, that now we
do observe in the death it self, the full perfection of all the most holy
sufferings, and sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, in this offering up of
himself, even to the death of the cross, for our redemption and salvation.



To this purpose we are to observe three things of special moment.

First, that the death of our Savior was the very true and real separation of
the soul from the body.

Secondly, that (as has been observed before) the death of our Savior
Christ, was not constrained, but most voluntary and willing.

Thirdly, that it was in it self a cursed death, in that it was the death of
the cross. Yet so that our Savior, by bearing our curse upon the cross even
to the death has taken it away, and procured most perfect blessing unto us,
and brought life and immortality to light for us. ^. Tim: 1.9.10.

Explication. and proof.
It is true. For first, the separation of the soul from the body, is manifest
by the speeches, whereby the Evangelists do express his death. And secondly,
we have seen it sufficiently cleared before, that the death of our S^u^our was
not enforced against his will, but most willing and voluntary. And so it was
necessary. For other wise, it could have been no meet sacrifice to a appease
the anger of God against our sins. We may perceive it from our own death. For
what is the reason why the death of the righteous is acceptable and precious to
God; when as the death of the wicked is vile and abominable before him: but
because the one is yielded in faith and obedience, in hope of a better life,
etc. the other is against the will, without faith, without repentance, etc. as
if their heaven and happiness were in this world, much rather therefore, yea
infinitely much rather, must the death of our Savior Christ (in whose death,
and for the sake whereof, our is accepted of God) be most willing and holy,
with all perfection of faith and obedience. And so it was, according to that
Heb: 10.5.6.7.8.9.10. yet when we say our Savior died willingly, we do not
mean, that he was void of all tentation to the contrary. But our meaning is
this, that albeit (as we have seen before) he was vehemently tempted by
experience of natural infirmity and fear to shun it: yet because he gave
not place to the tentation, but by mighty strife against it, overcame it, and
wholly gave over his own will and natural desire to the end he might obey
the will of his Father: therefore we do both mean and say the rather, that he
took his death most willingly. Yea even in so much the more perfect manner, by
how much the tentation was the more vehement to the contrary.

The perfection therefore of the obedience of our Savior Christ, to our
persite justification in the sight of God, is hereby confirmed unto us:
according to that alleged before, out of the second cha: of the Ep: to the
Philippians. And as we may further perceive, by that which the same Apostle
writes, Rom: 5. v 6.7.8. etc. For Christ, when we were yet of no strength, at
his time, died for the ungodly. Doubtless one will scarce die for a righteous
man: but yet for a good man, it may, be that one dare die.

But God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were yet sinners,
Christ ^ied for us: Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall
be saved from wrath through him. For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God, by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we
shall be saved by his life. And not only so, but we also rejoice in God,
through our Lord Jesus, by who^ we have now received the atonement. And verse
17. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of
one, shall many also be made righteous. And chapter 8.31. What shall we then say to
these things? If God be on our side, who can be against us? who spared not his
own Son, but gave him for us all (to death) how shall he not with him give
us all things also? who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is
God that justifies, who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, Read also,
Ep: 1.7. We have redemption through the blood (of Jesus Christ) even the
forgiveness of sins, through the rich grace of God the Father. And Colos. 1.
v. 19.20.21.22.23. Likewise, we may perceive it by that we read in the Ep: to
the Heb: ch: 2. v. 9. By Gods grace he tasted death for all men. And verses
14.15. He has destroyed through death, him that had the power of death, that
is, the devil. And he has delivered all the^ which for fear of death, were
all their life time subject to bondage. Read also ch: 10.9.10. and 18. likewise
2, Tim. 1, 9, 10. He has abolished death etc. And in the former Ep: of the
Apostle Peter, chapter 1, 18, 19. we are not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, etc. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb
undefiled, and without spot. And ch: 2.24. Christ his own self bare our sins
in his body on the tree, that we might be delivered from sin, etc. And 1.
John, 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God (says the Apostle John)
cleanses us from all sin. And chap: 2.2. And ch: 4, 10. And again, Revel:
ch: 1.5. Jesus Christ has washed us from our sins in his blood. And again
chap: 5.9. He has redeemed us to God by his blood. And Paul, Act: 20.28. God
has purchased his Church with his own blood. And Romans 3, 24, 25. We are
justified freely by the grace of God, through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his
blood to declare his righteousness, by the forgiveness of the sins, that
are passed through the patience of God. In the which, and like places, let us
observe that by the blood of Christ, his sufferings even to the death, and his
death it self is noted: because life, as the Scripture says, is in the blood:
Genesis chap. 9.4. and Leuiticus, chap. 17.11.14. And because as we are afterward
to consider, that the blood, yea the water and blood which was let out of his
side by the spear, which the soldier thrust into it, was a certain proof,
that he was verily dead. Ioh. chap. 19.34. and 1. Epistle, chap. 5. verse, 6.
and verse 8. And for the same cause also, the death of our Savior is noted by
the word of sacrificing, because the sacrifices of the law, which were figures
of Christ's death, were slain, when they were sacrificed to God.

Now secondly, that the death of our Savior, was an accursed death: and that
therein he did bear the curse due to us: it is evident in that it was the death
of the Cross. For the Lord himself says, The curse of God is on him that is
hanged. Deuteronomy. 21. verse 23. And that in bearing our curse, he removed it from
us, and procured us all blessing, it is likewise evident. Galath. chap. 3.
verse 13.14. Christ has redeemed v^ from the curse of the law, when he was
made a curse for us (for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on
tree) That the blessing of Abraham, might come on the Gentiles through Christ
Jesus: that we might receive the promise of the Spirit, through faith. And it
stands with good reason, that the Son of God, bearing the most cursed and
ignominious punishment (even a dogs death, as we use to speak of hanging,
yea worse then a dogs death, in this kind of hanging by nails) should
procure and purchase thereby, the greatest and most glorious blessing that
might come upon those, for whom, he, according to the will of God, endured so
miserable and cursed a death.

So then, insomuch as by the death of our Savior Christ, our curse is removed:
that is, the wrath of God, and all woeful effects thereof: and see^ng on the
contrary, we are made partakers of all blessing, even as amply as ever the
promise was made to Abraham: the perfection of the obedience of our Savior,
and the most blessed fruits thereof unto us (howsoever for the time most
bitter and grievous to him, in the sense and sufferings of our nature) is
evidently argued, as has been partly declared already.

But it shall furthermore be yet more fully cleared unto us, if we consider, in
the perfection of the death of our Savior, the perfection of that most holy
and propitiatory sacrifice, which he, our only high Priest, has once for
all, offered up to sanct^fie us unto God for ever. To the which end, let us
read, and mark well, that which we read, Heb. 2 16.17.18. Our Savior (says
the Apostle) in no sort took the Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham.
Wherefore in all things it became him to be made like unto his brethren, that
he might be a merciful and a faithful high Priest, in things concerning God,
that he might make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he
suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. And
chap. 4.14.1^. The which perfection of the sacrifice of our Savior, by his
sufferings unto death, as also the perfection of his high Priesthood, by the
most excellent virtue whereof, the sacrifice was perfited: they are in the same
Epistle, most notably laid forth and confirmed, by a declaration of the
excellent perfection of either of them, ^euit 8. and chap. 9.
in comparison both of the high Priests and also of the sacrifices of the law,
and of Moses himself, of whom the law bears the name, and whom God put in
special authority and trust, to see to the instit^tion and administration of
the ordinances thereof: according to that which we read, Heb. chap.
3.1.^.3.4.5.6. and chap 10. from the beginning of the Ch^pter to the 19. verse.
The which it were needless to set down here, seeing all is near hand, and
may easily be altogether in the view of every christian Reader, that will take
his bible to peruse the same. But heerewithall, I would entreat him, even for
his own singular benefit, to read that which our very learned and Christian
brother M. Perkins has written in his Exposition of the Creed, concerning the
excellency of the sufferings of our Savior Christ unto the death, in this
respect, that he thereby offered up himself in sacrifice unto God for us. For
as God has blessed his good servant with singular dexterity in other things,
so in this notable point, for one instance among the rest he has blessed both
him, and us by him in very gracious and excellent manner.

The sum of all briefly (if not over briefly for so excellent and large a
Treaty) it is thus much: that the perfection of the sacrifice arising from the
perfection of the Priesthood of our Savior, because of the Deity joined
therein with the humanity, which conferreth an infinite merit, virtue, and
efficacy unto it, is as much above all sacrifices of the law, as his
Priesthood is exceeding the Priesthood thereof, insomuch as he is a Priest of
the most high order of Melchisedech: who was both a King and a Priest, yea
infinitely excelling Melchisedech himself: as is evident from his most royal
and princely triumph upon the altar, whereon he offered himself. The which,
though to speak of the external matter of it, we may give that name unto the
Cross, whereon he was crucified and slain as an heave offering of elevation
to the Lord: yet spiritually, and as touching the most perfect holiness and
sanctifying power of this sacrifice, we are to understand, that the Deity of
Christ in that he offered up himself to God, by the eternal Spirit, was the
only altar which sanctified this most high sacrifice, for ever. The excellency
whereof, and of the most high Priest himself, is further argued and blazoned
as it were, by a most princely triumph upon the same Cross, as it were from
his triumphant chariot, by seven notable effects, as it were banners or
ensigns of the same.

First, the royal title set up over his head.

Secondly, the most gracious and miraculous conversion of the thief on the
Cross.

Thirdly, the miraculous darkening of the Sun, by the space of 3. hours.

Fourthly, the rending of the veil of the temple, from the top to the bottom.

Fifthly, the mighty earthquake.

Sixthly, the opening of the graves, and cleaving of the stones.

Se^uenthly, the testimony that his adversaries are enforced by these glorious
effects of his divine Majesty, to give unto him. I only mention these things,
and leave many other particulars unmentioned, desiring, that they who have not
read these worthy things, and the rest handled in that Exposition: might be the
rather induced to read that Exposition it self not only in these points, but
in all the rest, for the manifold benefit and fruit thereof.

Het^erto of the death of our Savior Christ.

NOw it follows, according to our course and order (we following therein the
order of the holy Story it self) that we do come to consider of those things,
which did either accompany, or immediately follow his death, and and
thenceforth, such other things, as did successively follow, till his body was
taken down from the Cross. For these are the things, belonging to the last
part of the third space of time, wherein our Savior continued hanging upon the
Cross, after that he was dead.



There are four of them.

First, the rending of the veil of the Temple.

Secondly, the Earthquake.

Thirdly, the cleaving of the stones and rocks.

Fourthly, the opening of the graves. From whence also, after that our Savior
rose again, the dead bodies of many of the Saints arose out of them, and
showed themselves to many in the City.



And behold (says the Evangelist Matthew) the veil of the Temple was rent in
twain, from the top to the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the stones
were cloven.

52 And the graves did open themselves, and many bodies of the Saints, which
slept, arose

53 And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy
City, and appeared to many.

Expli. Here is a plain record of the four effects which you rehearsed: and
all of them, very memorable, and in the wisdom of God wrought to singular
purposes, even for the honoring of the most blessed death of our Savior: and
for the rebuke of his wicked persecutors, to whom, both he and his death, were
most vile and reproachful. Let us therefore consider as diligently as we can,
of the gracious wisdom and purpose of God, in every of them.

ANd first, concerning the rending of the veil of the Temple, the which being
from the top to the bottom, as Saint Matthew has told us: and also in the
very midst of the veil, as the Evangelist Luke shows, chap. 23.45. the Lord
would no doubt, hereby declare: first, against the Jews, the exinanition (as
one may say) or making void of all their former prerogatives, and whole
dignity which they had above other nations: yea, even the abiection and
casting off of the Temple and City it self. For insomuch as all their
prerogatives, and whole dignity was founded in Christ, and the promise of his
coming, as it was apprehended by faith, of the orthodoxe and true believing
fathers and progenitors of the Jews, and their holy posterity: it cannot be,
but Christ when he is come, being most contumeliously rejected of the
degenerate and apostate Jews: they themselves also, must in the justice of
God, be likewise necessarily rejected and cast off, of him. Read Romans 9.1, 2,
3, 4, 5.

And secondly, as touching the Gentiles, God gives plainly to understand, the
ceasing of all the ceremonial and figurative worship, and the ordinances
thereof, whatsoever had been in former times, as the partition wall betwixt
them and the Jews: and consequently, betwixt them and God him self, unless
they would (while the law stood in force) have as it were incorporated
themselves into the body of the Jews. Read Heb. chap. 7. verses 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. And chap. 8. verses 7, 13. And chap. 10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10.

Thirdly, touching all believing christians, both Jews and Gentiles, God
declares by the renting of the veil, the uniting of them together, to be one
people unto him, in a most holy and spiritual communion, and fellowship,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Read Ephesians. chap. 2. verse 12, 13, 14, etc. to
the end of the chapter.

Finally, God would hereby give to understand, that in the days of the Gospel,
there should be both to Jew and Gentile (whosoever would receive and embrace
Christ by a true and lively faith) not only a more clear and full knowledge
of the mystery of godliness, but also a more sweet and comfortable apprehension
of the joys of the kingdom of heaven, and of the power of the endless life,
belonging to the same. Yea and a more comfortable assurance of the possession
of heaven it self. And therefore, in the Gospel, the time of the Gospel is
often called by the name of the kingdom of heaven, and of God: according to
that speech of our Savior Christ to his Disciples, at the beginning of his
public administration of the same his kingdom: Verily, verily, I say unto
you, hereaf er shall ye see heaven open, and the Angels of God descending upon
the Son of man. Read also Romans chap. 8.14, 15, 16. and chap. 14.17. The
kingdom of God, is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in
the holy Ghost. And most fully, and plainly, Heb. 9 verses 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 14.

So then, no less elegantly and in cho^se manner, then fruitfully for the
matter it self, may learned Beza, figuratively put this speech, as it were a
Sermon (partly to the Gentiles, and partly to the Jews) into the mouth of the
veil, being thus rent asunder, as it follows.

The veil (says he) whereby the people were restrained, yea even the Priests
themselves, save only the high Priest, from the sight of the Sanctuary, it
seems first of all to have answered even with an Amen, to the Lord, when it
was rent asunder from the bottom to the very top of it: The ground and history
of his agony upon the Cross.
and to have ratified these last words of Christ, It is finished: even as if he
had by this veil, at that time, invited the whole christian church, using
these words, Come hither you elect, and search ye out, even the very secrets of
your salvation. For behold this great and eternal Priest, he has once entered
into the true heavenly Sanctuary, to the end that he being entered in, you
might follow him, as they that have attained such knowledge, as shows you,
that all these shadows and figures are now at an end: wherefore go ye on
forward, Legentes illius vestigia.
and boldly enter unto the throne of his Majesty, treading as it were in his
footesteppes, to whom I give place, insom^ch as the whole time and date of my
ministry is now ended, and past.

Thus (says he) ye have the Sermon of this veil clearly and plainly
speaking to the elect, although it have neither mouth, or tongue to speak
withal: yea and it speaks to us also even to this day, according as these
things are declared more at large, in the 9. and 10. chapter of the epistle to
the Hebrews. What shall we say then of these wretches, who did again advance
that veil in the Apostles time, joining circumcision with baptism according
to that express mention which is made Act. 15.1. and thereby were more
troublesome to the Apostles, then any other? whom seeing the Apostle does
rightly call enemies of the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ: Philip. 3.18. yea
so that he says, If ye be circumcised, Christ profits you nothing. Gal. 5.2.
What do we think shall become of them, who in stead of the Mosaicall veil
which they have in part restored, have not hitherto ceased, neither yet do
cease to cover whole christianity with new vailes? who also, have so far
increased in impudency, that they do even openly restrain the seely people,
from the way of the Sanctuary: that is, from the reading and understanding of
the holy Scriptures? For they have disguised the Scriptures, by tuning them
into songs, mixed with infinite devises and lies: the which also, they have
thrust upon the people, in a strange language, after they have deceived them,
with the visard of an inwrapped faith.

And now (says he further) mark another Sermon of the same Preacher, to the
enemies and molesters of this crucified man, speaking to them after this
manner: Woe unto you ye cursed people, what do ye? Ye do open the way into
heaven which hitherto has been shut up, for him whom ye could not abide upon
earth; the which thing I the veil, here set up, did make a representation of.
Now so it is, that I must lay open the way unto him, from the bottom to the
very vpmost top. And herewithall I do admonish you, even you hypocrites, I
say, who abuse the veil of devotion and godliness, to the murdering of the
author and Prince of life, that you are herein, the instruments of your own
destruction, and of the abolishing of this Temple, the which you have so
greatly abused. For I do open unto him, who had hitherto figuratively dwelt in
the Temple, a way for him to go out of it, never to return thither again,
but to leave this house unto you, void and desolate, like as he told you,
when with scourges he cast you, and your merchandise out of it, twice before.
John 2.15. Matthew. 21.12. and 25.28. Such was the Sermon of this veil unto this
unthankful people, with whom at this day there is no Priesthood, no altar, no
Temple, to speak in a word, no state of people, (the which truly, though they
had them now, yet could stand them in no stead) but, that which is far worse,
upon whose heart, so great a covering is laid, that they are altogether blind
in the understanding of the old and new Testament. 2. Cor. 3.15 But alas, by
how much the vice of the ingratitude of us miserable Gentiles, is greater: by
so much is our blindness greater, the^ was ever that of the Jews, insomuch as
Pastors (neglecting the direction of the holy Ghost, by whom we were led, with
so great light, into all truth, comprehended in the sacred and very true
Apostolic writings, casting forth an exceeding brightness) some through over
great negligence, other by too great a conceit of their knowledge, and other of
ignorance and superstition, have suffered not only the Jewish veil to be
sowed together, and set up again, as is manifest by the Jewish ceremonies,
brought again into christianity (in witness whereof, let be holy water, the
Chrisme, the annealing, lamps and tapers, Priestly garments, and other trifles
not a few of this sort) but also they have suffered a more gross and thick
veil to be retained, under pretense of holiness and religion, then has been
among the Heathen: witnesses, the same their holy water, Altars, Idols, the
names only whereof are changed, crowns, Missa gesticulationes quas acibi
mimicas, and non minus ridiculas, quam superstitiosas, apellat. Hom. scil. 34
and goodly vestiments, in the worship whereof they do also burn incense, and
finally, the manifold moppings or busy gesturings, used in the Mass: with
other new vailes, above number, and Sacraments which they have fained: For the
which the Lord, being justly wroth, he has utterly subverted, and overthrown
infinite Churches in the East, in the South, in the North, and in the greatest
part of the West. And as touching them that remain, deservedly has the Lord,
in the Western parts, given such power to the Spirit of Error, that Christ
suffered nothing at the hands of the Jews, the which the small number of the
children of God yet remaining, even such whose eyes, God has opened, does not
suffer at the hands of the Caiaphases, Priests, and Pilates of this age. And
which is far more to be lamented, we see darkness, by little and little, cast
even upon those places, the which that true Sun had begun to make
lightsome, with his very bright-shining beams. For out of all doubt, there are
over many even among those, by whom the spiritual Temple of Jesus Christ
began to be restored in our age, who (not duly considering that which is
purposely said by the Evangelists, that this veil was rent, not only half
way through, or by the third or fourth part, but from the bottom to the very
top of it) have grievously erred, in that they have a remainder of the
leaven, as by experience it self we find: so that if it be not prevented
betimes, the whole leaven will wax more sour then ever hitherto it has done.
But brethren, let us give immortal thanks to the Majesty of our most gracious
God, for that he has dealt otherwise with this place, and with many other: and
yet let us think in good earnest, that if we do not walk more carefully, as
the children of light, following the light of the Gospel, while yet it shines:
as the Lord said once to the people of the Jews, John 12.35. that it will
come to pass, that this so great a benefit, shall turn to our greater
judgment, as the Lord threatens, Luke 11.26. Whereof, O how many, I speak it
with grief! wicked Atheists are witnesses at this day, who of superstitious
ones in the beginning, have at the last proved Athiests, Libertines, and
Epicures, yea even persecutors of the Church of God, by whom they are
deservedly thrust out of his house, and given over to the Prince of darkness.
This is that which the veil preached heretofore of old, and it teaches us the
same things, even to this day. Hitherto out of Beza Hom. 32. upon the History
of the Passion: toward the end of the Homily.

YEa, and because his holy Prosopopie is no less fruitful then delightful,
concerning the other effects, that did either accompany, or immediately follow
the death of our Savior: I will not be ashamed to play the truant so long,
till I have borrowed from him, that which I mean to write for the
interpretation of the wisdom, and power, and mercy, or wrath of God,
signified thereby.

Now therefore, concerning the second effect, which was, as it were, a second
Preacher, let us hear (says Beza) what the earth signified, the which,
insomuch as it subsisteth by the most mighty arm of God alone, it is never
moved, but that arm is likewise moved to show forth, the great and
extraordinary wrath of God, even as if he did hardly bear that the earth
should bear men any longer: so that we are not to stick in natural and
second causes, which the Lord uses, when, and how it pleases him. But in this
place, the history teaches us plainly enough, that the earth would testify
as it were by name, that it detested and abhorred that wicked mischief,
practiced even against the Person of the Creator, The ground and history of his
Death
as the most wicked practice of all that can be named to have fallen out at any
time: and that it did acknowledge that crucified man, how abject and of how
vile account or appearance soever, and by this moving, yielded faithful
obedience to him, (to the reproof of his persecutors) as unto the Creator
thereof: without whom nothing was made, of those things which were made John
1.3. And furthermore, by this moving, (as it were by groaning) it complained
unto God, that it did unwillingly sustain and nourish so wicked and
mischievous a people: and therefore did as it were entreat leave that it might
swallow them up into the bottomless gulf of it, as it did Corah, and Dathan
of old. Number. 16.31. insomuch as here the cause of a far more excellent Moses
was in hand, and of another altogether differing from Moses: and so likewise of
a crime far more detestable then that which was committed against Moses. And
in very deed, not long after, the earth vomited out these men, and the swords
of the Romans destroyed them. Moreover, this Land abundantly blessed of God,
with very great blessings, and specially with extraordin^ry fruitfulnes, by the
moving of it self, gave witness to that horrible change, whereunto it fell: it
being by little and little, transformed into a desert, as if it had been
strowed with brimstone and salt, even as Moses many ages since, has very
expressly prophesied that it should come to pass. Deuteronomy. chap. 29. verse 23.
Read also Psalm. 107.34. Lo this was the Sermon which the earth made then, to
every one of that most deaf auditorie.

But since that time, what Nation is there, where it has not preached the
same, and that also in a more sharp manner. For how many Cities have been
overthrown? yea, how many Countries have been swallowed up even in our
remembrance in every part of the world, by such earthquakes? And that I do not
go far off, was not this Church wherein we come together, as also the whole
City shaken? yea and the whole country near unto us, for fifty miles in
compass, has it not trembled a few years since, under the weight of so many
huge and high mountains, remaining even from the time, that the foundations of
the world were laid? And albeit, G^d has spared us, yet he has not spared
all, nor dealt so favorably with them. For behold, not very long ago, half
of the City of Vienna in the Country of Austria, a foretresse of these
christian parts of the world, was overthrown. And yet who is moved in
himself? who trembles? To be short, who learneth to be wise from the example
o^ other?

Thus then we see, how the trembling of the earth at the death of our Savior
Christ, preaches the wrath of God, against all sin: and namely against the
most blockish and hard hearted Jews, whom the most fearful spectacle of the
most grievous sufferings, and death of our Savior, could not cause to fear,
though they were laid upon him for their sins: I mean for the sins of so
many of them, as did according to the election of God, belong unto him.

Moreover, the earth by this trembling, acknowledged and testified, that this
crucified man, was the only true Messiah, so to be acknowledged, and
reverenced of the whole Church of God.

Yea, and no doubt, it did therewithal give to understand, as we may well
conceive, that the effect of the death of Christ, was, and should be, most
mightily for ever before the Lord, and in the preaching of the Gospel,
properly to the justification and salvation of the elect: and by accident that
is, by reason of the contempt of the wicked, and reprobate: to their most
fearful and eternal condemnation. For thus says the Lord himself, both by
prophecy aforehand, Hag. 2.7, 8, 9, 10. And by faithful record, upon the
performance of the prophecy by the coming of Christ, and that which followed
upon it: as Heb. 12.26. I will shake the heavens and the earth, etc. And as the
prophet Haggai says, I will move all nations, and the desire of all nations
shall come, etc. And when as every strange thing, either in heaven, or in
earth, eclipses, appearing of cometes, death of Princes, earthquakes, etc. do
cause us to expect strange things to follow: why should we not consider, from
the unwonted quaking of the earth, together with the darkening of the Sun,
and other strange accidents, at the death of our Savior: that every one apart,
and much rather, all jointly together, were tokens of strange consequences, or
things to follow, as also it came to pass, in the open sight of all the world,
immediately upon the same, even to this day.

The cleaving of the rocks an^ throwing o^en the heavy couerings of the
Sepulchers, shows that it was a might^e ea thquake, wherewith God at this
time shucked the earth. It^m, A memorable judgment of God, ten years before
the P^eacher preached this doctri e: the which he set down in writing about
twelve years since.
ANd for a further declaration thereof, let us come to the third Sermon, even
that which the cleaving of the rocks and stones did preach. For this (as Beza
well says) is a very special circumstance, not lightly to be passed over: to
wit, that the very rocks were cloven by the earthquake, and that not to yield
forth plenty of water, as once they did in the desert, through the exceeding
great mercy of God. Exodus 17.6. but contrariwise, to commence a sore action,
against this sturdie-hard-hearted, and incorrigible wicked people. And what
shall we say else? Were not (says Beza) the rocks before our eyes, ten years
since, cloven asunder, the which, we would have thought, could not have been
sundered? Were they not roled and tumbled more then a whole mile, b^eaking
down all whatsoever was in their way, with such force, as one would not
think? And for conclusion, O how horrible a sight was it! Did they not
ouerwhelme dwelling houses, meddowes, vineyardes, fields, men, women, children,
cattle, and all? yea and all this fell upon them, (if that be true which is
reported of them) of whom that may truly be said, which the Lord said to the
people of his time, concerning those, upon whom the tower of Si^oam f^ll and
pressed them to death. Luke 13.4.

So then, we want not preachers, no not from those things, which by their own
nature want sense, beside those things which are daily beaten into our ears,
out of the word of God, and which conscience it self does night and day tell
us of. But we have neither eyes to see, nor ears to hear, so that it
remains only, that the threatenings of God, so long time despised of us, be
in horrible manner executed upon us, while the earth groneth under our feet,
craving judgment and vengeance from God against the wickedness of men, waiting
even witn sighs, for that last day: Romans 8.20. in the which all things shall
be restored. Acts 3.21. when there shall be new heavens, and a new earth. 2.
Pet. 3.13. Apoc. 21.5.

Well therefore brethren (says Beza) let us change our selves betimes, lest
otherwise it come to pass, that God bring a change upon us. Let us with fear
and trembling, take unto us that contrite and humbled heart, which has through
the very long suffering of God, been offered unto us by the preaching of the
most holy word of God: that we may once truly and unfeignedly say unto him with
the Prophet, O eternal God, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me
in thy wrath. O that God would give us this mind.

THe last of these extraordinary Preachers, is death it self. The which,
though of the own nature, it is more deaf and dumb then any of the former:
In fine Hom. 33. and in principio. Hom. 34.
yet (says Beza) the Sermon thereof, was far more clear and notable then
the rest. For this has proclaimed as it were with a shrill voice, that the man
crucified, whom his enemies thought that they had overthrown, did by death
even slay death it self: and that in such wise, that those hooked and clasping
bonds wherewith it held the dead bound, being loosened, it self was
constrained, as it were by opening the very chaps of the grave, to let go the
pray: as though it should say, Go forth ye captives even when ye think good
your selves. And if (says Beza) we do examine the words of the Evangelist
Matthew very diligently, we shall see that this opening of the graves, did
first of all continue the three last hours of the day, mentioned in this
story: and after this, the night and the day of the Sabbath: and then also all
that night to the beginning of the third day, until he that was the true
light, rose again, and these also whose graves were laid open with him) in the
morning of that which we call the Lords day.

But of the resurrection of these, more afterward.

In the mean season, this opening, yea this so long lying open of the graves,
immediately upon the death of our Savior, preaches evidently, to all those
that be not stark deaf, and stone blind as we may say, that it is by the
virtue and merit of this most satisfactorie and meritorious death, that we are
delivered from the tyranny and power of death, hell, and eternal destruction
it self. And thus we may see, that our Savior himself, said not in vain,
Luke 19.40. If these should hold their peace, the stones would cry. For the
earth, and stones, and graves, and ^he heavens have cried out a loud, as we
have seen, so soon as our Savior ceased his speech. And note, that by all
those grave and reverend works, God did most fearfully rebuke the most wicked
practice of the beholders of our Savior, in their mocking and scorning of ^im.

Hitherto of these things, which did more immediately accompany the death of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

NOw we haste to those things which did more remouedly and successively follow,
even to the taking down of his body from the Cross. These also may we well
call the effects of the death of our Savior: but with this difference, that
beside they are not so immediately accompanying his death, but somewhat further
removed, they are also workings in reasonable creatures, and not in those that
be unreasonable, yea and without sense, as were the former. Of the Subjects,
(as we may say) wherein these effects uttered themselves in their diverse manner
of working, we have five sorts to consider of.

The first, were the Centurion, (that is, the Captain of an hundredth) and his
soldiers in general, or for the most part.

The second, were the multitude, to speak of them likewise generally, and for
the most part.

The third, were the Disciples of our Savior Christ, who were best affected
toward him.

The fourth, were the chief of the Jews: that is, the high Priests and
Pharisees, and Elders of the people, who were worst affected of all the rest.

The fifth sort, were those special soldiers, who were the executioners of our
Savior, and (as it is likely) had the taking down of his body from the
cross, committed unto them, as well as the crucifying of the same. To whom
also, we must add that one soldier, who of voluntary wantonness, or rather of
a licentious cruelty, (but yet not without the singular providence of God: as
after we shall see) above all usual custom, thrust him into the side with his
spear.

Of these several sorts, let us therefore inquire in order. And first, of the
Centurion, and his soldiers, more generally considered. Concerning whom, let
us call to mind the words of the holy story.



Now (says Luke, chap. 23.47,) when the Centurion saw what was done* he
glorified God saying, Of a surety this man was just.

The Evangelist Mark writes of this point thus, chap. 15. verse 39.

Now when the Centurion who stood over against him, saw that he thus crying
gave up the Ghost, he said, Truly this man was the Son of God.

But Saint Matthew, chap. 27.54. he joins to the Centurion those that were
with him, in these words.

When the Centurion (says he) and they that were with him watching Jesus saw
and felt the earthquake and the things that were done, they feared greatly,
saying, Truly this was the Son of God.

Ex^licatio^
This is indeed, the very true report of the holy story, and that also, by
the consent of the three Evangelists, compared together. Whereby we may the
more clearly, fully, and perfectly understand this point. And that three
ways. First, touching the persons affected, who they were: for though Luke and
Mark mention the Centurion alone, as the chief: yet Matthew expresses his
band also. Secondly, touching the causes, whereby they were affected, not only
as Mark says, for that our Savior died in a strange manner: that is, not a^
a bird, (if a man may so speak in this case) but as a lion, uttering forth a
mighty voice: but also, (as Matthew and Luke do further declare) because he
felt the earthquake, and saw the other strange things that fell out: such as
were the darkness before, and like enough, the cleaving of some stones: obseuing
also, no doubt, the constancy of the faith of Christ, in commending his soul
into the hands of God in the name of his father.

Thirdly, in respect of their words, whereby they declare how effectually they
were for the time, aff^cted and moved: for not only did the Centurion give
glory to God, saying, He was a just man, (as Saint Luke says) but he said
also, that he was the Son of God: as Saint Mark test^fieth. Neither did he
alone say thus, but his company also being stricken with great fear, consented
to the same: and so at once condemned ^ot^ the Jews, and Pilates, and their
own unjust proceedings against him. Thus ben^fi^ial^ (as we see) the
conference and comparing of the Evangelists is.

But here we cannot conclude, either from the affection, or from the speeches,
either from the Centurion himself* or of any of his company, that either he,
or they, were truly converted to God and that they did truly believe in Christ
as being perfectly righteous, and the natural Son of God: and that with
sanctified hearts, they did give glory unto G^d therein. For not every one that
fears, (and in fear is moved, from the reverend works of the majesty of
God, to see some glimse of the truth, and so to give glory to God an^ for the
time suddenly to speak good words) does truly turn to God For then ^haraoh
should have repented, and every hypocrite and convicted sinner should truly
bel^eue and ^epent. Only this is certain, that God minded, by this means, t^
give great honor and glory to hi^ Son to this day, in that he drew this
^estimony even from the enemies of our Savior: yea even from this heather
Captain and his soldiers: and that, by virtue of such evidence, as they could
not but see and acknowledge to be very ^a^e, and singularly serving to this
very purpose. And therefore we may justly admonish ou^ selves, that we do not
rest our selves in such sudden motions, and as it were passions of the mind,
(though the motions in themselves be good) but to try our own selves
diligently whether the knowledge, faith, fear, and love of God, and other the
holy gifts and graces of the holy Ghost be groundedly and upon good
deliberation, settled and confirmed to abide with us, yea even in tim^s of
tentation or not. It is to little purpose to be well minded at a start, while
the earth shake^h under us, or the heavens do terribly thunder and lighten
upon us: or while some grievous disease and sickness is upon us. All the trial
lies in the good use which we make of such things in the whole course of our
life afterward. Nevertheless, we may not deny, but that it may be, that these
sudden motions were unto some of these thus stricken with fear, the
beginnings of true faith, and conversion to God: yea even like to that
conversion of that Centurion and his soldiers, whereof we read in the 10.
chap. of the Acts.

THus much of the first sort: let us come to the second sort, which were the
multitude generally considered likewise.



In the ^3. chapter of Saint Luke, verse. 8. thus we read.

And all the people that came together to that sight, beholding the things
which were done, smote their breast, and returned.

Explication.
This second sort, were partly such of the people, as were moved by the
instigatio^ of the chief priests and elders, to choose Barabbas to be he that
should be reprieued: and contrariwise, to cry out Crucifigatur against our
Savior, as we have seen before, Matthew. 27. verse 20. And they were partly
such as were moved afterward, upon other occasions, to go see the execution,
whether by reason of the strange superscription which Pilate had set up over
the head of our Savior, according to that we read, John 19.20. Or otherwise
of a vain and curious mind, to feed their eyes with such a spectacle as was
seldom to be seen.

All these are said to be strangely affected at the strangenes of the things,
that fell out far above, yea clean contrary to their expectation: even to
the conviction of their consciences, that a heinous sin was committed by
their Rulers, in the unjust crucifying of this most righteous person: and that
they themselves had grievously sinned, in showing any liking and allowance of
the execution: but specially such as had suffered themselves to be misled so
far by their Rulers, that they should eagerly cry out, Crucify, crucify him.
And the rather, because the matter was by Pilate called into so favorable a
question, whether seditious murdering Barabbas should be delivered, or He.

The very earnest remorse of their hearts, is expressed by the Evangelist, from
this evident sign and effect of it, that they smote their breasts: like as we
read of the Publicane, that he smote his breast, in detestation of his
wickedness, Luke 18.13. As if he accounted himself unworthy to carry any breath
of life in his wretched and sinful body. Nevertheless, we cannot say, that
they did so truly repent them, upon this sudden remorse, as this Publicane is
described to have done. For there is great difference, as was said before,
betwixt a sudden motion, upon the outward view of strange things incurring the
senses, and a deliberate and settled resolution of the heart. And yet, nothing
lets, that this sudden compunction, upon the beholding of so great
accidents, should not make way to the beginning of true repentance, such as we
read of, Acts 2.37, etc. 41. if not even presently, to lay the foundation of
it in their hearts, as touching so many as should not suffer the affection to
vanish away, as suddenly as it fell upon them: but would cherish it, until by
the word, it might be further quickened as it were. For as Master Calvin well
observes, the trial of true profiting stands in the continuance of of the
fear of God, after the astonishment is well and quietly passed over: otherwise
it little profits. Discamus (inquit) hoc exemple, parum aut nihil esse, si
quis ex praesenti Dei potentia, horrorem concipiat, donec sedata
consternatione, in cord tranquillo resideat Dei timor. Let us learn (says
he) by this example, that it is to little, or no purpose, for a man to be
tremblingly affected at the present power of God, unless the fear of God do
continue, after the astonishment is over, and that the heart is quietly come to
the self again. This is an excellent, and very profitable rule. And
therefore, I pray let us all mark it well. There be a great many, when they
have sworn an oath, they will say, God forgive me, I have done amiss. But by
and by, they will swear again. Alas, to what purpose is this, but even to our
greater condemnation before God? Thus much of the second sort.

We come now to the third: that is, to the best sort of the beholders, which
were the Disciples of our Savior. Of which, there were two sorts: some men,
and some women.



The Evangelist Luke writes jointly thus of them. chap. 23. ver. 49.

And all his acquaintance stood a far off, and the women that followed him
from Galile, beholding these things.

Matthew and Mark do only mention the women Disciples, and not the men, and
of them also some particularly and by name, as we read, Math. 27.55, 56. in
these words.

And many women were there, beholding him a far off, the which had followed
Jesus from Galile, ministering unto him.

Among whom was Marie Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Ioses, and
the mother of Zebedeus sons.

Expli. The report of the Evangelist Mark, The ground and history of his
agony upon the cross.
is the same with this of Matthew, yet with these three or four additio^s:
first, that he calls James (the lesser) for distinction sake: secondly, in
stead of the mother of Zebedeus sons, he writes Salome, which as it seems,
was the name of that last described mother, in Matthew: thirdly, he makes
mention of the City Jerusalem whither many women came up with our Savior at
this last time of his going thither. Moreover, he makes a more distinct
rehearsal of those that ministered to our Savior, from the rest, then Matthew
does. The words of Mark are these. There were also women (says he) which
beheld a far off: among whom, was Marie Magdalene, and Marie (the mother of
James the lesser, and of Ioses) and Salome, who also when he was in Galile
followed him, and ministered unto him, and many other women which came up with
him to Jerusalem. Now let us consider of that which the Evangelists write of
this third sort of beholders. First more generally, both of the men and women,
and then severally and apart, of the women.

Generally, it is said of them all, that they stood a far off: but not in
that sense, wherein David complains that his friends and acquaintance stood
a loose from him, Psalm. 38.11. For while there remained life in our Savior,
they kept no doubt, as near as they could well prease, for declaration of
their love: they being still also peradventure in some hope, that he might yet
deliver himself from the cross, and out of the power of his adversaries
hands. For they did not yet thoroughly understand the mystery of our redemption,
concerning the manner of the working of it, as may appear by the talk of the
two Disciples, Luke 24.21. And as touching the near approaching of some, yea of
Marie Magdalene now men ioued, it is expressly testified, that she with the
Virgin Marie the mother of Jesus and Marie of Cleopas, and John the Evangelist,
stood very near the Cross, so that our Savior spoke to him and the Virgin
Marie, as we have already seen, John, 19.25, 26, 27. But after that our
Savior had given up his Spirit into the hands of God, and was perfectly dead,
many of them did withdraw themselves: and yet so, as departing out of the
prease, they could not but tu^ne themselves and make long delays, before they
would altogether depart. Nevertheless, John the Evangelist tarried near by
the Cross still, as the story it self shows afterward. Yea and some of the
women stayed to see him buried: yea and after that came again to imbalme his
body, as we shall see in the process of the holy history.

But how comes it to pass (may some say) that we hear nothing of their
beating of their breasts, or otherwise how they were affected? I answer, that
there was not like cause, why they should be like affected to the multitude,
see-they had not their hand in the persecution of our Savior; neither gave any
allowance unto it, whereby their consciences should accuse them: and therefore
no marvel though they beat not their breasts. Nevertheless, out of all
question, their hearts werefull of heaviness, like as a river up to the brinke:
and therefore the rather withdrew themselves from the rest, that they might the
more freely utter their sorrow, and one to make their move to the other. And
finally, we are not to doubt, but God taught them to make a more reverend and
comfortable use of all the wonderful things which they heard and saw, to the
nourishing of that seed of good hope which was sown in their hearts: though as
yet it lay buried, and after a sort even smothered in them, till our Savior
after his bu^iall, rose again out of his grave.

Now concerning the women: the proportion of the report, yields the ^p^ciall
prai^e of the dut^full and gra^efull observance of our Savior Christ, ^n this
time of his special humiliation, to the women Disciples. For whe^ea^ not one
of the men, are mentioned in any of the three evangelists, and n ne ^^t ^ohn
(by a circumlocution) in the fourth: there are three or four women named,
beside the Virgin Marie. The rest of the women also, are more ^m^ha^ically, or
significantly noted to be many, rather then the men. And further also, of these
many, a good many are honored, with this worthy commendation, that they did
not only with special care and travel, The ground and history of his Death.
even from Galile to Jerusalem attend upon our Savior, for the benefit and
comfort of his holy doctrine to themselves: but were likewise, careful and
diligent, to minister unto him, of their outward riches, to his outward
benefit and comfort, with a supply of the benefits and blessings of this
life, which were after a sort wanting to him: if in this case, and by any
lawfulnes of comparison we may so speak of him, who was the rightful Lord and
heir of all things. Yet so it was, that he was willing for our sakes, to
become poor, to be borne in a stable, to be brought up in a mean estate, and
under a Carpenter all the time of his private estate, and to labor with his
own hands, not to have a house of his own where to rest his head, nor any
ordinary revenues, or annuitie for his maintenance, when he labored night
and day in his public calling; to the end that by his poverty and abasement in
the whole course o^ his life, beside his m^st grievous and reproachful
sufferings at his death, he might make us rich in spiritual gifts and graces,
and honorable in the sight of God, and that he might purchase us the
inheritance of an heavenly Kingdom, with everlasting life and glory in the
most blessed presence of the Lord. And yet more particularly, concerning the
three women expressly named, it is well worthy to be observed, to their praise,
but chiefly to the praise of God, that as he had showed them special mercy
by our Savior Christ: to Marie Magdalene deliverance from 7. devils, and to
the other this favor, that he took of their children to be his Apostles: so
they show themselves in special manner loving and dutiful to Christ: contrary
to the practice of many, who the more they receive, the less they yield. And
last of all, touching the woman last mentioned, her great profiting is here
testified, in that albeit before she fanci^d the Kingdom of Christ in an
earthly manner: as Math. 20. verses 20.21. Yet now she forsakes not Christ
crucified, but is one of the forwardest among all the rest. Let this, for the
present suffice, concerning the third sort.

WE have forward to the fourth sort: to wit, to the chief of the Jews, who
continued worst affected of all the rest.



The Evangelist John chap. 19. ver. 31 continuing the Story writes thus.

The Jews then (because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not
remain upon the Cross on the Sabbath day, for that Sabbath was an high day)
they besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be
taken down.

Explication
The time which the Evangelist here speaks of, when the Jews (that is, the
chief of them: to wit, the high Priests, and the Pharisees; as we may perceive
by another like suit of theirs the next day, Math. 27.62) besought Pilate that
the legs of our Savior, and of the thieues crucified with him, might be
broken, etc. it was no doubt, with as good expedition as they could, after they
perceived that our Savior had given up the Ghost, and was dead.

But beside the notation of the time, we have two things to consider of, from
the report of the holy Evangelist.

First, the request of the Jews what it was.

Secondly, the reasons of the same their request.

Their request was double: First, that the legs of the bodies of the
crucified, might be broken upon the Cross.

Secondly, that their bodies might be taken down, from the Cross. The former
of these requests, was but a preparation to the latter. For insomuch as the
bodies might not be taken down, before they were dead: therefore they desire
that the bones of their legs might be broken, that by the inflicting of so
great a violence, upon those parts of their bodies, their death might be
hastened. But seeing they knew well, that our Savior was dead before: why
should they make request, for the breaking of his legs, as well as of the
legs of the other two?

It may be, they were willing to think, that peradventure be was not
perfectly dead. But though they did not think so, yet doubtless their malice
would easily suggest and carry them forth in desire, every way to do as great
violence to the dead body of our Savior, as they might: according to their
dealing against it, while yet he was alive, even till they had brought death
upon it, as we have seen. And so no doubt, they intended, and therefore made
the more expedition: nothing daunted by any of the reverend and fearful
works of God: they therein showing themselves more doggish and wooluish, then
all the rest: according to that of the Prophet Zeph. chap. 3. ver. 3. They are
as Wolves in the evening, which leave not the bones till the morning. This was
their wicked mind, though God by his most vigilant and divine providence,
otherwise disposed of the matter in this point: as we shall have occasion to
observe, to the glory of the most provident wisdom of God, in the order of
the Story, as it follows.

We see therefore, what either part of the Jews request was to Pilate, who had
authority to order the whole execution, as well as to give the sentence of
condemnation. Now what was the reason, why they made this suite to Pilate, both
for hastening of death, and also for the taking down of the bodies? As their
request was double, so they were led hereunto, by a double reason. First,
because God had commanded, that the bodies of such as were hanged, should be
taken down, and buried the same day, because the curse of God is upon him that
is hanged, as the text says. Deuteronomy. chap. 21. ver. 22.23. That is, God has
cast a special reproach, and infamy upon this kind of punishment, above
other. For headding, or stoning, or burning, is not so odious among any
people, as hanging is. And touching our selves, you know, how it is called in
special reproach a dogs death. And much rather, was this kind of hanging by
nailing to the Cross, specially odious and reproachful. Nevertheless, we
must not understand it to be so accursed of GOD, that none dying this death,
can be partakers of his blessing. For as touching those that have grace to
repent, we have a most comfortable example, in the thief repenting on the
Cross. The ground of which comfort is this, that our Savior Christ who died
to purchase remission of sins, died even this death, and that, in the most
reproachful manner. So grievous is our sin, and so infinite was his love
toward us. How great therefore, ought our duty and thankfulness to be to him?

Secondly, because the day following, was the Sabbath, yea as it were a double
Sabbath by their tradition: As it seems: though some be of another Judgment.
and so page 134 John. 19.31.
because they had put off the celebration of the Passover to that day, which
by the law of God, should have been a Sabbath of it self: and at this feast,
should have been eaten the evening before, according to their beginning of the
day, at what time our Savior Christ did eat it with his disciples. They
accounted therefore of that day next following, as of a special high day, as
the Evangelist shows. And for the same also, were ready to be so much the
more earnest, in their suite, if need should have so required. But without
this heaping up of circumstances, the law of God, properly respecting this
cause, had been sufficient of it self to have moved them, living then under
the authority and bond of that law. Yet the breaking of the bones of the
hanged, was not commanded in that Law: neither was that kind of hanging by
nayling to the Cross, appointed to the Jews by God, or practiced by them,
till the judgment of capital crimes was taken out of their hands by the
Romans, as has been declared before. But seeing the law of God, might of it
self have sufficed to cause them to procure the taking down of the bodies, by
their means at that time hanged up: why does the Evangelist so diligently
mention the other circumstances? No doubt, he would therein tax the
hypocritical superstition of this wicked sort of men, who making no conscience
of murdering a most innocent and just man, yea him that was the very Son of
God: yet pretend great conscience in a matter of external ceremony, like as
we saw before, how they would not go into the hall of the Governor, lest
they should have been defiled thereby: nothing at all troubled in the mean
while, that their souls should be perverted by outrageous malice, and defiled
with most innocent blood, as already, even then, they were.

And this is the common nature of all hypocrites, as our Savior himself had
charged these wicked ones before, saying that they strained at a gnat, but
swa^lowed a Camel. Math. chapter. 23. verse, 23.24. Woe be to you Scribes and
Pharisees hypocrites: for ye tithe mint, and anise, and leave the waightier
matters of the Law, as judgment, and mercy, and fidelity. These ought ye to
have done, and not to have le^t the other. Ye blind guides, who strain out a
gnat and swallowe a Camel. Thus far concerning the fourth sort of men, and
the effect which followed in their hearts, upon the death of our Savior
Christ: For as was obs^rued, they could not be ignorant, that he for his part
was dead already, whatsoever for the further fulfilling of their unsatisfied
malice, they might pretend.

THe last sort of those, whose dealings we are to consider of, even until the
body of our Savior, was to be taken down from the Cross: they only are now
behind. For as touching that which follows of Joseph, it may be fitly
r^ferred to the act it self, of the taking down of the body of our Savior,
because he was the next and immediate instrument of the procuring of it.



It follows in the Evangelist John, the 19. chap. from the 32. verse to the
38. in these words.

32. Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of the
other, which was crucified with him.

33 But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake
not his legs.

34 But one of the soldiers, with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith,
there came out water and blood.

35 And he that saw it bears record, and his record is true: and he knows
that he says true, that ye might believe it.

36. For these things were done that the Scriptures might be fulfilled. Not a
bone of him shall be broken.

37 And again, another Scripture says, They shall see him whom they have
thrust through.

Explication
In these words, the holy Evangelist declares what followed upon the suit of
the Jews to Pilate. And we have these five things to observe in them.

First, that upon the commission, or commandment of Pilate, who granted the
suit of the Jews: the soldiers to whom the execution appertained, brake the
legs both of the one, and of the other of those that were crucified with our
Savior: that is to say, they brake the bones of the lower parts of their
legs, betwixt the knee and the ankles, as the Greek word signifies: the
which parts also, were more apt and easy to be broken with some batt or
cudgel, Tascel^.
which it is like they used to that end, according to the custom of that part
of the execution* verse. 32.

Secondly, we are to observe, that contrary to the custom, and request of the
Jews, he legs of our Savior were not broken. verse. 33.

Thirdly, that moreover and beside the custom, his side was pierced, even to
the heart, as the effect following upon it, shows: insomuch, as both blood
and water issued (as is most likely) from it: the water from betwixt the
membrane or thick skin that compasses the heart it self, wherein usually
water is contained, for the cooling of the heart, as Anatomistes, and
Physicians, have by experience observed: the blood from the piercing of the
heart it self, and from some other passages, the blood, not being as yet cold
nor congealed. v. 34.

Fourthly, we have in the words of the Evangelist, to observe his earnest
asseueration, or testifying of the truth of these things; verse, 35.

Fifthly, the reason how it came to pass, that both contrary to the custom,
the legs of our Savior were not broken: and also, how contrary and beside
custom, his side was thrust through: verses, 36.37. Of these things therefore,
let us a little more fully consider, for our further instruction, as the matter
it self, in either branch, shall more or less require.

And first, beside that which has been observed already, touching the
breaking of the legs of both the thieues: let us only consider, that
howsoever our Lord Jesus Christ, had put the greatest difference that might be,
betwixt thief and thief: even as great difference as betwixt heaven and hell:
yet as touching the outward punishment of the civil Magistrate, they are as
like as one egg of the same kind is to another. Neither would the Lord put
any difference in this behalf: not that he minded to take the punishment of
the converted thief, for any satisfaction to his divine justice, more then of
him, that remained hardened in his sin: but that we might learn to depend
upon the promise of God, touching our salvation, and not to measure his
everlasting love and favor, or his hatred and displeasure, according to these
outward trialls and afflictions, whether we be exercised with them, or be freed
from them.

Secondly, concerning the not breaking of the legs of our Savior, albeit the
next and immediate reason thereof, was unto the soldiers that which is
mentioned in the 33. verse: namely, because he was dead already. For seeing the
breaking of the legs was inflicted to accelerate and hasten death, the^e was
no cause why they should deal so with our Savior: insomuch as they perceived,
that he was already perfectly dead, though the thieues legs were broken,
seeing they were yet living. Nevertheless, if there had not been another
cause of greater force (though in it self further removed) as is mentioned,
verse. 36. the fear of the Jews complaint to Pilate, and of Pilates
displeasure, for not fulfilling his commandment, would easily have moved them
to have done to our Savior, like as they had done to the other in outward
course, though there was not the like inward cause.

And how hardly they were restrained, it may appear by that which follows in
the third place, in that sparing his legs, when they brake the legs of the
other, they deeply pierce and wound his side, though they touch not theirs. So,
they would make sure, one way, that he should be dead indeed: though they
spare him in the other; because they could not but verily think, that he was
already dead. And thus no doubt, they thought that they should satisfy the
Jews, and stay all further complaint that might have been made to their
Master. For though it was but the act of one, yet it may well be out of
question, that it was well enough liked, and had the consent of all. But here
also there is a higher cause of this, then all their own reason, or will,
according to that we are to observe, when we come to the 37. verse. Who the
soldier was, that thrust our Savior into the side, it mattereth not, and
therefore the holy Evangelist makes no mention of his name. It is an ignorant
fiction of the Popish, that his name should be Longine: belike, because the
name of a spear, or iauelin, in the Greek is logche, and he that carries the
spear logchaios, and in Latin Lancea, and Lancearius: as if by the same
dexterity of their skill they should tell us, that the name of the thief
converted, were Lestine, because the Greek word leistes, signifies a thief,
or a robber.

It is also as unconscionable, and fabulous a lie, in that they affirm that
this Longine, or howsoever they will call him, was blind when he pierced the
side of our Savior, and that he was restored to his sight, by washing his
eyes with the blood and water, which flowed out of our Saviors side, and so
became a Christian forthwith, and afterward a Martyr. This was in those days,
when they made blind men soldiers, because they could see so much the better,
both to defend themselves, and to annoie their enemies. But let us send these,
and such like their lying legends, packing to the spirit of ^yes and errors,
whence they came. Only that which remains for us to consider of, in this
third place, is that the holy Evangelist himself mentions: to wit, that so
soon as the soldier had drawn his spear out of the side of our Savior,
forthwith there came out both blood and water. And in this respect, as it
follows in the fourth place, the Evangelist Saint John, is very earnest, in
testifying and confirming the truth of this his faithful report. And that by a
threefold asseueration, in that he says. First, He that saw it, has borne
record.

Secondly, his record is true: and thirdly, he knows that he says true.
wherein he uses a certain gradation or increase of speech. For first, he was
an eye witness, and speaks not by hear say. Secondly, he does not faigne a
matter or amplify it above that it was: but he makes a true report. Thirdly,
it was a truth, not in appearance only, in a false persuasion by delusion of
senses, as when a man thinks he sees that which in truth he does not see:
but he is well advised, and speaks of his own sure and perfect knowledge, yea
so perfectly does he report it, that we that read it, and hear it testified by
him, may and ought undoubtedly to believe it. And even to this end it is, that
he does so earnestly affirm it: as he gives plainly to understand. But it
may be demanded, why the Evangelist should be so earnest, in affirming this
point? we answer. First, because it is a most real and actual proof, even
to the satisfaction of the executioners themselves, that our Savior was not in
appearance and show, but truly and perfectly dead, and therefore much less to
be doubted of us, as some heretics have done: or to be thought, that Simon
the Cyrenian was miraculously crucified in his stead, as that An^ichristian
false Prophet Mahumet says in his blasphemous Alcoran. For this is one most
necessary point of our Christian faith, that our Lord Jesus Christ and no
other, has verily and indeed died the death of the cross for us. This
therefore, may be one weighty reason, why the Evangelist should be thus
earnest in testifying the very true and certain death of our Savior, even his
adversaries being experimental judges: as afterward he uses like earnestnes
in the confirmation and testifying of his resurrection, and other like
necessary articles of our faith, chap: 20.30.31. and chap: 21. verse 24.
Secondly, the reason why Saint John is thus earnest, in the affirming and
testifying, that water and blood came out of the side of our Savior, yea even
after he was dead, and that for a certain proof of the same his death:
because, as the holy Ghost taught and assured, that this was done, to declare
the most sweet and comfortable fruit of his death, suffered upon the cross:
which was, by his perfect obedience sealed up thereby, both to make
satisfaction to Gods justice for our sins, to our perfect justification: and
also to procure our sanctification in some measure or part. In which respect in
the 5. chap: of his first Ep. the same Evangelist makes them two assured
witnesses (the holy Ghost also bears witness thereunto) that whosoever
believes in our Savior Christ, shall be perfectly saved by him. For our
Savior Christ is not only the propitiation for our sins, but also the
washing of our new birth. Tit. 3, 5, 6, 7. And so, this is a matter of singular
comfort unto us, as we are further to observe, when we come to the comforts of
this point.

Now in the fifth place, we are to consider of the chief reason of these two
extraordinary things: first why, that which was intended (and as we may say
contended for, by the Jews) did not take effect: touching the breaking of the
bones: and secondly, why such a thing (to wit, the piercing of the side of our
Savior) should be done unto him: which neither the soldiers did purpos^ly
intend, when they went about the breaking of the bones: neither had Pilate
commanded it; neither came it into the minds of the Jews, once to desire, or
expect it.

The maine or supreme reason of all, was this; that God in his divine counsel
and providence had so determined and appointed. Of the which it is said, that
howsoever there be many devises in man, yet the counsel of the Lord shall stand.
And again, There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the
Lord. Prou: 19.21. and 21.30.

The second, is like to this: that the holy Scriptures of God, must herein be
fulfilled. And that in either respect, it might be confirmed by these
testimonies, moreover and beside all other, that this our Savior thus
crucified, was the true Messiah and Christ, both promised by God, and
prophesied and foretold of, by the holy prophets, as they spoke by the holy
Ghost.

And first, concerning the not breaking of the legs of our Savior: this was
done, says Saint John, verse 36. That the Scripture should be fulfilled, Not a
bone of him shall be broken.

But here, it may be demanded, where in all the holy Scriptures, these words
are spoken of Christ? we are to consider for answer, that the Evangelist
writes there, not as one simply and barely alleging the words of the holy
Scripture: but as a holy and faithful interpreter, (specially allowed and
sanctified of God thereunto) he shows unto us, the meaning and purpose of
God, in that he ordained, by Moses, that not a bone of the Paschal Lamb, which
was a figure of Christ, should be broken. For therein, he prefigured, even
this, that he purposed to perform, and did indeed in due season perform, at
the death of Christ, as the Evangelist observes. And so, that Scripture which
he alleges, is written by the Prophet Moses in the 46, verse of the 12 chap:
of Exodus: and repeated again in the 12. of the 9* chap: of Numbers. And in
the same respect, Paul writing of our Savior Christ says that Christ our
passover is crucified for us. 1, Cor. 5, 7. Now in preserving of the bones of
our Savior unbroken, it may in special manner be said of him (according to
that we read in the 34. Psalm. verse 19.20.) Great are the troubles of the
righteous: but the Lord delivers them out of them all. He keeps all his
bones, not one of them is broken. And herein does the most wise and holy
providence of God, most lively appear, in that like as he commanded his
ancient people, not to break the bones of the lamb, as a part of obedience to
him, because of the have of their departure out of Egypt (for men (as we know)
when they are in have, do not, neither can they stay, to pickle about bones,
or to break the bones to stand pickling out of the marrowe: No more then to
stay the leauening of bread, etc.) so he would not now (notwithstanding any
wicked have of these latter most ungrateful and rebellious Jews, to violate
the commandment of God) suffer any bone of this sacrifice to be broken: to the
end that all true believers might the more clearly see, that our Savior
Christ is that lamb of God, whereby we shall have our most speedy an^
prosperous deliverance out of the hands of all our enemies: if we for our parts
shall not slack the time to come unto him, that we may keep the spiritual
feast of his Passover with him: not in old leaven, neither in the leaven of
maliciousnes and wickedness: but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth: as the Apostle Paul, in the place before alleged, exhorts.

But here, another question comes to be answered: and that is this, how the
Apostle Paul is to be understood, where he teaches us, that the body of our
Savior Christ was broken for us: as we read, 1. Cor. 11, 24. seeing the holy
history of the Gospel, (according to the type and figure commanded in the
law) freeth him as we see from the breaking of any bone? The answer is easy,
if we consider that there is a breaking of the flesh, as well as of the bones.
And therefore, insomuch as the flesh of our Savior Christ was grievously
broken, and torn, both by whipping with rods, and crowning with thorns, and
also with nailing: and last of all, with this thrusting of the spear into his
side, yea even to his very heart, as was said: well may the Apostle Paul speak
as he does: and yet therein say no more then our Savior Christ did, when he
said, that his body is given for us. For it was given to that death of the
cross, wherein his flesh was thus wounded and broken, that it might be a
binding up, and a healing to us. For as the Prophet Isaias prophesied long
before. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our
iniquities. Yea so as body and soul were broken as it were, and rent a sunder,
for a time.

Hitherto, concerning the not breaking of the bones of our S^uiour, what the
chief reasons of it were, and how it was foretold in the holy Scriptures, that
it should come so to pass.

It remains that we do likewise consider of the chief cause, whence it
came to pass, that the side of our Savior was pierced. This also, as says
the Evangelist John, was done, that another Scripture might be fulfilled, in
that it says in another place: They shall see him whom they have thrust
through. This Scripture is written in the 20. verse of the twelfth chapter of
the Prophet Zechariah. The whole verse is this, the Heb: word is translated
compassion, but supplication (to wit, for mercy and forgiveness) is more
agreeable to this argument, seeing the same word yields this signification
also.
And I (says the Lord by his holy Prophet) will pour upon the house of David,
and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplication,
and they shall look toward me whom they have pierced: and they shall lament
for it, as one mourns for his only son: yea they shall bitterly mourn for
it, as one mourns bitterly for his first borne. Or more near to the words,
They shall do it, by taking it bitterly, or grievously, amaricando, etc. We
read it also, more usually thus: and they shall lament for him: by a change of
the person, as though the Lord, would therein by his spirit of prophecy, point
as it were with the finger, from himself, to our Savior Christ: in whose
piercing, he accounted himself pierced, yea in special manner pierced as it
were, above al other their grieuances and vexations of his holy spirit.

But howsoever we read the relative (for him) by a changing of the person, or,
(for it) in the neuter gender, respecting the wickedness of the rebellious
dealing it self: the Evangelist John, writing by the same holy spirit of God,
by the which the Prophet Zechariah prophesied: he puts the matter out of all
question, that the Lord putting his people in mind of all their former
rebellions and stubborn behavior against him, wherewith he accounted himself
wounded, and as it were pierced through the sides (according to that which is
said of cursing and blaspheming: that it is a kind of piercing the Lord, as
the word nakabh gives to understand, Leu. ^4.11.) Yet he does more
particularly look unto this piercing of him with the spear, in the side of
his Son. Yea and to the other piercing of his hands and feet also with
nails. The which, with all other their most cruel proceedings against him,
was as the filling up of the full measure of their most traitorous rebellion
against God himself, their sovereign Lord and King. For though the Evangelist
does upon the special occasion, apply the Scripture of Zechariah to the
piercing of our Savior in the side more particularly, and principally: yet
this does not exclude the other piercings, but they may justly be comprehended
also within this prophecy. For the word dakar which Zechariah uses, may note
as well the one as the other: the piercing with sword or spear, or dart, or
arrowe, or nail, or any thing that has a point, to pierce. And so may the
Greek words nusso, or nutto and centeo or execenteo which the Evangelist uses.

But how may it be said, that the Jews did thus, seeing it was a soldier of
the Romans that thrust our Savior into the side: and such likewise were they
that nailed him to the cross?

The Jews are nevertheless, justly charged with it, because they were the chief
causers of all that violence which the Romans used against him: like as Pilate
is said to scorn our Savior, seeing he appointed that the thing should be
done, though he did it not himself. So that we may see, it is nothing the
less sinful before God, when we commit wickedness by any evil instruments
which we set a work, or give them any encouragement thereunto: though we do it
not with our own hands. Nay rather, our sin is so much the greater, by how much
we draw more persons with us into the fellowship and guiltine^ of our sin.

Nevertheless, ^n these words of the Prophet Zechariah, The ground and history
of his burial.
which the Evangelist John alleges, we have not only to consider, an
admonition and reproof, given to the wicked concerning their sin (whether we
look to the Actors in this particular, or to any other peircers of God and our
Savior Christ by their wicked deeds, or blasphemous words) together with a
most fearful subindication and threatening of the wrath of God against them
for the same, whosoever shall not repent them thereof in due season, before the
day of Gods wrath does come: but also, (as touching those that shall truly
repent, both Jew and Gentile, mourning for their sins) here is contained, a
most gracious promise of mercy and forgiveness, so that all such may behold
Christ thus pierced for them to their comfort: yea though he was after a sort
pierced by them, and of us all. The text of the Prophet is plain. And thus
also, does the Evangelist other-where rehearse these words, as serving notably,
to either use and purpose: as Revel: 1.7. Behold, he comes with clouds, and
every eye shall see him: even they that pierced him through: and all kindreds
of the earth shall wai^e before him, ^uen so, Amen says the holy Evangelist
unto it.

Finally, from the words of the holy Prophet, let us diligently note, that as
touching all these, which either have, do, or shall repent of their sins,
done against the Lord our God, and his Christ: this is the work of God in
their hearts by his own most gracious and holy spirit: as Ier: 31.18.19. and
2. Tim: 2.25. And again, that true repentance is not without very earnest and
godly mourning for sin: as in the same place of Jeremiah: and 2, Cor:
7.10.11. Yea even in this respect, that they were the cause, and even we our
selves by them, that our Lord Jesus Christ was most bitterly crucifie^,
wounded, and pierced, not only in his holy flesh, but also in his very soul.
This, I say, is diligently to be marked of us, lest we deceive our selves, in
mistaking the nature of true repentance: and lest we deny God, the glory of
the same his most gracious work, so singularly tending to our own salvation
and comfort.

ANd thus, having considered all things, recorded in the holy story, from the
death of our Savior, until the taking down of his blessed body from the
cursed cross: let us now, renewing, and whetting as it were our care and
diligence, proceed likewise, to consider of the taking down of his body from
the cross, together with those things that do belong to the same: and
thereunto, let us annexe the history of the burial of the body of our
Savior, and the appurtenances thereof, like the warpe and the woofe, close
together.



The holy story is continued by the Evangelist John, in the same his 19. chap:
from the beginning of the ^. verse to the end of the chap. in this manner.

38 And after these things (says Saint John) Joseph of Arimathea (who was a
Disciple of jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews) besought Pilate, that
he might take down the body of Jesus. And Pilate gave him license. He came
then, and took Jesus body.

39. And there came also Nicodemus (who at the first came to Jesus by night)
and he brought of mirrhe and aloes mingled together about an hundred pound

40. Then took they the body of Jesus, and wrapped it in linen clothes, with
the odours, a^ the manner of the Jews is to bury.

41. And in that place, where Jesus was crucified, was a garden, and in the
garden, a new sepulcher, wherein was never man yet laid.

42. There then, laid they Jesus, because of the Jews preparation day, for the
sepulcher was near.

Explication
In this text, we have, according to that which was said before, the narration
of the taking down of the body of our Savior Christ, and of his burial
nearely knit together. We have the instruments, both of the one and also of the
other, by the Evangelist described unto us: and likewise, the manner, both of
the procuring of that, and also of the performance of this. The ground and
history of the taking down of his body from the Cross.
Of these things therefore, let us stand a while, as diligently as we can, to
consider: and that, withal such holy supply, as the other Evangelists, do in
diverse points afford unto us.

And first, touching the time of the taking down of the body of our Savior,
the Evangelist Matthewe reports, that it was when the even was come, chap:
27.57, And Mark, when night was come, chap: 15, 42. So that both compared
together, it is evident, that it was delaied as long as might be. And the
Evangelist Mark, does herewithall, mention the reason, which moved Joseph, in
this delay (beside that honor which he did bear to our Savior Christ) to
take an honest and godly care of the taking down of his body from the cross:
namely, because it was the day of the preparation, which is before the Sabbath.
And this was thought reason sufficient, to the malicious Jews, to move them to
entreat that the legs of our Savior might be broken. But being disappointed
of that, it was with them, a reason of no weight, to move them to have care of
his honest burial. And no marvel.

Herein therefore, is an exceeding great difference, betwixt Joseph, and them.

This Joseph, was the sole instrument of procuring the honest and seemly
taking down of the body. Indeed, in the burial, Nicodemus was a worthy
companion with Joseph, as we shall see anon: but it seems that Joseph was
all alone, in the procuring of the favorable and reverend taking down of the
body of our Savior. The manner of his procuring of it, was this. He knowing
that Pilate had the power of the disposing of the body: according to that which
we read was prophesied, Isay: 53. The people gave his grave to the wicked, and
to the rich, even to their own destruction, (according to their imprecation
against themselves: His blood be upon us and our children) as Tremelius and
Iunius do well translate and interpret those words of the Prophet: Joseph
therefore, is a Suitor to Pilate, that he would grant him this favor, that he
might take it down, and bestow it. For as the three Evangelists, Matthewe,
Mark, and Luke, tell us; he asked the body of Jesus: that is, not only to
take it down from the cross, but also, that he might bestow it in burial, as
the effect it self declares. For so soon as Pilate had granted him license
to do that which he had requested, he did not only take down the body, but
also he buried the same. And in the procuration of the taking down, and
burying of the body, the Evangelist Mark observes, to the commendation of
Joseph, that he used boldness in this his suit, howsoever it might seem to be a
matter wherein he endangered himself (at the least, through the malice of his
wicked brethren, the Rulers of the Jews) to some displeasure and rebuke, in
that he should show himself favorable, to the body of one that was executed
under the crime of a rebel against Caesar. But through the goodness of God,
it fell out otherwise toward him. For he gave him favor with Pilate. By whose
answer, it appears that Joseph in his suit, had informed Pilate, that he the
rather desired, that Pilate would forthwith grant him the body, not only
because it was near the evening, but also because he had been dead a good
while since. For as the Evangelist Mark says, Pilate marvelled if he were
dead already, and called unto him the Centurion (who was now returned from his
watch at the execution) and asked of him, whether he had been already dead.
Whereupon (says the Evangelist further) when he knew the truth of the
Centurion: that is, when he had confirmed that which Joseph had said before
to Pilate: he gave the body to Joseph. Thus then, after that Pilate had
commanded, that the body should be delivered to Joseph, as the Evangelist
Matthewe writes, he is said to take it down. So that, whether the soldiers
did it with their own hands, or other whom Joseph brought with him to do it
more tenderly, and reuerendly, then the Soldiers were like to do it: it is
ascribed to Joseph, as if he had done it with his own hands, seeing as was
said in the beginning, he was the procurer of it: and could no doubt, have
found in his heart, most gladly to have laid his own hands unto the work:
for the reverence, that he did bear to the body of Christ, whom before, he had
religiously honored. So good and godly a man, was this Joseph.

In this respect, we must not neglect, to consider that diligent description,
and honorable testimony, which every one of the Evangelists give concerning
Joseph.

The whole collection, and rehearsal whereof, out of them all, may be in this
order.

First, he is described from the place of his birth, which was a town or city
of the Jews, called Arimathea, as both Luke and the rest do write. The which
Arimathea, was no other city, then that Rama in the tribe of Benjamin, near
to Gibeon, and not far from Jerusalem: of the which we rea^ Josh. 18.25.
Though in the Sirian language (according to the dialect thereof,) somewhat
otherwise called, then it is in the Hebrew, as learned interpreters do observe.

Secondly, he is described from his outward estate, first that he was a rich
man. Secondly, that he was an honorable Counselor or Senator, one of the
chief Elders and governors of the people: and therefore in either respect,
more worthy commendation, in that he feared not the envy, and danger, that
might the rather have risen up against him.

Thirdly, he is described from his inward virtues and graces: and that also two
ways. First, in respect of his civil, or more common conversation among men;
in which respect, he is commended for two notable virtues, insomuch as he was
both a good man, and also a just man: the difference whereof read. Rom: 5.7.
And Ps. 112.5. A good man is merciful and lends. These were his more common
virtues, even such as do specially concern communion and conversation toward
men. He is described also, in respect of his religion, more directly toward
God. Discipulus christi is est, qui quae vera sunt, cum delectation^ recipit.
Josephus Antiquit: Iudiac: lib. 18. ch: 4.
First, that he was a disciple of our Savior Christ: that is, such a one, as
was willing to be informed concerning the truth, in matters of the religion,
and worship of God then in question, and much corrupted and depraved among
them: though he was so in secret for fear of the Jews, as the Evangelist John
observes. Secondly, for a special note of his religion, the Evangelist Luke
says, that he was one of those that waited for the kingdom of God, like as it
is said of Simeon, Luke ch: 2.25. that he waited for the consolation of Israel.
And as now all good Christians are described to be such as wait for the second
coming of our Savior Christ, Tit: 2.13. 2. Tim: 14.8. Read also, Mark chap:
13, verse 33. etc. and Luke ch: 12, 35, 36, 37, 38.39, verses.

Thirdly, for a note of his religious and godly heart, it is testified of
Joseph, that he did not consent to the counsel and deed of them that put our
Savior Christ to death. For Joseph had learned from the law of God not to
follow the multitude to do evil: no though they be of the more mighty sort,
who decline to overthrow the right: as Tremellius interprets Exo: 23.2. But
is this enough, not to consent with them? Or is it not rather the duty of
every one to stand against, and to hinder their wrongs? It is no doubt, the
duty of every one that has power in his hand to do it. But it was at this
time, as the ouerflowing of the raging sea with the wicked Jews. And what was
Joseph that he should be able to hinder the the same? wherefore seeing he
could not stay their rage, it was a great grace in him, to withdraw himself
from them. This is the notable description and testimony which the holy
Evangelists do give this worthy and notable man Joseph, who took this
honorable care, concerning the body of our Savior. So that a most honorable
cause or action and an honorable and worthy person are well met here together.
God of his infinite mercy give us grace to follow these his excellent
virtues, and namely his holy and resolute boldness in the open profession of
his singular love and reverence toward our Savior Christ in a time of special
reproach and danger: whereby the former blemish of his fearefulnes is through
the increase of the grace of God in this behalf (vz. by this resolute act of
his) removed, and as ^t were buried with the honorable burial of our Savior
Christ. The which description and testimony of the holy Evangelists, that it
may be the more clearly in our view, as a goodly clear glass for us to
look into: it shall be profitable, that we set down the words of the other
three, as well as we have done before, the words of Saint John.



The words of Saint Matthew are these. And when the even was come, there came a
rich man of Arimatheah, named Joseph, Mat. 27. verse 57.
who also himself had been Jesus Disciple:

58. He went to Pilate and asked the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the
body of Jesus to be delivered, Chap. 27.57.58.

The words of Saint Mark are these.

Mark. 15. verse.
42. And now when night was come (because it was the day of the preparation that
is before the Sabbath)

43. Joseph of Arimathea, an honorable Counselor, who also looked for the
kingdom of God, came and went in boldly unto Pilate, and asked the body of
Jesus.

44. And Pilate marvelled, if he were already dead, and called unto him the
Centurion, and asked of him whether he had been dead any while.

45. And when he knew the truth of the Centurion, he gave the body to Joseph,
ch: 15.42.43.44.45.

The words of Saint Luke are these.

Luke. 23. verse.
50. And behold, there was a man named Joseph, who was a Counselor, a good man
and a just.

51. He did not consent to the Counsel and deed of them he was of Arimathea a
City of the Jews: who also himself waited for the Kingdom of God.

52. He went unto Pilate and asked the body of Jesus.

Explication.
Hethereto therefore, of that part of this history which concerns the taking
down of the body of our Savior from the cross; the time when it was, the
person by whom it was procured, and the manner how: performed principally, yea
in a manner solely by Joseph. The burial follows, wherein Nicodemus had an
honorable partnership with him, as the Evangelist John declares, and as we
have already rehearsed out of his text. Nevertheless, because he is justly to
be accounted the first and principal in this duty also, let us begin with
him: and see what the other Evangelists do say more a part of him: and then,
we will come to consider of that which the Evangelist John records of
Nicodomus apart, and also jointly, both of Joseph and Nicodemus together. First
therefore, Joseph, in respect of the burial of the body of our Savior?

Matthew follow thus in the holy Story, as we read, chap: 27. verse 59.60.

Mat: 27. verse 59, So Joseph took the body, and wrapped it in a fair linen
cloth.

60. And he put it in his new tomb, which he had hewn out in a rock, and
rolled a great stone to the door of the Sepulcher, and departed.

The words of Saint Mark are these, chap: 15. verse 46.

Mark 1^.46. Pilate gave the body to Joseph, who bought a linen cloth, and
laid him in a tomb that was hewn out of a rock, and rolled a stone unto the
door of the Sepulcher.

The words of Saint Luke are these.

chap: 23.53. Joseph took down the body and wrapped it in linen clothe, and
laid it in a tomb hewn out of a Rock, wherein was never any man yet laid.

54. And that day was the preparation, and the Sabbath draw on.

Thus then we see how the Story is set down by these three, The ground and
history of the bu^iall of his body.
under the name of Joseph alone, because he was the principal. Let us
therefore consider, first of that which does prope^ly belong to him: and then
of that which is properly belonging to Nicodemus: and last, of those things
which by Saint John are attributed to them both.

That which is ascribed, as proper to Joseph is. First that he (coming from
Pilate, after he had obtained his suit, that he might have the taking down and
bestowing of the body of our Sa:) in the way, as he came through the city
bought, and brought with him, such a quantity of fine linen, as was fully
sufficient, in the best and most seemly manner, to be employed about this
business. In which respect, the Evangelist John speaks in the plural number,
that he had prepared linen clothes. Chap: 19.40 And again, Chap: 20.7.

Secondly, whereas the same Evangelist John writes, that near to the place
where our Savior was crucified, there was a garden, and in that garden, a new
Sepulcher, wherein was never yet any man laid: it seems by the testimony of
the Evangelist Matthew, that both the garden was belonging to Joseph, and also,
that the tomb hewn out of a Rock, was the tomb which Joseph had prepared
for himself: or at the least, for some of near and special acaccount with
him.

That which is proper to Nicodemus, concerning the burial of our Savior
Christ's body, was that he brought a great quantity, even about a hundredth
pound weight of mirrhe and aloes mingled together: such spices as were used
about the burial of the dead, having a sweetening and preservative quality in
them, usually employed in this kind of duty toward the dead, to nourish in
themselves yet living, the hope of the resurrection of the dead, and thereby
also to encourage themselves against the fear of death. To the which end
likewise, they used to wash the bodies of the departed, and to do other
offices of solemnity, as may appear in the histories of the holy Scriptures,
recording the manner of burial among the people of God. Gen: 50. verse 2. and
26. Read also Act: 9.37. The which, like enough, should have been done with a
more full solemnity, save that (as the Evangelist expresses) the Sabbath
drew on, and the evening was even at hand, when, with them, the Sabbath
began.

Neither is it to be omitted, concerning Nicodemus, that the Evangelist John
testifies, that howsoever, at the first, he was timorous and fearful (as he
remembre^h from his first coming to our Savior, which was by night for fear
of his fellow Pharisees and Rulers, according to that we read, chap: 3.1.2.)
yet afterward growing somewhat more bold, as we read, chap: 7.50.51. God
gives him now, an excellent courage, in professing so openly, his singular
reverence toward our Savior, that it cannot be obscure and hidden to any, but
that he was from his heart, a faithful and true Disciple of his. And this
fact of his, as well as the other of Joseph, was even as much, as if the one as
well as the other, was willing to put their whole state in hazard, rather then
they would fail in this declaration of their love toward our, and their,
blessed Lord and Sau^our.

But now, let us come to those things, which are jointly ascribed, both to
Joseph and Nicodemus, in this honorable duty of the burial of our Savior.

First, as the Evangelist John says, they together with their company, which
they brought with them to help in their business; took the body of Jesus,
and wrapped it in linen clothes, with the odours, as the manner of the Jews
is to bury.

Secondly, they by their servants, yea so far as was needful, no doubt, not
standing aloof, but setting their own hands to the work; did in seemly
manner carry and accompany him to the garden, which was not far off from
the place where he was crucified.

Thirdly, they lay him in that new Sepulcher mentioned before, wherein never
any was yet buried.

Finally, they cover the tomb with a stone, yea a very heavy one, as may
appear by this, that though they had some company with them, yet it was of
that weight, that they could not well remove it, but by turning it over and
over, till they had got it on the Sepulcher. And so, says the Evangelist Mark
expressly, Cap. 16.4. that the stone was a very great one. Which done, as the
Evangelist Matthew says, they departed.

Such therefore, is the history of the burial of our Savior Christ, the which
the Lord God would in his divine providence have to be performed, in a reverend
and honorable manner, by these reverend and honorable persons. For,
notwithstanding his burial was a further confirmation of his very true death:
a matter most necessary both to be suffered of our Savior (as has been
declared) and also to be believed of us: (and so was consequently, though
without all sense of pain, a remainder of his humiliation, in that his body
was to remain in the state of the dead, even in as sound a sleep as is
ascribed to their bodies, and to lie in the grave as under the power of death
though not corrupted, nor subject to corruption, as all other bodies of the
faithful are) yet I say, the Lord would have it performed in an honorable
manner, as a seemly preparation to the glorious resurrection of his body, which
was shortly to follow. Yea so to follow, as it might be most evident, that it
was the very true body of our Savior that died and rose again, and not the
body of any other.

For the which cause it was, that God so exactly disposed in his most wise
providence (he tendering the weakness of our faith, and also by this means, as
by other following, providing against all cauills of the wicked that might be,
to the obscuring of the resurrection) that Joseph should lay the body of our
Savior in a new tomb as S. Matthew writes; wherein no man was ever buried
before, as both Luke and John do expressly record.

NOw, if as an appendix to this part of the holy Story concerning the burial,
we shall consider in a word, that which the Evangelists Matthew, Mark, and
Luke, do observe, concerning the women disciples mentioned before, we will
proceed to that which follows, touching the time, wherein the body of our
Savior continued in the grave.



Saint Matthew writes thus Chap. 27.61. Math. 27.


61 And there was Marie Magdalen, and the other Marie sitting over against the
Sepulcher.

The words of S. Mark are these, Chap. 15.47.

47 And Marie Magdalen, and Marie, Ioses mother, Mark. 15.
beheld where he should be laid.

S. Luke is more large in this point, and writes thus, Chap. 23. ver. 55 56.

55 And the women also (says he) that followed after, Luke. 23.
who came with him from Ga^ile, they beheld the Sepulcher, and how his body was
laid.

56 And they returned, and prepared odours and ointments, but rested the
Sabbath day, according to the Commandment.

Explication
Touching this memorable appendix, by comparing the holy Evangelists together,
we may easily perceive, that not only the two Mary's (as the most forward, and
obseruant disciples) but also diverse other women attended upon the burial, to
see where the body should be bestowed: and that, as S. Luke shows; even with
this mind, that they knowing where it was intombed, they also (the women
disciples) might afterward, show some fruit of their reverence and love,
toward the body of their Master, as the men disciples, Joseph, and Nicodemus,
had done. Yea, they are so held in their affection, and longing after our
Savior, (though now dead and buried) that they cannot easily find in their
hearts to depart from the sight of the tomb, The ground and history of the
continuance of his body in the grave.
wherein his body was laid. Nevertheless, when time it self earnestly pressed
them (the night being even at hand, and therewithal, the Sabbath approaching)
they depart, laying up this in the purpose of their heart, that they would
return again to imbalme the body of Christ. And to that purpose, they laid
their purses together, and prepared odours, and oin^ments, either the same
evening, or the evening of the next day, the Sabbath being ended: as S. Mark
seems to affirm. For the next day they were so early in the morning, that
they could have no time to do it.

Now where it is asked, whether the women did well, in this their purpose or
no? we will put over the answer hereof, to the speech of the holy Angel which
he uses to them, when they come to put that in practice, which now they
intended. Neither will we then more or less reprove it in them, then the
Angel does. For he is the best moderator, that we can find in that case. In
the mean season, we may be bold to affirm, that their reverend, and dutiful
affection of inward love and honor toward our Savior, is exceeding
commendable, and worthy to be imitated of all good and fait^full Christians.
Yea, and they are likewise to be greatly commended, as very d^sc^ee^ and godly
women, in that they prefer the express^ commandment of God, for the
sanctifying of his Sabbath, before their own affection touching that purpose
of theirs, in a matter of no present necessity. Wherein also, they may
worthily be excellent paternes to all good Christians, from whence we may
learn what a holy regard we ought to have of the days and times specially
appointed to the divine worship and service of the Lord our God. And on the
contrary, their practice is a just conuicting, and condemning o^ all loose and
negligent worshippers of God: but most of all, of such as do wickedly
profane, and pervert the right use of the Lords Sabbathes: that is, the days
now appointed to Christians, for the worship of God, and our Savior Christ:
even the day of the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the weekly
recourse thereof, in stead of all the days of the Jews legal Sabbathes.
Finally, t^eir excellent virtue, and truly religious mind herein, may well be
illustrated by us, from ^he comparison of the wicked dealing of their ungodly
rulers, even on the sam^ Sabbath day, as it follows in the holy Story.
Mat^hew, 27.62. etc. as ^y the grace of God, we shall see further by and by.
For we refer the comforts of faith, as also the duties concerning ^he bu^iall
of our Savior, to their proper places assigned to them in our present course.

ANd we come now, as the Story it self guides us, to consider of the time,
wherein the body of our Savior continued in the grave.



The body of our Savior Christ, lay buried in the grave, a part (though but a
small part) of the day of the Jews preparation, which was the sixth day of the
week: from whence it continued the whole day, both the night, and the day of
their Sabbath, which was the seventh day.

It continued also, well near the whole night of the first day of the week,
even till a little before the breaking forth of the morning.

Explication and proof.
So indeed the E^angelists give plainly to understand, if we diligently
compare, Luke, 23.5. That day was the prepa^ation, and the Sabbath drew on:
with John chap. 20.1. The first day of the week came Mary Magdalen while it
was yet dark: And with Matthe^, chap. 28.5. where, by the speech of the
Angel, comforting the women, (while yet the keepers were astonished, and
feared, as if they had been st^iken dead) it appears, that our Savior was
risen but a while before they came.

So that, the time that our Savior Christ, continued in his winding sheet,
his body overwhelmed with odours, the grave close shut up, was at the least 36.
hours: and so a most full proof of his very true death, when as we know half
that time, will show that the coarse laid forth by the walls in open air, is
past recovery. And thus, was the tipe of Jonas the Prophet fulfilled in our
Savior, in that he resembled himself unto him, in regard of his abiding
three days and three nights in the belly of the Whale-fish. Matthew, 12.39.40.

But it may be objected, that the body of our Savior Christ did not continue
full three days, and three nights, in the heart of the earth: but only one
full day, which was the second, and but a little portion of the first day
wherein he was buried, even near upon the evening: and only the night of the
third day.



We do not read, that our Savior said, that he would continue three days
full and complete: neither did he ever purpose to do so, but rather to
prevent the time, for the more evident demonstration of his divine power in
rising from the dead: as he had done before, in the laying down of his life
among the dead, sooner then it was thought, that by the course of nature, he
could.

Explication and proof.
So indeed, do the effects themselves, in either respect, really, actually,
and sensibly declare. And that it was not the meaning of our Savior, to
determine the time of continuance in the grave, to be three whole days, it is
evident from his own words, Matthew, chap. 17.23. and chap. 20.19. The third
day shall the Son of man rise again: to wit, the third day after the
crucifying, or after the beginning of his sufferings: beginning at his
appre^ension in the ga^den. For that was the beginning of the sufferings of the
first day, by the spiteful dealing of the Jews: and so we may well reckon,
according to that of Cleopas. Luke, 24.21. And as touching all these things, to
day (says he) is the third day that they were done. Neither does our Savior
Christ say, three days after I am crucified, I will rise again: as the text
it self is plain. And so again, Mark, 9.31. and Luke, 9.22. And John 2.19.
In three days, I will raise it up again: that is, within the space of three
days.

And so are we to understand Mark: chapter 8.31. though in another phrase of
speech meta treis emeras, as Beza in his large Annotations does diligently
dispute, and clear it, from the use of the same preposition meta in the Greek
language. Yea he clears it, from the speech of the adversaries of our
Savior Christ: M^tthew, 27.63.64. Where the Euangel^st reports their suit to
Pilate, which was, that the Sepulcher might be m^de sure till the thi^d day:
because they remembered that he said, while he was yet alive, Within three days
I will rise. This their reason, Saint Matthew expresses in this phrase of
speech, meta treis emeras: the which if we should not understand, as it has
been interpreted, it were a reason reasonlesse. For if the words should
signify, I will rise after three days, they should rather have desired that
the watch should be set at the end of the third day.

Thus then we see, how long, our Savior being buried, continued in the grave,
in the state of the dead, touching his body: and even as it were among the
dead, unto whom he in his burial descended, according to the usual phrase of
the holy language: as we read Genesis 37.35. and chapter, 42.38. and 1. Kings,
2.6.9. and Numbers. 16.33. where it notes a corporal descending into the
earth, though not by burial. But of this more afterward. As for the comforts
and duties of faith in this respect, they shall, God willing, be set down in
their several places, as we come unto them. And therefore I pray the Reader
to turn thither unto them.

It remains only, touching this part of the holy Story, that we do
briefly consider of that malicious practice of the Rulers of the Jews, while
our Savior continued in the grave: in seeking if possibly they could, to have
hindered his resurrection.

Answer. The Evangelist Matthew, Chap. 27. from the 62. ver. to the end of the
Chapter, reports the whole matter in these words.

62 Now (says he) the next day that followed the preparation (of the Sabbath)
the high Priests and Pharisees assembled to Pilate, 63. And said, Sir, we
remember, that the deceiuer said, while he was yet alive, within three days I
will rise.

64 Command therefore, that the Sepulcher be made sure until the third day,
lest his disciples come by night and steal him away, and say unto the people,
He is risen from the dead: so shall the last error be worse then the first.

65 Then Pilate said unto them, ye have a watch: go, and make it sure, as ye
know.

66 And they went, and made the Sepulcher sure with the watch, and sealed the
stone.

Explication.
Here is a wicked conclusion, fitly agreeing to the whole pursuit of their
malice going before. Wherein, we are to consider: First, the su^e which the
rulers of the Jews, with a ready consent in their wickedness, made unto Pilate.

Secondly, the grant which Pilate yielded unto them. And thirdly, their
execution of the same.

In the suit of the Rulers of the Jews: to wit, of the high Priests, and
Pharisees, we are to mark: First, what it was: Secondly, the reasons which
moved them to make it: Thirdly, their earnestnes or rather eagernes, in going
about it.

Touching the first of these points. Their suit was, that sure provision might
be made, and due order taken by Pilate (who had authority to command, and give
order in such manner of watching and warding, as they required) that the grave
whrein the body of our Savior was laid, might be made sure, and watched,
until the third day. This was their suit. Now let us hear their reasons.
First that they might by this means, prove our Savior Christ now a liar, in
certain words which they called to mind he had spoken, while he lived: to
wit, that he would rise again, within three days after his death. For that
this was their intent, it is evident by their blasphemy, in terming our
blessed Savior, even the truth it self, a deceiuer. Secondly, that they might
prevent the fr^ud of the Disciples of our Savior, whom, most unjustly they
suspected, to have in purpose, to steal his body out of the grave, and so to
make other believe, that he should be risen from the dead. So (say they) the
last error should be worse then the first. O extreme malice! To what outrage
and blasphemy, will it not drive them, that once yield themselves over unto
it, in resisting of the holy truth of God? These wretched men resisted our
Savior, while he was alive: they cannot now d^sist, though he be dead, no
though (according to the prouerbiall saying, L^uor cessare solet in mortuos)
few envy or spite the dead. And thus they add sin to sin against God, and
heap up wrath upon wrath, as it were with ^ull measure, pressed down, and
running over, against themselves: which doubtless, long since having come to
the full measure, has swept them away like a flood, from the face of the
ear^h, and reserueth them, to further punishment, against the final
declaration of the vengeance of God, against a^l wicked sinners, which have
spoken and practiced their wicked devises against him, and his glorious Son.
O therefore, let us t^ke warning betimes, that we never begin to set our selves
against the truth of God, in any part. Nay rather, having by the grace of God,
begun to imbr^ce the truth: let us cleave fast unto it, laboring every day to
love it, and to believe it, and to obey it, more and more resisting and
suppressing to our power, all gaine-sayers and blasphemers of it: whether
Jews, or any heathenish Athiests, or heretics, whosoever. And touching these
adversaries here mentioned: what could they have spoken more wickedly, and
blasphemously, then first to call the appearance of the Messiah our Savior in
our nature, a deceiving: and then his resurrection, The ground and meaning of
his descension into Hell
and the doctrine thereof, an increase of the error? And see I pray you, how
through the suggegestion of the devil, they were more rise in remembering the
words of our Savior, to the oppugning of his resurrection, then his poor
sorrowful Disciples were, to comfort themselves, against the discomfort of his
death. Finally, that in the height of their malice, they seek as much as they
can, for ever to hinder the knowledge of his resurrection: the effect it self
declares, in that, as afterward it follows, Matthew. 28, 11. when it was by
their own watchmen certified unto them, that he was indeed risen again: they
use as devilish means as possibly might be, to smother the same.

Thus, the wickedness of their reasons, is convinced by the wickedness, and issue
of their very actions: howsoever they would cover the same with their fair and
counterfeit pretenses of preventing error. Now thirdly, their earnestnes in
their most wicked suit, is evident from the notation of the time, wherein they
assembled themselves, and made their resort to Pilate: to wit, even upon their
high Sabbath, and afterward also, in the same gathered together their
soldiers, and set them in this their wicked watch, gave them their charge, and
sealed the grave. In all which unholy bulying of themselves by the instigation
no doubt of the devil: they have no sparcle of conscience in defiling
themselves, nor in violating the holy rest of the Lords Sabbath.

Thus much, concerning the wicked and malicious suit of the chief Priests and
Pharisees: What it was, what reasons moved them, and how earnest they were in
it. These things considered more fully, we need speak the less of the other
two points: that is, of the grant which Pilate made to their suit very readily,
even as themselves would have wished. For he gives them liberty to appoint
the watchmen themselves, and to make it sure as they should think good: Pilate
giving them commendation also to be men wise enough, how to dispose of all
things, to their best assurance. And likewise, we need say the less of their
diligence, yea of their double diligence, in putting their commission in
execution to the full.

Only, let us, for an interim, mark the wonderful wisdom, and providence
of God, most graciously turning all things, so much the more pregnantly to
their confusion, by how much they had thought themselves, to have made the most
exquisite and full provision, to have it as it were reedified the Tower of
Babell, that would have reached not only to heaven, but against heaven, and
even against God himself. For by all these means, the resurrection of our
Savior Christ was made the more famous and certain to all, both Jews and
Gentiles, whosoever do not willingly shut their eyes against the light which
shines more clear then the light of the Sun. But of this more afterward.

ANd thus might we now, in the orderly course of our iniquirie, proceed from
the holy history and grounds of the sufferings and humiliation of our Savior
Christ, ending in his burial, and continuance in the grave: to the general or
summary meaning of these words, He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead and buried: and so forth on, to the comforts, and duties,
arising and pertaining to the same: save that certain words, interposed in the
Articles of our Creed: to wit, He descended into Hell; give us occasion, to
stay that our so speedy a passage, until we shall have weighed and considered
of them a while.



I have been taught, that albeit the whole doctrine of the sufferings and
humiliation of our Savior Christ has been fully and perfitly described, and
delivered unto us, by the holy Evangelists, (the chief Secretaries and pen men
of the holy Ghost) without any mention of these words, He descended into Hell.
Yet insomuch as we find them expressed in our Creed, after these words,
Crucified, dead, and buried: and that with the general consent of the Church
of God, for many hundredth of years: and seeing that they may bear a good and
profitable interpretation, with warrant from the holy Scriptures: that we are
therefore not so much to inquire how they came into the Creed, as how to
understand them rightly and to make good use of them, for the edification and
comfort of our faith.

Explication.
So it is very meet indeed. And the rather, because the misunderstanding of
them, has given occasion to sundry errors, among many that have not advisedly
examined and weighed them. Whereby it has come to pass, that in stead of the
embracing of the truth, they have in this point, fancied a lie: and instead of
believing an Article of faith, they have deceived themselves with an
imagination, concerning that which never was done, nor once intended by our
Savior Christ, as by the grace of God, we shall declare in the discourse
following.



First, insomuch as either of the words are of diverse signification, we are to
consider from the holy Scriptures, which those significations are, as well of
the one, as of the other.

And secondly, we are to observe, how they are jointly to be understood, in the
same present Article, or proposition; according to the same the holy Scriptures
of God: that is, in what sense, it is to be believed, that our Savior Christ
descended into Hell.

Explication
The course is good. And therefore, though it require some study and labor,
and will peradventure seem hard and troublesome at the first: yet seeing,
through the blessing of God, it shall in the end be found worthy, both all the
labor, and also all the trouble, whatsoever shall be employed about it: let us
willingly use all diligence that we can, to the clearing of the same. For if we
shall not, upon good warrant from the holy Scritures, grow to a right
persuasion, concerning the true meaning of these words of our Creed: how may we
profess in truth, that we undoubtedly believe the same, as an Article of our
faith?

And when I say, that we must have ground, and warrant, from the holy
Scriptures: it is to be understood, that in this Question, we must have a
special respect, not only to the best translations, but also even to the
original text of the Hebrew in the old Testament, and of the Greek in the
New. For by them, of necessity, specially by the Hebrew, which the Greek
follows, must both the Latin, and English, and all other Tongues, yea and
the hearts also of all Christians of every Nation and language, be ouer-ruled.
Let us therefore examine this point.

ANd first touching the word to Descend: Which are the diverse significations
thereof?

First, and most properly, it signifies to remove the body, or to come down
bodily, from the higher place to the lower.

But in a borrowed use of speech, when it is referred to man: it signifies an
alteration, or change of a man's former more comfortable and prosperous estate,
or condition, to a contrary, or very differing estate, either of soul, or
body, or any other way, without any bodily moving at all.

And sometime again, when it is in a borrowed signification, referred to God:
it notes the manifestation of his divine presence, without any either
alteration of estate, or motion of body from place to place.

Explication.
It is true. So we read 2. King. 1.4. where according to the first
signification, Elijah wills the Messengers of Ahaziah King of Israel, to tell
the King, that he should not come down from the bed, on the which he was gone
up, but should die the death. And in the same cha. verse 8. the messengers of
the King say to Elijah, sitting on the top of a mountain, O man of God, the
King has commanded that thou come down. And again verse 11. In the which
chapter also, fire is said to come down from heaven, at the prayer of Elijah.
And in many other places, the rain is said to descend, or come down from
heaven. And on the earth, the running of it, from the higher ground to the
lower, is called from the same word, a descending. The like is the use of the
Greek word caterchomai, and also of catabaino: either of them signifying to
descend, or come down: as we may see Matt. 17 9. As they came down from the
mountain (catabainonton) compared with Luke chap. 9.37. And as they came down
from the mountain, catelthonton. So, James chap. 9.17. Every good gift,
comes down from the Father of lights, catabainon. And chap. 3.15. This
wisdom (that is, bitter envying, etc.) descends not from above. Ouc estin
anothen caterchomene. And Matt. 7.25.27. catebe e broche. The rain fell or
descended, etc.

Secondly, in a borrowed use, the same words, being referred to man, signify
the extreme alteration, and change of a man's estate, from that which was
prosperous and comfortable, (as was said) to that which is adverse and
grievous. As Deuteronomy. chap. 20. verse 20. Thou shall make forts against the City
that makes war with thee, until thou subdue it. Word for word, until it
descend: that is, until it be ruinated, and so caused to humble it self, and
to stoop down unto thee, as some not unaptly do expound it. And thus, it is
said of the wicked Jews themselves. Their glory shall descend. And man shall
be brought down, but the Lord of Hosts shall be exalted. Isai. 5.14, 15, 16.
And concerning the King of Babell, Thy pomp is brought down (the word is
caused or made to Descend) Isai. 14.11. And verse 15. Thou shall be brought
down (or made to descend) to the grave, to the sides of the pit. And chap.
63.6. The Lord speaking of his enemies, says, I will tread down the people
in my wrath, and make them drunken in mine indignation, and I will bring down
their strength (or cause it to Descend) to the earth. And Ezekiel. 30.6. The pride
of the power of Egypt shall descend, or come down. Likewise Zech. 10.11. The
pride of Ashur shall be cast down, (or caused to descend) and the scepter of
Egypt shall depart away. And for affliction of soul, noted by this word,
read 1. Sam. 2.6. The Lord kills and makes alive: brings down (or
causes to Descend) to the grave, and raises up, etc. Likewise, when David
praises God for that he had brought his soul out of the grave, and revived
him, from them that go down (or Descend) into the pit: he acknowledges, that
his soul was before as it were Descended into the pit: that is, exceedingly
troubled and distressed. And so again, Ps. 71.20.21. and Ps. 86.13. But of
this more afterward. We also in our own language use to say, of one that is
fallen from prosperity to adversity, from a rich or honorable estate to a base
and poor degree, that such a one, is greatly come down. We use the word also
of Descending in a contrary sense to note the noble parentage or stock, of the
which one is descended or come. But of this enough.

Let us now proceed from man's descending, to the descending of God. This, as
was said, does only note the special representation of his divine presence,
without any moving of himself from one place to another. For seeing the
godhead fills all places, yea, comprehends all places, but is comprehended
of none, it must needs be so understood. As namely, where it is said, that he
descended upon Mount Sinay, Exodus 19.18.20. And Psalm. 18.9. Isa. 46.1, 2, 3, 4.
Hab. 3.3. through the whole prayer of the holy Prophet, contained in that
chapter. Like unto this, was the descending of our Savior, before he took our
nature, Genesis 18.20.21. And the descending of the holy Ghost at the baptism of
our Savior Christ. For the Deity it self, to speak properly of the person
of the Son, or of the person of the holy Ghost, did not descend: but only
manifested their special presence in that manner, and by those bodies which
they did for the time assume and take. But as touching the Son of God, our
Lord Jesus Christ, there is yet a more special reason of his appearance, in
our humane nature, by his incarnation: insomuch as therein he united the same
our humane nature, to his divine nature, in a personal union to continue firm
and indissoluble for ever: in which respect he says most particularly, and
most properly of himself, John 3.13. No man ascends up to heaven but he that
has descended from heaven the Son of man which is in heaven. Nevertheless,
our Savior Christ even in these words also, must needs be understood, to
speak figuratively, and in respect of the great mystery concerning the union
of two natures in one person attributing that to both, which is only proper to
one. For the Deity of the Son of God, did no more descend by local moving
from one place to another, then the humanity was then in heaven, when he spoke
these words to Nicodemus, or could afterward ascend up to heaven, but by bodily
motion. Only the descension of the Deity, must be understood of that most
special manner of the manifestation thereof, in the personal assuming and
uniting the humane nature to the divine. The which also, because it is most
near and firm in one indiuiduum, (that we may use the Logitians term)
therefore it is said, that the Word: that is, the Son of God, being very true
God, was made flesh: John. 1.14. And 1. Tim. 3.16. God is manifested in the
flesh. And therefore also is our Savior, very God and very man, called by the
name of Immanuell, God with us. Matthew. 1.23. even by the appointment of God
himself. Thus much shall suffice for the diverse acceptious of the first word,
to Descend. Whence, upon due consideration, we may easily see first, that the
descension, attributed in one tenure and course, to our Savior Christ
crucified, dead and buried, does not belong to his Deity, which cannot be
said properly to descend: but to his humanity, whereunto all that is believed
concerning conception, birth, life, death, resurrection, ascension, sitting at
the right hand of God, and coming to judgment, as well as his descension,
does properly apperteine. But how this descension does properly belong to the
humanity of our Savior Christ, whether to the soul or to the body alone, or
jointly to both: we shall better conceive, after that we have considered the
diverse significations and uses of the latter wore Hell, as we have of this
former word to Descend.

Show you therefore in like manner, the diverse significations of the word Hell,
accor^ing to the Hebrew word Sheol, and the Greek word Haides, englished Hell,
in this Article of out faith.

Which are these diverse significations?

First and most properly, (as I have been taught) they signify the grave.

Secondly, they are by a trope, as the learned speak, or figuratively, applied
to signify many other things.

Explication.
The truth herein has been taught and delivered unto you. For first, that they
signify the grave, and that also in the most proper signification: the words
themselves may give to understand. First, the Hebrew word Sheol, which has his
name of the verb Shahal to ask, yea to ask as a greedy co^morant, tha^ can
never be satisfied: according to that in the book of the holy Prou. chap.
30.15.16. There be three things which will not be satisfied, yea some which say
not, It is enough. And of these, Sheol the grave, is reckoned for the first.
Likewise Hab. 2.5. The proud man has enlarged his desire as the grave, and is
as death, which cannot be satisfied. And Isa. 5.14. And then the Greek word
haides, which comes of eido to see, and the privative letter a according to
the Greek deriuation: and signifies a place of darkness, which hides the
buried within the earth, from the sight of the living which walk upon it: Job.
10.21, 22. and chap. 17.13. But let us see some testimonies of holy Scripture
for this signification. And first, that Sheol signifies the grave, in the old
testament: we read Genesis 37.35. Surely (says Iaacob) I will go down (or
descend) into the grave, unto my Son, mourning. And chap. 42.38. My Son to
wit Benjamin, shall not go down with you: for his brother is dead, and he
left alone: (to wit, of those children which he had by Rachell) if death come
to him by the way that ye go, then ye shall bring (or cause) my gray head
with sorrow (to descend) into the grave. Likewise, by the same word, the grave
is noted, 1. King. 2. verse 6. King David speaking to his son Solomon, of
Ioab, who murdered Abner and Amasa very wickedly: do therefore according to
thy wisdom (says he) and let not his hoare head go down (or descend) to
the grave in peace. And of Shimei, who cursed him being his sovereign Prince,
with a horrible curse: he says in like manner, Therefore thou shall cause his
hoare head to descend down to the grave with blood. And in this sense, the
opening of the earth is called the grave of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and of
their rebellious company: but yet with a special declaration of the wrath of
God against them, by such an unwonted, strange, and fearful kind of burial:
as we read Number. 16.29. and 33. They descended, or went down quick into the
pit, or grave. Sheol.

But in the Psalms, the grave ordinarily used to burial, is oft^ntimes
signified by the same word Sheol: as Psalm. 6.6. In the grave who shall praise
thee? And Psalm. 16.10. Thou will not (says David, prophesying of the
resurrection of our Savior Christ) leave my soul, (that is, that part of my
humane person which is subject to burial) in the grave, Sheol. Neither will thou suffer thine holy one (that is, the body of me whom thou have graciously
received to thy favor) to see (that is, to have experience) of corruption,
shacath: that is, Shacath peraitio foue^.
to lie so long in the grave, that it should rot and turn to dust, as the
bodies of all use to do. Psalm 40.9. Man can by no means redeem his brother,
etc. That he may live still for ever, and not see the grave: the word is
shacath, corruption, as before. But sheol again, verse 14.15. of the same
Psalm. Like sheep they lie in the grave: to wit, like the rotten carkases of
sheep cast out into ditches. For the Prophet speaks of the wicked, that die
in their wickedness and in a hautie conceit of themselves. To the which purpose
he says further, Death deuoureth them, until the righteous shall have
dominion over them in the morning: that is, at the day of the resurrection, and
until that the grave (that is, Hell, as we are afterward, in the next
signification fu^ther to observe) do consume their beauty: that is, the beauty
of the wicked, or their form and substance which they shall at the last day
receive again to their further condemnation, both in soul and body together,
even from the house (that is, the grave) which belongs unto it: to wit, as a
prison house for the wicked until that day of their great Gaile delivery. But
God (says the Prophet, spe^king in the person of all true believers) will
deliver my soul from the hand: that is, from the power of the grave, (to wit,
so far forth that it shall not prevail finally against me) for he will
receive me. Selah. A matter worthy to be observed as an effect of the divine
and almighty power of God, as by the word Selah, the Psalmist gives to
understand. Moreover, Psalm. 31.17. Sheol is used for the grave. Let the wicked
(says David) be put to confusion, and silence in the grave. And Psalm. 55.15.
Let death seize upon them: let them go down quick into the grave: the
Prophet, as it is likely, alluding to that judgment of God upon rebellious
Korah and his company, Number. 16. as was alleged before. And again, in the same
sense, though in other words, They that seek my soul to destroy it, shall go
into the lowest parts of the earth. Yea generally, Psalm. 8^.48. What man ^iue^h
(says the Prophet Ethan, speaking as well of the godly, as of the wicked) and
shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the hand, (that is, from
the power) of the grave? that is, so deliver him, that he shall not return
again to dust, from whence he was taken. Selah. In the like manner do the
other Prophets use the word Sheol, as Isai. chap. 28.18. where the holy Prophet
speaking of the wicked, says, That the covenant which they seem to themselves
to have made with death, and their agreement which they fancy to be betwixt
them and the grave, it shall be disanulled, and not stand. Isai. chap.
28.15.18. Read also Ezekiel chap. 31. verse 15, 16, 17. and chap. 32.27. In
which chapters, these speeches are used in the same sense, to go down to the
pit, and to descend, or go down to the nether parts of the earth: wherewith
the Lord threatens the wicked in his wrath, as with a judgment that should
overthrow them for ever. Nevertheless, touching the godly, God himself says,
and will verily perform in and by our Savior Christ, that which he has
spoken by his Prophet Hosea, chap. 13. verse 14 saying, I will redeem them
from the hand (that is, as before, from the power) of the grave: I will deliver
them from death. O death, I will be thy death: O grave, I will be thy
destruction: repentance is hidden from mine eyes. And the same again in the
new Testament, under the Greek word Haides. 1. Cor. 15.54.55. And that this
Greek word is used for the grave, read Acts 2.27. And so we may understand
it also Revel. 1.18. where our Savior Christ says, I have the keys of the
grave and of death. And again, chap. 6.8. Death and the grave following after
it. And chap. 20.13. Death and the grave gave up the dead that were in them:
and they were judged, every man according to their works. And in the next
verse: Death and the grave were cast into the lake of fire: where the Apostle
shows what shall be done at the last day. Nevertheless, we will not exclude
every other signification of the word Haides from some of those places as
shall be further observed afterward. To conclude this point therefore, we may
easily perceive, that, as it is said of Sheol the grave, Job 30.23. so we may
say of Haid^s, that according to this first signification, it is the house
appointed for all the living. And Isai. 26.19. The dead are described to be
such as dwell in the dust.

LEt us now come to the second branch of your answer, wherein you affirm, that
the same words, Sheol and Haides, are by a trope, or figuratively applied to
signify sundry other things.



More generally, they are used, either to signify the state of dead men after
this life, both of good and bad, as they be removed out of this visible world:
without any further distinction of either of them from other, whether in
respect of soul or body Only they signify, that they are gone hence, and be
no more in the land of the living, but remain in the world of the dead if we
may so speak. Or else they are used to signify the destruction and removing
of other things from the use of men which remain still in the present world.

More particularly, they are used.

First, to signify the power of death, in holding all those under it, whom it
has seized upon, even so long as God permits it to prevail against them.

Secondly, to signify H^^l the peace appointed of God, for the endless,
easelesse, and remeadilesse torment of all that die in their sins.

Thirdly, they are used to signify the spiritual dolours and griefs of the
souls, even of the children of God, here in this life near unto death: yea in
their own judgment and sense, for the time of the tentation, near unto the
pains and torment of hell it self.

Explication and proof.
Thus you have been taught indeed. Let us now call briefly to mind, some
proofs of these things.

And first, concerning the former branch of the more general use, let us
consider, first of all, the words of the wise and believing Patriarch Iaacob,
Genesis 37. in the end of the chapter mentioned before, in that he says, he would
go down into Sheol the grave, unto his son, mourning. Wherein, it is
evident, that insomuch as he thought his son was devoured of some beast, as
his sons, (though lyingly) told him; and therefore to be without burial in
any grave, beside the bowels of the beast: it is evident, I say, that he
vnde^stoode more by Sheol then the grave, and comprehended the whole estate and
condition of his dead son, within the compass of it; he hoping that he was
alive with God, who is the God, not of the dead, but of the living, as our
Savior Christ has taught: though for any thing he knew, he was dead, and out
of the state of the living, here in this world. And thus far also, does the
word Sheol extend it self, in the places before alleged, Ps. 16.10. More
particularly concerning our Savior Christ, whose whole humane person was in
Sheol: that is, in the state of the faithful departed this life: to wit, his
body in the grave, and his soul in the state of other men's souls, until he
role again from the dead: Act. 13.30. And Psalm. 89.48. More generally,
insomuch as Sheol takes hold of all: though all that die, and descend to the
state of the dead, be not buried, and laid down in the grave: neither are they
all in one estate and condition of soul: like as the Latin words defuncti,
and inferi, comprehend all of all sorts of the dead. Read also for Sheol
referred to the soul, as well as to the body, Psalm. 49.14.15. And Isai.
38.10.11. the godly King Hezekiah, recording his mourning, for fear of an
untimely death: opposes Sheol to the land of the living, and inhabitants of
this world: he believing no doubt, that the dead are not utterly extinct when
they die, though their bodies go to the grave and consume away. And though
their souls also, by death are so separated from their bodies, that we cannot
easily conceive, how they should find themselves in a kindly state of
perfection without them: neither indeed are they fully perfect, nor shall be,
after they are once separated, until they be reunited again: yet the souls
of all that die in the faith, are no doubt, in a more blessed, comfortable and
joyous estate, then while they lived here. And therefore also it is, that
though the servants of God, even in death, do ascribe a certain death to the
soul: that is, a natural sense or consideration of the maiming or renting of
the creature; by the separation of it from the own natural body. As in some of
the places before alleged. And Job 33.28. God will deliver his soul from the
pit. And Psalm. 116.8. Thou have delivered my soul from death. And as our
Savior Christ says, My soul is very heavy even unto death: yet to speak
properly, their souls cannot die. Now, that which we have said of Sheol, we
may likewise affirm of Haides: and that, even from the places already
alleged. 1. Cor. 15.54.55. Acts 2.27. Revel. 6.8. and chap. 20.13. For (as was
said before) though Haides, as well as Sheol, do, in the holy Scriptures,
first and more properly signify the grave: yet we must not restrain them to
that signification only, The Hebrew word (s^ith Iunius) does in very many
places of the Scripture generally note whatsoever condition of the dead: and
for the same cause, is to be referred sometime to the grave, sometime to hell
synecdochicallie, and sometime to both together, according to the circumstance
of the place. And again, the Latin Fathers use the word Inferos, as well as
the Greeks do Haiden, indifferently for every place or condition of the dead.
no not in sundry of the places already alleged. Vox hebraea (inquit lumus in
Psalm. 49.) stationem quamlibet mortuorum in vniuersum notat permultis
Scripturae locis: ideoque modo ad sepulchrum, modo ad infernum, synecdochice,
modo ad vtrumque simul, pro ratione locorum accommodanda est. The same he says
likewise, concerning Haides, in his note upon Tertul: de Idololat: cap. 13.
Obseruandum quod ait Apud inferos de Lazaro: Nam inferos Latini Patres (vt
Graeci Hadem) pro omni loco, aut statu mortuorum, dixerunt promiscue. Atque in
hunc sensum, Lazarus and Dives apud inferos collocantur. Quomodo Iraeneus and
Chrysostomus ex verbis Lucae 16.23. locuti sunt, and Tertullianus locis
quamplurimis.

Thus much for the proof of the first branch of the more general
signification of Sheol and Haides.

Touching the second branch: to wit, that they are sometimes used in the holy
Scriptures, to signify the destruction of other things in the world, moreover
and besides the corruption of the bodies of men, and the altering of the state
and condition of their souls, by reason that they are by death separated from
their bodies: it is evident, Number. 16.32.33. Not only Korah, Dathan and Abiram,
with their families, but also their goods, and all that they had, descended
into Sheol. And Isai. chap. 14.11. Thy pomp is brought down to Sheol, and the
sound of thy violls: that is, they are destroyed, according to that we read
in plain terms, Ier. chap. 51. verse 52, 53, 54, 55. Read also Ezekiel. 26.19,
20, 21. the same in words of like signification. So likewise, the destruction
and overthrow of the City of Capernaum is threatened, and signified by this
word Haides: yea and also the everlasting condemnation, both of the souls and
bodies of the Citizens thereof: so many as were obstinate despisers of the
doctrine and miracles of our Savior Christ. Matthew. 11.23.24.

Hitherto of the more general signification.

Now more particularly. And in the first place, that the same words are used
to signify the continuance, power, and dominion of death, as it were some
great Lord and Commander: read the Prosopopie of the holy Prophet Isai. 14.9.
Sheol beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming, (says the
Prophet, speaking of the King of Babylon) raising up the dead for thee, even
all the Princes of the earth, and has raised from their thrones all the Kings
of the nations. This signification of Sheol is usual, when it is put after the
word Death: by an increase, or amplification of speech: to the which purpose
also, diverse times, the word signifying power, is expressed as we have seen
before, Psalm. 49.15. and 89 48. and Psalm. 6.5. Hos. 13.14. Likewise, Haides in
the new Testament, 1. Cor. 15.55. Revel. 6.8. chap. 20.13. Death and Haides.
The power of Death is also noted, Romans 6. verse 9. as prevailing so long as the
body of our Savior Christ lay in the grave.

Secondly, that Sheol signifies the place of the everlasting torment of the
wicked, which we do usually call Hell: read Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be
driven back, even to Sheol. We may well understand it, not only for the
grave, but also for hell, as it is englished: seeing that is the place
appointed for the souls of the wicked after this life. And Psalm. 49 14. Sheol
consumes their beauty. Tremel^us translateth it Infernus, Hell. Likewise
Psalm. 139.8. Sheol is opposed to Heaven: where the Emphasis is most full, if we
english it Hell. And Prou. 9.18. King Solomon says, That the wicked that
follow their own lusts, are in the depth of Sheol: which likewise, may well be
translated, and understood of Hell the receptacle of the souls of such wicked
persons. And chap. 15.11. Hell and d^struction are before the Lord. (Sheol
naabhaddon) Hell and destruction may well be matched together: seeing the King
of hell, is called by the name of Abaddon, a destroyer. Revel. chap. 9.11. And
again, Sheol may well be taken for hell, in the same 1^. chapter of the
Proue^bs, verse 24. The way of life is on high to the prudent, to avoid from
Sheol beneath. Moreover, Isai. chap. 5.14. we may extend the signification of
it to hell. And chap. 28.15. where the wicked said, We are at an agreement with
Sheol. But they are utterly deceived. For the fire of Gods wrath shall kindle
and burn upon them, even to the very bottom of Sheol, (^nadh Sheol tachtijah)
according to the phrase of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.22. The fire of which wrath, as he
says further in that place, shall consume the earth with her increase, and set
on fire the foundations of the mountains. Now, in the new Testament, the other
word Haides, is likewise used: is Matt. 16.18 The gates of Hell: that is, all
the destroying power of the Devils of hell shall not overcome the Church, and
faith of the people of God, by al^ the siege and battery, either spiritual or
outward, that they can possible either lay themselves, or by their instruments,
procure against the same.

Likewise, Luke chap. 16.23. The rich man being in Haides: that is, in hell
torments, etc. Thus then, both Sheol and Haides, signify hell the place of
infernal torment. The reason why these words are translated from the
signification of the grave, to signify hell also, may be for that the grave
being a place of darkness, and naturally unpleasant and uncomfortable, may fitly
be used, in way of a similitude, something to resemble and shadow it forth.

Let us now come to the last of the more particular significations: even to
bitter dolours and griefs of the souls of the children of God, near unto the
sorrows of death, yea of Hell sometimes, in their own weak sense and
judgment.

For the which, read Psalm. 18.5. where the Prophet David calls the
exceeding great sorrows, which he endured; the sorrows of Sheol: the which
some translate grave, other Hell: but all is one in effect. The Prophet being
in these grievous sorrows and trouble of heart, says in the same place, I
called upon the Lord, and cried to my God. So Psalm. 130. verse 1. Out of the
deep places have I called upon thee, O Lord. The same sense, though in other
words.

And as the Prophet prays in the deep distress of his soul: so, after that
he is most graciously heard of God, he does accordingly give most hearty
thanks: as Psalm. 30.3. O Lord (says David) thou have brought up my soul out
of Sheol; thou have revived me from them that go down into the pit. And
Psalm. 71.26. though in another phrase of speech: O God thou have showed me
great troubles, and adversities: but thou will return and revive me, yea thou will return and cause me to ascend up from the depth of the earth, mittomoth
aharets: ex abyssit terrae And yet more fully, Psalm. 86.13. Great is thy mercy
toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the lowest grave. Misheol
tachtijah. Some translate it, by an increase of the Hyperbole, from the
nethermost Hell. But most fully of all, does the Prophet Heman describe this
kind of the extreme trouble, and adversity, and distress of the children of
God, here sometime in this life, both from the word Sheol, and also from others
of like signification and nature. Psalm. 88.1. etc. O Lord God of my salvation,
I cry day and night before thee. Let my prayer enter into thy presence, Incline
thine ear unto my cry. For my soul is filled with evils, and my life draws
near to Sheol. I am counted among them that go down to the pit: (the word is
Bhor) and I am as a man without strength. Free among the dead, like the slain
lying in the grave (Keber) whom thou remembrest no more, and they are cut off
from thy hand. Thou have laid me in the lowest pit (Bebhor tachtijoth) in
darkness and in the deep. Thus, by Sheol and many other borrowed speeches of
like nature, as was said, this Prophet expresses the extremity of the sorrows
and affl^ctions of the children of God, which somet^mes fall upon them, either
for their trial, or for their correction, from the fatherly displeasure of
God: according as it follows in the same Psalm, Thine indignation lies upon
me, and thou have vexed me withal thy waves.

And thus, according to this last signification of Sheol, which notes such
adversity, and sorrow, as brings down even to the very brinke of death, so
that they may be said, after a sort, to have been brought down to the grave:
yea, even to Hell, though they never came, neither (by the grace of God) shall
euercome into the place of the damned. Neither is it unwonted with our selves,
in our own English speech, to use the word Hell in this signification; as when
we say of this o^ that man, he has a hell in his conscience, Infernus animae
re^ co^scientia. A guilty conscience is the Hell of the soul.
even here in this world: though God of his infinite mercy does not seldom
deliver such, from the place and damnation of Hell. In which respect, the
Prophet Jonah, a figure of our Savior Christ: says that he called upon God,
as it were out of the belly or womb of Hell (for so is Sheol not unfitly
translated:) when he was in the belly of the Whale. chap. 2.2. the which he
calls in the same verse, the place of distress. I cried in my affliction, or
distress, (says the Prophet) unto the Lord and he heard me. The like is to be
considered concerning Haides comparing. Act. 2. ver. ^4. with ver. 27.31. so it
be discreetly done: that is, if we consider the loosening of the sorrows of
death in Haides, not to be any sorrows which our Savior endured being in
Haides, but those which he felt before, and at his death, the which, (death
being in it self a doleful thing, and Haides the grave, a place and state, in
it self likewise, of discomfort, by reason of the separation of the life and
soul from the body) might well hitherto, and thus far forth, retain, and
continue to us, so much the more full, and through a memorial the^eof: and the
rather also express that singular joy, which is to be taken of us, in the
resurrection of our Savior: the which perfectly remoueth all remainder of
sorrow, whatsoever might seem to be continued and abetted by death, or any
other adversary, that we, or our Savior, had.

NOw therefore, that (as a fruit of this our inquiry hitherto) we have found
out the diverse significations of this word, to Descend: and also of these
other words, Sheol and Haides: whereon the sense of this article of our
Saviors descension depends: it shall be the more easy for us, to understand
the true meaning of them.

Question. May we not think so? Or is there any thing else, furthermore to be
considered, to the attaining thereunto?

Answer. I have heard you say that to the right understanding of these words,
spoken of our Savior, He descended into hell: it is necessary that we
consider the time when he descended, whether before in the garden when he did
sweat blood, and on the Cross, when he made his complaint, as one forsaken and
left for a season: or after his death, and taking down from the Cross.

It is indeed to special purpose. For this difference of time, does
necessarily infer, Explication and proof.
a diverse, and distinct sense, and meaning, of these words. For if we
understand them to have been principally accomplished in the garden, and upon
the Cross: then must the meaning be, that our Savior Christ did, for our
sins, suffer most grievous pains, and therewitha^l also, most deep reproach
and ignominy, to satisfy the justice of God, and to appease his wrath: even
such pains, and such reproach, as may justly be compared to the pains and
ignominy of hell. And this no doubt, our Savior did for the time sustain, as
has been already declared. Bu if we understand the descension to follow after
his death, then can nothing in any true sense, and soundnes of faith, be
affirmed: save only that he being laid down into the grave, continued so: as
a man truly descended to the dead, and abiding in their state and condition, as
touching the true nature of death (the soul separated from the body) until by
his divine power he rose up again, as truly from the state and condition of
the dead, as by his burial he had descended into it, and for a certain time
abode in the same: according to those speeches of descending to the grave, and
according to that signification of Sheol and Haides, which has been alleged
before, as tending to this and. And according to the spee^h of the Angel Luke.
4.5. who interprets the abiding of our Savior in the grave to be his abid^ng
among the dead: and his resurrection to be his removing from the dead. Math.
2^.7. Luke in the Gospel. 24.4^. Read also Act. 3.15. and chapter 1^.30.31. and
chap. 26.23. and 1. Cor. 1^.12. and verse, 20. and John. 21.14. But that we may
grow at the la^t to t e full point and issue of this mat er.



It seems very hard, and a matter of great doubt to say, which we are to
clean unto, with the utter refusing and rejecting of the other.

He descended into hell? Were it not better to end all questioning and doubti^g
about the matter, by putting them altogether out of our Creed, seeing many
affirm, that they were not put into it, a long season after the Apostles time?

I have heard you say that it is to be feared that the putting of them out, and
^ simple refusal to make profession of them, would breed more question and
doubt, then there is just cause of any question and doubt, about the retaining
and profession of them.

Explication and proof.
It is very likely, if not more then likely, that it would do so indeed. For a
descension of our Savior, is expr^sly mentioned in the holy Scriptures; as
namely Ioh. 3.13. Romans 10 7. and Ephesians. 4.9.10. How then can we simply refuse
to acknowledge and profess a descension? But it will be answered, that all the
question lies in the word Hell: and in this that the descension, which we
speak of, is neither immediately opposed to ascension (as in all the places now
mentioned) neither performed by his incarnation before his sufferings, (as in
the first and last of the same places) but to resurrection. It is true.
Nevertheless, the reply is ready, that there is also (as has been already
showed) an express mention made of such a descension, as does more immediately
and properly respect resurrection: as namely, that usual phrase of speech (to
descend to the gr^ue) whereby burial is noted. And on the other side also (as
has been further declared) this phrase of speech, has in the second
signification of the word Descend, and in the last signification of Sheol,
which is Hell: a certain aptnes to describe extreme sufferings and
afflictions. How therefore, shall we at once, reject all these considerations,
and not forthwith let in a Sea full, not only of questions and doubtings to
some, but also of endless contradictions from others. And the rather also
because by a common consent, in so many ages, and even of those that have been
best minded in those ages, and to this day: these words have been constantly
retained, as words which may be well understood, and truly applied to our
Savior Christ: according to the holy Scriptures o^ God. Now further, if we
should reject all sentences, admitting diverse interpretations, such as be not
repugnant, either to other, or to the truth it self: the holy Scriptures
themselves, should not in many places, find that in^ertainment with us, that
they ought of most bounden duty to have. Wherefore, as I suppose, far better
it is, with peace to embrace the words, and to inquire only into the true
sense and meaning of them: then to the breach of the peace of the Church, to
reject them.

Yea, rather to embrace either good sense, as subordinate each to other, or as
the special under the general, by a distribution of the humiliation and
sufferings of our Savior, into their distinct kinds, etc: then to cast away,
and suppress, the words of so good and comfortable signification as they be.
At the least, not to be contentious against any good and profitable
interpretation that may be given of them: remembering always the rule of the
holy Apostle, that we aim diligently at this: that we proceed by one rule,
that we may mind one thing. Philip. 3.16.



I hau^ been taught, that in respect of the word Hell, set down in our
English Creed: the most peaceable, fittest, and best sense, that may be given:
is, that our Savior Christ (beside those his sufferings, which were in the
common v^ew of all the beholders of them, and which are most familiar to our
understanding, from the holy history of his sufferings) did endure the secret
and invisible most fierce wrath of God, on our behalf: to the satisfying of
his d uine justice, and vengeance due to sin yea eu^n so great and heavy a
wrath, as was for the time, comparable to the spiritual dolor, and torment,
of the damned in Hell.

But if we understand these words, according to the order of the holy story,
as things were performed in time, one successively after the other, which is
the most fami^iar and plain course, in respect of the Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew phrase: Then are we to understand nothing else, by the descension of
our Savior, but his most willing and purposed abasing of h^mselfe to the
estate of the dead, though he was Lord of life and glory. The which his witting
abasing of himself he manifested, not only by yielding to be buried, but also
by his continuance in the grave, until his resurrection according to the
article next following He rose again from the dead: insomuch as it is
certain, that he rose again from no other, but from those to whom he had
descended before.

Explication and proof.
You have learned (as I verily think) that which may satisfy your conscience,
and also every reasonable man, to whom you should yield a reason of that faith
that is in you, touching this point.

For first of all, touching the former of the interpretations; it is received
of many good Christians, of our nation who the rather like well of it, because
the phrase seems well agreeing to our own natural language, and furthest
off, from dissenting from the word hell: seeing that translation is followed.

And touching the latter interpretation, as it is well agreeing with the holy
history according as it is set down most fully and perfectly in the holy
Scriptures: so it is also well fitting to the Latin phrase, Descendit ad
inferos: if we put any difference betwixt (ad inferos) and (ad infernum) as we
may very well do, although they be used sometimes of Latin Divines, for one
and the same thing. In which respect, well says M. Calvin Harm, Matthew. 28.1.
speaking of the resurrection of our Savior: Christus (inquit) mortis victor,
ex inferis emersit, vt nona vita potestate^, penes se esse ostenderet. Christ
(says he) brake forth from the dead a co^querour over death, that he might
declare that the sovereignty of new life is in his power. And it is also very
well agreeing with the use of the words, Sheol and Haides in the Hebrew and
Greek languages, as we have seen before. So then, these interpretations may
indifferently be received: yea, they may be together admitted, as pointing us
partly to those most grievous sufferings which went before, and partly also, to
that last degree of his humiliation which followed after, in that he lay in his
grave, as it were under the captivity and dominion of death, until his
resurrection: as was said before. For we are not precisely to bind our selves
to these words, as if, because they are set down in this sum of our belief,
therefore we must believe them, as being of them selves, the canonical text,
or ground of our faith. But we have free liberty granted, nay rather, we
stand bound, to take counsel from the holy Scriptures, and to believe them
only, in such sense as they do apply these words to our Savior Christ,
without any regard of the private interpretation of any, which has not
certain ground from the same.



I have heard it so affirmed, for our admonition, sundry times: that we might
be stirred up thereby to seek to ground our selves, in the right understanding
of them, so as no erroneous or groundless interpretation, might cause us to
decline from the truth thereof.

Explication and proof.
There is doubtless, just cause, why you should be thus taught, and admonished.
For sundry expositors, have their sundry expositions of these words, He
descended into hell, which cannot be concluded from the word of God. The which,
though they are in this respect all of like nature, yet they are not to be
accounted in like degree of error.



They are of three sorts.

First, of those that have taught the meaning of them to be this: that the
soul of our Savior Christ descended to hell, the place appointed of God for
the everlasting torment of the wicked: to manifest his divine power, to preach
and declare the victory of his cross, or rather, as some think, both to begin
his victory and triumph, and also vtter^y to subdue the power of the devil,
and hell it self, there.

Secondly, of those that have expounded the meaning of them, to be this: that
the soul of Christ, went down to Limbus Patrum, as it were to a region within
the earth, next above hell, to fetch out the souls of them that were there
till his coming: and to carry them with him into heaven, after his
resurrection.

Yea some have taught from these words, that the soul of our Savior Christ
descended to hell, to suffer the torments thereof, for the redemption of our
souls, that they might never come there.

Thirdly, the Marcionites, and other heretics, called Liberatores, affirmed
that Christ, by his Descension delivered the souls of the reprobate out of
hell.

All which opinions (specially the two latter sorts) and if there be any other
like to these, they are carefully to be avoided of us: as having either no
warrant in the word, or else are plainly contrary to it.

Explication and proof.
They are so indeed: insomuch as a little leaven (as we are admonished)
sowereth the whole lump. For to begin with the last of the second sort, how
can this agree with the words of our Savior on the Cross: who most solemnly
affirmed, that all his sufferings, foretold by the Prophets, were finished, and
perfited, even unto the point of death, which he also immediately performed, to
the sealing up of all the rest? At which very instant also, he did most
faithfully commend his spirit into the hands: that is, into the gracious
custody, and preservation of God his Father.

Who therefore, shall dare presume to disable that, which our Savior has
valued at a full and sufficient valor? Seeing all was fulfilled upon the
cross, which God foretold by his holy Prophets: who may be of sufficient
credit, to warrant us any revelation (to the contrary) to be given unto him?
And if, there be reason, that the soul of our Savior should descend to Hell,
to suffer torments in stead of our souls there, why should not his body
descend likewise, to suffer for our bodies, that they might never come thither?
Thus that exposition, which would lay the most heavy burden upon our Savior
Christ; may from these, and such like absurdities, which follow upon it, be
discerned to be the lightest in it self: and to recoile most dangerously
against those, that have so unreasonably ouercharged it.

The other exposition of this second sort, contains likewise, a mere
fiction: as may evidently be perceived, because they can no where show us any
ground for such a place, as they describe, and altogether without book,
determine unto us. But much rather, because that which they say, is contrary
to the holy Scriptures, which determine another place for the souls of the
faithful which have died in the LORD: even before the appearance of our LORD
JESUS CHRIST. For so does our SAVIOVR himself, give plainly to understand, in
that he places the soul of Lazarus, in the bosom of Abraham: which was in
such a place, as the LORD used the ministry of the holy Angels to carry it
unto. The which also is expressly said to be so situated, that there is a
great gulf betwixt the one place, and the other. Luke 16, 26. And as the
Preacher says Eccles: chap. 12, 7. Though the body which is dust, return to
the earth as it was, yet the spirit returns to God that gave it. No doubt, it
does not return downward, but upward: I speak now of the souls of the
righteous, who as they lived, so dye the servants of God. Yea like enough also,
the other may return even upward to God, if for no other cause; yet to receive
their sentence, and so to be cast down from the glorious presence of God. As
for that which we read, Heb: 9.8. The way into the ho^iest of all, was not yet
opened, while as yet the first Tabernacle was standing: it can by no means be
haled to determine any such Limbus, or region and place within the earth,
either nearer or further off from Hell: which the superficial, and dark
brain of man, has fancied from the same. The last opinion of delivering the
souls of the reprobate out of Hell: it is most heretical, and dire^tly
contarie to the eternal justice and truth of GOD, concerning that eternal
punishment, which he has threatened, and decreed, against them.

And touching the former sort of expositions, they are partly against the
express doctrine of the Apostle, Coloss. 2, 14, 15. Where he teaches, that
our Savior Christ by his sufferings, and humiliation upon the cross, did so
sufficiently subdue, yea and triumph openly over the Devil: yea (as we may
say) over all the Devils of Hell: that he needed not go down into any hidden
and dark places of the earth, to do it. And they are also, against those
famous testimonies, and declarations, which show that the victory was then
achieved: as appeare^h by the earthquake at the death of our Savior, and by
the rending of the veil of the Temple, and by the opening of the graves, etc.

Furthermore, this sort of expositions, does unaptly, and unskillfully, confound
the exaltation of our Savior Christ, with his humiliation. For although it is
truly affirmed, that our Savior Christ did obtain his victorious triumph upon
the cross; yet this was not won otherwise, then by humiliation before God,
whereby he satisfied his justice: and that in such sort, that the enemies of
our Sa: Ch: pursuing him to the death, were therein, the instruments of their
own overthrow, to our salvation: which could not otherwise be effected, but by
the death of Christ. Yea, and no doubt, notwithstanding this conquest was made
on the cross: yet the humiliation of our Savior, whereby he made it,
continued still, even till he was buried, and laid down among the dead: yea
so long also, as he continued in the grave, even to the time of his rising
again: though indeed, it was in another manner: that is to say, the feeling
of the pains and sorrows of his humiliation ceasing, but the reproach and
ignominy of his sufferings continuing still. Yea so continuing, that albeit,
it was the last part of his humiliation, and the least in sense, either of
inward dolor or of outward trouble, and affliction: yet among his most
malicious adversaries, it was the greatest for reproach, insomuch as they had
prevailed against him so far, that they brought his body down to the earth,
which was the lowest, that men co^ld bring him to. And that his going down to
the grave, and his abode there till his resurrection was a part of the
humiliation of our Savior: it may plainly be discerned, by that prophecy of
David, Psalm. 16, 10. and Act. 2.27.31. Therefore did my heart rejoice, etc.
Because thou will not ^eaue my soul in grave (that is, that part of my
humanity, which was subject to burial) neither wilt suffer thine holy one to
see corruption. This spoke the Prophet David, concerning the joy of our Savior
Christ in regard of his resurrection: and for that he knew, he should lie but
a while in the grave, and should not be corrupted there, as the Apostle Peter
interprets that prophecy of David. And therefore out of question, it was a
part of the humiliation of our Savior. Or else, he would not have so earnestly
rejoiced, that he should tarry so short a time in the grave. Neither would he
have said, Thou will not leave my soul. But, I my self will speed^ly come out
of it. They are words therefore, of his humiliation yet continuing: and not of
his triumph in Hell, as may be observed fur^her, from these words of the same
2. chap. of the Acts, verse 24. Whom God has raised up, and loosened the
sorrows of death, because it was impossible, that he should be holden of it.
So that until the resurrection, we see that death continued a certain time
grappling upon our Savior* but when he arose, it was forced to let go all his
hold: and thenceforth, death had no more any kind of dominion over him: as we
read, Rom, 6.9, 10. If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall live
also with him. Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more:
death has no more dominion over him For in that he d^ed, he died once to sin
(that is, to take away sin, not only by the merit of his sacrifice before
God, but also by the sanctification of his spirit, to the mortifying of sin,
and to the quickening of us to holiness of life) but in that he lives, he
lives to God. That is, to his eternal glory, never to die any more. The
which glory of God, is the chief and final end, both of the death, and of
the resurrection of our Savior Christ, and also of all the blessed fruits and
effects thereof. Behold (says our Savior himself) I am alive for evermore.
Amen. Ruel. 1, 18.

Now therefore, that we may conclude this point of our inquiry, touching
these words of our Creed, He descended into hell: we may perceive, by that which
has been alleged: first, what ground they have in the holy Scriptures, which
must be in all points, the only ground and warrant of our faith: secondly, how
we are to understand them: thirdly, that it is not meet, that they should be
rased out of the Creed, or at the liberty of every Christian at his own
liking, either to profess and express, or to omit and suppress them. And
therefore also, that we are not to be so scrupulous in inquiring, how and when
they came first into the Creed, as (seeing they are, and have of long time,
been generally received) how they are to be understood, according to the holy
Scriptures: and answerably, how to be believed of us.

THus then, having gone through the ground and history of all the holy
sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ: yea of his whole humiliation, unto the
very point, and time of his resurrection, which was the beginning of his
glorious exaltation. Let us now gather together briefly, the sum of all that
we are to believe, concerning the sufferings of our Savior Christ. The ground
and meaning of all his sufferings and whole hum^liation.


Quest. What is the sum of it?

Ans. The articles of our belief, concerning the sufferings of our Savior
Christ, teach me and every faithful Christian, that we ought steadfastly to
believe, that they are most perfectly worthy, and fully sufficient, to work
forth our redemption and reconciliation with God for ever: according to the
most holy counsel and decree of God himself, and that even of his most free
mercy and grace.

So indeed we read expressly, Act. 2, 23. He was delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God. And Rom: 3, verse 24, 25, 26.



We are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus.

Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness by the forgiveness of the sins, that are passed
through the patience of God.

To show at this time, his righteousness, that he might be just, and a
iustifier of him that is of the faith of Jesus.

Explication
It cannot indeed be otherwise, insomuch as he who suffered, yea suffered even
the most grievous sufferings; and humbled himself to the lowest degree of
humiliation that might be, as it were to the very bottomless pit of hell: was
the most high and excellent person, that possibly might have suffered for us:
and therefore is now also, on our behalf made higher then the heavens, as we
shall see more fully hereafter. And in the mean season, the excellency of the
obedience of our Savior Christ, in that he was obedient to the death, to
satisfy the justice of God, and to purchase an everlasting redemption for us:
it may notably appear by that comparison which the Apostle Paul makes betwixt
our Savior Christ and Adam, in the 5. chapter to the Romans v. 8, 9. etc. to the end
of the chapter Where he shows at large, that the obedience of our Sau^: (by
reason of the excellency of his person, and perfection of his sufferings) was
of more excellent virtue to save all that do truly believe in him: then the
transgression of Adam was of force to condemn, and destroy them.

And thus the history of the manifold and most grievous sufferings of our
Savior Christ is in it self a real confutation of all man's merit or
satisfaction for himself. For why then should our Savior have suffered so as
he did?

That which the adversaries of the most free grace of God say, that our Savior
has merited this for us, that we should be worthy in him, to merit for our
selves: it is an utter perverting of the most holy use and end of his
sufferings, which is the glory of the grace of God toward us. And it is also a
most subtle and mischievous enchantment of the Devil, to puff men up in the
greatest pride, under a color of the greatest, and most holy humility that
may be.

But here, seeing we are, according to the course and order of our inquiry, to
consider of the meaning of the Articles of our faith, concerning the sufferings
of our Savior; though in the opening of the history thereof, this has
already, in some measure, been performed. Yet to the end all things may be
made something more plain and familiar concerning this so great and weighty a
part of our faith: let us purposely call to mind, and set down, such
observations, as being laid together, may be a further help hereunto.



First of all, we are most earnestly, and with all holy reverence, to consider
that which was even now mentioned: to wit, the most high and incomparable
excellency of the Person of him that suffered, in that he is the most glorious
and only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth.

Secondly, that no one part or parcel of the sufferings of this most worthy
and excellent Person fell upon him, but by the foreknowledge, and determinate
counsel and appointment of GOD: and that even in most perfect wisdom,
justice, and mercy.

And therefore also, we are in the third place to consider, that the same most
excellent person, has in every part of his sufferings to dea^e, not so much,
with the extreme injustice and malice of men: as with the most just
displeasure and wrath of almighty God, fiercely bent against our sins.

Fourthly, we are to consider, that all his sufferings in the times of his
special passions, were in their own nature and kind extremely grievous and
dolorous, chiefly those which did more immediately befall his most holy and
righteous soul.

Fifthly, that he had a true sense and feeling of them always; and that at his
death he endured the uttermost smart and dolor of them; drinking as it were,
the full cup of Gods bitter anger, even dregs and all.

Sixthly, that he, of his unspeakable love, willingly endured them all, for our
sakes, and the rest of Gods elect: though we were all of us utterly unworthy to
be any thing at all respected of him.

Seventhly, that the fruit and benefit of his sufferings, is infinite and
unspeakable on our behalf.

Finally, the manifold virtues of our Savior Christ are diligently to be
considered of us, throughout all his most grievous sufferings, as of a most
perfect pattern of all wisdom, holiness, righteousness, faith, love, patience,
meekenes, magnanimity, and of all other virtues of most gracious behavior,
from the beginning to the end of them all.

Explication. and proof.
All these things are most worthy to be reuerendly considered of us. And first
of al, touching the most high and peerless excellency of our Savior, even
in our humane nature, we may call it to mind, from that which has been
declared before, concerning the union of the humane nature with the divine, in
one Person of a mediator. In which respect, he must needs be, even in the
nature of man, higher then all creatures, both men and Angels whatsoever. He
was even here upon earth, in the time of his humiliation, greater then the
Prophet Moses, Heb: 3, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 Greater then the Prophet Jonas, or any
other of the Prophets, Mat: 12.41. Greater then Aaron the high Priest, yea no
doubt, infinitely greater then Melchisedek, that princely high Priest, Heb.
chap. 7. Greater then king David: for he was David's Lord, Psalm 110.1. Mat. 22,
41, etc. Greater then king Solomon, Mat. 12, 42. He is the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, Revel. 19, 16. Neither is any, or all the Angels of heaven to be
compared with him, Heb. 1, 4. He alone, above all comparison, is the anointed
of God: in the same chap. verse 9. The light of the Gentiles, and glory of all
Israel. Luke 2, 52. Whence it is also (considering the extremity of the
sufferings, and debasing of so high and holy a Person) that his sufferings are
before the divine majesty of God, of infinite merit, and of a propitiatory,
and satisfactorie value for us: and that by suffering a finite space of time,
he (being eternal and infinite) has delivered us from that eternal
destruction which our sins have deserved. Yea, and that the sufferings of
him, though one alone, has prevailed to the justifying of infinite thousands,
from the beginning of the world to the end of the same.

Secondly, that no part of the sufferings of our Savior, fell upon him at
adventure, or by hap-hazard (as we do use to speak) but by the foreknowledge
and determinate counsel of God, a sufficient proof was alleged even now. And
we may read the same confirmed again. Act 4, 27, 28. For doubtless (say the
Apostles) against thy holy Son Jesus, whom thou had anointed, both Herod
and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israel, gathered themselves
together, To do whatsoever thy hand and counsel had determined before to be
done. And I, Pet. 1.19, 20. Christ a lamb undefiled, and without spot, which
was ordained before the foundation of the world, but was declared in the last
times for your sakes. And Reu. 13, 8. The ^ambe slain from the beginning of
the world. To wit, in the purpose of God, and as touching the virtue and effect
of it to all that believed the promise of his appearing. The Evangelists also
and our Savior himself, in the history of the holy Gospel, do make it
plain, from point to point, that the prophesies which God uttered by his holy
Prophets, concerning the sufferings of the Messiah, were fulfilled in him. Read
ye never in the Scriptures (says our Savior. Mat: 21.42.) The stone which the
builders refused, the same is made the head of the corner? This was the Lords
doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. And chap: 26, 31. He said to his
disciples. All of ye shall be offended by me this night: for it is written, I
will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered. And
again, verses 54, and 56. And chap: 27. verse 9. and 35. Likewise Mark 14,
verse 21, 27, 49. And chap: 15, 28. Luke 22, 37. John chap: 13, 18. And chap:
18.9. And chap: 19, verse 11. Our Savior tells Pilate that he could have
had no power at all, against him, except it had been given him from above. And
verses 24, 28, 29, 36, 37. To this purpose also, let it be observed; that God,
by his special providence, disposed of the time of the death of our Savior
Christ according to his own pleasure, against the mind of his adversaries, to
the end that even the time it self, might as it were speak with lively voice,
that Christ is our true Passover. Read Matthew: 26, 5. John 19, 13, 14. And
beside this very time, they had no power to accomplish that which their malice
intended, as our Savior himself gives to understand, Matthew: 26, 55. And the
Evangelist John: chapter 7. verse 30.44.45, 46. And again, chap: 8.20. No man
laid hands on him; for his hour was not yet come.

And now, howsoever the Jews did most wickedly, in all that they did against
our Savior (seeing all proceeded of their own malice, without any cause given
by our Savior) yet that God nevertheless, did in his most holy wisdom, and in
most perfect righteousness and mercy, ordain that our Savior should thus
suffer: it may be evident, both from those most holy ends which he propounded
to himself, and also by the most holy means it self which he used to effect
and bring to pass the same. The ends which God propounded to himself, were
his own glory, and the salvation of his elect. The means thereof, is such as
sets out his most holy and excellent wisdom, insomuch as therein he
approves himself perfectly just, and perfectly merciful, in saving poor
sinners: perfectly just in punishing our sins fully and perfectly in our
Savior, and perfectly merciful in the free pardon and forgiveness of our
sins, and in the free gift of eternal life for our SAVIOVRS sake: albeit we
(...) selves neither have made, neither can possibly make any satisfaction to
the justice of GOD, for the least of our sins.

Thirdly, that our Savior Christ had to deal with the strict justice and
severe wrath of God: it is evident, Luke 22.41.42.43, 44. And Mat: 26.39.42.44.
and chap: 27, 46. For it is to him alone that he prays in his bitter agony,
that if it were possible, he might have been delivered from that cup of his
wrath, which then he felt to be prepared for him. And to him alone, he
makes his moan, when the same was powered down into his bowels, and was as a
most sharp fire in his bosom, etc. as we have seen at large heretofore.
This is so necessary to be observed, that we shall understand no part of the
sufferings aright, unless we consider the stroke of Gods divine justice
therein.

The same places do declare also (according to the fourth and fifth
observations) that the sufferings of our Savior Christ were most sharp and
extreme* yea and by the whole course of the holy story of his suffering, we
may easily perceive, (according to that which has already been said of
them) that they were all of them, in their several kinds, very grievous, and
full of the greatest indignity that might be, unto so reverend a person as
our Savior was. So that it may truly be said, that they were a hellish, that
is a most painful and ignominious kind of sufferings, more inward in soul,
then outward in body: as has been further declared heretofore, answerable to
the similitude of a cup and potion, whose working is inward, and according to
those speeches of the holy Prophets, Psalm: 30.3. and 86.13. and 116.3. and
Jonah: chap: 2.2.

And thus, we may truly say, as a learned minister of the Gospel says, Vnicus
Jesus Christus, suo corpore crucifixus, noster est Seruator, long aliud maius
crucis onus anima sua perpessus, nimirum iram Dei, aduersus nostra peccata, cui
ferendae, vel ipse Christu^, impar fuisset, nisi Dietate sua sistinente ipsum:
tantum abest vt hac in part potuerit vlla re creata inuari. Beza Hom: in hist:
Passionis 27. That is, Only Jesus Christ crucified in his body, is our
Savior, who suffered a far other manner, and a more burdensome cross in
his soul, then that: even the wrath of God against our sins; to the enduring
whereof, even Christ himself had been to weak, save that his Godhead did
sustain himself: so far was it off, that any creature could relieve him.

The want of which due consideration, has caused some to think, that Christ
should descend to Hell to suffer there: and other, to seek to reitterate the
sacrifice of Christ in the Mass: or to eeke the merit of CHRIST'S sufferings,
by the merit of their own works, as if the sufferings and sacrifice of our
SAVIOVR, were not of themselves, once for all, fully sufficient.

Sixthly, that our Savior Christ of his unspeakable love, did most willingly
endure all his sufferings; yea, even the most grievous of them, for our sake^;
how v^worthie soever we are to be any thing at all respected of him: it does
plentifully appear, both by his own practice, and also by sundry other
testimon es of the holy Scriptures. By his practice; in that he goes up to Ie
u^alem, though he knew pefectly, that at the same Passover he should be
betrayed, most shamefully entreated, and at the last most cruelly crucified: as
John, 12.2^.24. The hour is come, etc. And chap: 13.1. Now before the feast of
the Passover (says the Evangelist) when Jesus knew that his hour was come
that he should d^part out of this world unto the Father, for as much as he
loved his own which were in the world, to the end he loved them, etc. And
chap: 16.32. and chap: 17, 1. Read also, Mat: 20.18. Behold we go up to
Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be delivered unto the chief Priest.
Likewise, Luke chap: 18.3^. Now when our Savior came to Jerusalem, what does
he? does he withdra^e himself? Nay, he knows the desire of the Jews to
apprehend him, when he should be from the people, lest they should m^ke some
uproar: and knowing also that the Devil had put into the heart of Judas to
betraie him, according to that their desire: he goes in the night, to such a
place a^ was known to Judas, and whether he knew that Judas would guide the
chief Priests, and their company, to apprehend him. Yea, and when the
company comes, our Savior flies not one step from them. Nay, he goes to
mee^e them, and yields himself into their hands. Yet so, as he lets them
well perceive, both by word and by deed, that unless he of hi^ own accord,
had been willing to be apprehended, they could have had no power over him: as
we have seen already in the course of the Story. The same thing is
otherwise plentifully testified; namely, that he suffered thus willingly for us
miserable sinners. Rom: 5.6. etc. And Gal: 2.20. The Son^e of God loved me
(says the Apostle) and gave himself for me. And chap: 3 13 14. And 1. Pet.
3.18. Christ has once suffered, the just for the unjust, that he might bring
us to God. And Revel: ^.9.10. And the Prophet Isaiah (more then 500. years,
before our S^uiour suffered. chap: 53.4. says) Surely he has bo^ne our
infi^mities, and carried our sorrows. The which is the rather to be observed,
because (as the holy Prophet gives to understand) without the special grace
and illumination of God, we shall be ignorant of this point, which is the ground
of all our peace and comfort: as appears from the beginning of that chapter,
in that the Prophet breaks forth after this manner, Who will believe our
report? And in the latter part of the fourth verse. We judged him plagued and
smitten of God, and humbled: not for us, as the wicked Jews thought, but
rather for his own sin; though in truth he knew no sin, as the same
Isaiah afterward teaches. And therefore he for his part makes the opposition
plain: that howsoever they, or any other think, yet it is most certain, that
he was wounded for our transgressions. To the which purpose it is good, that
we do further consider, that our Savior Christ has often testimonies of all
sorts, given unto his innocence, (the special providence of God gathering as
it were, or rather framing the suffragies and voices thereof) as being a very
necessary point for us to be resolved in. The Lord therefore has put this
testimony, into the mouths not only of the friends of our Savior, but also
of his very adversaries. As for example; John, 11, 49, 50, 51, 52. We have the
testimony of Caiaphas the high Priest himself, that our Savior was to dye
for the sins of the people. Matthew. 27.19. he is acknowledged to be a
righteous man, by Pilates wife: and oftentimes, by Pilate himself, though he
condemned him against his conscience: as appears ver. 24. of the same chap:
And Luke 23* 4 14, 15, 22. And before this, by Judas who betrayed him, Matthew.
27, 4. I have sinned (says Judas) betraying innocent blood. And afterward, by
the thief on the cross, 23, 41. This man has done nothing amiss. And yet
again after this, by the Centurion, verse 47. Of a surety (says he) this
man was just. And thus we see, how many witnesses we have, beside the
testimony of God himself, by his holy Prophet Isaiah, etc. And thus it must
needs be; I mean, that our Savior must be innocent. For else, how could
he be fit to satisfy for our sins? And if he had had any of his own, he
must needs have sunk under the importable weight of Gods wrath. For as it is
in the holy Proverb, A wounded Spirit, who can bear?

Seauenthly, as touching the infinitenes of the fruit and benefit redounding
to us, by the sufferings of our Savior; yea even to us, most unworthy the
least grace and favor: the Apostle does notably lay it forth, in the manifold
branches of it, Romans 5, 1, 2, 3, 4. But of these fruits more afterward, when
we shall come to the comforts belonging to this point of our faith.

NOw last of all, concerning the manifold and most excellent virtues of our
Savior Christ in every part of his sufferings: that we may see how admirably
they shine forth, above all that could be expected from our frail nature,
yea though free from sin as it was in our Savior; we are to inquire into
the particulars of them. They were mentioned, as it were by the way, before.
Rehearse them here more fully, and in some commodious order.



To speak generally, they are these which follow.

First, his most perfect faith, love and obedience to GOD his Father: whereof,
his most meek and willing enduring of all his sufferings, from his holy hand,
whatsoever they were, and whosoever were the instruments of them, is a most
perfect confirmation.

Secondly, his most present mind and excellent wisdom in his whole
behavior, accompanied with most holy courage and fortitude in every trouble,
temptation, and provocation; yea even in the sharpest and most vehement and
grievous of them; both toward his Disciples with singular love and tender
compassion, and also concerning every sort of those that were his adversaries,
with invincible patience and constancy.

Thirdly, his admirable love, and pity, toward all the elect of God; yea
toward those of his adversaries, whosoever among them, were for the present,
his cruel persecutors, whether Jews or Gentiles.

These being the excellent virtues of our Savior Christ manifested throughout
the whole course of his sufferings: they are not unprofitably; nay rather, The
perfection of his sufferings.
they are to our very great profit, to be considered of us in the
particulars: according to the several branches, thus already more generally
expressed.



It may be evidently discerned in this, that he prepared himself, to the
enduring of them by most humble supplication, and prayer: resigning over, and
submitting his own will altogether to the will of his Father; as we have
heard at large out of the holy Story.

Likewise, in that in all things, he had always an eye to the fulfilling of
the holy Scriptures, and the revealed will of God therein, by all the holy
Prophets which spoke before of him: as we may read, John 13.18. Matthew: 26.
verse 24.31.54. Mark, 14.49. Luke 22, verse 22.27. John chapter 18.37. and
chap: 19 verse 11.28.30.

Finally, the most resolute and ready willingness of our Savior, to suffer
his whole most better Passion, according to the will of God; is a perfect
declaration of his most perfect faith, and obedience to God his heavenly
Father.

Explication and proof.
It is so indeed, as we may read, Mat: 16.21, 22, 23. For when Peter would
have dissuaded him, from going up to Jerusalem; he most sharply rebuked him:
Get thee behind me Satan (says our Savior to Peter) thou art an offense unto
me, because thou understand not the things that are of God, but the things,
that are of men.

And the same his settled resolution, appears evidently again, Chap: 26.12.
and verse 46. And John 14.31. It is (says our Savior) that the world may
know that I love the Father: and as the Father commanded me, so I do. And to
show his readiness, he says forthwith, Arise, let us go hence: to wit, toward
the places where he was to suffer: in the garden first, and then before the
high Priests, and afterward before Pilate and then upon the cross. The same is
yet again, more notably, chap: 18.4. And all this, according to that holy
prophecy, Psalm: 40. verses 6.7.8. as the Apostle makes it plain by his
interpretation, Heb: 10. verses 5.6.7.8.9. So that (...) ever our Savior
(being most grievously troubled, and heavy eu^n to the death, under the horror
of Gods most heavy indignation bent against the sin of man) did (as we have
seen more at large before) of humane infirmity, yet without sin; pray,
that if it were possible, the same cup of Gods wrath might pass away, and
not be drunk of him: yet he presently recouereth himself (like as the Sun,
being for a while shadowed by some dark and thick cloud, breaks forth, and
shows that it has lost no part of the light it had before) and he
submits his will thus troubled, to the most holy and dete^mined will of God.
And thus, though he was, by the passing vehemency of the temptation, terriblie
shaken in his soul: yet was it, but as the shaking of most pure and clarified
water in a Cristall glass; which cannot by any troubling or shuffling of it
too and fro, be any thing at all sullied and rored: insomuch as there was no
whit of soil, or dregs, in the bottom of it.

But that we may return to the second branch of the former answer: wherein (as
was said) we may in the second place observe the present mind, and most holy
wisdom, and undaunted valor of our Savior in all his behavior toward
all sorts of people in the time of his sufferings. First, let us observe, what
it was toward his Disciples: that is, with how singular love, and in how
tender pity, and compassion, it was manifested toward them.



In this respect, the present mind, and most excellent wisdom of our SAVIOVR
shines brightly in this: that as the time of his sufferings approached nearer,
he did the more often preadmonish and acquaint his Disciples with the
praediction and foretelling of them: to the end they might not be altogether
sudden and unlooked for, and so the more discomfortable unto them.

The present mind of our Savior, together with his singular wisdom, and
tender love to his Disciples, is evident likewise in this; that when the time
was at hand indeed, then did he show himself most cheerful in heartening
of them: howsoever in ^ome considerations, he carried a very heavy heart in
his own most wise and holy bosom.

Explication and proof.
It is true. And thereupon does the Evangelist John give this testimony of our
Savior, That he loved those that were his own in the world, even unto the
end: so long as he lived with them, John, 13.1. The declaration, and constancy
of which tenderness of the love of our Savior, (insomuch as it was most
plentifully testified, at the celebration of that Passover, in the which he
was immediately to suffer, as it follows in the same. 13. chap. of John, from
the 2. verse even to the end of the 17. chapter: and by some other testimonies
of the other Evangelists) let us as briefly, and as orderly as we can, collect
and gather them together.



The most tender, and constant love of our Savior to his Disciples, and
consequently, even to his whole Church; is evident in this, that no
premeditation of his sufferings, which he knew must needs be most grievous,
and that only for their and our sins, and for tht sins of the rest of Gods
elect, and nothing at all for any default of his own, could possibly diminish
his love: no, though he had already begun to taste the extreme bitterness of
them.

Explication and proof.
So in deed we read Ioh. 12.27. And verily it is a lively proof of a more
perfect love, then the tender and loving mother can bear to her child, while
the sorrows of child bearing, are yet fresh in her mind. And which of us, if
so be we knew, that we must die (though the gentlest death that might be) for
any other man's cause, could love, and delight in that party, for whose offense
we must die? But specially, if he were a wicked man, and an enemy unto us:
according to that Romans 5. verses, 6.7.8. Yet our Savior died for us, and for
all other of his; though we are, both by nature, and in transgression of our
lives, such as we speak of.

But let us go forward.

How did our Savior, furthermore declare, the same his most tender love?

He has done it diverse other ways.

And first, by washing his Disciples feet, as it follows. John, chap. 13.
verses, 4.5. etc.

Explication and proof.
If there were no other thing but this, it must needs be accounted of us, an
admirable declaration of his incomparable love. For assuredly, whosoever, being
a Superior, can find in his heart, to wash the feet of his inferior (the
which no doubt, according to the use of that Country, was an office performed
of the inferior to the Superior, when a guest was entertained of the master
of the family: and a far more mean office, then to pour the Ewer at the
washing of hands after meat) it is a certain argument that he loves him
well. Infinitely much rather then, must it be conceived, that insomuch as i^
pleased our Savior (though he was the Lord and Master of his Disciples, and
knew well his sovereignty over them) thus far to abase himself: that it was
a singular declaration of his most dear love toward them.



It was not the only cause, though it was one of the chief and principal: as
the Evangelist Saint John gives to understand, from the beginning of his 13.
Chapter.

Question. You say well. But for our further instruction: What other causes,
moved our Savior, so to do?

Answer. He did it to show them, that as they had the beginning of their
sanctification from him: so they were to seek for their continuance and
increase therein, from him, and through the grace of his mediation alone.

He did it likewise, to give them an example of true humility; and in humility,
of the practice of all offices of love one to another, and to the whole Church
of Christ.

These causes are evident, from the explication of our Savior himself. First
verses, Explication and proof.
8.9.10. For to this end he says to Peter, who of modesty, or ciuility,
refused for a while, to have his feet washed; that if he did not suffer him to
wash his feet, he should have no part in him.

And touching the second, our Savior does further express it, from the 12.
verse, to the 18. And he stands the more fully, to instruct his disciples in
this point of humility in themselves, and of their mutual love and practice of
the duties thereof: because they were to be the Teachers of humility, and of
the practice of love to all other. For these are common duties, belonging to
all Christians, without exception. Whereunto, that our Savior might the rather
induce his disciples, he pronounces a blessing upon them, if according as they
were instructed by him, they would perform, and practice them. But this
belongs to that part of our inquiry, which concerns the duties: though
upon this so just an occasion, it is not amiss, that we touch them here.
Wherefore, that we may go forward.



A further declaration hereof, was the institution of his holy supper; thereby
to represent unto his Disciples before hand, and to apply to the hand of their
faith, the most precious fruit, and benefit, of all his sufferings: and
chiefly of the crucifying of his body, and of the shedding of his blood, which
were the sealing up, and ratifying, of all the rest.

This indeed is evident, from the words of the institution of the same the
holy Supper of the Lord: Explication and proof.
as was opened more fully in the Sermon upon the text, then now we can stand to
repeat. Only let us, at this time, call to mind, which those most sweet
fruits of the death of our Savior are: to wit, forgiveness of sins, and
everlasting life Ma^h. 26. ver. 28.29.

Then the which, what fruit can be more sweet, to all those that know how
great misery, our sins have presently brought upon us; and for the time to
come, have made us more fully subject unto, in everlasting torment both of body
and soul? This ordinance therefore of our Savior, is (as was said) a notable
declaration, yea and a confirmation of his singular love, both to his special
disciples, and also to all the members of the whole Church.

And yet behold, he has yet more abundantly expressed the same, by many most
sweet, and comfortable speeches, after the same institution and celebration of
his holy Supper: partly, while yet they stayed in the chamber, where it was
celebrated; and partly, in the way, as our Savior walked with his disciples,
from thence to the garden of Gethsemane, where he was betrayed and apprehended.
And also by that most divine prayer, John, chap. 17. (most properly to be
accounted the Lords own Prayer) even such a prayer, as no creature but he,
could, or might make. But of these things, we shall have the occasion renewed
to speak more, when we shall come to the comforts.

In the mean while, let us proceed to see how our Savior declared the
tenderness of his love, and care over his disciples, in the Garden, where he was
even within a short space after; that is, in the same night, to be betrayed and
apprehended.



As our Savior took them with him unto the Garden, to the end they might, to
their own benefit, and the common good of the Church, be eyewitnesses of
those things which should be fall him: so, they being there, he does for the
same causes, direct them in the best course that they were to take: admonishing
them to give themselves to Prayer, lest they should enter into tentation. Luke.
20.40.

And further, lest they should in their weakness, be discouraged by the
beholding of the extremity of his tentation, and affliction: our Savior
withdraws himself first, from eight of his Disciples. And after this also,
from the other three, Peter, James, and John, whom he had taken yet somewhat
nearer unto him, then he had done the rest.

Moreover, though his trouble and sorrows were exceeding all humane strength,
to endure them: yet our Savior, strengthened in the spirit, does not forget,
nor neglect, at that instant to visit his beloved Disciples, with a mind (no
doubt) to comfort them, as they should stand in need.

And though be found cause again and again, to alienate his affection from
them; by reason of their sluggishnes and sleepy neglect of the beginning of his
most grievous troubles: yet he does only gently reprove this their gross
failing. And though he could find no comfort from them: yet does he not cease,
to comfort and encourage them, against the terror of his apprehension: as one
insinuating the hope of a good issue, through all his sufferings, both on their
and also on his whole Churches behalf.

Explication and proof.
In all these things, the present mind, and most excellent wisdom of our
Savior is plentifully testified, to be filled with all love and tender
compassion over them. The same is likewise evident, by his most gracious and
earnest prayer for them all, in the 17. chap. of John* ver 6.7.8.9. etc. 19.
And particularly for Peter, as we read, Luke, 22.31.32. Where also, he does
most wisely, and lovingly, admonish all the rest, as well as Peter, of this his
trouble then shortly to ensue* verses, 35.36.37.

And after all this, when he himself was apprehended in the garden; he
appeased the rage of the adversaries against Peter, because of his violent
resistance against the Officers: and in tender regard, both of him and the
rest, gives them an evasion out of the hands of his apprehenders. John,
18.8.9.

Furthermore, when our Savior was examined before the high Priest, he had a
merciful regard of Peter, after his unfaithful denial: and therefore turned
back, and by casting a gracious eye upon him, effectually admonished him by
his holy Spirit to consider, how grievously he had sinned therein. Luke 22.61.

Finally, even in his agonies upon the Cross, our Savior declared that
singular love, and tender care and compassion which he had both upon his
mother, and also upon his beloved disciple John: chap. 19.26.27. And thus it is
plain, that (as was said in the beginning of this Treatise) Our Savior loved
them even to the end, whom he once loved. And touching the failing of the
disciples; and that drowsines of theirs, mentioned even now: it is no other
thing, but that which is common to all of us; that we would surely go even
sleeping, and snoring (as it were) to hell: were it not, that our Savior is
feign to awake us out of our dead sleep, ever and anon.

Now let us come to see, how our Savior did likewise declare, his most
present mind; and all holy perfection of wisdom, and fortitude, in his whole
course of behavior, toward his persecutors.



They shine as the stars of heaven; yea, even as the Sun in the firmament:
even from his apprehension, throughout the whole course of his examination,
condemna^^^n, and execution.

Explication and proof.
They do so indeed. The which, though they have been spoken of, in the
interpretation of the holy History; yet will we here, briefly gather the
proofs thereof, and call them to mind again, for our further instruction and
profit.

This present mind of our Savior, with his other most holy virtues, are
evident.

First, in that which the Evangelist John records, chap. 18.4. etc. alleged
even now: where our Savior, minding the deliverance and safety of his
Disciples, (as one remembering well what he had said in his holy Prayer to his
Father: Of them which thou gave me, I have lost none) he does to this
purpose, daunt his enemies at their first approaching unto him, in that he
gives them experience of his divine power: first in that they found themselves
not able to stand before him; much less to apprehend him, unless he should
voluntarily yield himself: and then, in that presently after this; he does
miraculously heal the man, whose ear Peter had cut off.

Secondly, they are evident, in that our Savior does at the same time, in
their apprehending of him, most wisely: first reprove Judas, according to the
quality of his great and grievous sin: and then the officers, for their
warrlike and furious manner of pursuing of him, who had been always most
peaceable among them. Math. 26. ver. 55. and Luke 22.51.52.53. And also Peter
for his rash, and disordered attempt at the same time: so that he did
admirably defeat the most dangerous devise of the devil, as has been more
fully declared before.

Thirdly, the excellent wisdom, and other most holy virtues of our Savior,
are evident, in that albeit he answers the high Priest, and the rest, so
far as was meet, for the testimony of the truth. Math. 26.64. Mark. 14.62.
Yet he knowing, that they were not minded, either to inquire after the truth,
with a mind to receive and obey it: or to let him loose, though he should
declare the truth never so plainly unto them: but that they were wholly
possessed with envy and malice: therefore he would not speak many words in
the answering of them; but used much silence, as appears in the places last
alleged: and also Luke, 22.67.68. where he renders the same reasons of his
silence, which were even now mentioned. If I tell you, ye will not believe it.
And if also I ask you, ye will not answer me, nor let me go, Hereafter shall
the Son of man sit at the right hand of the power of God.

Fourthly, the present mind of our Savior, with his holy wisdom and
courage, appears in that he being examined, concerning his Disciples and
doctrine, he appealeth to the common testimony of all men: insomuch as he had
preached it openly, both in the Synagogue, and also in the Temple. And so he
avoided much of their intended iangling, and contention, against him. And when
one of the Officers, more wicked and unreasonable then the rest, did at the
same time, smite our Savior with his rod, saying, Answerest thou the high
Priest so? Our Savior answered him most wisely, and discreetely, in these
words, If (says our Savior) I have spoken evil, bear thou witness of the
evil: but if I have well spoken, why smitest thou me? And so, boldly reproved
the disorder of their unjust proceeding; insomuch as the Governors suffered
him to be smitten, before he was convicted, or had any sentence pronounced
against him.

Fifthly, the same virtues, are likewise to be observed; in that, albeit when
our Savior was brought before Pilate sitting in judgment (whom he knew to
have authority and jurisdiction over him in that place) he answered him most
wisely, and directly John: 18.34. and again, chap. 19. ver. 11. in such sort
that it is worthily testified of him, 1, Tim 6.13.
that he witnessed a good confession under Pontius Pilate, as he had done
before, to the high Priest and Rulers of the Jews: yet bei^^ sent by Pilate to
Herod, who had no authority to examine his cause, and to give judgment of him
(our Savior being now in the City of Jerusalem, out of his regencie which lay
in Galile) he would not answer him at all, neither any whit yielded to his
profane humor. Luke, 23.6.7.8 9.

Finally, after that he was condemned, and had endured many unworthy
molestations, and was wearied in the way with carrying of his own Cross: yet
could nothing so ouerwhelm his mind, that he should not give good instructio
and admonition, to the women, that followed him, lamenting, and bewailing him.
No nor the most bitter anguish of the Cross, while he was nailed unto it
c^uld confound his mind, nor restrain him, from uttering such holy and wise
speeches, as were then most meet to be uttered; as it follows, to be yet
further observed.

Now therefore, let us come to consider of the invincible patience of our
Savior, toward his most wicked adversaries.



It is most clear in this, that although he was most unworthily provoked, even
in the highest degree: yet as the Apostle Peter testifies, 1. Epist. 2.23.
(and the holy history it self is evident therein) that being reviled, he
reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened not: but committed it to him
that judges righteously.

According also to that which Isaiah prophesied of him chap. 53. verse 7. He
was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth: he is
brought as a sheep to the sl^ughter, and as a sheep before his shearer is
dumb, so opens not he his mouth.

This is a sufficient declaration, of the invincible patience of our Savior,
toward his persecutors.



The general prayer of our Savior Christ, is a sufficient declaration of it,
John 17. verse 20.

And again, when he was nailed to the cross, in that he prayed, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do. Luke 23.34.

It is evident also, by his most gracious dealing toward the penitent thief,
hanging on the Cross by him, Matthew 27.44 in that he vouchsafe^ most eminently,
(as it were from a most high and open Theater) to make him partaker of the
fruit of his former prayer; assuring him, that the same day, he should be with
him in Paradise: that is, in his heavenly and glorious kingdom. Luke chap. 23.
verses 42.43.

It is true. Herein does the perfect love of our Savior show forth it self
most amiably. Explication and proof.


And thus, all things duly considered, it is most clear, that all perfection
of virtue, shined forth most brightly, as it were out of the most thick and
dark cloud of his whole passi^n, and the manifold grieuances thereof: so
that we may justly conclude, that he is even a most perfect mirror of all
excellent and holy virtue, according to the holy prophecy of Isai, chap. 11.
verse 2. and according to the testimony of John the Baptist, John chap. 3.34.
For what man, (of all men that eu^r were, even the most wise and holy among the
rest) could have gone through so many, and so great sufferings, not only from
man, but also from the divine justice of God, in the sense of his intolerable
wrath against sin: and not have been utterly dismayed, and overwhelmed
therein?

So then, by this time, we cannot but see, that the sufferings of our blessed
Lord and Savior, every way considered, (both generally in the whole, and
particularly in every branch thereof) are matter, most worthy our reverend and
serious meditation, continually: according as our Savior himself did
earnestly preadmonish his Disciples, that they should diligently premeditate of
them, though yet he had not then suffered these his most great and grievous
sufferings. As we read, Luke 9.44. Mark these words diligently (says our
Savior) for it shall come to pass, that the Son of man shall be delivered
into the hands of men, etc And chap. 18. verses 32.33. He shall be mocked and
spitefully entreated, and he shall be spit upon, and scourged, and put to
death. According also as we may learn from the Apostle Peter, in that he
tells us that the holy Prophets of ancient times, made diligent inquiry
after these things, which are now revealed unto us. Yea he says further,
that they are so worthy things, and of so excellent effect, etc, The Promise
that he should thus suffer for us.
that the Angels desire to look into them. 1. Ep. chap. 1. verses 10, 11, 12.

And the rather are we to stir up our selves to the earnest and reverend
consideration of these things, because we are naturally very dull and sluggish
in the minding of them: as we may perceive, not only from the example of the
Disciples of our Savior Christ, even now mentioned: (of whom it is written,
that they understood not the speech of our Savior, neither could perceive it,
etc. Luke 9.45. And again chap. 18.34.) but we may feel the same likewise in
our own selves, and that also from the very same cause. That is to say, even
because it is no grateful argument unto us, to think or hear much of
afflictions. Our souls are so taken up, and possessed with desire of ease and
earthly pleasure; that all thought or speech the other way, is so unwelcome
unto us, that we hear it with deaf ears, and as if it were spoken unto us in
a strange and unknown language. Yea, without the grace of God working mightily
in our hearts, we are for our own disposition, ready to condemn and reject
all doctrine of the cross and sufferings of our Savior Christ, as if it were
mere foolishnes, like as many other have done: as we read 1. Cor. 1.18, etc.
For the preaching of the cross, is to them that perish, foolishnes, etc. And
verse 23. But we preach Christ crucified: unto the Jews, even a stumbling
block, and unto the Grecians foolishnes, etc.

Hitherto of those observations, which are necessary to be considered, for the
better and more full understanding, of those Articles of our says, which do
concern the whole humiliation or abasement and sufferings of our Savior
Christ.

LE^ us now in the next place, come to the promise.



The 53. chapter of the Prophet Isaiah is plentiful to this purpose: and
worthy in this respect, that it should not only stand written in the book of
God, but also to be written and engraven in the heart of every believing
christian, by the finger of the holy Spirit of God.

Rehearse you therefore this excellent Scripture.



Who (says the holy Prophet) will believe our report? And to whom is the arm
of the Lord revealed?

2 But he shall grow up before him as a branch, and as a root out of a dry
ground: he has neither form nor beauty, etc.

4 Surely he has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows: yet we did
judge him as plagued and smitten of God, and humbled.

5 But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities:
the chasticement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.

6 All we like sheep have ^one astray: we have turned every one to his own
way, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all.

7 He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, etc.

11 He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear their
iniquities.

12 Therefore will I give him a portion, with the great, and he shall divide
the spoil with the strong, because he has poured out his soul unto death:
and he was counted with the transgressors, and he did bear the sin of
many, and prayed for the trespassers.

Explication.
This indeed is an excellent Scripture, to this purpose. And like to this, is
the holy prophecy of Daniel, chap. 9 versee 24, etc. Seventy weeks are
determined upon thy people, and v^on thine holy City, to finish the wickedness,
and to seal up the sins, and to reconcile the iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to
anoint the most holy, etc. And verse 26. And after threescore and two weeks
shall the Messiah be slain. The Comfort of his suffferings more generally.
These and such like prophecies of the holy Prophets, foretelling these things
by the Spirit of God: they do include the promise of God, with the reiteration
and renewing thereof. According to that of the Apostle Peter, Acts 3.18. Those
things which God had showed before by the mouth of his Prophets, that Christ
should suffer, he has thus fu^filled. Thus much therefore (briefly)
concerning the promise, and the ful^i^ling thereof.

THe comforts are next to be considered of us.

But before we do inquire of them: first, it is meet, that we rightly
understand, in what sense, the sufferings of our Savior may be said to be
comfortable unto us. For without due consideration, it may justly seem a most
inhumane and barbarous thing, to take any comfort, and joy, in the trouble and
affliction of any; specially in very grievous afflictions and miseries: but
most of all, if the party so pitifully afflicted, be an innocent, yea most
worthy to be spared. And so we read it determined by the holy Ghost, in that
he reproves the wicked; yea note^h them to be singularly wicked, even from
hence, in that they behold the distresses of their brethren, and be nothing
moved thereby to any commisseration: as in the 12. verse of the prophecy of
Obadiah. Thou shou^dest not (says the holy Ghost by his holy Prophet) have
beholden the day of thy brother, in the day that he was made a stranger,
neither should thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of
destruction, etc. Yea as it follows, Thou should not have once looked on
their affl^ction, in the day of their destruction. Read also Proverbs, chap.
4. verse 17. Be not thou ^lad (says the Spirit of God) when thine enemy
falls, neither let thine heart rejoice when he stumbleth, lest the Lord see
it, and it displease him, and he turn his wrath from him: to wi^, against thee.

Whence observe diligently, that if we must not rejoice at the adversity of an
enemy, then much l^sse may we rejoice or take comfort at the fall of a
friend, and of such a friend, as is a most innocent and righteous person:
according to that complaint of the Prophet David, Psalm. 22.14, etc. I am like
water poured out and all my bones are out of joint: mine heart is like wax, it
is moulten in the midst of my bowels My strength is dried up like a
potsheard* and my tongue cleaves to my ^awes, and t^ou have brought me into
the dust of death. For dogs have compassed me, and the assembly of the wicked
have enclosed me: they have pi^rced mine hands and my feet. I may tell all my
bones: yet (says the holy Prophet) they behold, and look upon me. They part
my garments among them, etc. In all which words, the Prophet does not so much
complain of his own calamity, as he does prophetica^ly describe the
suff^rings of our Savior, which now we inquire of; and the extreme malice of
his bloody persecutors, concurring with the righteous judgment of God, and
his most fearful wrath bent against a most perfect innocent man, yea against a
most righteous and good man: which makes the matter so much the more
lamentable, if it be nakedly considered in it self.



All our comfort, and rejoicing, must be only for a relief to our
consciences, against the most fierce wrath of GOD, most justly due to our
sins: and in respect of the manifold fruits, and benefi^es, which (through
the mercy of GOD, and by the gracious good will of our Savior himself) are
brought unto us by the same his sufferings, to the glory of God, and to our
own eternal salvation.

Explication
It is very true. And so it is evident, that the comfort and joy of the
sufferings of our Savior, does only belong to such as are humbled in the
sight of their sins, and be heavy laden with the burden of them. And unto
all such, the joy may justly be so much the greater; by how much the sufferings
of our Savior, were more extreme and bitter: and by how much they were more
willingly endured of him, for a most full and perfect satisfaction to God, to
the paying as it were of the uttermost farthing, of that price and ransom,
which God himself had set down to be paid, for the redemption of our sins.
According to that, Heb. cha. 2.9. By the grace o^ God, he tasted death for all
men. And Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he
was made a curse for us.

As touching the rest: that is to say, so many as be not humbled with godly
sorrow for their sins; they have no part in the sweet comfort of the
sufferings of our Savior: but contrariwise, look by how much their sins
have been more grievous, by so much may their terror be justly the greater:
insomuch as hereby, the wrath and curse of God, is so much the more clearly
revealed against sin, in that he has not spared to punish it, when it was
imputed to his own Son. Doubtless, all rejoicing in Christ's sufferings, is
profane and wicked, like to the joy of the wicked Jews, in persecuting our
Savior; until such as do rejoice in them, be truly humbled in the sight of
their own sins, for the which he died.



Beside the testimony of the Ptophet Isaiah, already rehearsed: our Savior
himself, has most p^e^tifully confirmed it, both by his word, and also by the
institution of his holy Supper, as was something touched before. According to
that, Matt. 11.^8. Come unto me, all ye that are weary and laden, and I will
ease you.

Explication.
It is so indeed. Of these things therefore, we are at this present, more fully
to consider, according as we promised before.

And first, seeing (as was said even now) the matter of this comfort which we
inquire o^, is not the suff^rings of our Savior, simply considered in
themselves; but in respect of the fruits and benefits, which he has
purchased for us, and does still c^mmunicate unto us, by the invaluable merit
and virtue of them: let us therefore, consider the more diligently of these
fruits and benefits, both from the instructions of our Savior Christ
himself; and also from the history of h^s suffe^ings, and from other
testimonies of the holy Scriptures.



To speak generally, they are either such as do concern deliverance from
evils: or else the conferring, and bestowing of the contrary good things.

Explication.
This is that, which (as was said before) is clearly and sensibly both
represented* and also appl^ed by the holy Sacrament the supper of the Lord, to
all true beleeuer^; whenever they do duly receive and partake in the same:
to wit, deliverance from sin, and the gift of eternal life, as ^ur Savior
does immediately upon the institution, very earnestly persuade with his
D^sciples, both in the chamber, and also in the way as he walked from thence
unto the garden.

In the which, his large and long continued speech (insomuch as we may easily
perceive from the last part of the 13. chapter, and throughout the 14.15. and
16. chapters of the Evangelist John, he labored mightily to comfort his
Disciples, against his bodily absence, which they were shortly to have
experience of; and against those worldly afflictions, which he knew they
should find present with them) we may hereby understand for our singular
instruction, what was the very true use and end of the Supper of the Lord
Namely, that it might be a means of spiritual comfort, to them, and to his
whole Church, to the end of the world, against the discomfort of the same his
bodily absence; and not to give any assurance of his bodily presence among them.

To this end therefore; and also to every other good purpose: The Comforts of
his sufferings more particularly.
let us weigh well, either part of the comfortable speech of our Savior to his
Disciples. And first, of that which he had with them in the chamber, as it is
contained in the last part of the 13. chapter, and in the whole 14. chapter,
from the beginning to the end thereof.

First, in the end of the 13. chapter, our Savior comfort his Disciples,
and consequently the whole Church, and our selves among the rest; that his
sufferings were the only way to glory: both for him in our humane nature, as
the head; and for the Church, as the members of his mystical body. And all to
the glory of God For so he says verse 31. Now is the Son of man glorified,
and God is glorified in him. If God be glorified in him, God will also glorify
him in himself: yea he will strait way glorify him.

Explication and proof.
These words indeed, are spoken in regard of the sufferings, which our Savior
was shortly after he spoke of them, to endure. And moreover, in that he says,
God is glorified in the Son: and God will glorify him in himself: he
preaches therein, his own Deity, and so lays the ground of the doctrine
following in the beginning of the next chapter, that they should therefore
believe in him, as well as in the Father, as we have seen it opened and
declared before.

Furthermore, our Savior in this 13. chapter, telling his Disciples of his
departure from them; first by death, and then his ascension up into heaven, and
that they were to stay a while here in this world after him: he does
therewithal comfort them in this; that they should afterward, in the time
appointed of God, follow him, and be for ever with him. This also he does
further confirm unto them, in the next chapter, as it follows in our text,
even from the first words of the same. And again, verse 19. Yet a little
while, and the world shall see me no more, but ye shall see me: because I live,
ye shall live also. At that day shall ye know that I am in my Father, and you in
me, and I in you. And verses 28.29. Ye have heard how I said, I go away, and
will come unto you. If ye loved me, ye would verily rejoice, because I said,
I go to the Father: for my Father is greater then I. Our Savior means this,
in respect of his humanity, and office of mediation. For otherwise, as he is
God, he is equal with the Father: as his own words in many places of the
Evangelists do plainly show; and namely, in this very chapter, as a learned
interpreter observes by many: that is, Piscator.
almost by twenty reasons.

And here also, this is worthily to be observed, that our Savior Christ at
this time, meditating of his humiliation and death: does comfort himself, in
the beholding of that glory, which was set before the eye of his faith, verse,
13. as also before, chap. 12. verses, 23.31.32. And afterward, chap. 17.4.5.
The which thing also, the Apostle observes, Heb. 12.2. Likewise no less
worthy is it to be observed on the other side; that at such time as he was
for the present in glory: to wit, at his transfiguration, and at his riding to
Jerusalem, when the people both old and young, yielded the honor of a King
unto him; he does even then, join with this, the meditation of the same his
sufferings and death; and cease not to renew the speech of them, not only
for his Disciples sake, to pull away their minds from their conceits, about
an earthly kingdom: but also, that he might the better prepare his own heart,
to the willing and patient enduring of them. Read also, Luke 9. verses. 43.44.

This example of our Savior (that we may by the way note a duty among the
comforts) is not only to be admired of us, in respect of his wisdom in this
his practice; but also to be immitated and followed of us, in our measure and
degree: to the end we be neither too much puffed up, when we are in prosperity
and honor, etc. neither yet too much dejected and cast down or discouraged in
our minds, when we shall fall into any adversity.

Moreover, it is to be noted for our comfort, concerning the sufferings and
death of our Savior; that both in this, and also in the chapter following, he
shows that the comfort, as well of his resurrection, as of his ascension,
does depend upon his death: insomuch as his death, The comforts of his
sufferings more generally.
was a necessary passage unto them, both for himself first, and then also for
us, by him. Yea so necessary, that if he had not died, he could neither have
risen again, nor ascended up into heaven, etc. Whence it is, that our Sauiou^,
from the comfort of the one, does argue the comfort of the other: as chapter 16.
verse 5. etc 22. And as we saw before, chapter 13. verses 12.24, 25.26, ^2.

And thus we see, after what manner our Savior comfort his Disciples,
against the sorrow of his death, and departure out of this world. The which
ground of their comfort, may likewise be justly the ground and warrant of our
comfort, and of the c^mfort of the whole Church.

Show you now likewise, how he comfort them: and how we our selves may take
comfo^t, against our own troubles and afflictions, or persecutions of this
world.



Our Savior Christ does this: first of all, more briefly verse 18. of this 14.
chap. of John, I will not leave ye comfortless (says he:) But I will come
unto you. And then verse 27. Peace I leave with you: my peace I give unto you:
not as the world gives, give I unto you Let not your heart be troubled, nor
fear.

^ut mo^e at large in the 15. chap. from the 18. verse, to the end of the
chapter: and that by many rea^ons. The which his comfortable speech, he does
also furthermore prosecute, from the beginning of the 16. chapter verses 1, 2, ^.4.
And thenceforth he returns again to comfort ^is Disciples: against their
sorrow, concerning his departure from them.

It is true, as was observed not long since, even from the 5. verse to the 22.

But which I pray you, are the reasons, whereby our Savior comfort his
Disciples, against afflictions, and persecutions of this world, yea of the
malignant Church that is both in the world, and also of the world, as our
Savior rangeth it:

First our Savior says, If the world hate you, ye know, that it hated me
before you, verse 18 The which reason he further amplifieth in the 20. verse,
in these words, Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not
greater then his Master. If they have pers^cuted me, they will persecute you
also: if they have kept my word, they will also keep yours.

Secondl^, our Savior comfort his Disciples against the per^ecutions of
this world, from the excellency of their estate, as being chosen out of the
world. If ye were of the world, (says our Savior) the world would love his
own, but I have chosen ye out of the world, therefore the worl^ h^teth you.

Thirdly our Sau our com^orte^h his Disciples from the causl^sse ground of the
persecutions of the wicked against them: the which he shows to be no better,
then mere wilful ignorance, joined with ^atred and malice, not only against
them, but also against Christ, and God the Father himself. Whereupon it
follows, that they are therein without all excuse and that they make
themselves most miserable and damnable, in that, wherein they imagine they
serve God.

Explication and proof.
So indeed it ^olloweth, verses ^1, 22, 23, 24, 25. All these things will they
do unto you for my names sake, because they have not known him that sent me.
If I had not come and spoken to them, they should not have had sin: but now
they have no cloak for their sin, etc. But it is that the word might be
fulfilled that is written in their law, They have hated me without cause.



Our Savior Christ promises his Disciples, the immediate comfort of the holy
Ghost to co^r^borate and strengthen them to the cheare^ull enduring of all
persecutions: yea that he will to this end, send the holy Ghost unto them.

Explication.
He does so indeed, as it is plain, ver. 26.27. the last verses of the chap.
But when the Comforter shall come, whom I (says our Savior) will send unto
you from the Father, eu^n the Spirit of truth, which pr^ceedeth of the Father,
he shall testify of me. And ye shall witness also, because ye have bin with me
from the beginning. Yea, he assures them, that this comfort shall be so great,
that it shall arm them, both against that excommunication, and also bodily
death, (the greatest and most grievous censures that may be in this world)
which our Savior knew before; the malignant and false Church, would abuse
against his true and faithful servants: as it follows from the beginning of
the 16. chapter, verses 1, 2, 3, 4. as was mentioned before.

Hitherto of the comforts, wherewith our Savior comforted his disciples,
against the discomfort of troubles and persecutions, for him, and his Gospells
s^ke. The which, we are diligently to mark, and treasure up in our hearts; as
the principal reasons, whereby we also are to comfort our own selves,
whenever we shall be exercised with like trialls: as all other of the
servants of God have done, from time to time before us, and thereby encouraged
themselves to endure such afflictions as would otherwise have bin intolerable
unto them.

Now let us consider of the other sort of comforts, which our Savior shows
his Disciples, that his sufferings and departure should bring unto them; in
that thereby, they should be made partakers of many special good benefits and
blessings, which should abundantly supply the want, of his bodily presence:
even such as should bring a further increase of comfort, against the troubles
and persecutions of this world.

The last of the former sort, may justly be the first of these; insomuch as the
Comfort of the holy Ghost, is not only the principal support of christians,
against the discomfiture of their troubles and persecutions: but it is also in
it self, the chief and principal blessing and benefit, above all other.

Explication and proof.
It is so indeed. And therefore it is, that our Savior does make so often
mention of it: as chapter 14.16.17 and v. 26. And chapter 15.26. ^s we saw even now.
And yet again^, chapter 16.6.^. and so forth to the 16. verse. Because (says our
Savior) I have said these things unto you, your hearts are full of sorrow. Yet
I tell ye the truth, it is expedient for ye that I do^ go away: for if I go
not away, the Comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart I will send him
to you. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, etc. And v. 13.
When he is come who is the Spirit of truth, he will lead ye into all truth
etc. This then is the chief blessing, and principal benefit above all the rest.



If we shall truly and constantly, believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, who
willingly suffered, and died for us, according to the most gracious, and
merciful good will of God toward us: God will always hear our prayers. He
will work mighty things by us, and for us. And finally, he will give us
everlasting joy and blessedness.

Explication and proof.
These indeed, are briefly the rest of the benefits. Of the which, though (in a
special degree) the excellency and first fruits (as we may say) did belong,
and accordingly, were bestowed upon those his choice Disciples, whom our
Savior sent forth into the world, to be his Apostles, and first preachers of
his Gospel: yet they are, and have been, in a very comfortable manner and
measure, continued hitherto unto the Church of Christ: and so shall be to the
worlds end: as we may perceive from our Saviors own words. For as we read
in the 14. chap. verses 12.13.14. Verily, verily (says our Savior) I say unto
you, he that believes in me, the works that I do, he shall do also, and
greater then these shall he do: (our Savior speaks of healing bodily
diseases, which is less then the conversion of souls, which was wrought by
the preaching of the Apostles, most abundantly) For (says he) I go unto my
Father.

13 And whatsouer ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father
may be glo^ified in the Son.

14 ^f ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it.

Any thing: that is to say, whatsoever you shall pray for, which is agreeable
to that rule of prayer, which our Savior himself has set down: and namely,
for the conversion of the elect, and for the blessing of God upon the preaching
of the Gospel, to the same end: for so must the words of our Savior be
understood.

And thus, we have sufficient testimony of the two former benefits: to wit,
The Comforts belonging to his agony and apprehension in the garden.
that God for our Saviors sake, will hear faithful prayers; and that he will
work great things in his Church, by the ministry of his faithful servants.
Read also chap. 15 verse 7. If ye abide in me, and my word abide in you, ask
what ye will, and it shall be done to you. Explication.




In the 16. chapter verse 22. Ye are now in sorrow: but I will see ye again, and
your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you, etc.

And again, verse 24. Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.

Explication.
These things are most comfortable. To the which end also, let us conclude with
the last words of the speech of our Savior, to his Disciples, in the way to
the garden: as we read in the last verse of the 16 chapter. Wherein he
expresses, what was the intended scope of his whole speech unto his Disciples,
saying, These things have I spoken unto you that in me, ye might have peace: in
the world ye shall have affliction, but be of good comfort: I have overcome the
world. Our Savior affirms that before hand, which he purposed most
assuredly, shortly after to perform. And verily, he has effectually
performed it, both on their behalf, and on ours; that we might likewise by
faith in him overcome, as it is testified in other places of the holy
Scriptures. And namely, in the 1. Ep. of John, chapter 5 verses 4.5. For all that
is borne of God, overcomes the world: and this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our faith. Who is it that overcomes the world but
he who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?

Thus then our Savior, beginning to comfort his Disciples in the Gospel of
Saint John, from the beginning of the 14. chapter; he continued still more and
more to comfort them, as he himself says in the same chapter, verses 28.9.
And again, chap. 15. verse 11. And chap. 16.1. and verses 6.7. And last of
all, he ended with most sweet and comfortable words, verse 33. as we saw
even now. So that it is very evident, that our Savior would have his death,
and whole sufferings, and his departure out of this world bodily, to be a most
plentiful argument of all comfort, to his Disciples Apostolical first; and
then to all other Christians, and to his whole Church for ever.

Thus much therefore more generally for our comfort, as touching the fruits
and benefits, which we do enjoy from the sufferings of our Savior Christ:
according to his own most sweet and consolatory speeches, which he used to
his Disciples to comfort them, against all whatsoever might be most
discomfortable to them.

NOw let us furthermore, well weigh and consider, how the same and like
comforts, may likewise be warranted unto us, from the rest of the holy history
of his sufferings, and from the testimony of other Scriptures.

We will collect them, as briefly, as so large an argument will permit.

And to begin withal; well may it be an exceeding comfort unto us, that (as
we have seen) our Savior endured all his sufferinges, (throughout the whole
ted^ous course of them) most willingly for our sakes. For hence were they
satisfactory to the justice of God on our behalf: which otherwise, they could
not have been.

Yea, not only the consideration of this one virtue, but also of all the
excellent virtues of our Savior, (shining forth most brightly, throughout the
same his sufferings, (as we have li^ewise seen) they may justly be so many
comforters, to cheer up our hearts, as it were by the light and warmth of the
Sun, in the whole race which it runs from morning to noone, and from noone
to night; even so often, as we shall renew and settle the thoughts of our
minds thereon. Doubtless, through the blessing of God, they will be, as the
renewing of the day upon us, by the new arising of the Sun of righteousness, to
bring the health of his Sunbeams, upon our souls and consciences.

The answer, which God the Father gave to our Lord Jesus Christ his Son, at
his first entrance into his most bitter passions; was an answer, containing
much comfort in it, not only in respect of our SAVIOVR himself, but also in
respect of us: as we read John. chapter 12. verse 28. For God our heavenly
Father, promised it at that time, and has no doubt, and does perform it
still: and so will do to the end of the world, and for ever, in glorifying his
own name, and the praise of his mercies, through the sufferings of his Son.
And the rather, because even then, when our Savior was in one part of his most
grievous trouble, and discomfort, God sent his Angel to comfort him: so that,
howsoever the hatred which was due to our sins, fell upon him; yet it was
impossible, that God should not love and tender him, for his own sake. Whereby
also, we may comfort our selves to believe, that although we may be sundry
times troubled in our souls, and in our prayers, and every other way for our
trial: yet for our Saviors sake, God will hear our troubled prayers, and
support us in all our distresses, if we be desirous to submit our wills to his
will, as our Savior did.

It may well be comfortable to us, that when the enemies of our Savior, came
into the garden to apprehend him, they were not able to stand before him, but
fell down backward; much less had they been able to apprehend and take him
in deed: save that our Savior, for obedience sake to God, and for the love
which he did bear to us, and our salvation, he did of his own accord yield
himself; and therewithal, by his divine authority, set his weak Disciples at
liberty at the same time, until they should be made more fit, to endure such
trialls, as they were for their parts in some respects to be exercised with:
though our Savior only, and alone, suffered for our redemption and salvation.

IT is comfortable to consider, that at the examination of our Savior before
the high Priest; the witnesses which came forth against him, were confounded,
and had nothing in truth to accuse him of, worthy the least blame. For hereby
it is made the more clear unto us, that he died for our sins, and not for
any of his own.

It is very comfortable, that at the same time our Savior plainly professed
himself, to be the natural, and very true Son of God; and that he will
assuredly come again in glory, to judge the world. Yea that he does this,
alb^it he knew, that his adversaries would be enraged thereby, and even from
thence, take the occasion of putting him to death. For hereby, these
comfortable Articles of our faith, are singularly confirmed unto us.

That silence also, which our Savior used, in some part of this examination,
before the high Priest, as also afterward at some seasons before Pilate and
Herod, has matter of comfort in it: in that, he being as the sheep dumb
before the shearer (as the Prophet Isaiah prophesied of him that he should be)
he did even thereby also, show himself willing, to offer up himself in
sacrifice to God for us, what means so ever were sometime offered, of getting
favor with Pilate, or Herod, against the wicked Jews, or with the Jews
themselves: insomuch as he sought no favor at their hands. Of the which
silence of our Savior: thus writes Beza worthily well, saying. Felix itaque,
felix inquam, and pretiosum silentium, quo nobis os aperitur, non solum vt Deum
alloquamur, sed vt magna cum fiducia clamemus, Abba, Pater. Romans 8.18. Gal.
4.6. Tantum ab est vt illo nos oporteat offendi. That is, O happy, yea I say, O
happy and precious silence, whereby our mouth is opened, not only so that we
may speak unto God, but that with great assurance we may cry, Abba Father. So
far off is it, that we should be offended at him herein.

ANd that we may proceed, according to the order of the holy History: It is
very comfortable, that albeit Peter fell lamentably, in this first examination;
yet we cannot but behold a very gracious fruit and effect of these beginnings
of the sufferings of our Savior, in the forgiveness of the grievous sin of
Peter, The Comforts belonging to his examination before the high Priest
and in the blessed gift of repentance bestowed upon him: as appears, in that
this so great a mercy followed, immediately upon the looking back of our
Savior, upon Peter.

It may be comfortable to us also, that God showed so heavy a vengeance, as he
did cast upon Judas, that most wicked Traitor, for the terrifying of all the
malicious adversaries of our Savior: and for the declaration of his divine
love toward him. For howsoever (as was said) the hatred and curse of God fell
upon our Savior for our sin, (insomuch as he set himself in our stead
before his tribunal seat of judgment, and took upon him our guiltines, etc.)
Yet in regard of the unspotted holiness of the humane nature of our Savior
Christ, of the righteousness of his life, yea of his obedience to the will of
God unto death, even the death of the Cross: but specially, in regard that the
same humane nature was united to the divine, in one most holy and divine
Person: it was impossible, that God the Father, should not most perfectly, and
most constantly love him, he being his Son, according to that most solemn
protestation from heaven: This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.

And further also, it may justly be very comfortable to us, in that we may not
amiss conceive from hence, that howsoever, God cannot but hate the root and
remnan^s of sin in our wicked nature, simply considered in the corruption of
it: yet in that the children of God, are regenerated unto God, as they that are
borne again of his own Spirit: it cannot be, but that God for his Son our
Lord Jesus Christ's sake, must love all such, and the work of his own holy
grace in them; so that he will surely cherish it by all means, yea even when
he does afflict them most sharply, and for the time most uncomfortably, to
their own thinking. We may from hence also see, as in a clear glass, that he
utterly misliketh the enemies of his adopted children: although he does permit
them, to trouble and vex them for a season, in very uncomfortable and strange
manner, and measure. And again it renueth in special manner, one of the
former comforts, that Judas is constrained, from the testimony of his own
guilty conscience; to give witness to the innocence of our Savior Christ: and
that he had no cause in all the world (though he was privy to all the course of
our Savior, he being in the place of a near servant, yea of a familiar
friend) why he should deal so treacherously against him, as he did.

ANd that we may now proceed to Pilate, to whom our Savior was sent, by the
high Priest: it is likewise very comfortable, that he justifies our Sauio^r
Christ: and yet further, that Herod could suggest no cause, no not from all
that knowledge or hearsay of his dealings, which he had; why he should be
accounted worthy any punishment.

Of the same kind of comfort is this, that Pilates wife was greatly troubled,
lest her husband should be miscarried by the envy of the Jews, to do any
thing against our Savior, whom she reputed (for any thing that ever she
could know or hear) to be a special just man. Have thou nothing to do (says
she) with that just man.

This also may fu^ther confirm our comfort in the righteousness of our Savior,
because Pilate himself, was greatly troubled in the whole course of his
groundless proceeding, even from the beginning to the end: as one going, and
doing, against his conscience, in all that he did, or permitted to be done,
against our Savior: as appears plainly, in that he professes sundry times,
that he held our Savior to be an innocent man, and that he held the Jews to
do all that which they did, of mere malice and envy against him. Yea so,
that at the mention of this, that our Savior should be the son of God, he
trembled and feared greatly, like as it is said that Felix trembled at Paul's
preaching.

Moreover, it is greatly comfortable to us, when we consider that which is
written of this most reverend Person the Son of God, The Comforts belonging
to his Condemnation and crucifying.
our Lord and Savior, that he boldly professed, and witnessed, a good
confession of his spiritual kingdom, before Pontius Pilate: and consequently,
that he is our King able and willing to defend us, etc.

Neither is the comfort of this, small unto us, that our Savior Christ refused
not, to be rejected and condemned, not as some small trespasser, but as a most
grievous malefactor; worse then Barabbas, or any other notorious sinner: and
accordingly, to be afterward, hanged up between two notable thieues, and
robbers. For hereby, he has plainly, and in the sight of all the world, showed
himself to be such a Savior, as has made full satisfaction for us, and all the
elect of God, how grievous sinners so ever we have been. For not only smaller
trespassers, such as are so accounted among us, though in truth not so: but
also grievous offenders, such as are condemned of al men, even they are
acquitted by our Savior Christ: whosoever do believe in his name, and repent
them of their sins. It was in deed, notorious wickedness in the Jews to
reject Christ, and to choose Barabbas: as the Apostle Peter does justly, most
gravely and deeply charge them. Act. 3.13. and chap. 4.11. and the Apostle
Paul. chap. 13.28. But the blessed counsel of God, was herein to our
unspeakable comfort: insomuch as now we are assured, that There is no
condemnation to them that be in Christ. Rom chap. 8.1. and verses. 33.34.

Likewise, the scourging of our Savior (though grievous and smarting to his
holy flesh) brings no little consolation to us, insomuch as we know, that by
his stripes we are healed: as we are taught Isai: 53.5. The chasticement of our
peace was upon him (says the holy Prophet) and with his stripes we are healed.

And no less true, and there withal no less comfortable is it, that our
Savior Christ enduring the derision and scornings of the wicked, against his
Person and Kingdom: has thereby, delivered us from that ignominious sin of
ambitious pride, and aspiring against God, which came in from the beginning.
And not only so, but for that he has also procured this great honor unto us,
that we are in a spiritual manner, made Kings unto God: in that he has
obtained this grace for us, by this his debasing of himself in the sight of
God, and under his hand; that we should tread all wicked pride under our feet,
and suppress every haughty thought, which is ready in our sinful nature, to
advance it self, against God.

HEerewith also, it cannot be but very comfortable for us to observe, that God
would not in any wise have our Savior condemned, and made away in a tumult, or
to die obscurely, yea or any other death then the death of the Cross.
Whereunto also, the Lord God would have him to be solemnly adjudged and
condemned, as from a high Theater, in the sight of all the world as it were;
and that his body likewise should be lifted up on high and fastened to the
Cross, and that he should be in three langauges proclaimed King, not only of
the Jews, but also of the people of all Nations and languages: and that all
this should be done, at the time of a most solemn feast, solemnized in the
chief City, even in Jerusalem the City of God, who is the City of the great
King of all the world, where both Jews and Gentiles were assembled together in
a great and populous concourse. And all to this purpose, that he might in so
evident and eminent a manner, most famously publish his most gracious promise,
to save all those, that would accept and lay hold of salvation offered unto
them, by the purchase of this most ignominious and cursed death of his Son.
For even to this end (as our Savior himself fforetolde) was he lifted up, as
the brazen Serpent was lifted up in the wilderness, that whosoever should
believe in him, might not perish, but have eternal life. John 3.14. 1^. And
again, chap. 12.32. And I (says our Savior) if I were lifted up from the
earth, will draw all men unto me. Most comfortable therefore is the crucifying
of our Savior Christ for us, insomuch as it brings so gracious and mighty
an effect, as is the drawing of all men to the faith of it, by that sweet
smell, and most pleasant perfume, which it casts forth, The Comforts
belonging to his crucifying.
to the refreshing of every humbled soul, and conscience, which feels what
the burden of sin means. The greatness of this comfort, may be the better
discerned, if we make the comparison, betwixt the fruit which the brazen
serpent above mentioned (which was but a type of Christ) yielded to the people,
which looked up unto it, when they were stung in their bodies, by the venomous
serpents in the wilderness: and the fruit which our Savior Christ yields to
all believers, from that Cross, on the which he was lifted up. For it must
needs be confessed, that it is by degrees above number, a more gracious
benefit, to be healed of the stingings of sin, and of the Devil, which
certainly (without this most spiritual and sovereign counterpoison) is
infectious, not only to the body, to the indangering of the temporal health,
and life thereof, but even to the destruction, both of body and soul, for ever
and ever. Now this has our Savior procured, by offering up himself, upon the
Cross, a sacrifice for our sins: in that he has herein, willingly yielded
himself, to be made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him: as we read 2. Cor. 5.21. And in that he has yielded, to have
his most holy hands and feetepierced through, that his blood might abundantly
issue out of them, to be as a fountain, to wash away our sins: according to
the com^ortable saying of the Apostle John, The blood of Jesus Christ the Son
of God, cleanses us from all sin, 1. Ep. 1.7. And Isai. 53.5. He was
wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniqui^ies, etc. And
Ephesians. 1.7. We have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins acco^d^ng to his rich grace. And Colos. 1.19.20. It pleased the Father
that in him should all fulness dwell. And by him to reconcile all things to
himself, and to set at peace through the blood of his Cross, both things on
earth and things in heaven, etc. Read also Heb. 9. verses, 12. and 22. And
chap. 10.19.20. By the blood of Jesus, we may be bold to enter into the h^ly
p^ace (that is into heaven) ^y the new and living way, which he has prepared
for us through the veil, that is, his flesh, etc. And chap. 12.24. The blood
of sprinkling (even that blood which our Savior, who is the mediator of the
new Testament, has shed to reconcile us unto God, etc.) speaks better
things for us (as the holy Apostle aff^rmeth) then the blood of Abel, which
cried for vengeance against that murderer Caine. And chap 13.20. The same
Apostle, calle^h the blood of our Savior, The blood of the everlasting
covenant: to wit, of that covenant, which God in Christ, has made with his
Church, concerning the eternal redemption, justification, sanctification, and
glorification of it.

To the which most gracious ends, we are further assured to our endless
comf^rt; that as our Savior h^th borne our sins upon the Cross (as we
read. 1. Pet. 2.24.) so he vouchs^fed also, to bear our curse; yea even to be
made a curse for us, that we might be blessed through him Galat: 3.13.14.

And herewithall, this also is very comfortable, that our ^lessed Savior, by
his bloody crucifying, and by the blood of his Cro^^e, has put out the
handwriting of the ceremonial ord^nances of the law, fastening it upon the
cross; so that it is of no power, either to condemn the believing Jews, or
to be any longer, a partition wall betwixt the believing Gentiles and them,
that they should not have one entrance to the Father, by the same faith in
Jesus Christ.

It is yet a further enlargment of our comfort, that our Savior has upon the
Cross, gloriously and triumphantly spoiled the Devil of his power, as we have
seen before. Colos. 2.14.15.

Yea, and the nakedness of our Savior upon the Cross, is richly apparelled, as
it were, with a robe of singular comfort: insomuch as thereby, he has taken
away that ignominy, which the nakedness and shame of our sins, had brought
upon us in the sight of God: and has adorned us spiritually, with his holiness
and righteousness, that he might commend us, and make us comely, and gracious,
in his presence.

But among all the excellent things, right worthy our consideration, for our
exceeding comfort, concerning the crucifying of our Savior: this is not to be
accounted the least, that even then, when his executioners were fastening his
most holy body to the cross, with nails driven through his hands and feet;
that even then I say, he showed himself so mercifully affected, and so
earnestly desirous of the salvation of us poor sinners; that he prayed for
the trespassers as Isaiah had prophesied long before. Father (says our
Savior) forgive them, for they know not what they do. For doubtless, this
prayer of our Savior being the dear Son of God: who by his own appointment
made a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of all the elect: must needs be
most effectual with him, not only for those trespassers among whom he was
crucified; but also for all other that belong to the Lord, and have their part
in his redemption.

It surely contains a notable ground of comfort, for the quieting of all
troubled conscience^; when poor sinners, remembering this sweet prayer of our
SAVIOVR; shall have the testimony of their consciences, that they sinned
ignorantly: that is to say, that they were not aware, how grievous and
sinful, those things were, which they committed, contrary to the most holy
will and commandment of God: according to that comfort, which Paul professes
that he had in the same respect; though he had cruelly persecuted the Church of
Christ, etc. 1. T^m. 1 12.13.14.15.16.17.

Ad thus, the knowledge of our Savior Christ, even in that he was crucified
for us; is every way most comfortable: in that therein, and thereby, he is unto
all true believers, the wisdom of God, and the power of God to salvation: as
the same Apostle S. Paul teaches. 1. Cor: 1.23.24, And thereupon, in the
beg^nning of the next chapter, in the same Epistle, worthily professes: that
he esteemed not to know any thing among the Corinthians, save Ie: Ch: and him
crucified.

But it may seem, that I had well near forgott^n my self to be in the
exercise of catechizing. Henceforth therefore, I desire that you do answer,
concerning the rest of the comforts, belonging to the sufferings of our Savior.



Yea. For this among the rest, is one notable testimony, that this crucified
man, was, and is the true Messiah, even Christ our Savior: insomuch as the
holy prophecy was in this point fu filled which we read, Psalm: 22. verse. 18.

Explication
I^ is true For there the holy Prophet, prophesying of the sufferings of our
Savior, says among other things, even as if it were already fulfilled: that
his cruel enemies, and persecutors, did part his garments, and cast lots upon
his vesture. But let us have forward with all convenient speed.

Virgin Mary: he seeing her standing by the cross. What I say, may be the
comfort of this?

This evidently testifies unto us to our great comfort, the perfection of his
obedience, to the law of God for us, in respect of either table thereof. And
that, by two notable instances; the one of most perfect patience toward God,
belonging to the first commandment of the first Table: the other, of most
perfect and convenient love and honor to his natural Parent appertaining to
the first commandment of the second Table.

These are evident testimonies of it indeed.

It follows in the holy story, that our Savior was reviled, and mocked of
all sorts of his wicked, and dispiteful beholders, while he hanged upon the
cross. Quest. What comfort may there be herein to us?

Ans. This does yet further confirm unto us, that our Savior is the true
Messiah, by the full accomplishment of the holy prophecy given forth of him in
the same 22. Psalm, verses 6, 7, 8. and likewise verses 12.13.

Explication.
It does so indeed, as the words of the Psalm do plainly give to
understand: in that the holy Prophet, speaking, not so much of himself, as in
the person of our Savior Christ says thus, But I am a worm, and not a man: a
shame of men, and the contempt of the people. All they that see me, have me in
derision, they make a mow, and nod the head, saying: He trusted in the Lord,
let him deliver him, etc. So that well may we sing this holy Psalm of David,
to our singular instruction, and comfort in this behalf.

Moreover, this we may be sure of; that by how much his most undeserved
reproach, was the greater: by so much, is our assurance the more comfortable,
that he has not only taken away our most deserved reproach before our God;
but also, that he has made us so much the more honorable in his sight.

Finally, our comfort herein, may well be perfitted, in that he would not come
down from the cross, to remove the reproach, fastened upon him the more
bitterly in that respect: but endured both the cross, and all the shame of it,
to the uttermost, even to the very death the most cursed death of the cross
for us. For only abundance of love toward us, and no want at all of power,
was the cause, that he would not come down, and deliver himself.

This does very sensibly confirm unto us, the mighty effect of his
sufferings, to the salvation of all the elect of God; and therewith also, the
princely authority, and dignity of our Savior, even then hanging upon the
cross: in that according to the title, which God caused to be set up over his
head, he gave the thief, that repented and believed through his gra^e, the
assurance of the inheritance of his heavenly kingdom.

Explication.
It is very true. For herein, he has showed plainly, that he has the keys of
David in his sovereign power, above that ever David had them: and that he
opens so as no man can shut, etc. This therefore, is one notable, evident,
and eminent token and effect, of his most glorious triumph, even against the
Devil and sin, while yet he did hang, as a forlorn man upon the cross: as
men commonly, for that time, thought of him.

But as touching us, and all that be now, or were then of right judgment
(insomuch as our Savior, has even thus upon his cross, magnified his
sufferings so far that they were auailable to reconcile so grievous a sinner
to God and that it pleased him to make the same a public testimony of the same
reconciliation, to all other that belong to him, though very grievous and
notorious offenders) it does both cau^^^: most justly to esteem so much the
more honorably of our most blessed Savior, and also it increases our
consolation and comfort, in believing that he will not fail to justify any,
that shall repent them, whom God has preserved ^^om falling into the like
grievous degree of sinning: that is, from following a most wicked and desperate
course of life as he had done.

It is not to be denied indeed, but all are naturally grievous sinners in the
sight of God, and that every one ought to esteem himself, a chief sinner
above all other generally considered: because if a man be not blind in
iudgeing of himself; it cannot be, but he must know more (at the least
inwardly) against himself, then he can know against any other. Nevertheless,
in outward transgression, and open outrage of sin, there is very great
difference betwixt man and man. God therefore, who only does perfitly know
the difference; seeing he has to our comfort thus notably declared and
testified, that he is minded for Christ his sake to forgive the greater: he
does therewithal, give us plainly to understand, that he will forgive the
smaller, to all such as shall thankfully receive that grace which he offers,
and unfeignedly repent of their sins. Seeing he is ready to forgive such, as
have lived in sins to the last hour of their life: he will no doubt, be
merciful to such as have repented, and have been careful to serve him a long
time* before death has cut the^ off, from continuing any longer in their sin.

Moreover, in that our Savior says to the repenting thief. This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise: we see to our great comfort, that the condition
and estate of our souls is blessed, even immediately after this our natural
life is ended: in such sort that we need not fear any purgatory fire to burn
them, after that they be once purged from sin, by the most precious and
satisfactorie blood of our Lord Ie^u^ Christ. According to that in the Revel:
Blessed are they that dye in the Lord, etc. chap: 14. ve^se 13.

Thus the most sweet and comfortable mercy of God, and of our Savior Christ
toward this thief repenting on the cross, and believing in Christ: may
likewise be a president for comfort in Gods mercy, to al other, whosoever
shall in like manner repent them of their sins, and believe in his name.

NExt to this, what may be our comfort, from that great darkness, which God
cast upon the wicked persecutors of our Savior; though no doubt they were
discomfortable to him, as being in his horror a representat^on of the darkness
of Hell: out of the which also, as we know, he cried mightily unto God, as one
for the time, and as touching present comfort utterly cast off, or left and
forsaken of him?



Yea do^btles. For look by how much the discomfort was the greater; and his
do^our and torment of soul, and outward estate, more grieuou^ and bitter: by
so much the more, may the assurance of all our comfort, be the greater, that he
has pai^e the full price and ransom for all our sins; and that no on^ of
them shall ever be laid to our charge.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. And we stand greatly in need of this comfort. For seeing our
sins are both infinite in number, and also most heinous in offense: how
should we have any sound peace of conscience toward God, in sure trust and
persuasion of the forgiveness of them; unless we did know, and upon good
warrant believe, that our Savior had endured very many, and the same also most
grievous sufferings, for the satisfying of the divine justice? Verily, if the
sufferings of our SAVIOVR, had been but small sufferings; we should easily
have doubted, whether they had been sufficient for our discharge or no. But
now, seeing we know: yea, do as it were see plainly with our eyes, while we
behold our Savior most doolefully crying out upon the cross, that his
sufferings were infinite in measure, above that we can conceive; and likewise,
in valewe and merit, most worthy before God: there is no place left for
doubting, unless we shall willingly shut our eyes, or suffer the Devil to
blind them so as we should not be able to discern a most comfortable and
clear truth. For, from hence, our faith and trust, may justly be confirmed,
and established, in every one of our hearts: that it cannot be, that the Son
of God, enduring so great wrath for us: as to be for the time, in the most
horrible estate of a man rejected of God: but it must of necessity, and in all
condignitie, obtain a most perfect* and admirable reconciliation for us. Yea
so, as we have this abundant consolation sealed up unto us; that even
therefore would not ou^ God spare his own Son for a while, that he might for
his sake spare us for ever: and that even therefore also, would he forsake him
for a short season, that he might, time without end receive us, and all his
elect, for his adopted children.

In respect of which singular comfort; The comforts belonging to his agony
upon the cross.
to the end that our minds may be stayed a little the longer, in the
meditation of it: I cannot leave unmentioned, a worthy speech of Beza, wherein
he does very notably express the same, Ecquis vero (inquit ille) non
obstupescat, admiratus Dei nostri sapientiam, bonitatem, and immensam
misericordiam, in tantis istis, tamque sublimibus and incomprehensibilibus
mysterijs, quibus in libertatem asserimur ab eo qui pro nobis ligatus and
vinctus est: cuius condemnatione absoluimur: morte vitam adipiscimur:
supultura, incorruptione induimur: and cuius tandem cruce, ueluti per scalas
ingloriam coelestem euehimur? si modo tamen, ex tanto, iudicij Dei in nostrum
Sponsorem effusi, furore, discamus quantum sit Deum offendere, and peccatum
detestemur renuntiantes nobis ipsis, and tanquam filij lucis ambulemus in
mensura Spiritus, etc. Homil: 32. in Hist: Passionis. That is, who can but be
astonished in admiration at the wisdom, goodness, and unmeasurable mercy of
our God, in these so great, so high, and so incomprehensible mysteries, in that
we are set at liberty by him that was tied and bound for us: in that we are
acquitted in his condemnation: in that we obtain life by his death: in that by
his burial, we are clothed with incorruption: finally, in that by his cross,
as it were by the help of ladders, we are carried up into the heavenly glory?
Provided, that from so great and furious a wrath of the judgment of God poured
forth upon him that was our Surety, we do learn, how grievous a thing it is
to offend God; and that renouncing our selves we have sin in detestation,
and walk as children of the light in some measure of the Spirit, etc. And the
same learned man in his larger Annotations upon the 7. verse of the 5. chap: to
the Heb: Quo humiliorem (inquit) and abiectiorem cernimus, nostra causa factum,
aeternum Dei Filium (excepto tamen peccato) eo minus vel de Patris
beneuolentia, vel de nostra per Filium expiatione facta, dubitare possumus. By
how much (says he) we do behold the eternal Son of God, more humbled and
abased for our sake (though ever without sin) so much the less doubt need
we make, either of the good will of the Father toward us, or of the full
satisfaction of the Son made to the Father for us. And again, a while after,
Quo verius ista cognoscimus, eo certiores desalute nostra sumus. By how much we
know these things more thoroughly, by so much the more sure are we of our
salvation.

Piscator.
Likewise, another learned interpreter, in his observation upon these words of
our Savior, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? he says thus, Ex hac
querela Christi percipimus eum ad tempus desertum fuisse a Deo, ita nimirum, vt
nihil sentiret solatij, sed tantum iram Dei, and cruciatus damnatorum propter
nostra peccata. Hinc habemus solidissimam consolationem, fore vt nos nunquam
sentiamus iram Dei, quia Christus illam pro nobis sensit. Hinc ait Paulus Heb:
2.9. eum gustasse mortem pro omnibus, nempe pro omnibus filijs Dei quos debuit
ad gloriam adducere, vt ibidem Apostolus declarat. By this complaint of Christ
(says he) we perceive that he was for a time forsaken of God, in such sort,
that he had the feeling of no comfort, but only of the wrath of God, and of
the torments of the damned due to our sins. Whence we have this comfort, most
thoroughly confirmed unto us, that we shall never feel the wrath of God, seeing
Christ has felt it for us. And hereupon says Paul, Heb: 2.9. that he has
tasted death for all men: to wit, for all the children of God, whom he was to
bring to glory, as the Apostle in the same place declares.



This likewise, may well be a further comfort, from a further consideration of
the greatness of his sufferings, from this particular added to the rest; in that
we may so much the more evidently perceive hereby, that our salvation was most
earnestly thirsted after, by our Savior: and accordingly, most perfitly
procured, and achieved by him, for so many as shall earnestly hunger and
thirst after the same.

Explication. It is true. The thirst of our Savior after our salvation, must
needs be exceeding great, in that it caused him to neglect, or rather to endure
in silence, so sharp a bodily thirst.

Next unto this: that is, immediately after our Savior had drunk, not that he
might quench his thirst (which the drink that was given him could not do) but
that the Scripture might in this point, as well as in all other, be fulfilled:
these words of our Savior do follow, It is finished.



It is most singular, to the end last mentioned: that is, to assure us of the
perfection of the sufferings of our Savior for us; insomuch as he himself,
(as we do hear) does expressly testify, that even now at this very point of
time that he uttered these words, all was perfitly fulfilled; whatsoever (by
the appointment of God) was to be suffered of him, before that he should dye
the death it self: which was the very last point of his sacrificing and
offering up of himself, once for all, to the full purchasing of our eternal
redemption and reconciliation with God.

Explication
This indeed must needs be most singularly comfortable to every true
believer: insomuch, (as it has been declared in the interpretation of the
meaning of this Article) that the perfection of the sacrifice of our Lord Jesus
Christ, is hereby confirmed, above all exception. For seeing our Savior
himself has said. It is finished: nothing doubtless, was then unfulfilled,
which was appointed of God, and foretold by the holy Prophets, that it should
come to pass, from the time of his incarnation and birth, to the very last
point and instant of his death. And even herein, the comfort is thus exceeding
great, seeing our Savior, of set purpose, would not put an end to his
sufferings, by departing this life: until all was finished, whatsoever God had
purposed, that he should endure, to the full satisfaction and appeasment of his
divine justice. So that most justly may we, yea and of duty ought we (as we
are hereafter to observe in the duties) to put away all care of any other
means, or merit, then of our most blessed, and alsufficient Savior alone; and
all fear of any other punishment for our sins in purgatory, after death, or
any other way here in this life, beside his satisfactorie punishment alone. In
which respect also, most comfortably does Master Beza conclude this point
after this sort. Agite igitur (inquit) gratias ingentes agamus Domino, qui
nobis oculos aperuit: and illis omnibus opponamus haec pretiosissima Domini
nostri verba. etc. quibus aduersus quaslibet tentationes, conscientiae nostrae
confirmentur, vera, and vina fide amplexantes integram illam, vnicam, and
numeris omnibus absolutissimam oblationem Jesus Christi semel a seipso factam,
qua nostrae conscientiae in perpetuum tranquillentur. En, quae consolatio ex
verbis illis, breuibus quidem, si sonum eoru^ attendas, sed tam amplis si
sensum inspicias, vt quae in illis continentur opes, exhanriri non possint.
Homil: in Hist: Passionis 33. Sect. 12. Go to therefore (says this godly
learned Preacher) let us yield exceeding great thanks unto the Lord, who has
opened our eyes: and let us oppose to al such doubts, or fears, these most
precious words of our Lord, etc. whereby our consciences may be confirmed
against all temptations whatsoever, while we embrace by a true and lively
faith, that entier, only, and every way most perfect oblation of Jesus Christ
made once by himself, by the which our consciences may be calmed for ever.
Behold what comfort is in those words, few indeed if thou look to the sound
of them; but so ample and large, if thou do regard the meaning of them, that
the riches contained in them, can never be drawn out.

Let us now, come to the last words, which our Savior uttered upon the
cross, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit: the which also (as the holy
Evangelists do testify) he uttered with a loud voice, as one even at the
point of death, having his full vigor and strength.



First, as touching the manifesting of his power hereby, even in the supporting
of his frail humane nature, against the extremity of all former and present
sufferings; it may well be very comfortable, in that it is evident by the same,
that our Savior, The Comforts belonging to his death
albeit he died a true natural death, and the same naturally caused by the
vehemency of his sufferings, and by the effusion of his blood, ^ripping out at
the piercings of his hands and feet: yet he died not so much either by the
forcing violence and power of the Jews, or of the Devil, or of death it self,
as of his own accord, in laying down his life, in obedience to the good will
and pleasure of God.

Moreover, it may justly be a good and comfortable assurance unto us, that he
has, and shall for ever, on our behalf, and benefit, prevail against all,
both his, and our adversaries; insomuch as in his very impotencie, and g^eatest
weakness, (as we see) he has showed himself stronger then them all, in
their mightiest rage and fury.

Explication.
Hereunto indeed, does the strength of the voice of our Savior, in uttering
these sweet words of this last farewell, (as we may say) upon the cross,
lead us. For herein was fulfilled in him, that which is said of God, 1. Cor:
1.25. The weakness of God, is stronger then men.

But you have not said any thing of the words themselves.



First they do confirm the same things unto us, which the loudenes and
strength of the voice did.

Explication
It is true. For insomuch as our Savior commends his soul into the hands of
his Father, it is evident that he yields himself to death, rather
apprehending and laying hold, or arresting of it: then as one violently
apprehended, and taken away, or led captive by it.



Secondly, by how much, the faith and assurance of our Savior, was more firm
and sure, that he having borne the sorrows and torments of the second death
and now mindi^g presently to dye the natural death: should thereupon on our
behalf, not only escape eternal death, but also peaceably enter upon the
eternal possession of everlasting life and glory, his soul immediately, and
both soul and body within three days after: by so much may we be more
assured, that we (believing in our SAVIOVR) shall likewise through him, not
only escape eternal death, but also have our natural death turned to a
benefit: in that it shall give us an entrance into the glorious kingdom of
heaven; our souls immediately after their separation from the body, and our
bodies at the day of the general resurrection, notwithstanding both the first,
and also the second death, were justly due to our sins.

Explication and proof.
It is very true: according to that which our Savior has given to understand,
by his gracious promise to the repenting thief, in respect of his soul as we
saw before. And as it may appear by the prayer of our Savior in the 17.
chapter of John.

And touching the resurrection of our bodies at the last day, we shall
afterward have a further occasion, to see how the resurrection of our Savior,
is a pawn and pledge of it.

In the mean while, the present words of our Savior, contain a sweet
comfort, in that we have good warrant, that our souls are a spiritual and
immortal substance, not vanishing away, but retaining their existence and
being, still and for ever, though for a time they are separated from the body.
And in that ^e have like warrant, that the place of their being, shall be in
the heavenly paradise of the Lord our God. The which comfort, was that which
gave good Simeon so great peace as he had at his death: even because he had
seen him, by whom he knew hi^ soul should still live blessedly after his
bodily death, Luke 2. And it was the comfort, which caused the Apostle Paul, so
earnestly to desire, and long after death (when once he should have finished
his course) because then, he knew likewise that his soul should be with
Christ. But of this also more afterward.

And thus we cannot but see, that the comfort of the manner of the dying of our
Savior, is very great.

Question. NOw, what is the comfort of his death it self?

Answer. This arises from the comfortable fruits, and benefits thereof.

Explication and proof.
It must ineedes be so. And they may be all of them considered of us, from the
holy Scriptures; under the name of our Saviors sufferings of death, or of his
shedding of his precious blood, or of the most holy sacrifice, which he has
offered up to God for us. For all these, do note unto us, one and the same
thing: and therefore also, all the benefits, proceeding from them, they are
likewise one and the very same.

And herein also, it is worthy to be observed, that howsoever no part (no not
of the least of the holy sufferings of our Savior) is to be excluded, from the
making up of the full measure of our comfort, much less are the most dolorous
and extreme sufferings of his soul to be excepted: Yet because the death of
our Savior, was the shutting up, and ratifying of all the rest: therefore not
without cause, all the fruits and benefits of his sufferings, are most
usually derived, from the mention of his death, or bloodshed, or sacrifice
externally offered up, and sacrificed upon the cross.

Let us therefore, according to the direction of the holy Scriptures, gather
them together, so well as we can, here in this place.

And whereas (like as was touched before, from the large speech of our Sato his
Disciples) we may well reduce them to these two kinds, either evils removed,
or benefits procured, and conferred, or bestowed upon us: let us consider of
them, under these heads again, though from some other testimonies of holy
Scripture.



First, by his death and passion, he has delivered us from the guiltiness
and offense of all sin, both original in corruption of nature, which is the
mother evil of all the rest, and also actual through transgression of life:
as well in the omitting, or failing in good duties, as in the omitting of
evil, both in smaller, and also in greater measure of exceeding therein.

And consequently, he has delivered us from the wrath of God, and from all the
just punishments, due to our sins, from the same.



The increase of natural rebellion and sin, by the exasperating power, of
the harsh rebukes of the law.

Likewise, the handwriting, or enditement, and curse of the law.

Moreover, the tyranny of death, both first and second: and also the tyranny
of the Devil, and Hell, and of all wicked instruments. From all which he has
so delivered us, as they shall never be able to prevail against us, to
frustrate our eternal salvation.

Explication and proof.
That we are delivered from all these evils, by the death, and bloodshed, or
sacrifice of our LORD JESUS CHRIST; it is evident by many testimonies of the
holy Scriptures.

And first, that we are delivered from the guiltines of all our sins, the
Apostle Paul testifies, Gallat: 1.4. Our Lord Jesus Christ (says he) gave
himself for our sins. So Rom: 4, 25. He was delivered to death for our
sins. Likewise. 1 Corin: 15.3. Christ dyed for our sins according to the
Scriptures* And 2. Epistle 5.21. God made him which knew no sin (that is him
who never sinned, neither was naturally tainted with any infection of sin) to
be sin for us (that is to be accounted a sinner, and sinful, and to bear
the punishment of sin, our sins being imputed to him) that we might,
through faith in him, be justified in the sight of GOD, by the imputation of
his righteousness unto us. And Ephe: 1.7. We have redemption (says the Apostle)
through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, according to the rich grace
of God. And again, Colos: 1.14. And Heb: chap: 9. verses,
22.23.24.25.26.27.28. This is that which John the Baptist Preached of our
Savior, that he is the Lamb of God which tak^th away the sin of the world:
as Saint John the Evangelist has recorded it, Gospel chap: 1.29. And in his
1. Epistle chap: 1.7 The blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God cleanses us
from all sin. And ch: 3.5. Ye know that he appeared to take away our
sins: and in him is no sin. And Revel: 1.5. Jesus Christ loved us, and
washed us from our sins, in his blood.

Sin being thus forgiven unto us, through the death, and sufferings of our
Lord Jesus Christ: the wrath of God must needs cease, according to that 2.
Cor: 5.18.19.20. And 1. These. 1.10. The Son of God delivers us from the
wrath to come.

The wrath of God ceasing; it cannot be, but the punishments must needs cease,
at the least so far forth, that they shall not be hurtful unto us: but
rather, shall be furtherances of our salvation.

And among the punishments; first, as touching the abating of the strength of
sin, and of the heat of lust in our wicked nature, by virtue of the
sufferings of our Savior: Read, Rom: 7.1.2.3.4.5.6. Where the Apostle Paul,
speaking figuratively of our second marriage to Christ; he shows that we are
thereby become dead to the Law, which was as our first husband, engendring the
fruit of sin to death: and do now by our second husband Christ, bring
forth fruit unto GOD. And chap: 8.10. If Christ be in you, the body is dead
because of sin. And Galat: 2.19. I through the Law am dead to the Law, and
that I might live unto GOD, I am crucified with Christ. Thus the applying of
the death, and sufferings of our Savior, by a true and lively faith, to the
soul of a penitent sinner; it is of like nature, to a strong corasiue, laid
to a sore which eats out the rotten and dead flesh, that lies festering in
it: as was observed in the Doctrine of Repentance. The greatness of which
benefit, may be the more clearly discerned of us; if we do consider on the
contrary, that it is the greatest and most grievous plague, and punishment of
all other, for a man to be given over to a reprobate mind, to follow sin
with greedines: and so to have one sin punished as it were with another, to
the increase of most heavy vengeance, from the revenging hand of God, in the
end. Rom: 1.24, etc. and chap: 2. verse 5. And therefore does our Savior
teach us to pray so earnestly, that God would not lead us into temptation.

Secondly, that the hand writing, or indictment and curse of the Law of God
which was against us: is now taken away, by the death, and sufferings of our
SAVIOVR: yea, and that the power of death, and of the Devil, and of all our
adversaries, both of flesh and spirit, are not only disaduantaged, but even
quite overthrown and vanquished: we read it affi^med, partly, Gal: 3.13. in
that the holy Apostle very comfortably assures us, that CHRIST has redeemed
us from the curse of the Law, when he was made a curse for us. For (says he)
it is written. Cursed is every one that hangs on tree. And this did our
Savior for us. Moreover, Colos. chap: 1.13. And chap: 2.14. our Savior Christ
has upon the cross, spoiled the devils, of their power, and delivered us from
all power of darkne^, etc. Likewise Heb: ch: 2. v, 9. etc. to the end of the
chapter, we read the same thing testified. And also John 12.31. and 1.
Epistle 3, 8.

Likewise in that our Savior Christ has died the death, which is the wages of
sin: he has by enduring the penalty of sin, delivered us from death,
which came upon us thereby.

He has delivered us also, from all the tyranny and malice, of all the wicked
instruments of the Devil, which he enrageth against the children of God, here
in this present evil world: yea, even from all inordinate desire, after the
vain glory, and applause of this vain world, and the children thereof:
according to to that, Gal: 1, 4.

Our Lord Jesus Christ (says the Apostle) gave himself for our sins (as was
alleged before) and then he adds furthermore, that he might deliver us
from this present evil world, according to the will of God our Father, To whom
be glory for ever and ever. Amen. And chap. 6.14. God forbid (says he) that I
should rejoice but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

To conclude; our Savior Christ has by his death, ransomed us from all our
enemies: as Zachary, by the spirit of prophecy, has testified in general,
Luke. 1.68.69.70.71.72.73. Blessed be the God of Israel (says he) because he
has visited and redeemed his people, etc. As he spoke by the mouth of his
holy Prophets, which were since the world began, saying, That he would send us
deliverance from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us. And thus
like as that valiant Judge Sampson, did at his death, kill more of the bodily
enemies of the people and Church of God, then he had done in all his life
before, Judge. chap, 16.30: so, yea infinitely much more triumphantly, has our
Savior Christ that victorious Lion of the tribe of Judah, by his death,
vanquished all our enemies, both spiritual and bodily; and even death, and
destruction it self. Yea, and (which is every way most admirable) he has made
his conquest, after a special manner, differing altogether from all worldly
fights and victories. For even as by being himself bound for us, he brake all
our bonds; by bearing our rep^oach, has removed it from us: by taking our
curse, has made us blessed: by sustaining the wrath of God, has brought us
into his favor: so has he by dying, made us alive, as it follows in the
next place to be considered.



They are these which fol^owe.

First our reconciliation with God, and therewithal the full confirmation, and
sealing up of his covenant, touching the forgiveness of our sins, and all other
the promises of God.

Secondly we being through faith baptized into the death of our Savior Christ,
have by the virtue thereof, our sinful and corrupt nature cleansed and
sanctified: so that our very persons, are by the death of our Savior, made
acceptable to God.

We have also, that holy and heavenly peace made in our consciences, which
passes all understanding.

We have furthermore, power to walk in some measure of righteousness and
holiness of life, in the sight of God: the which he does for Christ's sake,
accept from us, though it be full of much failing and weakness.

The blessings of this life, are made blessed and comfortable unto us. Yea, all
afflictions are sanctified, and made profitable unto us.

We have dominion, and Lordship over the creatures, restored unto us, by the
death of our Savior. And thereby also, the natural death, is made a
spiritual advantage unto us.

The holy Angels, are by the same, made most faithful, and loving friends unto
us, both in life and also at death.

Thereby also, we are reconciled, and set at peace among our selves, and with
all the people of God.

Finally, we have from the blessed sufferings, and humiliation or abasement of
our Savior Christ, the ground of all our hope, and longing after our
exaltation, to the happiness and glory of the life to come; in the expectation
whereof, we may boldly rejoice, with joy unspeakable and glorious.

Explication and proof.
Touching the first branch of this answer: that we have our reconciliation with
God, by the abasement and sufferings of our Savior Christ to the death: We
read Colos 1.19. etc. It pleased the Father (says the Apostle) that in him
should all fulness dwell And by him to reco^cile all things unto himself, and to
set at peace through the blood of his cross, both things in earth, and things
in heaven. And you who were in times past strangers and enemies, because your
minds were set in evil works, has he now also reconciled, In the body of his
flesh through death, to make ye holy and unblameable, and without fault in his
sight. We read the same again. Romans 3.24.25.26. We are justified freely by
his grace (says the same Apostle) through the redemption, that is in Christ
Jesus, whom God has set forth, to be a reconciliation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness, by the forgiveness of the sins that are
passed through the patience of God, etc. And the Apostle John testifies the
same. 1. Ep. chap. 1.2. And again. chap. 4.10. Herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son, to be a reconciliation for
our sins.

This reconciliation, is a greater benefit, then the staying of Gods anger and
wrath, as may be made plain by a similitude taken from the dealing of King
David, with his son Absalom. For though he let his anger fall, yet he would
not for two years space after that, admit him to come into his presence. 2.
Sam. cha. 14. It may be further illustrated from the book of Ester. chap. 2.1.
and chap. 4.11. with chap. 5.1.2. Yea it may appear by Gods own dealing with
K. Ahab, from whom though he stayed his wrath for a time, yet he was not
reconciled toward him.

And it is well worthy the noting, yea it is most admirable, concerning this
reconciliation, which we have through our Lord Jesus Christ; that God does not
defer it ^ill we seek after it (as men offended, specially men of greater
place then the parties offending use to do) but of his singular grace and
mercy, he himself, though he be the most high, makes the first offer of it:
yea, by his Ministers, he entreats us, to accept of it, and to be reconciled
unto him. 2. Cor. 5.18.19.20.21.

And furthermore, that the forgiveness of sins, and all other promises, are
ratified by the sufferings and death of our Savior: We read Heb. chapter 9.
verses. 15.16.17.18. in these words, For this cause is he the Mediator of the
new Testament, that through death which was for the redemption of the
transgressions that were in the former Testament, they which were called, might
receive the promise of the eternal inheritance. And chapter 13.20.21. The blood of
our Savior Christ, is called the blood of the everlasting covenant. We read
likewise Act. 20. verse. 28. answerable to the prophecy of Zech. 9.11. Thou
shall be saved through the blood of thy covenant: I have loosed thy prisoners
out of the pit wherein is no water. For not only the Jews in their bodily
captivity, but we also in respect of our spiritual thraldom, may well be
counted such prisoners: answerable to the pitiful estate, wherein Joseph was,
through the malice of his brethren for a time. Genesis 37.23.24. And yet more
generally, touching the ratifying of all the promises of God, by the same death
and sufferings of our Savior, Romans 8.32. If God be on our side (says S. Paul)
who can be against us? who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all
to death* how shall he not with him, give, us all things also? Thus much
concerning the first branch.

S^condly, that our sinful nature, is cleansed and sanctified by the death of
our Savior: it is figured, and represented unto us in holy Baptism, according
to the testimony of the Apostle Paul. Romans 6.3.4. seeing as there he
affirms, We are baptized into his death, and being baptized into his death,
we are also buried with him, as touching the life and strength of sin.
Knowing this (as he says in the 6. verse) that our old man is crucified with
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve sin. For he that is dead, is freed from sin. Likewise Colos. 2.11.12.
And Heb. 10.19 By the blood of Jesus, we may be bold to enter into the holy
place, etc. And that hereby our very persons are accepted with God. Re^d Ephesians.
1.6. and chap. 2.13. etc. 1. Cor. 6.11. Heb. 11.4.

Thirdly, that by the same death and sufferings of our Savior, we have inward
peace of conscience, as a fruit or effect of our reconciliation with God: we
read Romans 5.1. etc. Then being justified by faith (says the Apostle) we have
peace toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. The reason whereof is
rendered in the 6. verse, etc. because our Savior has died for us, and by his
blood reconciled, and justified us. This peace is called, The peace of God
which passes all understanding, Philip. 4.7. For as it follows, it
preserves our hearts and minds, quieted and pacified in Christ Jesus, against
all disturbances, above that we our selves would think how it could be; even as
if our Savior Christ kept continual watch and ward, and maintained a garrison
of soldiers, to defend us against all our adversaries. For thus much does the
Apostle give to understand, by the military word (phroureses) which he uses
in this place. This peace, and the comfort of it, is above understanding,
answerable to the cause of it: that is to say, the love of Christ, the which is
said likewise, to pass knowledge. Ephesians. 3.19.

Fourthly, that with this unspeakable consolation, we have power given us to
walk in some measure of holiness and righteousness o^ life: we may learn from
the grounds of the Apostles exhortation. Romans 6.12. etc. For it is grounded in
the virtue and efficacy of the death of our Savior, whereinto we are
baptized, as we saw before. And chapter 8.3. God (says the same Apostle) sending
his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and that even for sin (that
is, because of sin) he has condemned sin in the flesh (that is by Christ's
sufferings in the flesh, he has utterly disabled and disauthorised sin,
from all power of condemning the faithful. And that has God done, as it
follows in the next verse, to the end the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us: to wit, by the imputation of the perfect obedience of Christ
unto us; that we also (as a fruit thereof) might through his spirit of
sanctification, walk after the spirit, and not after the flesh. To ^he which
purpose also, he says further, ver. 10. If Christ be in you, the body is dead
because of sin (that is, as touching sin, so that it bears the sway or
dominion no longer) but the Spirit is life for righteousness sake. Or as
touching righteousness, mighty to quicken us to the actions thereof. And thus
also, he deriueth the ground of sanctification, from the death of Christ,
speaking in his own person. Gal. 2.19.20. I through the law (says Paul) am
dead to the law, and that I might live unto God; I am crucified with Christ.
Thus I live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me: and in that I live now in
the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God who has loved me, and given
himself for me. Read also Heb. 9 13.14. For if the blood of Bulls and Goats,
and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the^ that are unclean, sanctifies as
touching the purifying of the flesh, How much more shall the blood of Christ,
who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge
your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?

Fifthly, that by the sufferings and death of our Savior, the blessings of this
life, are blessed, and made comfortable unto us: we may take one proof, from
that which we read Psa. 22. ver. 26. where this is reckoned for a fruit and
benefit thereof: that the poor shall eat and be satisfied. And ver. 29. All
they that be fat in the earth shall eat and worship. So that both poor and
rich, feel the benefit of the sufferings of our Savior. Read also Act. 2.46.
Christians did eat their meat together, with gladness and singlenes of heart,
Praising God, and they had savor with all the people. And that even
afflictions also, are made beneficial and comfortable unto us, by the
sufferings of our Savior: see Heb. 12.2, 3. etc. Where they are held forth,
for a notable remedy, against all fainting and wearines, in the midst of all
trouble and reproach: yea, and as a means of making us partakers of the
holiness of God, our heavenly Father: and as leaving behind the^, a quiet fruit
of righteousness. Whereupon, the Apostle exhorts afflicted Christians, to lift
up their hands which hang down, and their weak knees, etc. verses 10.11.12.
And Romans 8.29. we are made like to the image of our Savior Christ by them. It
is also very comfortable, that we in suffering any affliction, for the love we
bear to our Sa: Christ: are for his sake (in that he has suffered for us)
accounted of God to have communion with him in his sufferings, and he with us.
Act. 9.4.5. and Colos. 1.24. Read also Philip. 3 8.9, 10. And Romans 8.17. If we
suffer with him, we shall be glorified with him. It is the ordinary, and as it
were the Kings high way, to the kingdom of heaven, to pass through many
afflictions. Act. 14.22. And 2. Tim. 2.11.12. And chap. 3.12. This causes the
servants of God to rejoice, and to be of good cheer, in the midst of their
afflictions: according to the exhortation of our Savior, Luke. 6.22.23. And of
the Apostle James. chap. 1. ver. 2. and of Peter. 1, Ep. 4.12.13.14.

All this doubtless is from the merit of the sufferings of our Savior for us;
insomuch as of punishments, they are by the virtue and grace thereof, converted
to be medicines, to cure those evils that are in us: such as are self-love,
and love of the world, etc. yea they are turned to be blessed preparations and
furtherances unto us, toward the kingdom of God: according to the holy
Proverb, chap. 6, 23. Corrections for instruction are the way of life. And Ps.
119. verse 67. Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now I keep thy word.
And verse 71. It is good for me, that I have been afflicted, that I might
learn thy word.

Sixthly, that we have the right of dominion and Lordship over the creatures
restored unto us, by the death of our Savior: read Ps. 8. conferred with Heb.
2.6.7.8.9. For though Adam at the first, had this dignity, by the right of
creation, through the bounteous mercy of God: yet he lost it by his
disobedience and presumption against God. And he lost it not only from
himself, but also from us. Our recovery of that interest, is only by the
redemption of our Lord Jesus Christ, who alone is the heir of all things: so
that we are no better the^ intruders and usurpers of all whatsoever we hold
not, as it were by lease and permission, or by free deed of gift from him.

Seauenthly, that the natural death, is by his death, made a spiritual
advantage unto us: we may be assured, by that which we read. Philip. 1.20.21,
22.23. This advantage, does first of all, betide our souls; in that they cease
to sin, and in that they are first received to glory: and then our bodies,
who resting from the toil of their labors, are freed for ever, from their
infirmities and diseases, and shall at the last day rise again to the same
glory.

Thus in death, we have, through the death of our Lord Jesus Christ, a
plentiful remedy against death it self: like as the Scorpion, by the skill of
the Physician, yields a medicine against the venime of the own stinging: and
so is also, the cause of the own death, unto it self.

Eighthly, whereas the holy Angels must needs be enemies against us, because of
our sinful rebellion against God: they are now made our friends, through our
reconcilia^ion with God, by the death of Christ. Heb. 1.14. For doubtless, it
is with the holy Angels, as with the servants of a Prince in his Court: who
when any are in disgrace with the King, all stand aloof from them, etc. but if
the King receive the same party, or parties, to favor, and do pardon their
offense; then are they kindly entreated of his servants again. The friendship,
which the holy Angels do us, for Christ's sake, is in this life, to defend us;
and at our death, to carry our souls into heaven; as has been proved
heretofore.

Ninthly, that the whole Church of God, is reconciled, and set at peace in it
self, as well as with God; as a fruit of the sufferings of our Savior: we
may be put in mind again, from that which we read, Ephesians. 2.13.14 etc. And
that it ought to be so; it will further appear, when we come to the duties.

Finally, that the sufferings and death of our Savior, are the ground of all
our hope, and longing after all our happiness and glory in the life to come:
read Philip. 2.8, 9. and John, 12, 24.25. etc. For like as the exaltation of
our Savior himself, is reckened for an effect of his humiliation. Philip. 2.8
9: so in that 12. cha. of John, the same our Savior speaks of our lifting
up, and advancing, as a fruit of the same his humiliation. Read also Heb. 2,
9, 10. By Gods grace, he tasted death for all men. For as the Apostle says, It
becam him, for who^ are all things, and by who^ are all things; seeing that he
brought many children unto glory, that he should consecrate the Prince of their
salvation through afflictions. And chap. 9.15. For this cause is he the
mediator of the new Testament, that through death which was for the redemption
of the transgressions which were in the former Testament, they which were
called, might receive the promise of the eternal inheritance. And 2, Timothy,
1.9, 10. He has saved us, and brought life and immortality to light through
the Gospel. What Gospel? even that, which preaches that Christ did this, by
dying for our sins: according to that 1. Cor. 15.1, 2, 3. And that this hope
is so certainly warranted unto us thereby, that we may rejoice in the hope of
it, with joy unspeakable and glorious: read 1. Pet. 1.6. Read also Romans
8.33, 34. Thus (as the holy Apostle says, Heb. 12.24.) We are come to Jesus
the mediator of the new Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling, that
speaks better things then that of Abel. And Ephesians. 5.2. Christ has loved us,
and given himself for us* to be an offering, and a sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor to God. Yea more sweet and pleasant, then were all the
sacrifices of rest, which Noah offered, Genesis 8.21, 22, 23. or then were any, or
all those which the Priests of the law offered in their daily ministry, etc.

Neither is it to be neglected here; that as the sufferings of our Savior,
(being most grievous and bitter unto him, yea even unto the death) are every
way most beneficial and comfortable to all true believing Christians: so by
the same, the wicked adversaries of our Savior, and of his holy Gospel, are so
much the more, left without all excus^; yea, their wickedness is most woefully
sealed up against them: as may evidently be collected, by the most sharp and
zealous imprecations of those Psalms, wherein, by the holy Spirit of
prophecy, mention is made of such: namely, Ps. 55.15. end Ps. 69.22, 23, etc.
and Ps. 109. in a great part of the Psalm. And that most worthily; insomuch as
all that the wicked have done, or do at any time against our Savior: it is
without any cause, yea most contrary to all equity. For infinitely above any
other, may it be s^id of our Savior Christ, What evil has the righteous
done? yea rather, what good has he not done? He may therefore, infinitely
above the most just man that ever was, take the book that should be written of
his reproaches, and injuries, and bind them unto his head, as a crown of
glory. Job 31.35, 36.

Thus much concerning the comforts and benefits of the sufferings of our
Savior, oftentimes (as was said) noted in the holy Scriptures, by his death,
or by the shedding of his blood, or by his offering up of himself in sacrifice
to God for us: because this death, or bloodshed, or sacrifice of his, is the
conclusion of all his painful sufferings; and the sealing up as it were, and
confirming of all the rest: according to that of the Prophet Isaiah, 53 8 etc.
He was cut out of the land of the living, etc. He shall see of the travel of
his soul, and be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many: for he shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I give him
a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong,
because he has poured out his soul unto death: and he was counted with the
transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and prayed for trespassers.

The places of holy Scripture have been alleged already, which do ascribe
all the benefits of our Saviors sufferings, to his death, bloodshed, and
sacrifice. Nevertheless, it shall not be amiss, here in this place, to sort
them to their several heads, in a more short view thus.

They are ascribed to the death, Romans 5. verses 6, 7, 8, 19. and chapter 8.31, etc.
2. Tim. 1.10. Heb. 2.9. and chapter 10.15, 16, 17.

To the blood put for his death, Heb. 10, verse 18. Romans 3.24.25. Ephesians. 1.7.
Colos. 1. ver. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. and 1. Pet. 1.18, 19, etc. 1. John 1.7. and
cha. 2.2. and chapter 4 1^. Revel. 1.5. and chapter 5.9 Act. 20. verse 28.

To the sacrificing of himself, by his enduring of the same his death. Heb.
chapter 5.1, 2, etc. 7, 8, 9, 10. and chapter 9.23, 24, ^5, etc. and chapter 10.4, 5, 6,
etc. 18. And 1. Pet. 2, 24.

NOw let us go forward, to those particular comforts, which are yet behind:
following the order of the holy history, as hitherto we have done.

What may be the comfort of our faith, from the rending of the veil of the
Temple,

It contains matter of good comfort; in that hereby, God has sensibly
declared, that he has removed that partition wall, which had been in former
times reared up, and did make a separation, both betwixt his divine Majesty
and us, and also betwixt us and the Jews: and consequently, that he was now
minded thenceforth, to call us the Gentiles, into the fellowship of one and the
same covenant of his mercy and grace, together with all believing Jews. Which
thing also, he has accordingly, most graciously performed, to our unspeakable
comfort.

Explication and proof.
This is matter of very good comfort indeed, according to that mentioned of
late, once or twice before, Ephesians. 2. ver. 11, 12, 13, etc. to the end of the
chapter. Seeing also* now we need not discomfort our own souls any more, to
say, I am a stranger, I am a dry tree, or an Eunuch, etc. Isai. 56.3, 4, 5, 6,
7. And seeing no other may say to us, ye are an unclean people: or, thou art
a profane person; if so be we do truly believe in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, according to that Acts 10.28. God (says the Apostle Peter) has showed
me, that I should not call any man polluted, or unclean. And verses 34.35. Of
a truth, I perceive that God is no accepter of persons, but in every nation,
he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him. And yet
furthermore, for the increase of our comfort in this behalf, let us read Heb.
6.13, etc. When God made the promise to Abraham, because he had no greater to
swear by, he did swear by himself, saying; Surely I will abundantly bless
thee, etc. So God willing more abundantly, to show unto the heirs of promise,
the stablenes of his counsel, he bound himself by an oath, That by two
immutable things, etc. we should have strong consolation, which have our
refuge, to hold fast the hope that is set before us, etc. which enters into
that, which is within the veil, whether the Forerunner is before us entered,
etc. Thus the rending of the veil, is very comfortable.



All these were comfortable witnesses of the innocence, yea even of that
excellent dignity* and reputation, wherein our Savior was with God.

They were likewise all of them, (even in themselves) real, and very eloquent
witnesses of the divine power of our Savior himself, yet fastened to the
Cross: to the sharp reproof of his persecutors, though they used not one
vocal word of speech.

And namely, the opening of the graves, was a real testimony, that our
Savior Christ has by his death, vanquished death: and that death, has no
longer any power over our bodies; but that they shall in due time, be raised up
again to everlasting life by his divine power, as one singular fruit, of that
reconciliation which he has made for us with God, by the same his death.

Explication.
It is true. But of this point of the resurrection of our bodies, we shall have
occasion to consider more fully afterward. And as touching the rest, we cannot
but presently see; that these, with all the former, contain no small comfort
in them: in that as they foreshewed, so in the remembrance of them, they do,
to this day, confirm unto us, the mighty power of the saving health of our
Lord Jesus Christ, toward us, and his whole Church. In which respect it is,
that for a special instance thereof, the holy Evangelist does before hand (as
we have seen before) intermixe that history of the rising of the bodies of
many Saints, with the mention of the death of our Savior; though the
accomplishment thereof, was not till our Savior himself did rise again: to
the end, that this might be some sweetening as it were, to the doleful report
of the bitterness of the death.

Moreover, as Master Beza well observes, these works of God, and the rest of
this sort, manifested at the sufferings and death of our Savior: they are
such, as may be justly looked unto of us; and be used, as comfortable helps and
encouragements, through the whole course of our lives, aduersus quamuis
incredulitatem, against all unbelief, yea and against all fear of the grave,
and of death it self.

But let us go forward. What comfort may our faith reap from hence; that God
did by the strange manner of the death of our Savior, and by those his other
strange and fearful works, which did accompany the same; draw even from the
heathen captain and soldiers, who were specially appointed to see the
execution performed, (and therefore no doubt, did accordingly place themselves,
so as they might most commodiously hear and see all things: for as the
Evangelist Mark says, they stood over against Christ) What I say,

It may justly be very comfortable unto us; insomuch as they, hereby were so
convicted, that they could not but give glory to God: as the Evangelist Luke
speaks of this confession of theirs. Yea by so much may it be the more
comfortable unto us; because albeit they were heathen men, yet were they
convicted from that which they saw, and from the prayer of our Savior to God,
(whom he called his Father) to testify thus much.

Explication and proof.
It may be so indeed. For it may well be out of all question, that they (being
profane persons and very spiteful enemies) would never have acknowledged so
much, unless they had stood notably convicted in their consciences, by that
which they saw, and beheld with their own eyes. The friends of our Savior,
might peradventure have been thought, to have spoken partially, etc. but
these, cannot with any reason, be so thought off. And therefore in deed, (as
was said) the comfort hereof, may be so much the more comfortable unto us.

The like is to be said, and conceived of us, concerning that confusion, which
from the beholding of the same things, fell upon the multitude. Of whom it is
said, that they returned beating of their breasts, with indignation against
themselves, for that which they had done: and with an astonishment at the
fearful works of God.

And moreover, where as the Disciples of our Savior Christ, and such other as
did bear any dutiful affection toward him, (both men and women who were at
the same time present) were not thus confounded; though no doubt their hearts
were full of pensive and reverend fear: we may from hence, worthily consider;
how blessed and comfortable a thing it is, and ever shall be, unto the conscience
of all such, as give no consent, and do with-holde both heart and hand, from
joining with the wicked against Christ, either in regard of himself, or of any
true and faithful christian whosoever. For to all persecutours, belongs
shame and confusion: but joy and comfort, to such as be faithful and friendly
unto them. God therefore of his infinite mercy, give us grace, to be
faithfully and friendly affected always, to the least of the members of
Christ: that our portion, may be in this comfort, with peace of a good
conscience, even for our Lod Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

Furthermore, it may well be to the singular comfort and encouragement of all
good weomen; when they shall consider how God has honored their weak and
frail sex, by working more graciously in their hearts many times, then in the
hearts of men: and even for that at this time of the crucifying of our
Savior, more special commendation is recorded of them, concerning their
special care, both in ministering unto him things necessary before, and also
concerning their tender observance in this time of his extremity. So then
though in Eve, woman kind was greatly dishonored, in that she was first in
sin, and thereby brought into special thraledome, both to sin and Satan:
yet in Christ, they have this honor, to have their part with the first, yea
before many men, in the embracing and honoring of him, and in seeking that
deliverance and salvation, which is brought to light, and purchased by him.

ANd now, that we may proceed to the remnant of like sweet consolations: What
is the comfort of this, that albeit the malicious Jews, being superstitiously
cruel, (as has been declared) made suit to Pilate, that the legs of our
Savior might be broken: and that although Pilate also, (a man of no constancy
in his goodness) too easily granted them their suit: yet God, by his most
gracious and divine providence,, so ordered this matter, and ruled both the
hearts and hands of the soldiers in such sort; that notwithstanding they brake
the legs of both the thieves, yet they brake no bone of our Savior:

Beside that general comfort, which may justly arise, from the certainty of
Gods counsel and providence, which can by no counsel, or contrary endeavor of
man be frustrated; as the preventing of the present counsel and endeavor of the
Jews may well be a very notable and chief instance: We have also two more
special, or particular comforts, from the same.



First, it is alike notable instance, concerning the truth, and certainty of
the holy Scriptures, in all things, wherein they prefigure or foretell, what
the providence or fore appointment and purpose of God is, concerning any thing
to come.

Secondly, it is a comfortable assurance unto us, that our Savior Christ
prefigured in the Paschall Lamb, is our true Passover, even the Lamb of God,
sacrificed to take away the sins of the world by his death.

Explication.
It is very comfortable indeed, in either of these respects.

For first; insomuch as God had appointed the Paschall Lamb, to be a figure of
Christ, even in that no bone of it was to be broken: therefore did the Lord so
order the matter, by his watchful providence, that (as we see it fulfilled by
the testimony of the holy history) not a bone of our Savior was broken.

And secondly, from that our further assurance which we have hereby, that our
Savior is a Passover unto us, through his blood sprinkled on our souls, and
bodies, and apprehended by the hand of our faith, through the sanctification of
the Spirit of God, and of our S^uiour himself: we have from hence, an infinite
measure of comfort, concerning our spiritual and eternal deliverance from
sin, death, hell, and damnation. And on the contrary, we have like comfort
concerning our translating into the most glorious possession of the kingdom of
heaven; above all the comfort, which the Israelites could take in their bodily
deliverance out of the tyranny of Pharaoh; and above all the joy of their
temporal possessing of that goodly and fruitful land of Canaan, which God
gave unto them. For if we shall by faith truly feed upon our Savior Christ,
who is our only true Paschall Lamb; making his flesh our meat, and his blood
our drink, to slake the hunger and thirst of our souls, and to refresh us in
the sure hope of everlasting life: we shall be most certainly, so delivered,
that not only no deadly euil^, shall be able to touch us; but also, that we
shall be partakers of most perfect and eternal blessing and heavenly
happiness.

Neither is that to be neglected in this point, which a learned Interpreter
observes; That the bones of our Savior, which are as the timber and strength
of the body, were preserved untouched: to the end it might appear to our
comfort, that in his greatest weakness, he retained sufficient strength, to
perform all such things unto us, fot the which he vouchsafed to die for us.
Beza Hom. 35. in Hist. Pas.

And to this end also, it is very comfortable for us to consider; that as God
by his most gracious and divine providence, restrained the soldiers from
breaking any one bone of our Savior to the contrarying of the former type and
figure: so by the same providence, he gave liberty to one of the spear men,
to follow his cruel mind, in a practice unusual in that case; to thrust our
Savior with his spear or iaueline into the side: yea as the effect argues,
even to to the very heart of him; to the end another Scripture might be
fulfilled, as the Evangelist John testifies, They shall see him whom they have
thrust through. Yea and further also, to the end that the blood of our Savior
Christ: yea his blood together with water issuing out of his blessed side, (as
the same Evangelist testifies) might to our exceeding great comfort, confirm
unto us, that the death of our Savior, is unto us all in all, whatsoever was
prefigured by the legal purifications and washings with water, and by all the
bloody sacrifices, slain by the appointment of God, in the same his
ceremonial law: that is to say, that our Savior Christ is by his death and
obedience to God, both perfect justification, and also perfect sanctification
unto us; as well to beautify us with his righteousness in the sight of God, as
to cleanse us from the guiltines and filth of our own sins. In which
respect, the same Evangelist assures us to our comfort, in the 5. chapter of
his first epistle: that this blood and water, flowing out of the side of our
Savior, are two witnesses here upon earth, familiarly to testify unto us,
that God has appinted our Lord Jesus Christ, to be a perfect Savior unto his
Church. And for the amplification of this our comfort, he does in the same
place, first of all, reckon another witness beside these two; namely, the
Spirit, which is ready to warrant and perform effectually and in truth, all
whatsoever, that blood and water do represent unto us. And hereunto also: that
is, to the sealing up of this comfort, serve the two Sacraments of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord; in that either of them, do
both signify and assure us, that our Savior by his death, is both
justification and sanctification unto us.

Great therefore, is the comfort of these things unto us, they being truly
believed of us.

Nevertheless, here it is necessary that we do observe; that whereas the
Evangelist John, ascribes these most sweet and comfortable fruits and
benefits, to that blood and water which issued out of the side of our Savior;
after that he was now freshly dead: that his meaning is not, in any wise to
exclude any part of his blood, shed in the sense and feeling of Gods wrath for
our sin, either in his bloody sweat in the garden, or by the distillation and
dropping of his blood from his holy hands and feet, while yet he lived hanging
upon the Cross, (which was most properly, and principally, our ransom and
satisfaction to the justice of God) but the holy Evangelist, ( synecdochically
putting one part for the whole) insisteth thus earnestly upon this last portion
and remainder of blood; because in this last emptying of the body, now freshly
dead, and yet warm: even from the heart root, (as we may say) the whole
effusion was fully perfitted.

Yea, and further also; to the end we may enjoy the comfort of our Saviors
sufferings, and of the piercing both of his hands and also of his feet and
side: we must in no wise forget, so to look unto him that was so pierced and
wounded for us; as we may therewithal join mourning hearts in remembrance of
our sins, which caused the wrath of God, to break forth so sharply against
him: as well as joyful hearts, for the appealing of Gods wrath, and for the
removing of the guiltines and punishment of our sins thereby. For this
mourning heart, is that chief sacrifice of thanks, which we for our parts,
can offer up unto the Lord, Psalm. 51. to the which also the promise of this
special comfort does specially belong. Matthew. 5. And Ezekiel. chap. 9. Let us not
therefore in any wise, fail in this duty: neither yet be negligent in prayer
to God, that ^e may vouchsafe us this singular grace of godly mourning, which
has so singular comfort annexed unto it.

Finally, let us not here neglect, to gather up (as it were by the way) some
comfort, even from that cruelty, which it pleased God, to permit the soldiers
to execute upon the repenting thief: though he had through the virtue of our
Saviors mediation and death, received him into his divine favor. For hereby,
we may plainly perceive, that howsoever the external and temporal
afflictions, and grieuances of this life, The Comforts belonging to his burial.
with civil punishments may have their course in this world: yea even to the
destroying, or cutting of it off from hence, though we have truly repented us
of our sin, and turned to him: yet will he not cease to love us, nor fail to
save us with his everlasting salvation, as he did this poor hanged and
crucified thief, if we shall truly believe in his Son, as he did.



The principal and chief comfort thereof, lies in this, that the very true
natuturall and propitiatory death of our Savior, is hereby so much the more
certainly confirmed unto us: and the rather will it be so; if we shall duly
weigh the time of his continuance in the grave.

Explication.
It is true. For the continuance in the grave, was so long, that it must needs
put the truth of his death, out of all question. Now then, this we know
further, that by how much the death of our Savior is more assuredly warranted
unto us; by so much also, all the fruits and benefits of his death, are made
more sure and certain unto us. The burial therefore of our Savior, may well
be very comfortable unto us, in this respect. But is there no other comfort?

Yes. For as our Savior Christ died not as a private person, and for his own
cause or desert, but for us and our sins to our benefit, yea to the benefit
of the whole Church: so also are we to esteem of his burial.

Wherefore, justly may it be comfortable unto us all, in that, like as by his
death, the nature and quality of death, or rather death it self, which is a
privation of life; is so changed, that of a curse it is made a blessing,
(insomuch as the end of the natural life yields the soul a passage from the
body, to the fruition of a more excellent estate and condition of life, then
before it enjoyed, or could attain unto, while it abode in the body) so, by
the burial of our Savior Christ, the nature of the graves, of all such as die
in the faith of CHRIST, is altered. That is to say, of prison houses (such as
they are to the wicked, against the day of the great and fearful assizes and
judgment) they are, unto all believers, peaceable resting places for their
bodies, to take a certain quiet sleep in them, as in their beds; until
their resurrection at the last day, which shall be to their immortal
happiness and glory.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. As we may perceive by that which we read in diverse places
of the holy Scripture. For as touching the wicked, and the vncomfortablenes of
the death and state at them, (yea though they be buried as the faithful are)
read Psalm. 49.14. and Job, 18.12, 13, 14. and chap. 20.4, 5, 6, 7. And for the
comfortable estate of the godly, even in respect of their bodies, which do
rest, and as it were sleep peaceably in their graves: read Isai. 57.2. and
John chap. 11. verse 11. Matthew. 27.52. Act. 7.60. and chap. 13.36. and 1. These.
4.15. But this we must know, that the ground of this comfort to our souls,
from the comfortable estate of our bodies lying and resting in the grave, it
rests in this, that our Savior, by his burial, and continuance in the grave
for a while, has infinitely more sweetly perfumed our graves, then his own
was, with all that mirrhe and aloes wherewith Joseph and Nicodemus embalmed his
body. So then, though it be an uncomfortable thing to the nature of every man
to die, and thereby to have the body separated from the soul, and turned to
dust: yet in our Savior Christ, we have a sweet comfort against it, seeing he
has as it were broken the ye, or rather paued the way before us. It is true,
that there is a great difference betwixt the burial of our Savior, and our
burial: and betwixt his continuance in the grave, and our continuance. For he
continued but a short time, and his body saw no corruption: but ours lie a long
while, and do corrupt.

Nevertheless, seeing in the death and burial of our Savior, we have the
ground of our comfort, that as he rose out of the grave, and vanquished death,
so shall we by him: it need not, neither ought it to discourage us, but rather
put us in good comfort; seeing (as we know) a thousand years with the Lord,
are but as yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in the night, Ps. 90 4.
and 2. Pet. 3.8. And accordingly, he knows when and how to awaken every
one, and to raise up all in due time; even as if they who have been longest
dead, had been dead but a day or two since. Thus then we see, that the
burial of our Savior, ministers unto us this second comfortable
consideration, to our faith in Christ buried, and laid in the grave after the
manner of other men: though there be some special difference to be considered,
as has been herein observed.



Yes. For by the burial of our Savior, and by his continuing dead in the
grave, till the third day; his resurrection is so much the more evidently
confirmed unto us.

Explication
This also is very true: and it contains another singular comfort in it. And
the rather also, by reason of the malice of the chief Priests and Pharisees,
in their sealing of the stone which covered the sepulcher; and by their setting
of a watch to keep the same, lest (as they pretended to fear) the body of our
Savior, should by some fraudulent means, be stolen away.

Yea, and some comfort rests in this also, that God for the honoring of the
burial of our Savior, stirred up the heart of the honorable Counselor
Joseph of Arimathea, to undertake the care of the reverend performance of it.
And in that he moved Pilate, to yield to the suit of Joseph, in that behalf.
And yet further, in that he gave Nicodemus a heart, to join with Joseph, in
the solemnizing of the burial, etc. For thus it is manifest unto us, that our
Savior died not as a vile and contemptible person: but as one honorable in
the sight of God, and before good men; far above that honor, which King David
gave to Abner, who died by the wicked hand of Ioab in Israel: howsoever the
outward solemnity was not so pompous and princely. 2. Sam. 3.31, etc.



As our Savior Christ did not only suffer death for our sins, but also lay
in the grave, for the more certain confirmation of his death; and even thereby
also to endure for a while, the reproach and tyranny of death, to the end he
might afterward, make a more glorious conquest thereof, by his rising again:
(in that it is thereby evident, that he has vanquished our last enemy, even
within his own castle, or within his own trenches, and as it were the old
cruel lion in his own den) so he has thereby assured us, of this singular
fruit and benefit; that he will not for a time only, somewhat weaken and
suppress in our wicked nature, that body of sin and wicked corruption which
is in us; but even thoroughly and for ever at the last so to destroy it, (even
in the secret of our souls and spirits) that it shall neither be able to
hinder us from the first resurrection of our souls, from the death of sin to
the life of righteousness; nor yet from the second resurrection, which shall
be of our bodies, from mortality to immortality, at that day, when they
shall be united again to our souls.

Explication and proof.
This indeed is that comfort, which the Apostle Paul intimates, and assures
unto us, from the burial of our Savior Christ annexed to his death; for a
further manifestation and amplification of the same comfort: whereof also, (as
he teaches) our baptism is a representation and pledge; in that we are in the
administration of it, for a while put under the water: much rather as they have
been, who were baptized being of years of discretion and at man's age: as many
thousands were, at the beginning of the conversion both of Jews and Gentiles,
to the faith of the Gospel. For the which comfort, of the burial and
destruction of sin; thus assured from the burial of our Savior, and from
the use of our christian baptism: read Romans chap. 6. verses 1, 2, etc. even
to the 12. verse, Know ye not (says the Apostle) that all we which have been
baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into his death? We are buried
then with him by baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised up
from the dead, to the glory of the Fat^er, so we also should walk in newnes
of life, etc. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the
body of sin might be destroyed, that thenceforth we should not serve sin,
etc. Thus we see, that the burial of our Savior, has a joint use, with the
death of our Savior, for the comfort of our faith; yea for a certain
progress, or increase of our comfort, touching the weakening and wasting, yea
the utter destruction of sin at the last. And again, Colos. 2.11, 12. In
whom also (says the same Apostle) ye are circumcised with circumcision made
without hands, by putting off the sinful body of the flesh, through the
circumcision of Christ, In that ye are buried with him through baptism, in
whom ye are also raised up together, through the faith of the operation of God,
who raised him from the dead.

Thus much for the manifold comfort of our faith, concerning the burial: yea
the honorable burial of our Savior; together with his continuance in the
grave, until the time of his resurrection. For even therefore no doubt, would
God in his divine providence, in no wise have the body of our Savior, thrown
out or tumbled aside, as a thing despised and abominable, (as the Jews in
their malice, still raging against him, could have been content; yea rather
would earnestly have desired) but to be in a very seemly and honorable
manner, taken down from the Cross, embalmed and entombed: that thereby it
might the more clearly appear to our comfort, that the Lord our God, has
immediately, from and by his death, received a full reconciliation for our
sins, etc.



Yes no doubt in this respect, it is to us the most comfortable history of all
other, insomuch as it contains the only ground and foundation of all true
joy and gladness: according to that saying of the holy Apostle St. Paul, God
forbid that I should rejoice in any thing, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Explication.
It is so indeed. For as has been already declared, the cross and sufferings
of our Lord Jesus Christ, are both satisfactory for sin, to the remoouing
away of all evil due to it: and also reconciliatory, and meritorious, to
procure unto us the favor of God, and all good fruits and blessings with the
same.



No, nothing at all. For as it was said before of death it self; that by the
death of our Savior, the nature or office of it is clean altered and changed:
so also, are all sicknesses and afflictions, which are but the messengers and
forerunners of death.

Explication.
You say well. For to all such as do truly believe in Christ, and apprehend the
satisfaction, and merit of his death and passion: they are no more tokens or
punishments proceeding from Gods wrath, but rather fruits and effects of his
fatherly love, in that he minds by the^ more effectually to settle our faith
in our Lord and Savior; and therewithal, to further our repentance, and even
our very salvation it self.

Justly therefore, may we above all, yea against all exception, rejoice: yea
rejoice, and (as the Apostle says) again and again rejoice in the sufferings
and death of our Savior. The excellency whereof is so great, that unless he had
suffered for us: neither the holiness of his humane nature, The Comforts
concluded.
nor the righteousness of his life, nor the perfection of his doctrine, nor any,
or all of his admirable and miraculous works; no nor yet (which is most strange
to speak, Deitas Christi non seruat nos al^ter quam per satisfactionem
humanitatis: nec vicissine humanae naturae perpessiones aliun ^o nos
viuificandi vim accipiunt quan a Deitate cum quainseperabiliter est coniuncta
and vnita. Beza Hom. 1. in His. Pass.
though as true as the rest) the very Deity of the person, could have done us
no good. But as was said, (and I cannot but repeat it again) the way to this
singular comfort, and rejoicing in the sufferings of our Savior, is not but by
godly sorrow for our sins; with an unfeigned acknowledgement, that all the
miseries which fell upon our Savior for a time, were only due to us, and not
to him: and that not only for a short time, but even for ever and ever, if it
had not been for him.

As for such as regard not to attain to this comfort, by taking this course:
they do as it were hedge up the way from comfort, against their own souls,
as it were with a most sharp and high hedge of thorns.

But leaving all such hard hearted and impenitent sinners: I desire that you
would, for the conclusion of this large collection of the comforts, even
briefly run them over; that so we may see them in a more short and easy
view; to the more lively quickening and chearing of the very comfort of our
hearts,

The betraying of our Savior Christ, may be esteemed, as the means of
knitting us in a most faithful bond to our God, to whom we were before,
rebels and traitors.

His binding may be accounted of us, our unloosing, In ipsius vinculis nostram
liberatio^em: in ignomi^ia gloriam: in condemnatione absolutionem: tandem^; in
morte vitam inuenimus. Beza Hom. 12 in Hist. Pass.
and freeing from the bonds and fetters of our sin, and from the power of the
Devil, by whom we are bound with m^re strong and uncomfortable chains then
Manasses was by the King of Babel: and for the which we have deserved, not to
lie bound still for a while, but being ^^und hands and feet, to have been
thrown into utter darkness for ever.

The disgrace of our Savior, was the means of bringing us into favor with
God; who had deserved, that he should have spit in our faces, and had us in
most deep abomination and derision for ever.

His grievous stripes and wounds, were the healing of the blanes and botches
of our souls.

His accusation was our excuse.

His condemnation our acquiting.

His cross and curse our blessing.

His death was the means of our eternal life.

Finally, as was said even now, his burial is the daily weakening and wasting
of our sin, that power may increase in us to live more and more unto God, and
to go on forward from hell and destruction, toward the kingdom of heaven.

Explication and proof.
Thus verily, and much more abundantly, may we in the serious meditation of the
manifold sufferings of our Savior for us, comfort our selves, from the
particular consideration of the several parts of them. The brief sum
whereof is this, that our Savior suffering for us, both in body and soul:
has perfectly redeemed us, both bodies and souls, from eternal misery, and
all evil; and obtained everlasting life and glory, with all meet blessings
for us in them both.

Whereunto let me yet add this one thing more, for an vpshcote of all: that
insomuch as our blessed Savior, has paid so great a price, and endured so
many exquisite sufferings for us: it is from the same, most clear and evident,
to the filling up of the measure of our comfort, yea to make it as it were
pressed down and running over; that he has, and does still accordingly love
us, and his whole Church, with a most dear and perfect love: and that the
inheritance which he has thus dearly purchased for us, is passing great, and
infinitely above that value, which we can possibly estimate. For none will
give much, for that which they set little by. The Duties more generally.
Who would lay out thousands of gold and silver, for such a cottage, as is
scarce worthy twenty shillings? Much less, would our most wise Lord and
Savior have given his blood, etc. Which is more worth then all the gold and
silver in the whole world; yea then the world it self, and all that is
therein: unless it had been, to the most excellent and precious uses, that
the most high price above all other, might be disbursed for. And therefore well
may the Apostle say, and worthily are we to learn it from him: that Christ
has loved us, in that he has given himself for us, to be an offering and a
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God. Ephe. 5.2. Wherefore also, most
justly ought we to love him, with a most dear, holy, and religious love: and
to walk in love, both toward him, and one with another, as the Apostle
exhorts in that place: yea to walk in all holy duty, according to the
plentiful instructions, and exhortations of the holy Scriptures, and even of
the sufferings themselves, which being duly weighed, do mightily call and cry
out, for all good duty, and thankfulness, at our hands: yea even from heart, and
hand, and all; as the diverse considerations thereof will declare.

FRom the comforts therefore, to the duties now do we come, with all the
speed that we can.

We will inquire of them, first more generally, and then more particularly,
according to the several branches of the sufferings.



As you said even now, it is our duty first of all, to love our Savior most
dearly: and as a fruit thereof, even as his redeemed, to serve him most
religiously, for ever and ever. For so our Savior himself requires, saying,
If ye love me, keep my commandments. John. 14 verse. 15.

Explication. and proof.
Our Savior Christ takes it for granted, that we ought most dearly, to love
him. For who can otherwise say, or think: but he must be convicted in his own
conscience, if he have any knowledge of that which our Savior has wrought
and suffered for him?

Well therefore. This he infers justly, as a fruit belonging to that love,
which his redeemed stand bound to bear unto him; that they do declare it, by
their obeying of his commandments: that is to say, of the commandments of
God, which are the commandments of the Son, as well as of the Father.

And to the same end, he repeateth it again in the 21. verse of the same
chapter: saying, He that has my commandments, and keeps them, is he that
loves me. To the which love also, he does in the same verse, persuade by most
forcible reasons. For, says he, He that loves me, shall be loved of my
Father: and I will love him, and show mine own self unto him. And yet again
verse 23. If any man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love
him, and we will come unto him, and we will dwell with him. But on the
contrary, he professes in the 24. verse, that he accounts none of them to
bear him any true love, whosoever do not keep his words. Of the which words,
our Savior says further, That they are not his: to wit, as he is man simply
considered in his humane nature: but his Fathers who sent him.

Moreover for love, and the trial of true love toward him, by a general care
of obedience; thus our Savior says, chap. 15.9.10. As the Father has loved
me, so have I loved you: continue ye in my love. If ye will keep my
commandments, ye shall abide in my love, as I have kept my Fathers
commandments, and do abide in his love.

Proceed now, to show the rest of the duties, in like general manner.

Question. Which may they be?

Answ. They are all the duties of love, mutually to be performed, of one
christian toward an other: and the same also from an humble and lowly mind.

This is very true. For so did our Savior first of all give to understand, by
his washing of his Disciples feet; as he does plainly express his own
intent therein. Explication and proof.
For so soon as he had done it, Know ye (says he) what I have done? ye call
me Master and Lord, and ye do well: for so I am. If I then your Lord and Master
have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another feet. That is, ye
ought to carry this mind, to be always ready, to do as much as this comes
too: and that even with all humblenes of mind, void of ambition, void of all
bitterness and contention, etc. For I (says our Savior) have given ye an
example, that ye should do, even as I have done to you. Wherein also, our
Savior is very earnest, saying, (as it follows in the text) Verily, verily,
I say unto you, The servant is not greater then his Master: neither the
Ambassador greater then he that sent him. If ye know these things, (that is
seeing now ye know them to belong to your office and duty) blessed are ye
if ye do them. John cha. 13. verses 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

The same doctrine, he renueth again, verses, 34.35. of the same chapter:
saying likewise to the same his Disciples, A new commandment (that is a
commandment, the care whereof I do renew and revive) do I give unto you,
that ye love one another. Yea, as I have loved you, that ye also love one
another. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love
one to another. For verily, true and unfeigned love, not in word only, but in
truth and in deed: it is (as our Savior in these words gives to understand)
so rare and difficult a grace to be obtained, and so contrary to flesh and
blood, and the practice of this selfe-louing world: that it cannot but be
acknowledged of all that know any thing, that they have been singularly
taught, and instructed even of God himself, whosoever are endued with it.

And for the same cause, does our Savior yet again renew and revive it; as it
were in a new parliament: and that earnestly, with a new weight of reason.
chap. 15. verses. 12.13.14.15.16.17. This is my commandment, that ye love one
another, as I have loved you. Greater love then this, has no man, when any man
bestows his life for his friends. Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I
command you. Henceforth, I do not call you servants: for the servant does not
know what the Master does: but I have called you friends: for all things that
I have heard of my Father, have I made known to you. Ye have not chosen me,
but I have chosen you, and or dained you, that ye go and bring forth fruit,
and that your fruit remain, that whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
name, he may give it you. These things command I you, that ye love one another.

This also, is that which our Savior does instantly pray for, as a singular
effect of the holy Ghost, through the preaching of the Gospel; chap. 17.20.21.
I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe in me through
their word: he means the preaching of his choice Disciples, and other
succeeding them: That they all may be one, as thou O Father art in me, and I in
thee: that they may be also one in us, that the world may believe that thou
have sent me. To wit, as being convicted thereof, by so notable and admirable
an effect; and that thereby many may be induced truly to believe, from time to
time.

These things (beloved brethren) we are to apply to our selves. For verily, no
man can be a true Christian without love to the brethren: nor unless we
carry so humble a mind, that we be very ready and willing, according to those
places and callings, wherein God has set us: to perform all good offices and
duties of love unto them, even as it were to the washing of their feet. The
Christian King, or Queen, must not refuse to be a servant to God, for the
benefit and welfare of the Church of Christ: nay rather, they must for the Lord
Jesus sake, and for that duties sake which they owe to him: be willingly
serviceable to his Church: as the holy Prophet Isaias, does (by as mean a
similitude, as was the practice of our Savior, in washing his Disciples feet)
give plainly to understand, in the 23. verse of the 49. chap: of his
Prophecy. Read also, Psalm. 72.9. where the subjection, which is due to our
Savior himself, from the Kings and Princes of the earth, is noted by the same
phrase of speech: They that dwell in the wilderness shall kneel before him, and
his enemies shall lick the dust. The Kings of Tarshish, and of the Islands
shall bring presents, etc. Wherefore, if Kings and Queens ought to stoop thus
low to our Savior Christ: and to his Church for his sake: who may think
himself excepted from like duty and service? And seeing the king ought to
have this general care and dutiful regard of all; for Christ sake: how can we
think, but every Christian in particular, stands deeply bound, to love and
reverence the Christian King and Queen, in and for the Lord Jesus Christ's
sake: yea even for their own sake in him? Rom: 12.10.11.

But let us proceed.



It is our duty, both in regard of the glory of God, and also of love to our
Christian brethren: and likewise, for the testimony of our faith in Christ,
who has endured all kind of sufferings for us, and therewithal also, for the
strengthening of the faith of the brethren: to suffer whatsoever affliction, it
shall please God to call us unto, even unto the death, if need shall so require.

Explication and proof.
So it is indeed: as our Savior himself gives to understand, John 12.25.26.
He that loves his life, shall loose it; and he that hates his life in this
world, shall keep it unto life eternal. If any man serve me, let him follow
me. etc. And chap: 16.1.3. These things (says our Savior) have I said unto
you that ye should not be offended They will excommunicate ye: yea the time
shall come, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service.
And the Apostle John is plain in this point, 1. Epistle 3.16. Hereby (says
he) have we perceived love, in that he (that is our Savior) laid down his
life for us: therefore we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. Read
also, 1. Pet. 2.21. Hereunto are ye called (to wit, to endure with patience,
sufferings unjustly laid upon ye) for Christ also suffered for us, leaving us
an example, that we should follow his steps. And cap: 4.12.13.14.15.16. Herein
we are partakers of Christ's sufferings, and God is glorified. Read also, Colos.
1.24. where the profession of the Apostle Paul, is notable to this purpose. And
likewise, Philip: 2.17. yea though I be offered up upon the sacrifice and
service of your faith, I am glad, and rejoice with you all. For the same cause
also, be ye glad, and rejoice with me.

Now furthermore; insomuch as we stand justly bound, to yield such an entier
obedience unto our Lord and Savior, who has so dearly redeemed us unto
himself, from the wrath of God, eternally due to our sins: is it not our
duty, much rather to be sorry for our sins, to hate and abhor them, and
even in all holy defiance to seek the utter death of them, which were the
cause of the bitter death of our Savior? which also (had it not been for his
death and sufferings) would most certainly have been our most woeful death and
destruction, both of bodies and souls for ever and ever.



It must needs be so in all good reason. For otherwise, we should make but a
light matter of all the sufferings of our Savior, and bereave our selves, of
all the fruits and effects of them.

Explication. and proof.
It would doubtless prove so in very deed. For if we seek not to be partakers of
the power of Christ's death, to the crucifying of the power of sin, in our
wicked and sinful nature: we shall never be partakers of the merit of his
death, to the removing of the guiltines of our sin, out of the sight of God.
And even to common judgment, it might seem a most absurd thing, that we
should profess our selves to believe in Christ (who has for no other cause
then for our sins, suffered most grievous sufferings, The Duties in respect
of his preparation to suffer.
even to the enduring of a most cursed death): and that in the mean while, we
should make no conscience of sin, but without all remorse, give our selves
over to commit wickedness, etc.

Hitherto of the duties, belonging to the more general consideration, of all
the sufferings of our Savior.

LEt us henceforth, consider of the duties pertaining to the same, in more
particular respects: and that according to the order of the historical report
of them, as we have done before in the comforts.

And first of all, in regard of our Saviors preparing of himself to his
sufferings.



First, our Savior himself has taught us, that we for our parts ought to
prepare our selves in the times of our trialls, by watching and prayer, lest we
should enter into tentation.

Secondly, that we be constant in prayer, yea with feruencie in praying, so
long as the occasion of any special tentation remains.

Thirdly, that we labor to frame our hearts, to be willing to suffer for
Christ's sake, when the occasion so requires: and to this end, to subdue our
own wills, to be obedient to the will of God.

Fourthly, that according to the grace of God bestowed upon our selves; we be
careful to encourage and hearten others unto sufferings: specially such, as by
their special places and callings do more nearely appertain to our SAVIOVR
CHRIST.

Explication and proof.
All these duties are evidently to be observed, partly from the example and
practice of the same our Savior: and partly from his doctrine, together with
his example. Luke. 22.40. When he came to the place, he said, Pray, lest ye
enter into temptation. And he himself prayed often at the same time. And
finding his Disciples weak, he encouraged them: as the story makes all
plain.

Finally, seeing our Savior himself, could not overcome himself to be
willing to drink of his bitter cup, until he had overcome his natural
desires; though in him (arising from pure affection of nature) they were
without sin: how may we think, that we shall ever be able, without striving
by earnest prayer unto God; to overcome our sinful corruption, which is
infinitely more loath to suffer for Christ's sake then he was for us, without
Gods special grace?

Now, that we may go forward. When we consider, that our Savior was betrayed
by Judas, one of his own most near, and familiar Disciples.



This ought to teach us patience, and to arm us, that we stumble not, nor
fall away from our Savior Christ and his Gospel; although we do, at any
time, see such as made great show of godliness, and Christianity, in outward
appearance and profession, most grossly to fall away: yea, though (like Judas)
they grow to be such, as do betray us into the hands of wicked men, as he
did our blessed Savior.

This is so clear, that we will not stand upon any further explaning of it. We
will therefore proceed.



We ought from thence, to learn to yield our selves to our persecutors,
without all force and resistance: when they come in the name of that authority
of Magistracy, under which we do live. Neither are we to fly, when the
occasion requires that we should stand to it, to the glorifying of the name of
God.

Ex. Therefore it is indeed, that our Savior reproved Peter so sharply, The
Duties, in respect of his examination, etc.
for taking up the sword, Mat: 26.52. saying. Put up thy sword into his place:
for all that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. And our Savior for
his own part, knowing himself to be called and appointed of God to suffer,
and that the time thereof was now come: he does most willingly yield himself.

But here it may be demanded, how we may know our calling; and when that time
shall be come, wherein we likewise for our parts, ought to suffer for the
testimony of the truth: as our Savior did in his season, suffer for our sins,
the just for the unjust, etc.



God himself will doubtless make it manifest unto us, if we will, with
upright hearts, seek to him for grace, to deal faithfully with him, and with
his cause, and Church.

Explication. and proof.
There is no doubt but he will. For when it is his good pleasure, that we
should suffer, and not fly: he will give us no honest, or allowable evasion,
wherein we might have peace to our consciences therein. And on the contrary,
if it be his will to spare, or deliver us, from suffering for a while: he
himself will in his divine providence, prepare means, and work it forth in
such sort, that his holy arm (as the Scriptures speak) shall be made naked
and bare, to the effecting of it. If not so clearly to others; yet to the
parties themselves: for the peace of their own souls, betwixt his Majesty
and them. We will have forward.

Caiaphas, and the whole Council of the Jews?

We are taught, by the example and practice of our Savior going before us: as
to be simple like the dove, so to be wise as the serpent.

As to be silent and sparing, in giving answer to frivolous and vain
accusations: so to be ready and bold to answer to such things, as be of good
weight, and to the glory of God, and edification of our brethren.

As to bear all injuries and wrongs, patiently: so yet to show in the bearing
of them, that we are not so simple, but that we know what is equal. And for
want of such dealing at the hands of our adversaries; to show our selves
grieved on God, behalf, to see justice perverted from the seat of justice:
which ought to be sacred, and kept inviolable before him, who has from heaven,
authorized the same.

Explication. and proof.
Thus indeed, ought we to behave our selves. For so we have the example of our
Savior, evident and plain in the holy history, before our eyes. He does not
answer the false witnesses that came against him; because he saw that they did
overthrow their own testimonies, by disagreeing among themselves: yea he does
not answer to their false testimonies; though the high Priest would have
pressed him thereunto.

Nevertheless, in other things, he answered so far as was meet, concerning
his doctrine, and Disciples: and most fully and plainly, concerning his divine
Person and holy office.

Neither did he conceal his grief, concerning him that smote him
disorderedly: nor against the common course of injustice in their corrupt
proceeding. Thus much therefore may we learn, from the example and practice
of our Savior, in these respects.

And here by the way also, we may, before we go any further, inform our
selves in many things, by occasion of the fall of Peter: while our Savior was
so examined, accused, and condemned.

We are justly to take warning from Peter's fall.

First, that we never presume, in confidence of our own strength, to enterprise
any thing; no, though it seem never so good; specially if it be against the
express admonition, of the word of God to the contrary: as Peter did against
the admonition, and warning of our Savior Christ.

Secondly, we are from Peter's fal^ to take warning; that in time of tentation
and trial, we be very diligent in prayer: and every way in singular manner
careful, to seek the whole furniture, and armor of Christianity, from the
hand of God; as it were out of his armourie.

Explication and proof.
It is very meet and necessary that we do so indeed. For Peter at this time,
which now we speak of, failing in these duties; and not humbling himself
before God, to seek strength from him, in conscience and fear of his own
imbecilitie and weakness: he fell so fearfully, and grossly, as he did.

And first, that he presumed, in confidence of his own natural strength, and
stoutenes of his heart (for it is likely that he was naturally of a good
stomach, and a man of his hands, as we use to say) it is evident, in that he
neglected the plain, and redoubled admonition of our Savior, to the contrary.
And therefore it was just with God; to humble him, by the experience of his
pusillanimitie, and plain dastardlines: in that he is daunted by and by, upon
the speech of a maide-seruant, etc. And alack for very pity; what is all the
natural stoutnes that may possibly be in a man, to endure the force of a
spiritual combate^ verily it is nothing. The encounter is exceeding unequal.
The fortitude and valor which must stand out here, is of another nature
altogether, then natural stoutenes is.

O therefore, how much better had it been for Peter, to have hidden himself
in some corner; and to have given himself to earnest prayer unto God, for
strength of grace, against the time that he should have called him forth to
trial: rather then thus rashly to have adventured, and thrust himself into so
great a trial, before he was fit for it! It ought surely, to have been as a
renewed admonition unto him, to surcease from his enterprise; when he found
the door of the hall of the high Priest shut, before he could get to it: and
not, to have lingered to get in; or being helped in, not to have thrust
himself into the company of the high Priests servants, to warm him by their
fire. It had been far more seemly for him, to have followed the example of
that faithful soldier Vriah: who would not take his lawful delight and
pleasure, while his Captain was in the danger, and difficulties of war in
the field. But Peter, for want of such due consideration, is like to such a
foolish soldier, as rusheth into the battle, without all weapons and armor.
And therefore no marvel though he was grievously wounded; and very narrowly
escaped death: yea though he was speedily reskued.

To this purpose, the holy providence of God is worthily to be observed; which
(to the end that Peter's presumption and selfe-confidence might be chasticed,
for a common admonition to all) would not suffer him to be hidden: but so soon
as he is come in at the door he is challenged by one, to be a Disciple of
Christ: yea the party eyeth him, and having well looked on him, and (as we may
say) faced him: he uses these words, This man also was with him, Luke 22.56.
And after this another. And by occasion thereof, many together make their
challenge against poor Peter. They reason also against him, from his speech,
that he was a Galilean: and therefore the more like to be one of them, Mat:
26.73. yea one of the company among the rest, lays to Peter's charge: that he
saw him with our Savior in the garden. And this man (as S. John testifies)
was the Cosen of him, whose ear Peter had cut off in the garden. Thus Peter,
being pitifully snared, as a dove deceived, and without heart, as the Prophet
speaks: falls, for the relief of himself, most unfaithfully to deny his
Master: even at the first assault. And as the heat of the skirmish increased,
so did he show himself more and more cowardly: yea worse then a coward,
proceeding from simple denial, to a swearing and cursing denial: and from a
sudden denial, to a denial upon an hours respite; and that also after that
he was admonished by the crow of the Cock once, Mark: 14.68. Luke. 22.59. In
which space of time, and by this admonition of the Cock, he ought to have
been brought to some better thoughts then before: seeing our Savior made that
a sign of admonition unto him.

Thus pitifully did Peter fall, for a just punishment of his carnal confidence
in his own strength: and the rather, because he neglected that warning which
our Savior had given him before. In the which fall no doubt, Peter should have
lien for ever: had not our Lord Jesus Christ, taken tender compassion of him;
and given him grace to repent. For no means could move him to consider his
sin; till our Savior turned back, and looked upon him; and therewithal,
touched his heart, by the finger of his holy spirit. Mat: 26.75. Mark 14.72.
Luke 22.62.

Wherefore now for our own admonition; to the end we may not fall with Peter:
let us take heed that we do not presume with him; as he did at this time of
his so grievous a fall. Neither let us be negligent in prayer, as he was at the
same time. But let us receive instruction, and learn to be wise from his
folly; praying God to make us (without any such fall) faithful in some
measure: as Peter was in an excellent degree, ever after his conversion. Yea,
and according to the wise example, of such as have obtained the crown of
martyrdom; let us in all times of trial and persecution, give our selves much
to prayer and supplication to God; that by distrusting our own selves, we may
settle our hearts, to put our whole trust in the living God. Verily, it is no
small trial; when the goods, and liberty, and life of a man, are called into
question all together: as our blessed Martyrs, (who gave their lives for the
testimony of the truth of God) give us to understand by their practice, and
also by their letters to others, which they concluded often with Pray, Pray,
Pray.

Unto this example of Peter, we may add that other of Judas also, for our
further admonition to the same end; insomuch as, though it pleased God to give
Peter grace to repent, who sinned of infirmity: yet he would not grant it to
Judas who sinned not through sudden fear and terror, but maliciously, and of
deliberate and set purpose; yea as it is very likely, even against the holy
Ghost, in a very high degree. Wherefore, from the most fearful example of
Judas, let us in any case, learn to take heed, that we do not secretly
harden our hearts, as Judas did; neither yet that we stomach any that rebuke us
for our faults, as he did our Savior. Let us also, from his example, take
warning to beware of hypocrisy, and to resist all beginnings of evil betimes;
whether it be theeuish pilfrie, or any other sin. Neither let us content our
selves only with an external profession of Christianity, as Judas did.

Nay rather, let us take earnest warning, that we do on the contrary, labor
after inward truth of heart in the profession of the name of Christ: and that
we keep our selves, so faithful and upright to God, his truth, and his church;
that we may never upon any occasion become false brethren. Chiefly, let us be
faithful to God; and so shall we be preserved in fidelity toward his church
and every part and member thereof.

Now the excellency of truth above hypocrisy, we may also easily perceive, by
comparing these examples of Judas and Peter together. For although the
repentance of Judas, might externally, be thought greater then Peter's (insomuch
as Judas confessed his sin openly, and restores the money which he had
received for the hier of his wickedness, etc. but Peter wept not openly, he does
not openly confess his sin, but only secretly to God, when he had withdrawn
himself from company, etc.) yet because that which Peter did, was done in
truth, and he sought to God for mercy, in trust of his goodness; therefore was
it accepted of God, when as the repentance of Judas being extorted, and in
despair of Gods mercy through an evil conscience; both it, and Judas
himself, were rejected. This repentance growing from an evil cause, it rested
in an evil issue. For he most unnaturally, cruelly, and violently, threw down
himself, as it were from a high gibbet, or win-beame: and so hanged himself,
that with the vehemency of the fall, his bowels gushed our of his body. Thus
(as the common saying is) he must needs go, whom the Devil drives. For like
as he gave entertainment to the Devil, to fill his heart to practice his
wickedness: so no doubt, through the just judgment of GOD, the Devil was full
as great with him, to drive him to work this horrible mischief upon himself.

Wherefore, let us (I beseech ye) be exceedingly careful, that we tread not in
Judas his steps, nor walk in his crooked ways. And if at any time we fall,
let us pray earnestly to God, that it may please him, to vouchsafe to give us
Peter's repentance, which was a true and believing repentance: and not the
confounding, and despairing repentance of Judas.

And thus, (by the way as it were) these two contrary examples, falling within
the compass, of the history of the examination, and condemnation of our
Savior Christ before the high Priest, and the Council of the Jews: they may
profitably admonish us, of such good duties, as have been specified.

But let us now return to those uses, which we are to make more directly, from
the rest of the sufferings of our Savior.

Pilate?

We are from the example of our Savior, to learn to use all wise and holy
modesty in our answers, when we are called into question, for the truths
sake: and that we give no just occasion to the wicked, why they should scorn,
and deride us.

Seeing our Savior teaches us, that he is our King: we must profess and
perform all homage and subjection unto him.

Seeing his kingdom is not of this world, we learn, that we are not to
seek after earthly pleasures, nor to aspire after worldly honors, etc. but
how we may be partakers of his heavenly, and spiritual kingdom, and of the
joys and glory thereof. For the obtaining whereof also, we ought to be
willing to loose all the things of this life; yea life it self, if need
should so require.

And accordingly, our Savior gives us to understand, that it is our duty, to
hear and obey his holy and heavenly doctrine in all points: and so by our
obeying of his voice, to show our selves to be of the truth.

Explication and proof.
It is true. For as our Savior says, John 18.37. Every one that is of the
truth, hears my voice. And for our behavior; that it ought to be wise, and
discrete, before the adversaries of the truth: we may perceive it, in that our
Savior so carefully declineth, that which he knew would be had in derision of
the hearers: as namely, if he should at the first (without any caution, or
qualification of speech) have professed himself to be a King.

But concerning the duties here mentioned, and the like, we have seen the
ground, and observation before, in speaking of the titles of the Son of God;
Jesus, and Christ.

Let us therefore (so much the more speedily passing over these) go forward in
our present purpose.

Pilate in the presence of the Jews: and also after that, before Herod, by the
direction of Pilate?

When we hear nothing, but wrathful and slanderous accusations, we learn
from the practice of our Savior, that silence is the best answer: and the
rather also; if the truth has been declared already, as it had been by our
Savior: and if the servants of GOD be among such adversaries, as be very
subtle and captious.

Expli. This use does the Apostle Peter gather, from the example of our
Savior, in that he observes, 1. Ep: 2.23. that he did not contend with those
that reviled him. Wherefore, like as we see that our Savior Christ answered
when it was so meet; but at other times was silent: so it is our duty, to
entreat wisdom and discretion from the spirit of God, that we may be taught by
him, when to speak; and again, when to be silent and to hold our peace. For
it is not the wisest course, to be most quick and rife in answering: but to be
circumspect, in preventing, and avoiding the least advantage, that might be
given to the adversaries, to speak evil of the truth, or of our holy
profession of the name of Christ. Thus then we see, what use we are to make for
duty, from the most holy, wise, and patient silence of our Savior.

Barabbas?

We are to bear it patiently, though we be for Christ's sake, accounted the
offscouring and vilest among the people of the earth: rejoicing in this, that
we know we are so much the more acceptable to our God; and that our praise is
the greater before him, while we walk in his holy ways.

Explication and proof.
The example of our Savior is notable to this purpose. For seeing he, the most
worthy and excellent above all other, did bear the greatest indignity for us:
reason requires, that we poor wretches, and vile sinners; ought to esteem
it our chief honor, to be abased for him.

Here also, from the most unworthy dealing of the Jews against our Savior: we
may clearly behold, how extreme the hatred of the wicked is against the godly,
even because of their godliness, which they do extremely hate. Yea we may
evidently perceive, that our superstitious wicked, are more full of hatred,
then those that are more heathenish and profane. Pilate was not so hateful
against our Savior, as Caiphas the high Priest, and the rest of the wicked
Jews were. And so at this day, the Turk is more peaceable, toward the true
Christian in his dominion: then is the Pope, where he has (through his
usurpation) any command. The Pope also, can better favor an obstinate Jew
that denies Christ, then a faithful and zealous Christian, who with all his
heart, rejoices truly in Christ and his Gospel. He gives the Jew liberty
to dwell under him: but he will not suffer a protestant Christian to live in
peace, if his inquisition may possibly reach unto him. Herein is the holy
Proverb true, The righteous is an abomination to the wicked.

Magistrates also, need not think it amiss, to learn from Pilate; not to
admit every accusation, which is framed against the poor servants of God:
though indeed, their proceedings, have need to be more upright and constant,
then his was. For he, though he cleared our Savior Christ; and therein did
wondrous well: yet he did nevertheless punish him, and so committed the greater
sin. So must not the good Magistrate do.

Finally, as touching the false accusations of the Jews against our Savior:
all Christians may justly learn, that it is their parts, not to be over
credulous, to believe the wicked, in their allegations against the servants of
God. For it is their property, to be most bitterly and slanderously bent
against them; as experience has always showed it to be true.

It follows in the holy Story, that our Savior yielded himself, patiently
to be scourged, at Pilates appointment; and after that was done, to be
disguised in apparel, and so to be as a common mockery to the people.



We are in like manner, meekely to yield our selves to be scourged for his
sake, if we fall into the hands of like cruel adversaries: yea, and to wear
the yellowe cappe with papers pictured with Devils, and hell put upon it; as the
manner of the Spanish and Romish persecutors is, to lead true professors of
the Gospel to execution.

But much rather, are we most patiently to bear the fatherly rods and
corrections, which it shall please God, by his own more immediate and holy
hand, to lay upon us, at any time.

Expli. Good reason indeed. For insomuch as our Savior was whipped and
disguised for our sins, as a punishment from the wrath of God, for
satisfaction to his divine justice; and he took it patiently: much rather are
we to be patient, when we are justly afflicted for our own sins; seeing God
does in great mercy, seek to bring us nearer unto himself, thereby. But most
of all, ought we to be patient, yea and thankful to God; if we be counted
worthy to be scourged for his sake, and the Gospels: as Paul reports of
himself, that he received of the Jews five sondrie times, forty stripes
save one; and was beside that, thrice beaten with rods. 2. Cor: 11.24.25. And
as diverse other of the good servants of God have been likewise dealt withal.

We may learn also, from this disgrace cast upon our Savior for our sins; how
odious and shameful a thing sin is in the sight of God: and therefore, that
it is our duty, even with godly shame, to withdraw our selves from it. And
namely, from that aspiring mind that is in us, and in all mankind, from the
beginning; whereby we have all deserved, to be in perpetual reproach before
God, as Adam and Eve were for a while. Gen: 3.22. and so should have been for
ever: had not our Savior by his enduring of reproach both for them and us,
taken it out of the way.

Moreover, we, by the eye of faith, beholding our Savior scourged for us;
ought to acknowledge in our hearts, with godly grief for our sins, that it
is we, that have deserved all whipping cheer: and that not for a time, but in
a perpetual bridewell as it were, even in hell.

They say, it is the manner of nourturing young Princes, by letting them see
some such one whom they specially affect and love, to be corrected in their
sight, for the same or like falt wherein they have offended: whereby also, the
ingenuous young Prince, is moved to amend his falt, as we may take that which is
reported of good King Edward the sixth, for an excellent example in this
behalf. But in the case we now speak off, we our selves only are the
offenders; yea rebels and traitors against God, the King of all Kings, etc. and
yet behold this Kings only Son, the Son of God (a strange thing to speak)
is whipped for the offenses of us, most base persons. Shall we not profit by
this kind of teaching? verily if we do not; a thousand thousand times shall we
be worthy, to be punished in the most base and shameful manner that may be,
not only here on earth, but also in hell torment for ever and ever.

Now show further, what our duty ought to be, in consideration, that the
wicked did, beside their whipping of him, most despitefully reproach him: even
as wicked ones do to this day. By how much the wicked do more despise and
reproach our Savior: by so much are we, on the contarie side, both to esteem
and also to speak the more honorably of him, even all the good that possibly
we can: as of the only begotten Son of the most high, full of all grace and
truth, the Lord of life and glory, etc.

Explication and proof.
It ought to be so indeed. And accordingly, by how much they are more eger and
unweariable in seeking to pull down, and deface the name and kingdom of
Christ: by so much ought all that belong to our Savior Christ, to be the more
zealous, and constant, in laboring to set up and advance the same. Wherein no
doubt; the Lord God will be with his servants, to assist them: and to take
their parts, against all the adversaries of our Savior; how many, or how great
soever they be.

Moreover, in that we hear from the testimony of the holy Evangelist, that
Pilate trembled, so soon as his conscience was but a little touched with
fear, lest he had done injury to the Son of God, though he did not
understand the mystery of his Person: much more let us (who know him to be so
indeed, as he is acknowledged by the Father himself) always remember to fear
before him: though not with Pilates servile fear, but with a reverend and
godly fear, that we do by no means, any thing against him; but all that we
can for him, and to the honor of his most blessed name.

We are come to the answer of our Savior Christ to Pilate, upon his last
examination.



Our Savior does most notably give Pilate to understand, whence the authori^ie
of the Magistrate is; and how it ought to be used: namely, so as Magistrates
may approve themselves and all their courses, in a good conscience before God,
the supreme King, and only sovereign Judge of all Whence also; all other,
whosoever have any power over other, whether ecclesiastical or domestical, as
well as the civil Magistrate: ought to learn, that it is their duty, carefully
to take heed; that they never abuse their authority, to any tyrannical, or
unjust oppressing and grieuing of the least of those that be under them.

Moreover, all private persons, ought to learn from the same answer; that it
is their duty, to take great heed, and to have very conscionable regard, that
they do never abuse the sacred seat of justice, by their presenting before
it, any false accusation whatsoever.

Finally, this special lesson we are to learn from the example of our Savior
in giving answer; that albeit by occasion of the abuse, which any shall
undutifully offer the Magistrate, by false suggestion or slanderou^ accusation,
we shall be ill dealt withal at the Magistrates hand; yet that we must keep
our selves within the bounds of good duty, toward the Magistrate himself; and
by no means seek to disgrace his authority, and the dignity of his office,
which is of God.

Explication. and proof.
Touching the first of these points; the words (given, and from above) contained
in the answer of our Savior, do plainly import. For if all power and
authority be the gift of God: t^en it is most meet, that it should be ordered
and disposed according to the will of the Giver; lest otherwise, he should be
provoked to take away tha^ power, which he had before given.

And seeing the chief, and most sovereign Magistrate, or King here upon
earth, does stand thus bound unto God: i^ fo loweth by good and current reason,
that all inferior power and authority, should likewise submit it self to the
will of God.

Touching the great sin of those, ^ho fear not to abuse the seat of justice,
and the authority of the Mag^strate by vn^ust and untrue informations: our
Savior Christ in this respect says expressly in his answer to Pilate; that he
had the greater sin, who had delivered him unto him: to wit, as if he had bin a
malefactor.

Finally, that the Magistrate is to be dealt honorably withal; though he for
his part should be sinisterly carried aside, by the vnfai^hfull service, of
such as should give right information, and testimony unto him: the example and
practice of our Savior, does notably show that it ought to be so. For though
he judged it meet, in his godly wisedom^, to let Pilate see his falte: yet he
does it in singular modesty, covertly insinuating as it were, his reproof
under the reproof of other; reproving Pilate rather by consequence of reason,
then in apert and open terms.

But that we may go another step forward.

Rome, the highest Magistrate in all the world: yea or rather from heaven it
self, God being himself the very appointer and ordainer of this sentence
against our Savior, even for our sins?

We are, from the due consideration hereof, most sensibly taught; that it is
our most bounden duty, to judge and condemn our selves; to the end we may
escape the fearful judgment, and condemnation of the Lord.

Explication and proof.
It is true. This and such like duties, are justly to be derived from this
consideration. The which duties, I think good at this time, to express, The
Duties in respect of his condemnation.
by the words of a very learned and godly Preacher; they being of great force
(as I suppose) to move unto due regard of the same.

This (says he) was not done in vain: it being the will of the Father, that
the Son should not dye, either by the deceit of the Jews, o^ in any tumult,
or secretly: but openly in the eyes and beholding of all; and that also in a
judicial form of proceeding, though in respect of men very unjust: even as if
God from heaven had thundered forth these words, both East, and West, North and
South: as afterward it came to pass, by the Preaching of the Gospel.

O ye miserable men, behold ye in this my only Soon, (whom I have set forth
upon this Theater, as a Surety on your behalf) on the one side; how great
wrath I bear against sin, and what you your selves have deserved: and on the
other side, how unmeasurable, both my mercy and his is, toward all those that
will embrace this our grace. Go too therefore brethren (says the Preacher)
Let us learn to muse in our minds upon this history: let us learn I say,
not to meditate upon the chief heads in general only, as it were through a
lattis; but even to weigh every circumstance thereof: insomuch as these things
are written very diligently, and plentifully, for our instruction. For which of
us can behold such a spectacle, and not be affected with it? But we are to know
the causes wherefore it should be so. And verily, his heart must be harder then
any iron and steel, which cannot be moved with the injurious indignity
practiced against so innocent a man: if he do but weigh this fact, by the
light of humane reason. But we ought to make a far other manner of
consideration, concerning this mystery: to wit, that we may in this spectacle,
behold our selves to be as the principal debtors: to the end we might with
sighs that cannot be expressed, cry out a loud before our God; O good God
what a thing is this, which thou do set before our eyes to look upon? It is
we, it is we, who have transgressed; it is we that are guilty. Whence then is
this so great a change, but from thy most unmeasurable and incomprehensible
goodness? O wretched and unhappy man that I am! How should I in such sort
forget both my self and thee? O Son of God, how is it that thou have so
far made thy self of no reputation? Give me therefore this grace O God, that
I earnestly beholding my self in this spectacle, and abhorring the cause of
all these things, which is inherent and abiding in me; I may with a true and
lively faith embrace that discharge which thou offerest me, even me I say, a
miserable sinner, by the condemnation of thy righteous Son, who has taken
upon him that which was to be borne of me: and that I may lay hold of that
glory, which has been obtained on my behalf, by the reproach of my Surety,
who has given his word for me. O Jesus Christ the Savior of the world, I
beseech thee to join and unite me to thy self, by thy holy Spirit; that by
thee I may be as acceptable to him, unto whom thou have offered up thy self
for me; as I do willingly acknowledge and confess my self, to be in my
self, worthy every way to be detested of thee. These are the things which we
ought to behold, and to make our use and profit of, from this so fearful a
spectacle, whereby we see both heaven and earth to be shaken. And what then?
Shall we alone be stony and without sense? Thus far Master Beza Hom: 27.
in hist. Pass.

N^w we re^urne to our own course.



We may justly take forth this further lesson from hence; that it is our duty,
patiently to bear, not only one or two, but every affliction, which it shall
please God to lay upon us, for our Savior Christ's sake, and the testimony of
his truth.

Explication and proof. We may justly do so in deed. The Duties in respect
of his crucifying.
For (as has been observed in the like consideration before) seeing our
Savior did bear his cross, and endure the shame, etc. to satisfy Gods wrath
for us: we ought to endure the cross, to declare our thankfulness to him, etc.
yea every one to bear his own cross Luke, 9.23.

Simon the Cyrenian (at the first compelled by the soldiers, only to bear a
part of the material and wooden cross of our Savior, to the place of
execution) is afterward honored of God, in the record of the holy Story: in
insomuch as he became a faithful Disciple of Christ, willing to bear his
own cross, if need should so have required; as it may appear even by this,
that he is so diligently described, both he and his Sons, Alexander and
Rufus: as we read Mark. 15.21. So ought every one of us to be willing to
do; as God shall show it to be his good and holy will, in the time and season
thereof.

The same use does the holy Apostle make, from the consideration of the
carrying of our Savior, to be crucified without the City. Let us go forth
therefore (says he) out of the camp, bearing his reproach. For here we have no
continuing city: but we seek one to come. Heb: 13.11.12.13.14. And we are
likewise from the same meditation; to be of good comfort in our Lord Jesus
Christ: though for his sake, we shall at any time, be indicted, condemned, led
forth, and executed with the wicked, as our Savior Christ was: seeing there is
no cause to doubt, but if our cause be good, God himself: both knows perfitly
well, and will also out of all question, most graciously put the difference
betwixt the one and the other.

But that we may proceed with the holy Story:



We are to learn from hence, that it is our duty, to be willing to loose all
for our Saviors sake: that is, even to go naked out of the world, like as we
came naked unto it: nothing doubting but God has prepared a heavenly clothing
for us.

We may perceive also by this, that by our sinning against God, we have made
our selves unworthy of any ragge to cover us: and therefore in no wise to be
proud, though God do never so richly cloth our frail and unworthy bodies;
but in all outward clothing and decking to be soberly minded.

Yea, we are taught from hence, to embrace naked Christ, yielding himself
naked to the Cross for us; as being through faith, our only clothing, which
makes us comely and well pleasing, in the most gracious eye of our God.

Explication* and proof.
It is very true. For otherwise, if we be not clothed with Christ, and his
righteousness, by faith: no silks, nor veluets, nor any ornaments, or jewels of
gold, or the most precious pearls that may be, can any thing at all, commend
us in the sight of God. So that, that may be said of all such, which we read
in the holy Gospel; that they are yet for all these things, still without
their wedding garment. Read also, James. 2.1. etc. And 1. Tim. 2.9 10. and 1,
Pet. 3.3. etc. And Isai. 3 16. etc.



It is our duty, to lift up the eyes of our minds, through a true and lively
faith, to look for our redemption only from him, even from naked Christ, and
from no other person, or thing, whatsoever beside, never so richly clad or
adorned: we knowing and believing, that even therefore he did set himself
thus naked, to the judgment and anger of God: that he might clothe, and adorn
us, with the glorious robe of his righteousness, and replenish us with our
sufficient portion of that spiritual fulness, which is perfectly complete in
him.

Explication and proof. This also is very true. For notwithstanding our
Savior cannot be seen now; nor for many hundreds of years since, upon the
cross: neither are we at Golgotha, that place and hillocke, whereon his
Cross was set up: yet he is still lifted up unto us, by the preaching of the
Gospel; according to that which the Apostle Paul writes to the Galatians,
chap. 3, 1. Where he reproving them, for their turning aside to the ceremonies
of the law, according as they began to be seduced, and led aside, by some
false Teachers, says: O ye foolish Galatians, who has bewitched ye, that ye
should not obey the truth, to whom Jesus Christ was before described in your
sight, and among ye crucified. Like as we also may say the same, to all such as
are led aside by popish Seducers, to set up to themselves lying Crucifixes in
Church windows, in high ways, etc. O ye foolish Papists, how is it that ye
are thus bewitched? etc. The preaching of the Gospel of our Savior Christ,
and of his Cross, by lively voice; is that only lifting up of Christ, which
since his bodily crucifying, he has allowed unto us and his whole Church, for
the informing of our knowledge, and faith, to look up, and to rest upon him
crucified for us.



This may justly teach us, that we are to acknowledge our selves, not small or
petty offenders; but most grievous and heinous sinners against the Majesty of
God: even such, as have robbed, and spoiled him, of that glory, which was most
due from us, unto him.

Explication and proof.
We have in deed dealt so with the most high Majesty of God infinite ways;
in that we have denied him every good and holy duty, even as if we had the
sovereignty in our own hands, and did owe no duty at all to him, answerable
to the dealing of our first Parents, at the beginning. And according to the
sin of Israel, wherewith the Lord charge them by his Prophet Malachie. chap
3.8. Will a man spoil his Gods? yet ye have spoiled me, etc. yea even this
whole nation: says the Lord. Read also Isai. 1.21.22.23. and Ierem.
7.8.9.10.11.



We ought to learn from hence, that it is our duty, to slay, and as it were
to crucify our wicked affections, and lusts, which rebel against the holy
law of God: insomuch as these wicked lusts, and affections of ours were the
cause, why our Savior must then bear our curse, that we might be blessed, and
why he must be crucified, or else we could not have been s^ued.

Explication and proof.
It must needs be so. Who therefore, duly considering, that sin was the cause
of this so grievous an execution; and the same also, against a most dear and
gracious friend, (such a one as our Savior was to us, and against such a one
as was in respect of his own most perfect holiness and obedience, in most high
reputation before God) who I say, considering these things, can but hate
sin, as the very sword, which so deeply wounded our Savior, yea even to a
most grievous and doleful death, as we are hereafter further to consider,
when we shall come to that part of the history?



This teaches us, that it is our duty, not only to abstain from desire of
revenge against our adversaries: but also to pray earnestly to God, for the
forgiveness of their cruel dealing against us, and that it may please God, to
turn the hearts of so many, as do belong to his most holy and blessed
election.

To this purpose indeed, the most blessed example of our Savior, is very
notable. And though it be a hard lesson for us to learn: yet the grace of God,
is sufficient to teach it, to every one that will endeavor to learn it of him.
And therefore it is, that the Apostle Peter, doubts not to hold forth the
example of our Savior, to inuit and encourage all Christians thereunto, 1.
Ep: 2, 18, etc. 23.

Moreover, in that our Savior Christ (praying for sinners) says that they
do, they know not what, and so gives to understand (as has been observed
before) that ignorance is the cause, why many do that, which otherwise they
would not do: if they knew how great and grievous the evil is, which they
do commit. We ought therefore from hence, to learn that it is our duty to
seek after knowledge, that so coming to the knowledge of sin, we may be
sorry for that which is past, strive against present tentations, and be more
prudent and circumspect to prevent much sin, for the time to come. Yea*
therefore ought we to stir up our selves, to a careful seeking after
knowledge: to the end we may know how to keep a good conscience, in the doing
and minding of those things only; whereof we may have good warrant, from the
word of God, that they are agreeable to his most holy and blessed will. And
then may we be sure, that through the blessing of God, we shall not only
abstain from evil, which we are wont to commit above knowledge: but we shall
do more good, then we can thoroughly know that we do.

As for those that do otherwise; that is to say, which have no care to seek
after knowledge: they easily working more mischief, then they would think, do
thereby procure greater wrath against themselves, then they are aware of. For
he that rashly thrusts himself into sinful actions; he deals as if one
should bring fire among barrels of gunpowder: not considering that the nature
of it, is to blow up, and overthrow all: so soon as it takes any sparkle of
fire. As for example, who knows how many souls perish, or at the least, are
hindered from their more speedy conversion: by an ignorant and wicked, or
unconscionable Minister of the word of God? Who knows likewise, how much good
he hinders, that is a wicked instrument of the Devil, to disgrace, or
displace, any godly and faithful Preacher of the Gospel of our Savior Christ?

Finally, what love of ours, can answer the wonderful love of our Savior, in
praying and suffering for us miserable sinners: all of us, being naturally
enemies unto him, as well as these his persecutors mentioned in this Story,
were? Rom: 5, verses, 6, 7, 8. etc.

Such are the duties, belonging to that comfort, which faith apprehends, from
the lifting up, and fastening of our Savior naked upon the cross.

LEt us now come to those things, which do concern the time of his
continuance upon the cross.



This we learn, that it is our duty patiently to bear our affliction, and
cross; whatsoever, and how grievous soever it may be* even so long as it shall
please God, to continue the same upon us.

Explication and proo^e.
You say well. Neither ought we to doubt of a good issue, according to that in
the Ep: to the Heb: chap: 12.1.2.3.4.



Here again, we are to learn, to be content to loose all for Christ's sake:
and to think our selves to have sufficiency of all things, when we have
Christ; even naked Christ, or Christ alone, to be ours by faith.

But in no case, must we be riflers of Christ, to take away any thing that is
due unto him, as these soldiers did; and as many robbers and thieues do,
which live in the bosom of the Church.

Explication and proof.
God forbid we should do so. But if we shall account our Savior Christ to be
our portion; doubtless we shall have sufficiency of all things, in the midst
of all wants: and our greatest losses in this world, shall bring our greatest
advantage in the world to come. Philip. 1.21. and chap. 3.7, 8, etc.



All children have a most worthy pattern, of that great honor and duty,
which they owe unto their Parents; in tendering the peace and comfort of their
life, of whom they have received their natural life: as from those special
instruments, which it pleased God to use thereunto.

Explication and proof.
The example of our Savior is an evident pattern hereof, in very deed. And
herewithall our Savior had no doubt, a tender regard, to mitigate the present
sorrow of his mother, in her heavy beholding of his calamity: which could not
but pierce her tender and motherly soul.

As touching our selves; it is true, that we shall never be able to perform
so perfect love and duty to our natural Parents, as our Savior did to his
Mother, and namely at this time: neither shall we have, nor could we endure at
any time, the like occasion: that is, out of so great an agony, to show so
tender and strong an affection. But contrariwise, we find rather, that every
little head ache, or other trouble, is able to make us forgetful of all good
duty and love toward any. We may be compared to the snaile, whose property it
is, (as we know) if it be touched never so little, to draw it self altogether
into the own shell. The like is our practice; we care only for our selves.
All, as we think, is little enough to procure our own ease: self-love so
wholly possesses us.

Nevertheless, the example of our Savior shows us what we are to strive
unto. To the which purpose also, serves the example of David, that notable
figure of our Savior Christ, who had care of his Parents, in the time of his
afflictions: as we read in the holy story. 1. Sam. chapter 22.1, 3, 4.

Neither is the example of John, the D^sciple of our Savior to be neglected of
us; who in obedience to the word of Christ, did willingly entertain Marie, the
mother of our Savior: and did the duty of a son unto her. And note we here
from this holy president, that we are not only to receive legacies of gain,
from our friends always; but sometimes also, legacies of trust, though they
bring matter of charge with them. Contrary to the course of the world, and the
worldlings thereof; who are altogether bent to receive what ye will, from the
deceased, but have no dispsition at all, to perform any duty of love for the
deads sake: though it be never so reasonable, and upon never so weighty
considerations required of them. They have only the passive, but no ac^i^e
charity at all, in them.

But let us return to the duties which we are to learn from our Savior:
whose example, as it is our intended inquiry; so it is most worthy above all
other examples, to be looked unto.

What duty therefore, are we to learn, according to the progress of the holy
Story; from this, that our Savior did patiently endure, the most bitter
tauntings and reproaches; of all sorts of those that beheld him, hanging upon
the Cross?

Ans. The consideration of this, teaches us to prepare our selves, not only
to one kind of reproach, but even to many of sundry sorts, for Christ's sake:
insomuch as experience shows, that all sorts of wicked persons, are ready
to consent, and to yield their mutual help, to the increase of the
afflictions of the servants of God.

Explication.
Hereunto also, the example and practice of our Savior is very singular for our
instruction. And from the practice of the devil against our Savior, by these
his wicked instruments; we may perceive, which are those most dangerous
reproaches, which we are to arm our selves against: to wit, even those
especially, which would bring us into doubt of Gods favor toward us, and so
consequently, of our salvation.

Moreover, we are, from the evil example of the wicked; to admonish our selves,
to take heed against sundry evils, which we see to have been in them: and
by occasion thereof, to stir up our hearts, to mind the practice of diverse
good lessons, in a course contrary to their wicked and outrageous dealings.



We must learn, in a contrary course to that which they took; not to presume
to prescribe unto God, what way he shall take, for the manifesting and
ordering of any of his divine works: and to the effecting of such things, as he
(in his divine wisdom) has propounded to himself, for his glory, and for
the benefit and sa^uation of his Church.

Likewise, we must beware, that although God do not satisfy our expectation,
we do never the more call into question his wisdom, or goodness, or power, or
any other of his divine virtues; as these wicked ones did.

Explication.
It is true. In either of these great points, did all sorts of these wicked
scorners, grievously offend. For they are first, offended at this; That God
sent not the Messiah, in such outward pomp, as they presumed it had been
meet that he should have come. And secondly, they profess with obstinate
scorning at our Savior; that they will not believe, that he is the true
Messiah, unless he will come down from the Cross.



It is our duty, to receive, acknowledge, and believe in our Savior, in such
manner as it has pleased God to manifest and reveal him: that is, we are to
believe in Christ, not only crucified or fastened to the cross at the first,
but also in Christ continuing on the cross, even until death seized upon him.

Explication and proof.
So it is very meet indeed. For otherwise, how should the holy prophesies have
been fulfilled in this behalf? Such as we read Psalm. 22. Isai. 53. Dan. 9.
etc.

And as for these scorners, that professed that they would not believe, unless
that our Savior should have come down from the Cross: it is as much as if
they should say, they would not believe in true Christ, unless he should show
himself to be a false Christ: even such a one, as neither they, nor any other,
could have had any benefit by. For the whole benefit, which the Church of God
receives by our Savior Christ, rests upon this foundation as it were: that
he died for us, yea that he died the death of the Cross, and so ratified the
covenant of Gods everlasting mercy, by the price of his most precious blood,
shed upon the same. Zech. 9.11. and Heb. 13.20.



We must not desire any other miracles, for the proof of Christ to be
Christ; then those which it has pleased our Savior himself to work for the
confirmation thereof: according to the appointment of God.

Explication and proof.
Very good reason, why it should be so. For assuredly, whosoever they be, that
will not be induced to believe, by the help and authority of them; they would
not, neither would God give them grace to believe: though they might have all
the miracles that they would desire, wrought before their eyes. The Devil would
still delude them, to think that they might be fained miracles, or
insufficient, etc. God gives this grace, only to those that humble
themselves, to the revealed counsel of his will.

These are very worthy points for our instruction.



We are furthermore, clean contrary to their practice; both to think, and
speak always, most reuerendly and honorably of our Savior Christ: yea, even
in this respect principally, that he of his unspeakable love, vouchsafed to be
crucified, and to die for us.

Explication and proof.
That we are to do so; and that also even of most bounden duty: common reason
it self, may lead us to acknowledge. For by how much, any friend shall deal
more friendly, and suffer more hard things, for the benefit and safety of his
friend: by so much, do we judge a man the more bound to the same his friend;
and that he ought to be the more thankful, both by word, and deed, to the
uttermost of his power. And therefore, insomuch as our most blessed and
gracious Savior and redeemer, has wrought the best things for us, and
suffered the worst things that might be laid upon himself; to the end he
might procure and purchase our eternal redemption and salvation: infinitely
much more are we bound, to be, by all means, more thankful and dutiful to
him, then we may, or ought to be to any other our greatest friend; or to all
our friends in the whole world.

Wherefore, to all that has been said already, let me add this; that as the
wicked consented together in scorning and deriding of our most worthy and dear
Savior; and as one of them took example and encouragement from another, so to
do: in like manner, let us, and all true christians, consent and mutually
encourage, every man his christian brother, to give all the honor and glory
that may be, to our Savior Christ; even for that, whereby they took occasion,
so unworthily to dishonor him.

And insomuch as, we can give no greater glory to our Savior, then by a most
thankful and dutiful memorial of all that reproach, which he willingly
endured for us, even to the death, the death of the cross; and that by the
preaching of his glorious Gospel, and use of his holy Supper: let us therefore,
be specially careful, to acquaint our selves with these holy ordinances of our
Savior; remembering always therewithal, to show forth all worthy fruits of
obedience unto him.

Now let us proceed. And seeing in the midst of these heavy sufferings of our
Savior, it was a part of our comfort, that it pleased God, for a declaration
of that effect which his sufferings had with him, to give one of the thieues
that were crucified with him, grace to repent, though the other remained
obstinate: What duty are we for our parts, to learn from hence?

The due consideration of these examples, teaches us thus much; that as we are
from the example of the obstinate thief, to take heed, that none of us do
delay our repentance, in a presumptuous hope of Gods mercy at the end of our
lives: so on the other side, that none are to despair of Gods mercy, no not at
the hour of death, though they have lived a long time in much sin; if God
vouchsafe at the last, to give them grace truly to repent, and believe in
Christ, after the example of the repenting thief.

Explication and proof.
These ineeede, are those good instructions, which we are on either side to
learn, from these two contrary examples. For even to this end no doubt, has
the Lord lifted them up before us, in the holy record of the gospel: and
specially conce^ning the repenting thief, like as St. Paul writes to the same
purpose, 1. Tim. 1.15.16. First generally in these words, This is a true
saying, and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners, of whom (says he) I am chief. And then more
particularly concerning himself, as it follows thus, Notwithstanding for
this cause was I received to mercy, that Jesus Christ should show ^n^m^t
prot^^, O^^ne so the ^hi^fe: acc r^ing to that which was said in the f^rmer ve
se, Con protos e^mi ego. O^ whom I am c^i^fe.
on me a chief one (that is, a chief sinner) all long suffering, unto the
example of them which shall in time to come believe in him to eternal life.

And beside this, the repenting thief is also a lively example of true
repentance to us all. For those graces of Gods holy Spirit, which were evident
in him: must likewise be the graces of every one, that does, or shall truly
repent, even to the end of the world. Repentance is one and the same work of
the same spirit in all; though in a differing measure of grace: as it pleases
God diversely to dispose of the same, to every one. Neither must any of us
account the example too base to be set for a pattern before us, because he was
a notable thief: but much rather, we are to esteem it as a most worthy
mirror, and monument of Gods singular mercy.

To this purpose Master Calvin writes excellently in his Harmony upon the holy
Gospel, that he was, Eximius fidei and pietatis magister toti mundo, vt nobis
quoque ab eius ore, petenda sit verae ac legitimae confessionis regula. That
is, He was a notable schoolemaister of faith and godliness to the whole world,
in such sort, that we also, must learn the rule of true and lawful
confession from his mouth. And a little after, Tenendum vero memoria quod nuper
dixi, editum esse a latrone poenitentia documentum, quale Deus a nobis omnibus
exigit, dum se confessus est dignam factis mercedem recipere. And we must
remember (as I said even now) that the robbing thief gave forth such a
documentall instruction (or form) of repentance, as God requires of us all,
in that he acknowledged himself to receive a reward worthy the things he had
done. And again after this, Quod si (inquit Caluinus) latro Christum in cruce
pendentem and quasi maledictione obrutum, fide sua in coeleste solium euexit:
vae nostrae socordiae, si non reuerenter suspicimus a Dexteris Dei sedentem: si
non spem vitae in eius resurrectione figimus: si non tendimus in coelum quo
ingressus est. I am si ex altera part reputamus in quo statu Christi
misericordiam implorauerit, crescet fidei eius admiratio. Lacero corpore iam
exanguis, extremam manus carnificem expectat, and tamen in sola Christi gratia
acquiescit, etc. Quare and mortificationem carnis, and patientiam, and fidei
altitudinem, and spei constantiam, and pictatis ardorem, ab hoc magistro
discere non pudeat, quem Dominus ad humiliandam superbiam, nobis praefecit. Nam
vt quisque eum alacrius sequetur, ita propius ad Christum accedet. Now (says
Calvin) seeing the thief by the confession of his faith, has advanced Christ
(hanging on the Cross, and overwhelmed as it were with the curse,) even to the
celestial throne: fie on our sottishnes, unless we do reuerendly look up
unto him, sitting at the right hand of God: unless we do settle the hope of
life in his resurrection: unless we do bend our minds toward heaven,
whether he is entered before us. And if we do think with our selves on the
other side, in what case he was, when he called upon Christ for mercy, we
shall so much the more admire his faith. His body being torn and left void
of blood, he looks when the hangeman should quite and clean take away his
life: and yet he quieteth himself only in the favor of Christ, etc.
Wherefore let it not be any shame unto us, to learn of this instructour, (whom
the Lord has set over us, to take down our pride) both what the mortification
of the flesh, and what patience, and what the valor of faith, and what the
stedfastnes of hope, and what the zeal of godliness do mean. For as every one
shall follow him more chearefully, so shall he approach nearer unto Christ. And
yet again (says Master Calvin) Si quis grauetur latronis vestigijs insistere,
and praecuntem sequi, dignum esse aeterno exitio, quia impio fastu seipsum ab
aditu coelorum arcet. If any man will not vouchsafe to tread in the steps of
this thief, and follow him thus going before him: he shall be worthy to
perish eternally, because by his wicked pride, he shuts up the kingdom of
heaven against himself. Finally, a little after this, Quod si (inquit) vero
and serto se quisque nostrum excutiat, merito nos pudefaciet immensa scelerum
nostrorum congeries, vt hominem perditum, qui meragratia salutem adeptus est,
ducem and antesignanum habere minime pigeat. That is, If so be (says he) every
one of us, do truly and in good earnest sift himself, justly will the
unmeasurable heap of our sins so shame us, that it shall be nothing irksome
unto us, to have a forlorn man, who has of mere grace obtained salvation, to
be our leader, as one going next to the standard, before us.

And thus God has most graciously admonished us, by the impenitencie of the
one example of these two robbers, to take heed of all presumptuous or secure
delaying of repentance; seeing usually, the end of all such, is like to the
former course of their life: that is, deuoid of true repentance: and by the
other, he does exceedingly comfort such poor sinners, as do yet at the last,
truly repent them of all their sins. For to this end no doubt, God would set
forth his wonderful mercy in one notable example, repenting at the point of
death; though no more then one is mentioned in all the Bible, of so late
repentance as he was. The duty of which comfort has also been declared.

To day shall thou be with m^ in Paradise?

We learn from hence, that we believing in our Savior Christ, and repenting
of our sins; are to dispose of our selves comfortably to depart this life:
nothing doubting of the blessed estate of our souls in the kingdom of heaven,
immediately after our natural life is at an end here in this world.

Explication and proof.
That we may boldly and comfortably do thus; beside this particular example,
we have the general warrant of the holy Ghost, Revel. 14. expressed
heretofore in the Comforts. So that we need not be in fear of the sleeping of
our souls, till the last day, as some fondly imagine: neither yet of the
danger of any purgatory fire, for them to pass through. For who might have
been more like to go to purgatory, then this robbing thief, before he should
have been admitted to heaven: if there were any such place ordained of God,
for such as live not to work out their own satisfaction, as the popish
Teachers would make us to believe? But as we see, our Savior says plainly,
To day shall thou be with me, etc. Nevertheless, it will peradventure be
replied, and said, that though our Savior Christ made an exception in this
particular; and that he may, as pleases him, dispense with who^ he will: yet
the other is the ordinary course for such as he was. We may answer them upon
better ground: that if there were any such matter, as is pretended for a place
of purgatory, our Savior would rather have taken this so singular an occasion,
to have made it known for the common admonition of all such kind of persons;
and not to have been utterly silent, concerning such a point.

These are the duties to be learned from this part of the Story.



We are to take heed, that we join not our selves with the wicked, in
conspiracy against Christ; lest we be partakers with them of their
punishments, threatened and portended by that darkness: such as are ignorance and
hardness of heart, and all outward calamities; yea and even Hell it self, and
utter darkness, at the last.

Explication and proof.
All these evils indeed, were aptly threatened and portended hereby. And it
stands with good equity, that all the companions in one and the same sins;
should be partakers of one and the same kinds of punishment: Re. 14.^.10.



The extremity of the sufferings of our Savior, are most fit, and effectual,
(if we have any grace in us) to teach us how infinitely we stand bound, in all
love, The Duties in respect of his agony upon the Cross.
and good duty, to serve and honor Christ our Lord and Savior: and God our
heavenly Father, for his infinite mercy toward us in him.

And again, how deadly we are to hate and abhor sin: and that we ought to
be very willing and ready, to suffer any the most sharp sufferings that may
fall upon us, for his sake.

Explication and proof.
It must needs be so indeed: according, as upon like occasion, has been
observed once or twice before. For who, duly weighing the unspeakable dolor
and torment of soul and body, which our Savior endured, for his sin; but
the same party must needs be out of love with his sin: yea in an earnest
loathing and hatred against it, so as he will be no longer a retainer or
v^ss^ll to sin and Satan: but contrariwise, a faithful servant to God,
choosing affl ction for godliness sake, and not the pleasures of sin.

It is used for a good reason, to draw children to a due regard of their duty
toward their natural parents, even because their fathers have begotten them,
and their mothers have brought them forth: and because either of them have had
a tender and diligent care of their education. The Spirit of God himself uses
these reasons, Pro* chap. 23. verse 22. and chap. 31.2. O therefore, how much
more ought the consideration of the sufferings of our Savior for us, be
effectual, to move us unto good duty toward him: seeing his care has been
infintely more tender toward us all; and his sufferings a thousand fold more
painful for our sakes: then the travel of all mothers can be in their
childe-bearing, or of all both fathers and mothers care or sorrow, about the
bringing up of their children.

To this end therefore, let us well think of that, which a good and very
learned Preacher of the Gospel, has prompted us with: to wit, that insomuch as
the cause of all the wrath of God toward our Savior, was in us; and from us
derived to him, as being our Suerty: we ought in him, to behold as in a glass,
what sin is; to the end that we should, all that we can, turn away and fly
from it, and not to cocker the inticements thereof, as we use over much to do.
Beza Hom. 5. upon the history of the Passion. Sect. 12.

And again* in his 32. Hom. Sect. ^. as was in the Comforts noted before And
yet again more fully in the same Hom. Sect. 9. writing thus, But if for our
salvation, he that had no sin in himself, neither was himself the d^bter,
was brought into so great straits for us; uttered this voice, whereat we may
be astonished, seeing heaven and earth were shaken by it: must we not needs
confess (if we do not think of these things day and night, but continue in
our wickedness* not liking to be rowzed out of them) that we be stout, yea more
hard then the rocks themselves which do melte at the presence of God: Psalm.
68.9. And even to this day do sigh and travel together, because of the sins
of men: until that last day do come. Romans 8.21, 22, etc.

Now if so be we will not make this use, then let us learn another thing:
that is to say, that insomuch as, (notwithstanding our Savior was most dear
to God) yet he setting himself in the place of us miserable sinners, was left
without all comfort; yea in most heavy distress, as one forsaken of God,
though in the secret counsel and purpose of God, he remained still most dearly
beloved of him: therefore, that albeit we also, may comfort our selves, that we
are (in our Savior, and for his sake) the elect and beloved of God still, and
that he is so constant in his love, that he will never reject any of those whom
he has once chosen howsoeur for the present, we may be very heavily
afflicted, either for the trial of our faith, or for the chasticement of our
sin: yet if any of us wax wanton against him, he knows nevertheless, how
to make us weary of our part, by withdrawing all comfort from us in such sort,
that we shall find that it had been a thousand fold more happy for us, never to
have known that wicked pleasure of sin, whereby we have been drawn from
obedience to our good God and gracious father: as the example of king David may
sufficiently inform us from the 51. Psalm.

Let therefore, the extremity of the sufferings, cast upon our Savior for our
sins; teach us, speedily, and heartily to deny sin: lest we provoke the
Lord to cast some heavy and uncomfortable corrections upon us in this world,
(it may be for some longtime) howsoever it shall please him of his most free
grace and mercy, to save us in the world to come. Yea I pray ye, let the
consideration hereof, be the more mighty to prevail with us; because
otherwise, as we have been admonished heretofore: there can be no truth of
christianity in us, nor any comfort of a lively faith, and of a good
conscience; nor any chearefulnes in the care of good duty in the sight of God.
Without which care, al whatsoever may seem to be good, shall be but
hypocrisy: and fit for nothing, but to deceive other, yea and our selves too.

But that we may haste forward, to that which remains: What duty may we
learn, I thirst?

As our Savior was more desirous to procure our salvation, (and that to the
same end and purpose, the prophecy of giving him tarte vinegre in stead of
comfortable wine, might be fulfilled) then he was of sl^king his own thirst;
though it was (no doubt) at this time, most sharp and extreme: so it is our
duti^, as we may well inform our selves from hence, that we for our parts,
ought more earnestly to seek after the knowledge and faith of him* then after
any thing else: whether meat or drink, or whatsoever beside in the time of
our greatest need thereof.

Explication and proof.
I^ stands with good reason that it should be so: insomuch as our Savior,
appr^hended of us by faith; is not only the most perfect food of our souls:
but also for our bodies, to preserve them both, to everlasting life. As our
Savior himself teaches, John 6. verse ^7. and for the same cause exhorts,
that his Disciples would be more careful, to l^bour after that meat, which
endures to everlasting life; then after the perishing food of this transitory
life. And in the 5. chapter of Matthew, verse 6. he pronounces those blessed,
who do hunger and thirst after righteousness: and promises that they shall
be satisfied.

We ought therefore, in our desire and longing after our Lord Jesus Christ, to
be (with David) like the heart: that is, most earnestly panting after him as the
^iuers of water. Ps. 4^.1. And like as if we were in a barren and dry la d
without water, until we have found him: acco^ding to that which we read,
Psalm. 6^.1. and 143.6. yea, though we had never so great su^ficiency of all
corporal food. For he only is the fountain of those living waters, wh^reby
refreshing to eternal life is to be found. John 4. verses 10.13.14. and ch
7.37.38. Read also Isai: chapter 12.3. and chapter 5^.1, 2, 3.

Thus we see, what du^y may aptly be required of us, in respect of that thirst
which our Savior had after ou^ salvation, more then after his own refreshing;
he refusing and forgetting to drink in his greatest thirst, till all things
should be fulfilled: yea, even that which was foretold, concerning this his
last vnc^mfortable draught.



Yes, we may learn further hereby: that it is our duty, to accept of those
succoures, which the Lord offers unto us: whether by his own hand more
graciously, or otherwise, by such instruments as it pleases him to use; though
they (of their evil disposition) deal nothing so kindly by us, as they ought
to do.

Explication and proof.
It is so indeed. For we ought rather to consider the providence of God therein
for our trial; and in that respect to be patient, as our Savior was: then
impatiently to exclaim against the unkind dealing of the wicked; though in
stead of re^ieuing us, they do rather augment and increase our grief.

But as touching our selves, if it be so, The Duties in respect of his death.
that we are (in the time of the affliction of any of the servants of God) in
case, or estate, to do them any good: we must (contrary to the practice of
these wicked ones) yield both God, and his children, the juice of the sweet
grape; and not of that which is sour and wild. That is to say, we must yield
the fruits of such a kind and dutiful affection, as may stand best with the
good pleasure of God: and as may be most comfortable, to such as belong unto
him. Far ought our hearts to be from minding, and our hands from doing, that
which should in the least respect, be grievous to the Lord (as the Jews are
blamed to do: Isai. chap. 5. verses 4, 7, etc.) or that which should fail the
least of those, that be the Lords; which he takes in like ill part, as if he
were neglected, or molested himself. Matthew. 25. verses 45. It ought to
suffice, yea to be over much in our judgment; that the Lord has once drunk
vinegre, and every way the most bitter potion of Gods wrath for our cause:
though we do never make him, nor any of his, any unkind offer of it again.

Thus much, concerning this short speech, I thirst: for declaration of that
duty; which ought to be yielded from the comfort of it.

NOw we are come to the next like short speech of our Savior, which was his,
It is finished. What duty ought to arise from the comfort of faith herein?

It is most clear and manifest from hence, that we ought not in any wise, to
look to any other sacrifices, or satisfactions, or merits; either in the
whole, or in part, for our red^mption, and justification in the sight of God,
but to this of our Savior alone: neither that we are to fear the popish
dream of any other purgatory, then the blood of our Savior Christ; to the
washing away, and removing of all sins out of the sight of God.

Explication and proof.
This is very clear and manifest indeed. For seeing we have our warrant from
our Savior himself, that all was finished; yea even to the very point of
death, when he spoke these words: and that immediately after this; he took his
death, which was the sealing up of all: therefore we may, yea we ought justly,
to be out of doubt, that all doctrines of any further addition, for
satisfaction, or merit before God; are false and Antichristian. And for the
same cause to be utterly rejected of all true christians; who cannot, bu^ look
only to Christ for their perfect redemption and salvation: according to the
express doctrine of the holy Scriptures.

THe duties which do belong to that comfort of faith, which arises from the
consideration of the last words of our S^uiour upon the Cross; they are yet
behind.



We ought from the example of our Savior Christ, who at his death commended
his spirit into the hand of his Father; to esteem always of our souls, as of
a chief treasure: and to be careful over them, above all earthly things. Yea,
more then of our corruptible bo^ies, against the time of our death, whenever
it shall come.

Secondly, it is our duty to make choice of God, as of the only worthy
feoffie of trust as one wou d say; to whose custody, we may safely commend
them from day to day.

And thirdly, it is likewise our bounden duty, comfortably to believe; that if
we shall faithfully commit our souls unto him; he will for our Saviors sake,
keep them most charity and tenderly in his own hands always; and at the end
of our lives, receive them, and reserve them, in a blessed estate; until the
resurrection of our bodies; and then also, will join them again to our
bodies; like as our Savior, returned to his body the third day: and
thenceforth will bless us with glory and happiness in them both, for
evermore.

Explication and proof.
Unto these duties no doubt, do the words of our Savior Christ lead all true
believers; according to that notable imitation of Stephen. Act. 7.59. Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit. And according to the practice of S. Paul. 2. Tim.
1.12. saying, I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able
to keep that which I have committed to him against that day. Yea, and he
believed likewise no doubt; that God was as willing to do it, as he was able:
according to that in the 8. verse of the 4. chap. of the same Epistle; in that
he says, Henceforth is laid up for me, the crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge will give me at that day: and not to me only, but
unto all them also, which love his appearing. The same thing therefore, ought
we to believe at this day, which they did then: according to the practice of
our most blessed Savior. And the rather, because as we may perceive, both by
the words of Stephen, and also of the Apostle Paul, that our Savior has the
joint care of our souls, together with the Father: according to that he says,
None shall take them out of my hand. John. 10. verses. 27.28, 29 30. My sheep
hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, And I give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out
of my hand. My Father who gave them to me, is greater then all, and none is
able to take them out of my Fathers hand, I and my Father am one. So that well
says M. Beza, The hands of our Savior, are not now held fastened to the
Cross, after the manner as our painters do paint him (for then he could not
embrace us) but he has them at full liberty, even from heaven to embrace the
souls of those that dye in him: the which he cherishes in his bosom, unto
the time, that they shall be restored to their bodies, to the enjoying of an
everlasting spiritual life, and until that he do come in the clouds of
heaven to meet us; and that we for our parts be taken up into the air, to
meet the Lord, to enjoy (together with him) that blessed estate, which is
prepared for us for ever. 1. These. 4.14. Go to therefore (as says that
comfortable and faithful Preacher) Let us be of good cheer, and lay these
things to heart; even these so great and notable comforts for our necessary
relief: specially against the last combat.

God (as we know) does earnestly require, trusty fidelity in one man toward
another; even concerning the least things, that are committed to any man's
trust, that they should be forth-comming: and therefore inioineth a penalty to
be laid by the Magistrate, upon all such, as shall be found to deal
vntrustily: as we read Exodus chap. 22. verses 7.8. etc. to the 13. How
therefore can we think, but that the Lord, who requires fidelity in men, as
a principal point of his law (as our Savior also declares, Matthew. chap. 23.
verse, 23.) will assuredly approve himself, most faithful above all men: to
every one, that (accounting him faithful) shall commit themselves to his
trust?

Thus much of the comfortable duties of faith, concerning the comfortable
manner of our Savior Christ's dying.



First of all, as his death was in the manner of it, far differing from the
death of all other: so are we to know, that the ends and fruits of his death,
are most singular, above the death of any, or all other creatures.

Explication and proof.
It is very true, as the ends and fruits themselves, rehearsed in the
Comforts; do evidently declare. So that, as K. David was not affected after a
common manner at the death of Abner: because he died not as a fool, but as a
man falls before wicked men: and because a Prince, and a great man was fallen
in Israel. ^. Sam. chap. 3.33.34 38. as it was alleged before in the Comforts:
so, nay infinitely much more, ought we to be most rarely affected, with the
consideration of the death of our Savior Christ, the greatest and most
excellent of all that ever died: so often as we do think of it, which ought
to be continually, though in another manner in deed, and in other respects,
then King David was affected for Abner; or the people of God for the death of
King David himself: or for Josiah, or any other of the most excellent servants
of God. For according to the singular greatness, and variety of the comforts of
it, which are not to be found in the death of any other: so ought the duties to
be, in a singular manner, framed and disposed.

So then, as the benefits and comforts of the death and sufferings of our
Savior, are (as has been declared before, of two sorts, from him unto us)
first in the removing of evils, and then in the procuring, and conferring, or
bestowing of good things: so the fruits of thankfulness, and obedience, from us
to God and our Savior Christ; they are likewise of two sorts. First, such as
consist, in the forsaking and leaving of evils. Secondly, such as stand in the
embracing and following of good things.



The due meditation of the sufferings (and namely of the crucifying of our
Savior to the very death, and perfect shedding of his most precious blood upon
the cross) is very mighty and effectual, to teach all true believers, to
deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts: yea even to crucify them, at the
holy Scriptures speak; insomuch as they were the cause, why our Savior was
crucified, as was touched before.

Explication. and proof.
It is very true. For hence it is, that the Apostle Paul tells us, that we
must be grafted into the similitude of the death of our Savior, and that our
old man must be crucified with him, That the body of sin may be destroyed,
that henceforth we should not serve sin. Rom: ch 6. ver. 6. And Gal 5.24.
They (says he again) that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts. So that we learn from hence, that it is our duty, so
to strive against sin, that we never give over the fight, until we see (as
it were) the heart blood of it. Like as our Savior, after he was fastened to
the cross, never left bleeding, till he had shed his heart blood out of his
body, to finish the satisfaction to Gods severe justice for our sin. And in
this respect, the Apostle says to the believing Jews (in way of inciting and
encouraging of them to this fight) Ye have not yet resisted unto blood,
striving against sin As though he should say, Ye shall show your selves
cowards, and no worthy, and vali^nt souldiars of Christ; if ye give over this
spiritual battle, before y^ have vanquished your sinful lusts. Heb. 12.4.
The which (as the Apostle Peter tells them also, and in them us) are most
dangerous adversaries unto us all, seeking no less mischief, then the
eternal destruction of our souls. 1. Pet. 1.11. Now therefore (to the end we
might take courage to this fight) the Apostle Paul assures Christians, that
there is sufficient power in the cross of our Savior: that is, in Christ
crucified, utterly to subdue sin, and to strengthen v^ fully to a most
ioifull victory. For by the cross of Christ, he found that the world was
crucified to him, and he to it: and therefore reioiceth in it, above any worldly
thing. Gal. 6.14.

This forsaking of ungodliness, and worldly lusts; must arise in our hearts,
from godly sorrow joined with godly indignation and hatred against sin: not
so much, in thinking that our Savior Christ should suffer death, in such sort
as a man (in reading the history of Joseph's affliction by his brethren, or in
beholding the cruel execution of some godly Martyr) would melt in his heart,
and therewithal conceive indignation against the cruelty of the enemies of the
Gospel: but rather in weighing with our selves, that our sins, (yea the
sins of me, and thee, and of every one of us) were the cause of his death:
yea so, that not only the Jews, with Herod and Pontius Pilate, were the
persecutours of our Savior Christ: but even we our selves also, had our part,
and (as it were) our bloody hand, in the crucifying and piercing of him,
according to that. Zech. 12.10. and Revel. 1.7.

And verily, we as well as any other, if we had lived at that time, and had
been left unto our selves, void of the grace of God; we should have done as
they did. For we are all by nature, as treacherous and rebellious against God,
as ever were the wicked Jews.

Wherefore (beloved) it is not enough for us, to mislike the wicked dealing of
the Jews and Gentiles, that were then the actual persecutors of our Savior
Christ. It is not enough for us, to feel our hearts somewhat to melt; by
conceiving in our minds, what grievous pains they put him unto, without all
cause on his part, yea clean contrary to his most worthy deserts: but our
melting must be for our sins, even every man's heart must melt for his own
sins; according to that admonition, which our Savior himself gave to those
women, that lamented his estate, when he was led to execution. Lu, 23.28.
Daughters of Jerusalem (says our Savior) weep not for me, but weep for your
selves, and for your children, etc.

Hence therefore, may appear a notable difference, betwixt the popish and
frierly preaching of Christ crucified: and the true and right preaching of his
cross and passion. They take it for a great glory to them, if they can handle
the matter so passionately; that they can bring their ignorant and
superstitious hearers to weep a little, in thinking of the cruel dealing of
his persecutors against him: when nevertheless, they encourage the same their
scholars, to pursue the servants of Christ, the true professors of his name,
with like malice and cruel practices, which the Jews then executed against our
Savior: and so do persecute our Savior himself in his members. This no
doubt, is most odious, and abominable hypocrisy, and most deceitful dealing
of false Apostles, in the sight of God, and of our Savior Christ.

The only true preaching, and hearing, or reading, and meditating of the
passion of our Savior; is, when we learn from hence, so to sorrow for our
own sins, that we do acknowledge, that we had deserved all the punishments
which fell upon our Savior: yea and that they should have continued upon us,
with all disgrace before God, for ever and ever. And therefore, that knowing
our selves to be once delivered by our Savior, we do thenceforth generally
renounce all ungodliness, and wicked lusts: that is to say, all our sin and
wickedness, which our Savior suffered for, on our behalf.

This general doctrine, may profitably be illustrated, by some particular
sins, which the sufferings and death of our Savior, ought in special manner,
to move us to forsake.

To speak more particularly; the due meditation of the sufferings and death of
our Savior, must needs be as a most strong engine, to make a notable battery,
yea to work the overthrow of all pride and vain glory, and of the inordinate
love of the profits, pleasures and honors of this world: the which do
naturally, and through the suggestions of the Devil; mightily rule and reign,
in our wicked hearts.

Explication and proof.
They do so indeed. Yet the power and death of our Savior, is more mighty in
the hearts of true believers, to suppress and destroy them; then our own
natural corruption, and the tentations of the devil, are to continue and
uphold them, in the strength of their dominion. For who can be proud of
himself, if he do duly bethink himself, after what manner it was necessary
for the Son of God to abase himself for us: or else vile and wretched
sinners that we are, we must have perished in the most base filth of our
sins, for ever? And who loving Christ that died for him, can immoderately
affect the world, and the things thereof; when he sees by daily experience,
that the world, and all things therein, are unkindly and aduersly bent against
him? Love not the world (therefore says St. John) nor the things that are in
the world, etc. 1. ep. 2.15.16.

Thus much, for a taste of those evils, which the meditation of the sufferings
and death of our Savior, do call us from.



The due meditation of the sufferings and death of our Savior, teaches and
requires of us not only to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts; as has
been already answered: but also, that we live soberly, and justly, and godly,
in this present world.

So in deed we read Tit. 2. verses. 11.12.13.14.15. For (says the Apostle)
the grace of God which brings salvation to all men has appeared. What grace?
Explication. and proof.
Even the most free favor and mercy of God, in giving his only Son our
Lord Jesus Christ, to the death for us. This grace (as the Apostle adds)
teaches us; not only to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts: but also, that
we should live, first soberly: that is, with good moderation, touching the use
of those worldly blessings which God has blessed us withal: secondly,
righteously, that is, in yielding to all and every one, that which of right
belongs unto them, for the comfort of their life: thirdly, that we should
live godlily, that is, with a religious and holy regard to obey and please God
in all things, specially in the duties of his divine worship and spiritual
service: Looking (as the Apostle adds yet further) for the blessed hope and
appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us
to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works. These things
(says the Apostle) teach, and exhort, and rebuke, with all authority. And
that by good reason, even from this most weighty consideration of the death of
the Son of God our Savior, to redeem us.

A learned Interpreter, speaking of these three words of the Apostle, Soberly,
justly godly, he moves to the careful regard of them, in these two verses
following in Latin:

Haec tria perpetuo meditare aduerbia Pauli:

Haec tria sint vitae regula sancta tuae. The which we may english thus.

Three words of Saint Paul, in mind see thou bear:

Sober, just, godly: life's good rule they are.

For the proof of the same duties, belonging to the consideration of the
sufferings, death, and bloodshed of our Savior upon the cross, read that
notable exhortation of the Apostle Peter. 1. Ep. chap. 1. ver. 13. etc.
Wherefore gird up the loins of your minds and be sober, etc. As obedient
children not fashioning your selves to the former lusts of your ignorance. But
as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation, etc. Knowing that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things,
as silver and gold, from your vain conversation, received by the traditions of
the Fathers, But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled and
without spot, etc. And ver. 2. of the same chapter (as we should have said
before) the faithful are said to be elect according to the foreknowledge of
God the Father; unto sanctification of the Spirit through the obedience and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. And chap. 2. verses. 24.25. Christ his
own self did bear our sins in his body on the tree, that we being
delivered from sin should live in right^ousnes, etc. And afterward again,
chap. 4.1.2. Forasmuch then, as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm
your selves likewise with the same mind, which is, that he which has suffered
i^ the flesh, has ceased from sin, That he henceforth should live as much
time as remains in the flesh, not after the lusts of men, but after the will
of God.

This care of pleasing God, in leading a righteous and holy life, is said to
be the end of our redemption. Luke. chap. 1. verses. 74.75. And so we read
also 1. Cor. 6.19.20. Know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy
Ghost, who is in you, whom ye have of God? and ye are not your own. For ye a^e
bought for a price, therefore glorify ye God in your body and in your Spirit,
for they are Gods. But how shall we glorify God if we l^ue in sin?

Read also Ephesians. chap. 4.32. Be ye courteous one to another and tender hearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake forgave you. And chap.
5.1.2. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear children, and walk in love,
even as Christ has loved us, and has given himself for us, to be an offering
and a sacrifice of sweet smelling savor to God. Likewise Colos. 3.12.13.14.
And Phil. 2.1. etc.

Moreover, for our cheerful, reverend, and zealous worshipping of God, from
the force of this argument: read Revel chapter 5.9. etc. And Ps. 22. from the 23.
verse, etc. after a prophecy of the sufferings of our Savior. Whereunto also
may be referred, all those prophetical exhortations in many Psalms following
one another, from the 95. to the. 101. For all rejoicing is grounded upon this,
that our Lord Jesus Christ has dyed for us; and by his death has reconciled
us to God, etc, according to that of the holy Apostle. Let him that rejoices,
rejoice in the Lord etc. 1. Cor: 1.31. and Gal: chap: 6.14.

Thus then, all that have any comfort in the sufferings and death of our
Savior, must humble themselves and be obedient to him: as Heb: 5.10. He was
made the author of eternal salvation to them that obey him. And if any will
not do thus: let us here remember again what John the Baptist has said, in
the Gospel according to John. ch: 3.36. He that obeys not the Son, shall
not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

And beside all that has hitherto been said concerning this answer: the
consideration of the sufferings and death of our Savior for us, ought to
provoke us to be willing with all meekenes, to suffer for his sake: as 1. Pet:
2.19. and so forth to the end of the chapter. Here call again to mind, John
15.18.19.20. Virel.
Act: 14.22. 2. Tim: 3.12. Heb: 12.1.2.3.4. For as it is well said of one, The
servants of God may not look to be without afflictions and troubles here, so
long as the devil is not without envy, nor the world without malice, etc.
Hereunto therefore, let us not forget to prepare our selves, according to the
often admonitions of the holy Scriptures in this behalf: and after the most
blessed example of our Savior himself: lest unhappily, we should be like the
unadvised warrior, or builder, that neither considers the charge of the
matter, nor the power of the adversaries Luke 14.28 etc. And lest we should be
in the number of those, which boast at the putting on of the harness, as if
they had already fought the battle, and were presently to put it off. For such
have no good ground, or warrant, for hope of any prosperous and blessed
success.

And yet further; this may in no wise be neglected of us: that all whatsoever
we suffer, or do in obedience to our Savior Christ, and for his sake; it must
proceed of love, and be willingly, yea joyfully, both performed, and endured of
us. For without love, all is nothing, whether we respect God or men. 1, Cor:
13.1.2.3. And therefore worthily says the same Apostle, 2. Ep: 5.14.15. The
love of Christ constrains us: because we thus judge, that if one be dead for
all, then were all dead (that is, were worthy of death, yea of eternal death)
And he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but to him which died for them and rose again. Read also, 1. John.
4.10.11. And James ch: 1. verse. 2. And 1. Pet: 1.6 7.8.9. and ch: 4.12 13.

Finally, the death of our Savior Christ, does most earnestly challenge this
at our hands, and at the hands of all faithful Christians; that we be very
chary that we do by no means, in any point, go about to alter or violate
that most holy covenant, or last will and Testament: which he has for ever
sealed and ratified by his most precious blood, Read Gal: 3.15. and Heb: 9.15,
16, 17. and ch: 13.20. alleged a while since. For this we must know, that if
we keep not the will of our Savior inuiolably, we do frustrate as it were all
those legacies, which he had bequeathed us: as may appear by that which the
Apostle teaches, concerning the abuse of the Sacrament of his death: 1. Cor:
11.26.27.28.29.

Thus then, we may perceive; that according to the notable saying of a learned
man, Pet: Mart in cap: 5. ad Rom-verse. 9.
Nulium habemus librum, vberiori doctrina refertum, quam mortem Christi. Eam si
diligenter excutiamus, omnia ferme officia, quae ad salutem necessaria sunt,
edocebimur. We have no book filled with more plentiful instruction, then the
death of Christ. The which, if we shall diligently search into, we shall be
informed in all duties almost, which be necessary to salvation.

NOw from the duties of the death of our Savior, let us proceed to those
things, which accompanied his death.



Ans. It shows plainly, that although the Jews stood bound, until the death
of our Savior, to worship God, according to the outward ceremonies, and
sacrifices of the law: yet since that time, neither Jew nor Gentile, do stand
bound thereunto; but are to worship God, more spiritually, according to the
instructions, and directions of the Gospel.

Explication and proof.
It is even of it self evident to be so indeed. For seeing God himself has
rent the veil; and that also, even from the top to the bottom: what reason,
or authority, can any man have, to go about to sow it again? And much
less, can any have any found reason, or lawful authority, to hang up another
veil in stead of it.

This has been laid open more at large, in the interpretation: and therefore
we will not stay any longer upon it, at this time.



Insomuch as the kingdom of heaven (both the kingdom of grace, and also the
kingdom of glory) is laid more open unto us, by our Savior Christ then ever
it was under the law, as the rending of the veil gave to understand: we
ought therefore, to be so much the more careful, not only to make our
entrance into the kingdom of grace, but also to continue and increase in
holiness, and in all good fruits thereof, until it shall please God to take us
out of this world unto himself; even to that place, which is said to be
within the veil: that is, into his heavenly kingdom of everlasting blise and
glory. Heb: 6.19.20.

Explication and proof.
It is very meet indeed we should do so, unless we would show our selves,
intollerablie unthankful to God, for his grace in so special manner offered
unto us: according to that notable exhortation, in another place of the Ep: to
the Heb: chap: 10. verse. 19. etc. in these words, Seeing therefore brethren,
that by the blood of Jesus, we may be bold to enter into the Holy place, By the
new and living way which he has prepared for v^, through the veil, that is,
his flesh: And seeing we have an high Priest, which is over the house of God.
Let us draw near with a true heart, in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our
hearts, from an evil conscience. etc. Thus, the old veil (which shadowed)
being rent and taken away: we have a new veil in Christ, which gives a
clear light unto the kingdom of heaven: and therefore we ought so much the
more cheerfully, to walk on forward unto it.

Such therefore are the duties, belonging to the comfort of faith, touching the
rending of the veil of the Temple.



Hereby we are admonished, to take heed, that we be not as the Jews were, a
hard hearted and rebellious people, to despise the counsels and judgments of
God, and to o^pose our selves against Christ: but contrariwise, to learn even
from these reverend works then wrought, by the mighty hand of God; to esteem
most reuerendly of him, as of the glorious Son of God. And to take
encouragement, to lead the lives of the righteous, as becomes the Saints of
God: that so we may both dye the death of the righteous, and also be partakers
o^ their resurrection; in so much as the opening of those graves, was a
testimony from heaven; to declare that all graves, shall one day give up their
dead, as the graves of these Saints did.

Explication and proof.
We may indeed justly be admonished, from the consideration of these reverend
works of God wrought at that instant; to be careful of these duties, both in
judgment, and also in practice: lest, i^ we should b^e like the wicked Jews;
that should come upon us, which fell on them, as the more ancient imprecation
of the holy Prophet, might justly cause us to fear, Psalm. 28.5. They regard
not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands: therefore break
them down and build them not up. This ruin, brought the wicked builders among
the Jews upon themselves, and upon their people: because they rushed
themselves, so proudly, against this building of the Lord, yea even against the
foundation stone, which his own hands had most tryly squared and laid. God of
his infinite mercy, deliver and preserve us always, from that wicked, profane,
and obstinate mind, for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

But let us come to those effects, which these reverend works of God, and the
rare manner of the death of our Savior, wrought in the hearts of the
beholders: yea even in the hearts of the most part of the profane, and wicked
persecutors of him.



That fear, which took hold of them on a sudden by their beholding of them;
ought to take a setteled abode in us for ever: by our continual reading,
hearing, and meditating upon them.

That good testimony, which they gave concerning our Savior, after a sort
constrained^y, and by forcible, or terrible euiction; ought to be yielded of
us, most willingly and gladly.

Finally, to the end we may avoid confounding terror and compunction; yea
utter desolation, with the obstinate sort of the Jews: and to the end, we
may, on the contrary, have peace to our consciences; we must take heed, that
we do nothing either of our selves or by the instigation of others, against
Christ, or against his truth, or against any true Christian professing his
b^essed name, to the least hinderance of the truth; but all that we can, for
Christ and for his truth, and for all that are Christ's, for his truths sake.

Explication and proof.
To these purposes indeed, may the examples, which God has set before us,
stand us in very good and profitable use. God give us grace to make such good
uses of them: and namely, from those excellent weomen, who would by no means
be feared from the profession of their love, and duty, to our Savior; neither
in death nor after. Let their example teach us, to account it a shame for us,
(now since the time of the resurrection of our Savior etc.) not to profes his
name: notwithstanding any terror of the wicked, or any loss, or hurt, that
might any way grow unto us, thereby. Otherwise, these women shall rise up
against us, at the last day. And whereas we cannot now, do the offices of love
to our Savior himself; let us do them to our Christian brethren in his
stead, according as just occasion shall be offered: seeing, as we know, our
Savior does account that done to himself, which is done to the least of them.
Neither let men only be careful, but women also; seeing the example is of
women. For seeing they are heirs of the same grace, let them as companions
with men, be careful to perform like duty with them.

Now in the next place, what duties may this require of us; that God in his
divine providence, did as well fulfill his own will, in frustrating the will
and desire of the Jews touching the breaking of the legs of our Savior, as
in leaving him that pierced our Savior with his spear, to his own wicked
will: and so in either of them, fulfill the prophesies of the holy Scriptures.



We are herein, greatly to praise and glorify the name of God; because he has
hereby, in a very lively manner, manifested and confirmed unto us, the
certainty of his holy counsels: against all doubtful contingencie of contrary
events.

Whereupon also, we may well learn, to confirm our hearts, with all comfort
and peace in believing; to commit our selves to the same his most faithful and
divine providence, while we walk in his holy ways: and that even without
fear of any the least evil to fall upon us, above that he shall think good;
or otherwise, then he will turn it to our singular benefit, in the humbling
and trying of us therewithal.

Explication and proof.
The consideration hereof, may justly teach us so much indeed. And therefore (as
well counsels a learned and godly Preacher) Precemur Deum, vti nobis hanc
gratiam largiatur, vt in omnibus angustijs and difficultatibus, ad sacrosanctam
eius and tutisimam prouidentiam, vt ad sacram anchoram confugiamus, patienter
exitum illius expectantes, vt pulchre monet Psalmus 27. quo tandem, cum eodem
Propheta, vere in has lauds erumpamus, Exspectando exspectani Iehouam, and
inclinauit sese ad me, and audiuit clamorem meum. Psalm: 40.1. That is, Let us
pray to GOD, that he would give us this grace, that in all our straites and
difficulties, we may fly to his most holy and safe providence, The Duties in
r^spect of his burial and continuance in the grave.
as unto a holy ancre-hold, patiently waiting for that issue which he will
give, as the 27. Psalm does notably admonish. To the end, that at the last,
we may with the same Prophet, upon just occasion, break forth into these
praises, I have earnestly (or patiently) waited upon the Lord, and he inclined
himself unto me, and heard my cry. Psalm: 40.1.

LEt us come to the consideration of the burial of our Savior.



To speak generally, all the duties belonging to the comfort of faith in our
Savior, in respect of his death; they may be furthermore required at our
hands, in regard of his burial: the which, together with his continuance in
the grave, is a further confirmation of his death, and of the fruits and
benefits thereof.

Explication and proof.
This stands with good reason. For as the burial is a further confirmation of
his death: so it may be a further admonition unto us, to walk so much the more
carefully, in those duties, which the death it self does challenge at our
hands. And so does the Apostle Paul reason in the 6. cha: to the Rom: from the
12. verse, to the end of the chapter. Let not sin reign therefore in your
mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. Neither give ye
your members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin: but give ye your selves
unto God, as they that are alive from the dead, and give your members as
weapons of righteousness unto God, etc. This general exhortation is raised from
the due consideration of the death and burial of our Savior Christ.

But let us now consider more particularly, what duties, the comfort of the
burial, may require of us.



To speak more particularly, the burial of our Savior, in consideration that
he did not only dye for our sins, but also yielded himself to be buried; to
the end (as has been observed in the Comforts) he might show himself more
clearly, to be the most mighty conqueror over death, and over the grave on
our behalf: it teaches us, first not to content our selves to leave sin for
a certain season, as it were half dead, and so laid forth by the walls; but
to labor still after the full and perfect destruction of it, and to cover it
so deep, and to lay so heavy a weight upon it; that it might never be able to
recover the former life and strength again. And that even to this end; that we
might be still more and more, both willing, and also able, to walk before God
in the duties of the first resurrection: in comfortable hope to attain to the
second resurrection, which shall be of our bodies at the last day; as was
further observed likewise, in the Comforts heretofore.

And secondly, as a consequent hereof; insomuch as our Savior did not refuse
to submit himself, to be in the state and condition of the dead for a time,
and even bodily to be laid down and detained in the grave: we learn, that
we ought to be willing to yield our selves, to the good will and pleasure of
God, in the same behalf: nothing distrusting his goodness toward our souls,
through any fear of death, or the grave, or of him that has the power of
death which is the Devil, or of hell it self, whereof it has a certain
resemblance, both in nature and also in name.

Explication and proof.
So it is indeed, through the guiltines and desert of sin. For all men,
destitute of the grace of God, and void of faith: either do, or may justly
fear, the grave, as it were the suburbs of hell, and an entrance to eternal
destruction.

Yea the excellent servants of God, have so feared it; at such time as they
could not find themselves so well prepared, and fitted to dye in the Lord, as
they desired to be, (as we read, in the 6. Psalm, and in diverse other places
of the holy Scriptures) until that by faith, they had recovered themselves, so
as they could comfort themselves, in certain hope of their eternal salvation:
to say in some measure of good persuasion of heart, O death where is thy sting?
O grave were is thy victory?

Touching one and the same name, attributed both to hell and the grave, this
being a representation of that, by reason of the discomfort of it, to all
unbelievers: it has bin plentifully declared, in the explanation of the
doctrine of our Saviors descension to hell.

And that the duties rehearsed, ought to be yielded, in respect of that
comfort, which the burial of our Savior affords; it is evident in the 6.
chap: of the Ep: to the Rom: above rehearsed: and likewise in the 2. ch: of the
Ep: to the Colossians, where the same is mentioned again, to the same purpose:
as was also alleged in the Comforts.

Furthermore; like as we desire, that the Lord our God, of his infinite mercy,
for our Saviors sake (even because he dyed and was buried for us) would
therefore bury our sins as it were in the grave of Christ, that they might
never come up before him in remembrance against us: so is it our duty, to
bury them our selves; that is, to leave and suppress them in such sort, that
they may never rise up in practice, or allowance with us: to provoke the Lord
against us, as in former times they have done.

And yet further, the due consideration of the godly boldness of Joseph and
Nicodemus; yea and of the women also, in showing forth their love and reverence
toward our Savior in the honorable burial of his body being dead, and that
also in a time of danger: it may justly admonish us, and all Christians, of our
duty, in seeking by all lawful ways and means, to declare that reverend
regard which we have of him. For seeing these did so, toward the dead body of
our Savior; much more ought we to give honor unto him, being alive, and at
the right hand of the majesty of God, ordained the sovereign Lord, and Judge
of all the world.

And hereunto, let us encourage our selves, from that good success, which God
gave to Joseph, in that he moved the heart of Pilate, to grant him his sure:
nothing doubting, but if we do with a single heart, rightly seek the glory of
Christ our Lord; in honoring his Person, in furthering his Gospel, in
succouring his people our brethren, by such authority, and with such riches as
we have, and by means of such good friends, as any of us can make: God will be
with us therein, and bless us above that we can ask or think. Let us also,
animate and hearten our selves hereunto; by beholding that confusion, which the
Lord cast upon the chief Priests, and Pharisees; who made their contrary suit
against our Savior Christ. For although they prevailed with Pilate (a man of
no value, carried hither and thither, in the lightness of his unstaid conceit
and affection) so that they had full liberty granted them by him, to put their
malicious devise in practice, according to their own hearts desire: yet God
from heaven laughed them to scorn, and utterly confounded them, howsoever they
would not see it, neither will their graceless posterity see it to this day:
but do abide still in the obstinacy of their wicked forefathers, who most
wretchedly renounced the Lord our Savior and Redeemer. But thanks be to our
God: who has given us grace to see it. Let us therefore abide faithful to our
Savior in all good duty; yea, let us increase more and more therein: nothing
doubting of most happy and blessed success in the end, against all contrary
endeavors of all the enemies of our Savior, and his Gospel, whether more
secret and crafty underminers, or more open and violent oppugners of the same:
whether by spiritual encounter of false prophecy by speech and writing, or by
outward force of hostility and war. Our Lord Jesus Christ (whom no force
could hinder from rising again out of the grave, wherein his body lay dead)
will most assuredly prevail against all his adversaries, of all sorts
whosoever. They shall all be subdued under his feet, as we read Psalm. 110.1.
and 1. Cor. 15.25.

Moreover; and beside all that has been said: seeing the wickedness of the
nature of us all, is discovered by the example both of Jews and Gentiles, in
their extreme contempt, and most cruel pursuit against the Son of God: yea,
even that wickedness, whereby the Devil at the first; corrupted our first
Parents, in moving them to aspire to be as Gods (For we are all by nature very
ra^ke rebels, descended of a traitorous stock: The danger of not believing the
Articles of his sufferings.
so that justly might the Lord cast a double condemnation upon the world, unless
it had pleased him, to the more wonderful overthrow of the Devil, and all
reprobates, to turn that to the salvation of the elect, whereby we had
deserved to be twice condemned. Let us therefore, from hence learn betimes,
and so forth, to persevere continually, to humble our selves under the holy
hand of God: and to seek for his grace and mercy, that we be never led into
the tentation of the Devil; that we should be found rebels and traitors
against the Son of God. And chiefly, let all such, take heed to themselves,
whosoever be in high place above the rest: and are endued with special gifts
of wit and learning, etc. For if they be left unto themselves, and to the will
of the Devil; the cause of our Savior Christ shall no sooner come before them,
but the higher their places, and the greater the pride of their natural wit,
or the show of their holiness is; by so much will they show themselves to be
the more sore and spiteful adversaries unto him, in the resistance of his
Gospel, and in vexing the true and faithful professors thereof.

To conclude this part of our inquiry, this we may boldly affirm: that if any
doctrine will do us good, this of the sufferings of our Savior must have a
chief place in the effecting of it. And it cannot be, that it should be truly
known, and believed: but it must needs have such manifold and admirable
effects, as have been rehearsed.



Whosoever do not believe, that he has suffered all these extreme pains and
reproaches, even comparable to the reproach and torment of hell, both in body and
soul for their sins; neither that the sufferings of our Savior alone, are
perfectly sufficient for their redemption and reconciliation with God; neither
do regard to know and obey the Gospel in this be ^a^fe, they shall surely dye
in their sins, and justly bear their own reproach and torment, both in body
and soul for ever in hell. Specially such, as having received knowledge, and
some taste of the heavenly gift; do afterward fall away: and tread under foot
the Son of God, accounting the blood of the Testament, as an unholy thing.

Explication and proof.
So indeed we read, Heb: 6.4.5.6. and ch: 10.28.29, 30.31. with a more full
declaration, then you have rehearsed out of the^, Read also, John 8.24. where
our Saui: generally affirms, Except ye believe that I am he, ye shall dye in
your sins. And John the Baptist, John ch: 3.36. He that obeys not the Son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. This wrath of God, is
upon such even in this life: but it shall be more heavy to the soul immediately
after this life ended; but most of all both to body and soul, when our Saui:
shall come to execute his last judgment: according to the word of our Saui:
himself. Luke 9, 26. And of the Apost. Paul, 2. These. 1.6.7.8. etc. Verily, as
our Savior had the perfect sense and feeling of his dolorous sufferings for
sin: so will he come with perfect indignation, against all such, as shall
despise his sufferings, and take delight in their sins.

To speak more particularly, if we believe not to be set loose by the bonds of
Christ, we shall lie bound still in the fetters and chains of our sins: for
unless the Son make us free, we cannot be free. If we believe not that Chr: our
Lord was scourged for us; we our selves shall taste of the whip of gods wrath. If
we believe not that he was as the sheep before the shearer, dumb for our
sakes: we shall never be able to open our mouth before God to plead for our
selves. If we believe not that he was condemned at the judgment seat of
Pilate for us: we shall be condemned before the tribunal seat of Gods judgment.
Finally if we believe not that he sustained the torments of soul for us,
co^parable to the torments of hell for a tim^; we shall for ever be tormented
with them. Thus necessary is it, that every true Christian, do believe firmly
in the most perfect, and alsuf-ficient sufferings of our Sa: Ch: endured by him
for every one of us. Let us therefore pray accordingly, as the Apostle teaches
us, Heb. 13.20.21. That the God of peace would vouchsafe even through the blood
of the everlasting covenant to make us perfect in all good works, to do his
will working in us that which is pleasant in his sight through Jesus Christ, to
whom be praise for ever and ever, Amen.

Belief in God the Son, who the third day rose again from the dead.
As for those that go about any way to lessen the grieuousnes of the sufferings
of our Savior; The ground and meaning of his glorification in general.
as if he had but only made a show of suffering as the Simonians and diverse
other heretics are said to have fa^tastically imagined: or as if the
sufferings of Martyrs must be joined with the sufferings of Christ, to the
perfect merit of salvation: or as it the sufferings of Christ, were not
properly and chiefly in his soul, nor necessary so to be: or on the contrary,
as if the soul of our Savior had suffered after death, in the place of
torment in hell, or that the Godhead of our Savior suffered, as the heretics
called Theopaschitae affirmed: let us utterly withdraw our hearts from their
opinions, being erroneous from the faith, both on the right hand and on the
left, in excess and in defect.

Belief in God the Son, who the third day rose again from the dead, and so
began his exaltation or glorifying.
Having thus gone through the doctrine of faith, concerning the whole
humiliation of our Savior Christ in our humane nature; even from his
incarnation, to his very last sufferings unto death: yea even to the last
moment of time wherein he continued in the grave in the state and condition of
the dead. Let us now henceforth, proceed to the doctrine of that his
exaltation and glory, which followed the same his humiliation and sufferings.
For this is the orderly course of the revealing of our Savior Christ to his
Church. And herein consists the whole doctrine of our belief in him the
second person of the most holy and blessed Trinity, the Son of God: that he
has taken our nature, to the end he might be a meet mediator for us unto God,
to the purchasing and performing of our eternal redemption, justification, and
salvation. According to that which our Savior himself said to two of his
Disciples, the same day wherein he rose again from the dead. O ye fools
(says he) and slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken:
Ought not the Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his
glory? Luke 24. ver. 28. According also to that of the Apost Peter. 1. ep.
1.10.11. Where he affirms that the prophets inquired diligently, after the
time and season, wherein the sufferings of our Savior should be revealed, and
the glory which should follow the same. Unto whom (as the Apostle says
further) it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but that unto us they
should minister the things which are showed unto us. etc. And according to that
of the Apost^e Paul, Act. 26.22.23. I witness no other things, but those which
the Prophets and Moses did say should come to pass: to wit, that Christ should
suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, etc.

Wherefore, seeing by the ministry of the Evangelists and Apostles, the glory
of our Savior Christ which followed his sufferings, is revealed unto us in the
holy Scriptures of the new Testament, as well as the sufferings themselves: let
us according to the example of the holy Prophets, inquire after the same. First
of all therefore,

The glory of our Savior Christ which followed his sufferings, comprehends.

First, the deposition or laying down and leaving of al his humane infirmities,
and natural weaknesses in the grave.

Secondly, the recovering assuming, and taking to himself, that whole
perfection of our humane nature, wherein God at the first had created Adam: yea
and that in a more excellent and perfect degree, at might best beseem the
natural Son of God, the eternal King and Savior of his people.

Thirdly, the glory of our Savior Christ comprehends that more clear,
sensible, and full manifesting of his divine nature, and the infinite power and
grace thereof: both by the raising up of the body from the dead, an^ also b^
the ascending of the whole humane nature, both body and soul up into heaven to
the right hand of the Majesty of God.

Fourthly, it comprehends that possession of all sovereign and divine power,
which he has in heaven: even in that he is in the nature of man, The gru^d and
meaning of his glorification in general: and the Comfort arising from the same.
seated at the same right hand of God the Father, to rule and govern all
things.

Finally, the glory of our Savior Christ comprehends that authority which
he has (even in that he is the Son of man) to judge the whole world, at the
last day.

Thus large indeed, is the glory and exaltation of our Savior Christ even in
his humane nature: Explication and proof.
answerable to the degrees of his humiliation, considered before at large. The
which humiliation of our Savior, we will here briefly call to mind, for the
more clear illustration of that glory which we do presently inquire of. For
like as, though he were the Son of God, in most high glory one with the Father,
yet humbled himself; (first to take our humane nature to the divine, ^n
personal union: secondly in that same personal union, to take all the
infirmities of the same our humane nature, even all infirmities which sin has
brought upon us, such as are hunger and thirst, wearines, faintnes, sorrow, yea
so as in this respect he has yielded himself in all things like unto us, sin
only excepted, as the holy Apostle teaches us: thirdly in the same our nature
to be subject to the whole law of God, both ceremonial, and therefore was
ccircu^cised; moral, and therefore was subject to his natural parents;
judicial, and therefore was subject to death by civil judgment: yea fourthly,
more then this, to bear ye whole curse of the law and spiritual punishments in
his soul, whatsoever were to be endured of him for us to a kind of death
thereof, in feeling the horror of Gods forsaking of his creature for a time, so
far as it might be a punishment of our sin upon him, without any sinful
forsaking of God on his part, as we had done: finally, as our Savior being the
Son of God, humbled himself, not only to death, but even to descend into the
grave, and to lie for a time in the most low and base estate and condition of
the dead, as touching his body) so after the humiliation even of the divine
nature (after a sort) by reason of the personal union with the humane for the
work of our Redemption and salvation; the humane nature (the same work of our
redemption accomplished) has bin glorified and exalted with a certain divine
glory in such sort as has bin also expressed. Both which points of our faith
(as well humiliation as exaltation and glory of our Savior) the Apostle Paul
does notably comprise in that one place of his holy ep: or letter sent to the
Philippi. as we read, ch: 2. v. 5. Let the same mind be in you (says the
Apostle) that was even in Christ Jesus, etc. even to the 11. v. I pray read the
text in your Bible. And Act. 3.13. The God of Abraham, and Isaak, and Iaakob,
the God of our Fa hers (says the Apostle Peter) has glorified his Son Jesus
whom ye betrayed, etc. The comfort of this most high glory and exaltation of
our Lord and Sau: Chr: in our humane nature, after that he had perfectly
humbled himself, and suffered for our sins in the same, though personally
united to the divine nature: the comfort is exceeding great, in this most
exceeding great work and mystery of our redemption, according to the
thanksgiving of the Virgin Mary Luk, 1.46. etc. and according to the
thanksgiving of Zacharias, as it follows in the same ch: from the 68. v. And
even herein is the comfort exceeding great, that we may rejoice with joy
unspeakable and glorious, seeing the fruit of this humiliation and exaltation
of our Saui: is our salvation and glory also: according to that, Heb: 2.9.10.
We see Jesus crowned with glory and honor, who was made a little inferior to
the Angels, through the sufferings of death, that by Gods grace he might taste
death for all men, etc. Whereby as it follows, he brought many children unto
glory, etc. And 1. Pet: 1, 9, In whom you believe and rejoice with joy
unspeakable and glorious. Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation
of your souls. For this we must well understand and consider, that albeit the
purchase of our redemption and salvation has bin perfectly made and obtained
for us, by the merit and worthiness of the humiliation and sufferings of our Sa:
in a limited and finit time; yet the communicating of them unto us, and our
attaining and inioying of the^, to the comfort of our faith here in this life,
and to the glorifying of us for ever in the kingdom of heaven, depends upon
the advancement and eternal glorification of ^ur Savior. So then, it was
necessary, that our Sa: Ch: should not only humble himself, and suffer for
the sins of us, most vile and base sinners; whose sins and reproach, he of his
infinite love and pity toward us, took upon him: but also that he should be
lifted up and adua^ced in the highest degree of glory, because of the
excellency of his divine person, and because of the dignity of his most high
office of eternal meditation, and for the glory of God the father: according to
his own most holy and gracious counsel; and according to the revelation of the
good pleasure of his divine will herein, by the spirit of prophecy, from the
beginning of the world.

Now furthermore, as the comfort hereof is exceeding great to our faith; The
ground and meaning of his glorification in general. And our duty in respect
thereof.
so ought the duty to be, both in the affection of our heart, and also in the
external actions and obedience of our lives: as we may perceive by that which
has been alleged concerning the comfort, Philip. 2.5. Let the same mind be
in you that was even in Christ Jesus etc. And as we read from the beginning of
the chapter: If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, (that is, any
Christian consolation, to wit, either from his humiliation or from his
exaltation) if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any
compassion and mercy, Fulfill my joy (says the holy Apostle) that ye be like
minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one judgment, That
nothing be done through contention, or vain glory, but that in meekenes of
mind, every man esteem other better then himself. Look not every man on his
own things, but every man also on the things of other men. And then it
follows (as was alleged a little before) Let the same mind be in you that
was even in Christ Jesus, etc. And so the Apostle lays open the ground of the
former duties, from that which is the ground of all, both former, and present,
and also of all perpetual and future comfort. Likewise in the former Epistle
of Peter. chap. 1. ver. 8. alleged before that; concerning the comfort. Where
(from the comfort and joy, that we have by the sufferings first, and then from
the glory of our Savior) he exhorts all Christians, more and more to rejoice
in him, and to love him; yea, even to rejoice in him in the midst of the
tentations and trialls of faith: the which (as the Apostle teaches) is more
precious then gold which perishes (though it be tried with fire) that it may
be found to their praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus
Christ. And afterward. verse. 13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your minds:
be sober and trust perfectly on the grace which is brought unto you, by the
revelation of Jesus Christ, As obedient children, etc. To the which end also
let us remember always, that upon condition we suffer with our Savior
Christ, we shall also be glorified with him. For by humility is the way unto
glory: according to that. 2. Tim. 2.11.12. It is a true saying, for if we be
dead with him, we shall also live with him. If we suffer, we shall also reign
with him. Read also Rom 8.28.29.30. etc. to the end of the chapter: and
likewise that notable exhortation. Heb. 12.1.3. etc.

But that we be not ouerlong in the general consideration of the most high
glory and exaltation of our Savior Christ, let us know, that as all comfort
is warranted unto us by it: so all duty is justly made tributarie unto it. Yea
even to the yielding of all divine honor and glory to this our Lord and
Savior; simply unto him as he is God, yea as he is in one Person both God and
man, for the Godheads sake: like as we yield civil honor to the Crown,
Scepter, and chair of Estate of the King, for the honor we bear to the King
himself. Yea, much rather to the humanity for the De^ties sake, because it is
never separated from the Deity: as the Throne, Scepter, and Crown are
oftentimes, from the person of the King, etc. Homil. 1. in Hist. Pass.
So that (as learned Beza says very well) Toti personae Christi debetur
adoratio religiosa, quem vna implet gloria, Deitatis nimirum respectu d^recte,
quatenus verus est Deus: humanitatis vero oblique, quatenus nimirum haec
humanitas est Dei filij humanitas, etc. That is, Religious worship is due to
the whole person of Christ, who^ one glory fills: to his Deity directly,
insomuch as he is very God; but to his humanity indirectly, and only in this
respect, that humanity is the humanity or manhood of the Son of God.

Only now, let us observe generally, concerning the glory and exaltation of
our Savior Christ, that as before his resurrection he did more specially
execute his Prophecy, and at his death his Priesthood, though his kingly
authority was not in the mean while idle and without operation: so although by
his Resurrection, and his whole exaltation following the same, he does more
principally exercise his spiritual kingdom: yet he does not lay aside his
Prophecy and Priesthood. For they must all continue for ever; insomuch as by
the grace of his everlasting kingdom, he continues for ever the effect of
all that which was once only done touching the act, in a limited space of
time: according to that. Acts. 5.31. The particular degrees of his
Glorificat^on.
Him has God lifted up with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior to
give repentance to Israel, and remission of sins. And for the continuance of
the Prophecy of our Savior: read Act. 3.22. and so forth to the end of the
chapter: yea, and that not only after his Resurrection, Act 1.3. but also
after his Ascension up into heaven. Ioh. 16.5.7. etc. 12.15.25. Act. cha. 2.
and Ephesians. 4.7.8. etc. So that we may truly say, Jesus Christ yesterday, and to
day the same is also for ever. Heb. 13.8.

Hitherto more generally of that glory which followed the sufferings of our
Savior Christ.

WE come now to the particular degrees thereof, as they are set down, in the
Articles of our Belief.



The articles of our belief, teach both me and every Christian, to believe in
Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God, our Lord; that after he had suffered
under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, buried, and descended into hell: The
third day he rose again from the dead, ascended up into heaven, sits at the
right hand of God the Father almighty: and that from thence he shall come to
judge both the quick and the dead.

Explication* and proof.
In these words in deed, the particular degrees of the glorious exaltation of
our Savior Christ are contained. The first whereof is his Resurrection from
the dead. Act. 3.13. 1. Pet. 1.21. in which respect he is called the first
fruits, and the first begotten of the dead. 1. Cor. 15.20. and Colos 1.18 Let
us therefore in the first place, consider of this first degree. And to begin
withal, insomuch as the holy Scriptures, must be the ground and warrant of
every Article of our faith, as has been hitherto observed, and as we learn
from the practice of Saint Paul in his preaching of this point, as well as of
other. 1. Cor. 15.1.4. and 2. Tim. 2.8. and from the practice of our Savior
himself after that he was risen, as we read Luke, 24. verses 25.27.44.46:
for otherwise in matter of faith, whatsoever is without warrant from the word,
it is fancy and not faith.



The holy history is faithfully recorded at large, by all the holy
Evangelists. Matthew. 28. Marc. 16. Luke. 24 John. chapter 20. and chap. 21. The same
is more briefly testified, in many other places of the holy Scripture.

Explication and proof.
Let us therefore, from these holy Scriptures, search out the doctrine of the
Resurrection of our Savior from the dead. The which also, (because it shows
a notable difference betwixt our Savior Christ and all other men; insomuch as
the most excellent men when they are once dead, do cease all their actions
here in this world, and their thoughts are at an end, so that there is nothing
to be said furthermore of them, then what they did or suffered while they were
alive; whether we look to Moses or Elijah, or any other: but the Acts of our
Savior Christ are infinitely more and greater after his death then they were
before, if we shall consider them not only in the raising up of his own body,
and the bodies of many other that were dead, and in working of many signs and
miracles by himself; but also in giving his wonderful gifts unto men
immediately after his ascension, and in working most strange works by them, by
the power of his divine word and spirit, and in giving his graces and by
working of his works by his holy servants from time to time even to this day.
Let us so much the more diligently, and with so much the greater delight,
settle our minds to consider of this point of holy Doctrine, and so also of
those which do follow. Remembering always, that this is so necessary a ground
of our faith and salvation; that unless our Savior Christ were risen again,
all faith and all preaching were vain. 1. Cor. 15.14. therefore our Savior
himself does stir us up to an earnest consideration of it. Revel. 1.18,
saying, I am alive, but I was dead: and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen.

Question. But in what order shall we proceed, The order of handling this
Article of his resurrection.
to consider of this doctrine of the holy Resurrection of our Savior, from
that history and ground of it, which you have already mentioned?

Answer. I have heard you teach, that diverse things are carefully to be
examined, to the end we may profitably understand and believe it.



The first of them was: what this word of the Resurrection does signify in
this Article.

Secondly, the time when our Savior did rise again.

Thirdly, the place from whence he arose.

Fourthly, the manner how.

Fifthly, the reasons or causes why he rose again.

Sixthly, the proofs and confirmations that our Savior is risen again.

Seventhly, the comfortable fruits of his resurrection.

Eighthly, the duties arising from the same comforts.

Finally, the danger of not believing in our Savior Christ risen again.

Explication
These were the things in deed, which we propounded to our selves to consider
of; as those, in the compass whereof, the whole doctrine of the resurrection,
will (through the grace of God) be sifted out. Let us therefore examine these
points one by one. And first of all,



The word Resurrection (or to rise again) does properly belong unto the body,
and signifies the quickening and setting of the body on the feet again.

Explication and proof.
It is true. That is said properly to rise again, which was fallen before: but
the body of our Savior Christ was that which was fallen. And therefore that
alone did rise again. Nevertheless this could not be done, but by the return
and reuniting of the soul unto it, the which by death was separated from it
before. Now that the death of the body (which comes by the separation of the
soul from it) is usually signified by the word of falling: it is plain in
many places of the holy Scriptures; and namely Numb. 14.29.32. Your carkases
shall fall in this wilderness. And 1. Cor. 1^.5. there they were overthrown.
But Numb. 26.65. Moses speaking of the same destruction, or casting down,
expresses it by these words. They shall die in the wilderness. Likewise whereas
the Apostle says. 1. Cor. 1^.8 There fell in one day three and twenty
thousand: Moses reporting the same fall, says that all these, yea a thousand
more died in that plague. Read also Leuit. 26.7.8. Psalm 82 7. By the same word
of falling does our Savior Christ himself speak before hand of his death:
Ioh. 12.24. in that he says, Verily, verily, I say unto you: Except the wheat
corn fall into the ground and die, it bideth alone: but if it die, it brings
forth much fruit. And that by the Resurrection, is meant the rising of the
body; the history makes it plain: because it was the body which the
Soldiers watched. It was the body which the Angel told the women that it was
risen again: even that body of his, which they came to imbalme, and the
removing whereof Mary so much lamented; she thinking that some man had taken
it out of the grave. It was the body, by the feeling and handling whereof, our
Savior did assure his Disciples, that he was verily and in deed, and not in
appearance only risen again. The other words of the Article, do likewise
make this plain, in that it is said, He rose again from the dead: that is to
say, from the estate and condition of those that were bodily dead; of the
which, all that died in the Lord; were in their souls alive with the Lord. And
thus in the Prophecy of Isa. chap. 26.19. the word of resurrection is referred
to the body expressly. Thy dead men shall live (says the Prophet) even with my
body shall they rise. Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, etc.

It is true in deed, that these words of falling and rising again, are used
otherwise in a borrowed kind of speech, to signify the falling, that is the
sinning of the soul, and the spiritual calamity thereof: or the rising, that
is, the returning of the soul unto God by repentance, and amendment of that
sin, whereby it fell from obedience to God before: as Ier. chap. 8.4. Thus
says the Lord, The meaning of the word Resurrection.
Shall they fall and not arise? shall he turn away, and not turn again? And
Luc. 2.34. Beheld (says Simeon speaking of our Savior Christ a few days
after he was borne) this child is appointed for the fall, and for the rising
of many in Israel. Likewise Romans 9.31.32. They have stumbled at the stumbling
stone. As it is written, Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling stone, and a rock to
make men fall: but every one that believes in him shall not be ashamed. And
again, chap. 11. verse. 11. I demand then (says the Apostle) have they
stumbled, that they should fall? God forbid: but through their fall, salvation
comes unto the Gentiles, to provoke them to follow them. Wherefore if the
fall of them be the riches of the Gentiles, how much more shall their abundance
be? And verse, 15. For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the
world, what shall the receiving be, but life from the dead? And in this respect
also, the Apostle John tells us of a first Resurrection: that is to say, from
the death of sin, wherein we naturally lie dead: before we can escape the
second death, and be partakers of the Resurrection of the body to everlasting
life. Revel. 20.5.6. And the Apostle Paul. Romans 6.1.2. etc. 12. But neither
this falling, nor this rising, belongs to our Savior Christ, because he
never knew sin. For his soul being most pure and holy from the womb,
continued so in the whole course of his life, even to death, and in death,
without any falling, or the least declining that might be, from the obedience
of God. Thus then we see, how in the first place, the word of Resurrection or
rising again, is to be understood in this article of our faith. Wherein,
though we have been somewhat long, yet I trust not without some good fruit.



The time is expressed in the words of the Article, The third day he rose
again from the dead. But yet more particularly, the holy Story shows, that
it was in the morning of that third day, very early, even at the rising of the
Sun.

Explication. and proof.
So it was in deed. For first, concerning the third day, it is agreeable to
that which our Savior himself spoke before, of the time of his Resurrection.
Mat. 16.21. and chapter 17.23. and chapter 20.19. Ioh. 2.19. And the same day that our
Savior did perform this; the Angel testifies, that it was the third day
after that he had suffered: according to the same words of our Savior. Luke.
24.7 And the same day the two Disciples acknowledge that it was the very third
day, verse, 21. of the same chapter. And our Savior himself again, verse,
46, Likewise the holy Apostles, first Peter Act. 10.40. and then Paul. 1. Cor.
15.14. He rose the third day, according to the Scriptures.

And that the same Resurrection of our Savior, was early in the morning, even
about the sun rising: it is evident by the holy Story, insomuch as he was
risen before Mary Magdalen could come to the Sepulcher, though she rose while
it was yet dark, and hasted her journey thither: as we read, Ioh. 20.1. Now
the first day of the week came Mary Magdalen early, when it was yet dark unto
the Sepulcher (for so early did she set out) and yet when she came, she saw
the stone taken away from the toombe, etc. And Mark. 16.2. it is reported that
other women also; early in the morning, in the first day of the week, came to
the Sepulcher, when the sun was yet rising, etc. But the body of our Savior
was risen before, as the Evangelist does furthermore testify, verse, 9.
saying, And when Jesus was risen again in the morning, which was the first day
of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalen, etc.

Thus then, touching the time of the Resurrection of our Savior, it is noted
three ways. First, that it was on the third day after his sufferings,
reckoning from the beginning of them (as we may well do) though in deed it
was the third day, albeit we reckon from his death and burial, as has been
observed heretofore. Secondly, it is noted to be early in the morning, near
about the rising of the Sun. Thirdly, that it was on the first day of the
week: The time when he did rise again.
that is to say, the day after the Jews Sabbath, which was that day that in
the weekly recourse the^eof, was answerable to the first day that ever was:
even that wherein the world was first made by the Son of God. Not a by an
instrument or servant; but even by his almighty power, together with the
Father: by whom also, the light was created, and brake forth as on this day in
the morning, which was the first light that ever lightened this world: as we
read Genesis 1.1.3. Ioh. 1.1.3. Col. 1.16. and Heb. 1.2. The which day also, is
that which we call the Lords day, for a memorial of this resurrection of our
Savior: and do keep it holy, instead of the Jews Sabbath.



First, ^n that our Savior Christ rose again the third day as he said that
he would; we may well observe his divine power. Secondly, in that he appointed
this third day to be the first of the week, even the day which answers to
the first day of the worlds creation: we may well observe that as by our
Savior, (in that he was God from the beginning) the world was made; so now by
the grace of his mediation (in that he is both God and man) the ame world being
corrupted and decayed shall be restored again. Thirdly, in that he rose so ear^y
in the morning even with the Sun: it fitteth very well with that prophecy of
Mal. chapter 4.^. to lead us to acknowledge him to be the true Sun of
righteousness; to give light to all the the e^ect of God who do naturally sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, till this heavenly light do lighten our
eyes, by the bright beams of his Gospel, through the inward operation, and
illumination of his holy Spirit.

Explication and proof.
These things verily, may we not causlesly, admonish our selves of, from this
holy consideration of the time. Yea, so may we observe, both his power and
divine grace; that how soever foolish and wicked men, armed themselves and
watched the body of our Savior, as if they would willingly (no doubt if they
could) have knocked him down with their bills and halbards; or have taken and
carried him to the chief Priests to have been crucified again, so soon as
he should in their sight, have offered to rise out of the grave. Yet it was as
impossible for them, to keep him down that he should not rise, etc. or to
hinder the fruit and effect of his resurrection; that by it the world should
not be enlightened with the knowledge of his salvation: as it was for them, or
for all the wicked in the world, with all their power or devises which they
might possibly use, to hinder the Sun one moment of time, from the course of
the rising thereof; and that it should not cast forth the bright and warm
beams of it, ever the face of the earth. And so likewise is it vnpossble at
this day, or for the time to come, (eue^ as it has bin from the first time of
our Savior Christ's resurrection) that any adverse power should be able to
hinder the light of the gospel, that it should not shine forth there, where as
God does command the light of it to break out for the comfort of his people.
Yea and though it falls out by reason of the sins and unthankfulness of
the world, that it is obscured and darkened for a time; as the Sun is
sometime by a thick cloud: yet it is impossible, that it should not according
to the good will and pleasure of God, renew the light; like as the Sun, after
a while breaks through the cloud again. Th^s then, the time of the
resurrection of our Savior, may fitly lead us to consider of the comfortable
prophe^ie of Malachi, in the place alleged before, in these words of the
Prophet, Unto you that fear my name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise,
and health shall be under his wings, and ye shall go forth, etc. And likewise
it may aptly put us in remembrance of the like prophecies of new heavens and a
new earth, and of a new and clear light, to be made by our Lord Jesus Christ,
at the manifesting of himself, and through the breaking forth of his Gospel,
and the publishing of it to all the nations of the world. Isai. 60.1.3, etc.
and chapter 65.17.19. and chapter 66.22. and Zech. 14.7.9. And even for this cause (as
it seems) would the Lord then begin the world to come: even in the morning
with the light (as the time of the Gospel is termed, 1. John 2.8.) to put a
difference betwixt it and the former world, The place from whence he did rise
again.
which in the creation thereof was begun in darkness: for darkness covered all:
as Genesis 1.1.

Hitherto of the time when our Savior rose again.

THe place now follows to be considered of us. Which therefore was the place
whence our Savior did rise again?

The grave wherein he was buried* and continued to the third day, (as it were
among the dead, and in the very state and condition of the dead) that was the
place, from whence he rose the third day, even from the dead, his body being
quickened by the returning of the soul unto it again.

Explication and proof.
It is true. For that was the very place whether the women came early to seek
the body of our Savior, but saw that it was gone. And the Angel speaking of
the same place, tells them, He is not here, but is risen: remember how he
spoke unto you etc. Luke 24.6. And Mark 16.6. He is risen, he is not here:
behold the place where they put him. And Matthew. 28.6. He is not here, for he is
risen, as he said: come see the place where the Lord was laid. And in this
respect, let us call to mind, that (to the end there might be no pretense of
cavil against the resurrection of our Savior from the very place where he
was laid) the holy Story assures us, that the sepulcher, in the which he was
laid, was by Gods providence newly hewn out of the rock, and that never any
had been buried in it, till our Savior was laid there. Matthew. 26.60. John
19.41. Let this for the present, suffice touching the place.

THe manner how our Savior Christ arose out of the grave, is next to be
examined.

The holy Story reports it thus. While the unbelieving and malicious Jews,
little thinking that our Savior Christ should indeed rise again the third
day, as he had said that he would: and yet, to put the matter out of question,
gathered together, set, and charged a watch, or garrison of soldiers, to keep
the sepulcher wherein the body of our Savior was buried, lest his Disciples
(as they pretended) should come by night, and steal it away, and say to the
people, he is risen from the dead; and lest (as they further pretended to
fear) that by this means, the last error should be worse then the first: the
Lord in this while, even early in the morning on the third day, sent his holy
Angel from heaven, who caused a great earthquake, and rolled away that great
stone which was laid over the sepulcher, and sat upon it, having a countenance
like lightening, and his raiment white as snow: so that for fear of him, the
keepers were astonished, and become as dead men: so that (as the holy Evangelist
testifies) our Savior Christ did rise again from the dead even in this time,
according as he had said that he would.

Explication and proof.
Such indeed was the manner of the resurrection of our Savior, as the
Evangelist Matthew reports it, chapt. 27.62, etc. to the end of the chapter,
and cha. 28. verse 2.4. So that we may truly say, that he rose again in a
divine manner: insomuch as he rose by his own divine power, and so declared
himself mightily, to be the Son of God: according to that we read, Romans
1.4. and John 2.19. and 10.18 as we have seen before. Neither is it any thing
against this, that the raising up of our Savior is attributed to the Father,
Acts. 2.24.30.33. and chap. 3.15. and 5.30.31. and 13.30.33.34.37. Romans 8.11.
Ephesians. 1.20. and 2.6. and 1. Pet. 1.21: this is not against it I say, insomuch as
there is but one Deity both of the Father and the Son.



Like as it is a greater glory to an earthly Prince, to suppress his adversary
by sending forth some Captain, with a small number of soldiers, then if he
should go forth against him in his own person, and with a royal army: so
was it more glorious for our Savior, to do this exploit, by one of his
Angels, The manner how he did rise again.
then if he had done it more immediately, by the glory of his own power.

Expli. The similitude is very fit and plain. For thus may we well reason;
that if one Angel of Christ, has so great power, that he can shake the earth:
and so great glory, that the sight of him does take away all valor from a
company of armed soldiers; yea does strike them with such confusion, as they
become forth with like dead men: how infinite then is the divine glory of our
Savior Christ himself? and how unmeasurable is his power, who has thousand
thousands of the Angels ready at his beck and commandment? Moreover, let us
add to this, that our Savior did not vouchsafe this wicked company to have
the sight of him as being utterly unworthy thereof. And therefore also would he
not show himself openly at Jerusalem, to the chief Priests, or Pilate, etc.
but choseth to manifest himself only to his D^sciples, and appoints Galile
(where he began his preaching) to be the place rather the^ Jerusalem, or any
other near to it: had it not been for the more speedy comfort of his
Disciples. And though he showed himself once, to more then five hundred
together, as we are afterward somewhat more purposedly to consider: yet it is
therewithal said, that all these were of the brethren, 1. Cor. 15.6. and Act.
10.41. Furthermore, touching the manner of the resurrection of our Savior, it
is to be observed, that he would not yet show himself in his perfect glory,
because the time of it was not yet come; though he was already entered into
the first degree of it, by this his resurrection: for he reserved the perfect
manifestation of his glory to his second coming. Neither were his Disciples
fit to have endured the brightness and excellency of it.



By that which the Evangelist Luke writes, chap. 24. verse 12. and by that
likewise which the Evangelist John records, chap. 20.5.7. it seems that our
Savior Christ ros^ out of the grave naked; insomuch, as he left the linen
clothes (wherein he was buried) in the grave.

Explication and proof.
So indeed do the Evangelists write. Peter (says Saint Luke) looked into the
Sepulcher, and saw the linen clothes laid by themselves, and departed,
wondering in himself at that which was come to pass. That which Saint Luke
writes concerning Peter; the Evangelist Saint John testifies concerning
himself, that he likewise saw the linen clothes lie still in the Sepulcher:
yea he testifies furthe^, that both Peter, and he himself, saw the kerchief
that was upon his head, not lying with the linen clothes, but wrapped together
in a place by it self. Thus therefore it seems to be evident, that our
Savior Christ rose naked out of the grave.

Hereby our Savior would leave as it were a perfect token behind him, that he
was ri en again. And besides, it was most agreeable to that glorified estate
of his body, which it was raised up in: that he should do so.

Explication and proof.
It is true. For first, that the linen clothes (the apparel of death as a man
may say) left behind, yea and handsomely folded up, were a token that our
Savior was rise^ again; and that his body was not by any other taken out of
the grave, it may well be concluded: because it is against all reason, that any
should take away the body naked; whether they were friends or foes. If they
were friends, it is out of all question (even of it self) that they would not.
If they were enemies, ^hey would rather have left the body, and taken away the
linen, it being (no doubt) of some good worth: ^hen to have taken away the
body, and left the linen behind.

Secondly, that it was most agreeable to the glorified estate of the body of
our Savior, (I mean it being at the least in a great part, though as yet not
su^ly glorified till the ascension) it may be considered from the estate of
mankind in the first creation: and also because he stood in no need of any
clothing, to keep his body either from cold or heat, etc. Nevertheless in
respect of the infirmity of those to whom he showed himself, he neither took
unto him the full glory of his humane nature: neither refused to use such
apparel, as he thought meet, as it is after to be further observed.

The like is to be said concerning the bodies of those Saints, that rose out of
their graves; whom God no doubt apparelled, and did not send them naked into
the city, for common honesties sake, etc. The which resurrection of theirs
also; because it serves to set forth the manner of our Savior his
resurrection: we are now to consider of it, in this place.



The Evangelist Matthew reports it in these words, as we read, ch: 27,
52.53. Many bodies of the Saints which slept arose, And came out of the graves
after his resurrection and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many.

Explication and proof.
This memorable record, ought not to be in any wise forgotten, when we speak
of the resurrection of our Savior: insomuch as hereby it is evident, by the
faithful testimony of the Evangelist; that he showed himself to be such a
first fruits of the dead, that should sanctify the whole lump: and therefore
would not himself rise alone, though he was (we grant) the first that rose
from the dead, and that also by his own power never to dye again; For though
sundry other had been raised up from death to life, yet they died again.
Neither did ever any before, neither shall any for ever after, rise again by
their own power, as our Savior did. This was only proper to him.



The holy Story makes no mention, what became of them: and therefore it is a
thing not over curiously to be inquired into, as I have been taught.

Explication and proof.
You answer well. For this modesty, does well beseem every scholar in the
school of Christ, that he do cease inquiring, where our Savior cease to
teach: and to think our selves sufficiently taught and instructed to the
kingdom of God, when we have learned those things that have certain and sure
ground in the word of God: and therefore to abstain from all curious
speculations beside. As for example, it were in the present case a vain thing,
for any of us to busy our selves, to know who those men were, that our Savior
raised up at this his own resurrection: and who they were to whom they
appeared; and what their communication and behavior was, etc. Nevertheless,
insomuch as the end why our Savior Christ did raise up the bodies of these
Saints, is of it self evident; namely, to declare the mighty effect, and most
blessed fruit of his Resurrection unto his Church: which is, that by him, all
the faithful shall at the last day rise again to everlasting life, never to
die any more: it seems that we may not without good reason conceive, that
they died not again; but that they are received up into heaven, as a fruit of
our Saviors Ascension thither, on the Church of Gods behalf, like as their
resurrection was a fruit of his Resurrection, as was said even now. But it is
not meet that we should be over stiff, or contentious in it, no more then we
ought to be concerning the bodies of Henoch or Elijah: though it is most likely
that they were taken up bodily into heaven. The judgment of M. Calvin is
worthy to be respected of us, in that he writes concerning this point, in his
Harmony thus. Sicuti non facilis est, nec prompta solutio, ita anxie laborare
nihil attinet in re cognitu non necessaria. Diu in hominum coetu fuisse
versatos, verisimile non est: quia tantum ad breue tempus conspici oportuit, vt
in illo speculo vel imagine, manifesta esset Christi virtus. Quum autem Deus
apud viuos spem celestis vitae confirmare voluerit in illorum persona, nihil
absurdi erit si dicamus eos hoc officio defunctos, iteru^ quieuisse in suis
sepulchris. Very similius tamen est, vitam, qua donati sunt, non fuisse deinae
illis ademptam. Nam si mortalis fuisset, solidae resurrectionis documentum esse
non poterat. That is, As the dissoluing of the doubt is not easy or ready at
hand, so there is no need to trouble our selves much about it, seeing it is a
matter not necessary to be known. That they continued long among men, it is
not very like: for it was enough that they were seen for a short time, to the
end that the power of Christ, might in that glass, (as it were) be
represented and made manifest unto them. And insomuch as it was the pleasure of
GOD* in their person to confirm unto the living, the hope of the heavenly
life, it shall not be unreasonable to say, that they rested again in their
graves, after they had performed this duty. Nevertheless, it is more likely,
that the life wherewith they were endued, was not afterward taken away from
them. For if it had been subject again to death, it could not have been a
through proof of the resurrection.

To the which resolution Master Beza does easily condescend, where he writes
thus. Qui ante ipsum and per ipsum ex miraculo suscitati sunt, iterum morituri
suscitati sunt, quum tamen huius miraculi finis sit, vt sciamus hos fuisse
suscitatos, testes virtutis resurrectionis Jesus Christi in aeternam
felicitatem, futuros. Hom. 34. in Hist. Passionis Sect. 4. That is, They which
have been miraculously raised up before him, and by him, were raised up to die
again: but the scope of this miracle is to let us know, that these were raised
up to set forth the power of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, touching
endless happiness.

And Master Perkins in his exposition upon this Article; It may be demanded
(says he) what became of the Saints that rose again after Christ's
resurrection?

Answ. Some think they died again: but seeing they rose for this end, to
manifest the quickening virtue of Christ's resurrection, it is like that they
were also glorified with Christ, and ascended with him to heaven. This is the
judgment of those good and faithful servants of God.

But some man may say, If it be not a matter of faith, but left as uncertain
by the holy Evangelist; what mattereth it, that any should be careful to say
any thing at all, this way or that way of it?

I answer, that it is a good duty, and a worthy fruit of faith in matters
doubtful, and yet of good use; to interpret them most nearely, according to
the proportion of faith: and yet so as to determine, without preiudicing of
those, who without contentiousnesse, and without prejudice against any Article
of faith, do differ in judgment from us.

Touching other things, contained in this text; they are more questionless,
and very certain.

First, that the bodies of the Saints only, (that is, of those that died the
faithful servants of God) were raised again; and that also to certify the
faithful living, that Christ was risen, and that the raising up of the bodies
of these Saints should be likewise, as a pledge of the resurrection of all the
faithful to everlasting life, at the end of the world.

Secondly, that their souls returned, every one to their own body; from that
place of rest, where they were preserved among the souls of all other the
faithful departed. Whence also, the being or existence and immortality of the
soul, (though separated from the body) may be confirmed.

And thirdly, it is certain that these Saints did not appear after the manner
of Ghosts, without any true bodies: but they appeared verily and indeed, in
their own true and natural bodies which God restored to them again. And
finally, where it is demanded, why in this our text, the City of Jerusalem,
being most bloody and wicked (yea though there had been no other sin among
them, but this of putting our Savior to death) i^ for all that, called the
holy City? I answer, that the holy Evangelist calls it so: first and
principally, in respect of Gods sanctification and dedication of it from the
beginning to himself to be a most holy City, and therefore pl^ced his holy
Temple in it: though they had now long since, miserably polluted and defiled
both it and the Temple by their sinne^. And secondly, he calls it so, The
causes why he was to rise again.
because there were in it remaining still, a remnant of the holy servants of
God, both of men and women. Thirdly, it is called holy, because God minded to
rear up a spiritual Temple and Church unto our Lord Jesus Christ, in the
midst of it, by the Apostles preaching: that from thence, even out of the Sion
of God, might the Gospel be carried unto the ends of the earth. Psalm. 110.3.
Isai. 2.3. Mich. 4.2. Luke 24.46.49. Thus far of the manner of the
resurrection of our Savior.

THe reasons or causes why the same our Savior did rise again, they are next
to be considered of us.

First, the prophecies of the holy Scriptures in former times, and the
predictions of our Savior himself to his Disciples, must be fulfilled herein.

Secondly, the most high excellency of his person, in that he was the Son of
God required it.

Thirdly, the eternity of his most holy office called for it.

Fourthly, the justice of God could not suffer it to be otherwise.

Finally, neither could the glory of God have been perfectly advanced in his
Son: nor the redemption and salvation of the Elect perfected by the Son,
unless he had in our nature risen again.

Explication and proof.
It is most true. For first of all, so says our Savior himself, concerning
all whatsoever was written of him by the holy Prophets; that it must be
fulfilled: as Luke 22.37. Doubtless (says our Savior) those things which are
written of me, have an end. And chap. 24.25.27. and verses 44.46. He said to
them, (that is, to his Disciples) all things must be fulfilled which are
written of me in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms.
Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures.
And he said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to
suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day. Now that there are
prophecies of the resurrection of our Savior in the holy Scriptures: it is
evident, Psalm. 16.10. and Isai. 53.10. This was figured also in the Law, by the
two Goats, Leuit. 16.5, etc. verse 20, etc. the one a sin offering to be
slain; and the other a escape goat, to be sent away alive into the
wilderness, to carry away the iniquities of the people into a land that is not
inhabited: as though the Lord would give plainly to understand, that though
our Savior must die for our sins; yet he should also live, and so give us
assurance, that he has made a perfect remouall of our sins out of his
sight. But our Savior Christ, who died for us, could not have lived again,
unless he had rose again from the dead, unto whose estate he was gone. Yea
and all the prophecies that speak of his ascension, and of his last judgment,
such as we read Psalm. 68.18. and the prophecy of Henoch, in the Epistle of
^ude, ver. 14. And likewise, all that our Savior himself spoke before, of his
ascension, sitting at the right hand of God, and coming to judgment at the
last day: they do all include the resurrection: insomuch as he could not have
ascended, etc. unless he had first risen again. And touching the predictions
of the resurrection of our Savior by his own sacred mouth; we have so lately
set them down, that we need not here repeat them again. Secondly,
considering the most high excellency of the person of our Savior, in that he
is the eternal Son of God, and very God, the author and fountain of life,
John 1.4. How should that nature of man, which he had united to the nature of
God, be vanquished of death? It was impossible that death should prevail
against the power of the living God. The same is to be acknowledged in the
third place, in respect of the perpetuity and eternity of his office, in that
he is anointed of the Father, to be a royal high Priest to rule and reign,
and to make intercession for his people for ever. And how should he give life
to other, in that he is the Son of man, if he himself should rest bereaved
of life? John 5.26.29. How should we receive of his fullness, if he had
remained as an empty vessel? How should he defend us against our enemies, if
our enemies, had prevailed against himself? How should he reconcile us to God,
The pr^ofes of his resurrection by witnesses.
if God were not perfectly well pleased and satisfied in him for us? etc. It
was necessary therefore in regard of his office, that he should rise again.

Fourthly, as a consequent of the former, insomuch as our Savior has paid
the full price and ransom for our sins; and fulfilled all righteousness for
us (as it is every where evident in the Scriptures) it should be against the
justice of God, that our Savior should continue under the dominion of death.
It is just therefore with God, that our Savior should rise again, a glorious
Conqueror over death, and also over him that had the power of death, even the
devil, etc. Heb. 2.14.15. So then we may justly conclude; that neither could
God have been perfectly glorified in his Son, nor the Church have been
perfectly redeemed by him, unless he had risen again. And therefore the
Apostle Paul makes this resurrection of our Savior a special declaration,
and (as we may say) a seal and confirmation, that he is the very true Son
of God. Romans 1.4. And that we are perfectly justified by him; and that
therefore we may boldly believe in God that has raised him from the dead: as
chap. 4.24.25. For he was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen
again for our justification.

Thus much concerning the reasons or causes, why our Savior Christ rose again.

We come now to the proofs and confirmations that he is risen again.



They are either the testimonies of others, or else the appearances of our
Savior himself, by the space of forty days after his resurrection, together
with the words which he spoke, and the things which he did in that space.

Explication and proof.
Such indeed is the testimony of Saint Luke, Act. 1.3. He presented himself to
his Apostles alive (says the Evangelist) after that he had suffered, by many
infallible tokens, being seen of them by the space of forty days, and
speaking of those things that appertain to the kingdom of God. These two
sorts of proofs of the resurrection of our Savior (the testimonies of other,
and his own appearances) they are so lincked in the holy Story, that we cannot
altogether separate them asunder: neither is it meet we should do so.
Nevertheless, we may lawfully distinguish them. Yea, and notwithstanding the
appearances of our Savior, are in order of time before the witnesses thereof;
yet because without the witnesses, we could not have known the appearances
(seeing our Savior appeared to them, and not to us, and so their testimonies
are the most immediate proofs unto us) therefore we will begin with them.
And yet so again, as we will esteem of our Savior Christ's own appearances,
as the ground of their testimonies: and therefore stand most diligently to
consider of them, after that we have briefly observed, who they are which do
witness this Article of our faith unto us.



The witnesses of the resurrection of our Savior, were of these five sorts
following.

First, the holy Angels from heaven.

Second^y, the Saints risen from the dead.

Thirdly, the soldiers that were set to watch the Sepulcher.

Fourthly, certain godly women, first Marie Magdalene, and then diverse other.

Fifthly the two Disciples which went from Jerusalem to Emmaus.

And last of all, the Apostles of our Savior Christ.

Explication and proof.
For the testimony of the holy Angels, read Matthew. 28.5.6. Mark 16.6. Luke
^4.4.^. John 20.12.13. The Evangelists Matthew and Mark do make mention
only of one Angel, because there did but one speak unto the women. But Luke
and John do testify of two, and therefore ascribe the speech to both of them;
because he that spoke not, did nevertheless give consent to all that was
spoken: as well as if he himself had spoken the same. And herein, let us
observe the readiness of the holy Angels, to show themselves servants unto
our Savior Christ: as well in the publishing of his resurrection, as they had
done before, in the publishing of his birth. This may lead us to consider
further, of the most high excellency of our Savior Christ: in that the holy
Angels are willingly and dutifully servants unto him. And likewise, the great
love they bear unto those, which are belonging to Christ: even for that love
and reverence sake, which they bear to him; as appears by their most gentle
and comfortable speeches unto the women.

Touching the Saints that rose from the dead, we heard but a while since, (from
the testimony of the Evangelist Matthew, chap. 27.52.53.) that our Savior
raised them up, to be real witnesses of the virtue, and end of his
resurrection: which is to raise up the bodies of all the elect, in due time, to
the possession of etern^ll life. Yea and considering that the end of their
resurrection, was undoubtedly such as we have said: we may without vanity of
curious speculation, furthermore conceive of them; that they did by word of
mouth, testify the resurrection of our Savior, to those unto whom they did
appear.

Of the testimony of the Soldiers, we read Matthew. 28.11. the which their
testimony, notwithstanding it was not willingly yielded, for any love of the
truth; but rather against their will: yet may it be unto us, as a testimony of
good credit, considering therein, that the hand of God did enforce them to
acknowledge the truth, though they were willing, by and by for filthy lucres
sake, to give forth a false rumor, as if his body had been stolen away by
his Disciples, while themselves were asleep, etc. But the vanity of this lie
is palpable, even in it self. For how unlikely is it, that his poor daunted
Disciples, should dare attempt such a matter? Likewise, how unlikely that none
of the soldiers should be more waking then others, to hear so great a noise,
as must needs be by remoouing of the great stone, etc? Moreover, how absurd
is it, that there should be no pursuit made after these graue-robbers? And
besides, it is not to be neglected of us; that (as the holy Evangelist
reports) not all, but some of the watch, came to the high Priests: the rest,
very likely, were more constant in speaking to others; that which they were
most deeply convicted to be the truth. So then, let the wicked Priests and
Elders, be as bountiful as they were, to corrupt the false soldiers, to give
fo^th their gross lie: let the wicked soldiers set the truth to sale for
money, and sell their souls to the devil: let all foolish and reprobate Jews,
give credit to this senseless rumor, that the body of our S^uiour was stolen
out of the grave; yet unto us, their own first report, (if we had no other
testimony) should be sufficient to confirm us; and to detect and overthrow
their after lie: as that which came to late, and is altogether too weak to
dispossess the truth; it having already taken sure possession in the hearts of
all the children thereof.

Concerning the testimony of the godly women; whom both the holy Angels, and
also our Savior himself, authorized to be witnesses of this public and
common truth, though by private message, only to the Disciples: we read
Matthew. chap. 28.7.8. Mark 16.7.8. Luke 24.8.10. John 20.17.18. Concerning
these women witnesses, though the Evangelist John does make mention only of
Marie Magdalene, because she was the first: yet the Evangelist Matthew names
the other Marie also, whom Mark notes to be the mother of James the less,
and of Ioses, chapter 15. verse 40. and chapter 16.1. with whom also, he does in the
same places reckon Sal^m. And Luke beside these, names Ioanna, yea and adds
that there were other women also with them: as we may read in the places even
now alleged out of him: all of them being no doubt wise, godly, and reverend
women, worthy of credit, in the report of this most grave matter which was
committed unto them; howsoever the most of the Disciples (to whom they made
report thereof) would not at the first believe it, but esteemed their message
no better then as if it had been a thing devised of their own heads: as we
read Mark. 16.11. and Luke 24.11. It is like also that some of the women were
more weak then other at the first; yea, so as they seem unfit either to
receive or to deliver the message of the Angel: as appears by that which
Mark writes. chap. 16.8. For he says They went out quickly and fled from the
Sepulcher. Yea, as he says further, they trembled and were amazed: neither
said any thing to any man. etc. Nevertheless we may assure our selves, that
they did recover themselves out of their fear: yea so far that some made
faithful report of that which they saw, so soon as they were gone to the
disciples. Of the which we shall have occasion to consider more afterward.

Fifthly, for the testimony of the two disciples, who went from Jerusalem to
Emmaus: read Luke, 24.30.33. and 35. And Mark. 16.12.13. Of the which likewise
more afterward.

Finally, albeit the holy Apostles, not yet endued with the extraordinary
gifts and graces of the holy Ghost; did at the first, doubt again and again:
and were all very weak to believe that our Savior was risen; though some more
weak then other; yea, so as the weakest of these women might justly have shamed
them: yet after they had vanquished their unbelief, they became not only
private witnesses (as the women were) but public witnesses and preachers of
the Resurrection, wi h special power and authority from God; to the
certifying of all the Nations of the world herein. For the which, read Luke.
cha. 24.48. Now (says our Savior) ye are witnesses of these things. And Act.
1.8. Ye shall receive power of the holy Ghost, when he shall come on you: and
ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth. And in the same chapter ver.
22. the Apostle Peter speaking for the election of one to be an Apostle in
stead of Judas, whose room was vacant; he says thus: Of those men which have
companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus was conversant among us,
Beginning from the baptism of John, unto the day that he was taken up from us,
must one of them be made a witness with us of his resurrection. And further, how
they gave this testimony to the Resurrection: read in the same book of the
Acts. chapter 2.32. This Jesus (says the Apostle Peter) has God raised up, whereof
we all are witnesses. And again, chapter 3.15. ye killed the Lord of life (says
Peter to the wicked Jews) whom God has raised from the dead, whereof we are
witnesses. Likewise, chapter 4.33. with great power gave the Apostles witness of the
Resurrection of the Lord Jesus: And again, chapter 5.30.31.32. The God of our
Fathers has raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree. Him has God
lifted up with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance
to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. And we are his witnesses concerning these
things which we say; yea and the holy Ghost, whom God has given to the^ that
obey him. And yet again, chapter 10. v. 39. etc. 4^. And we are w^tnesses of all
things that he did, both in the land of the Jews, and in Jerusalem: whom they
slew, hanging him on a tree; Him God raised up the third day, and caused that
he was showed openly: Not to all the people, but unto the witnesses chosen
before of God, even to us who did eat and drink with him after he arose from
the dead. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that
it is he that is ordained of God a Judge of quick and dead To him also give all
the Prophets witness, etc. Read also chap. 13.30.31. God (says the Apostle
Paul) raised him up from the dead, And he was seen many days of them which
came up with him from Galile to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses to the people.
And again* chapter 26.21.22.23. The Jews (says he) caught me in the Temple, and
went about to kill me. Nevertheless I obtained help of God and continue to
this day witnessing both to small and great saying none other things, then those
which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. To wit, that Christ should
suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, and
should show light unto the people, and to the Gentiles. And yet again. 1.
Cor. 15.15. we have testified of God, The proof of his resurrection by his own
appearances.
that he has raised up Christ. Thus the whole blessed company of the twelve
Apostles, together with Paul an honorable increase of that number; they are
all of them most faithful and authentical witnesses of the Resurrection of
our Savior, so appointed and authorized by God himself: they having his
suffrages and voices so to be, as we saw before, Act. 10.41. For so the Greek
word procecheirotonemenoi signifies. This testification and witnessing of the
holy Apostles; it was principally, while they were living, by wise and zealous
preaching. But seeing they were appointed to be witnesses to the end of the
world: they have also for that cause left the same testified in the holy
Scriptures; as we read to this day in the writings of the holy Evangelists,
and in the Epistles of the Apostles. But seeing the ground of all these
witnesses, and witnessings (as was said before) were the appearances of our
Savior, whereby he manifested himself after that he was risen: as was
alleged heretofore from the beginning of the Acts: and as it is touched
again. chapter 10.40.41. and chapter 13.31.

LEt us therefore come unto them, and consider of them as diligently as God
shall give us grace: the which he, for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake grant us.
Amen.

They were these which follow.

First, he appeared and showed himself to Mary Magdalen, she being alone.

Secondly, to s^ndry other women.

Hos nuntios, hoc ordine recenset Beza. Hom. 11. in H^st. retur page 263. nisi
quod q^a^to in loco ponit ap^aritionem Christi qua se ostendebat Petro. page
262. Sed tamen Apost. Paulus. 1. Cor. 15.5. primo in loco recenset Petrum. Vnde
Caluinus, Cum (inquit) dicit Apostolus Christum Petro apparuisse primum,
intellige omnibus viris praeponi. N hilo ^nnus de ordine non contendemus.
Thirdly, to Peter.

Fourthly, to Cleopas and another disciple, as they walked from Jerusalem to
Emmaus. And to all these, our Savior Christ appeared the same day, on the
which he rose again before it was night.

Then the same day at night, he showed himself to the eleven, which were his
most choice Disciples, only Thomas being absent.

And eight days after this, he came unto them again, when Thomas was with
them.

And again after this, he showed himself to seven of his Disciples: that is,
to Peter, and Thomas, to Nathanaell, to James and John, and to two other of his
Disciples at the Sea of Tiberias.

Moreover, he appeared unto the eleven, on a mountain in Galile.

He was seen also of more then five hundredth brethren at once.

And after this, he was seen of James alone. All these several appearances
are mentioned by the holy Evangelists, and by the Apostle Paul, to have been
within the space of those forty days, in the which he presented himself to
his Disciples, before he ascended up into heaven.

Now when the time of his Ascension was come, it is said further, that he led
them out into Bethania, and that from the mountain of Olives he ascended up
into heaven in their sight.

Explication* and proof.
So then, we have the Resurrection of our Savior Christ confirmed unto us, by
eleven several appearances, and presentings of himself personally and bodily
to his disciples, from the time that he arose, until he ascended up into
heaven. Whereunto, if we shall add two other appearances of our Savior, after
his Ascension, the one to Stephen. Act. 7.56. the other to the Apostle Paul. 1.
Cor. 15.8. then have we all the appearanc^ gathered together, which are
mentioned in the holy Scriptures: even so many as may and ought justly be
accounted abundantly sufficient, for the assuring of the Resurrection of our
Savior unto us; above all question or doubt, that may be made about it. And
these two, the last of all, they may be to our special comfort: in that, not
only the Resurrection of our Savior is confirmed unto us by them, but also
that he being ascended up into heaven, has not laid away his humane nature:
but retains it still, even on our behalf, until he come again to
judgment; and thence-forth no doubt, for ever and ever.

But insomuch as it is not sufficient to the confirmation of our faith, The
proof of his resurrection, by his first appearance.
to hear of them g nerally; unless we do consider of them, and lay them to
heart, with all the circumstances, as God of his mercy has commanded them to
be recorded, for a full help of the dullness and weakness of our faith: let us
therefore, by a fresh renewing and enlarging of our course already mentioned,
inquire into the particular grounds of every one of the former appearances.

Mary Magdalen, what is the ground and report of that, as the holy Evangelists
have set it down for our instruction in that behalf?

This is set forth unto us at large, by the Evangelist. John. chap. 20. from
the beginning of the Chapter, in these words, Now the first day of the week
came Mary Magdalen early when it was yet dark unto the sepulcher, and saw the
stone taken away from the tomb, etc. to the 19 verse.

Explication and proof.
Here is in deed a large and very profitable narration of this point. The
which we are to consider of in this order. First, the Evangelist reports unto
us the singular diligence and zeal of Mary Magdalen, to perform that last
duty, which she thought her self to stand bound to perform to the body of
our Savior Christ; which she thought to have lien still dead in the grave: and
that, as a fruit of her special thankfulness toward our Savior; for his
wonderful mercy in delivering her from her wonderful misery, under the
possession of seven devils; as it is expressly recorded by the Evangelist Luke,
not long after the time of her deliverance, cha. 8.2. And as it is remembered
again, at the time of the Resurrection of our Savior, by the Evangelist
Mark. cha. 16. verse, 9. Secondly, the Evangelist reports the most gracious
and favorable good will of our Savior toward this Marie: in that he
vouchsafed, not only to show her a vision of Angels sitting in the sepulcher;
but also to show himself, first before all other, unto her.

The singular diligence and zeal of Mary Magdalen, is argued and declared unto
us, by the holy Evangelist, first in that she was very early in setting forth,
and coming to the Sepulcher, as has been already alleged out of the text:
secondly, by her speedy return back into the City, to make her moan to the
Disciples, that the body of our Savior was taken out of the grave. And
thirdly, it is argued by her like speedy return again unto the sepulcher,
with two of the Disciples, who hasted to see if that which she said were so
or no: and by her continuance still at the grave, with great lamentation and
inquiry after the body of our Savior; when as the Disciples made have back,
and made no stay any while there. Let us for our better understanding, and for
the edification of our faith, hear how the Evangelist sets down these
things in the excellent wisdom of the Spirit of God How does the report
hereof,

The speedy return of Mary Magdalen from the Sepulcher, is thus set down
unto us, in the second verse of the same twentieth Chapter. Then she ran and
came to Simon Peter, and to the other Disciple whom Jesus loved, and said unto
them, They have taken away the Lord out of the Sepulcher, and we know not where
they have laid him.

Here in deed is plainly set forth the diligence of Marie, in her speedy
retu ne back into the City, to the Disciples. Her like speedy diligence in
hasting back again with the Disciples, so fast as possibly she might: is
evident likewise, as it follows in the same text; from the beginning of the
third verse.



The words are these. Peter therefore went forth, and the other Disciple, and
they came unto the Sepulcher. So they ran both together, but the other
Disciple did outrunne Peter, and came first to the sepulcher, And he stouped
down, and saw the linen clothes lying: yet went be not in.

Then came Simon Peter following him, and went into the Sepulcher, and saw the
linen clothes lie, And the Kerchiefe that was upon his head, not lying with
the linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by it self. Then went in
also the other disciple, who came first to the Sepulcher, and he saw it and
believed: for as yet they knew not the Scripture, that he must rise again
from the dead. And the disciples went away again to their own home. But Mary
stood without at the sepulcher weeping, etc.

Explication. and proof.
In these words, the singular diligence, and earnest zeal of Mary Magdalen, is
declared; not only by a comparison of the like, in that she returned to the
Sepulcher with all have as the Disciples here mentioned, Peter and John (the
writer of this history) did; but also by an unequal comparison, in that they
hasting away again, she abode still lamenting the removing of the body of our
Savior, as if it had been of ill will, and in despite taken away: as
appears by her words to the disciples, and as we shall see again in the
renewing of her complaint, as it follows. But before we come to that, let us
well observe (as one step to the confirmation of our faith in the Resurrection
of our Savior) that not only by the speech of Mary, upon her certain sight
and knowledge; but also by the eye-witnes of the disciples finding the same to
be so; it is evident that the body of our Savior was not remaining in the
grave: but only the linen clothes, to wit, the winding sheet, as we may
call it (according to our use) and the kerchiefe that was about his head, as
the Jews used to lay the body into the grave, as may further appear. chapter
11.44. Let us, I s^^, well observe from these witnesses, that these linen
clothes were l^ft behind, the one in one place, as it might be at the head, and
the other at the feet. Yea, let us observe that Peter and John saw this so
evidently, that neither of them could doubt, but that the body of our Savior
was verily gone: and that John also (making a more full use then Peter) began
even from that which he saw, to believe the Resurrection, though not perfectly,
because (as he says of himself among the rest) that as yet, his faith was not
grounded upon the holy Scriptures, touching this point; the which, as he gives
to understand, are the only sure ground for faith to stay upon: yea more sure,
then any apprehension that the natural sense of the eye may lay hold upon, can
be. These things thus observed for the help of our own faith, and therein
acknowledging some commendable diligence of Peter and John in taking proof of
the truth of Mary's report: yea, so that in swiftnes of running, John comes
first to the Sepulcher, and afterward goes away better confirmed then Peter,
touching the resurrection: but yet so again, as Peter was more bold then John
in going into the sepulcher, to see whether the body were removed or no, he
also wondering in himself at that which was come to pass, as we read in Luk,
chapter 24.12. Yet for all that (as we began further to observe) and as the words
of the text make it manif^st, Mary was more careful about the matter, then
either of them both: because whereas they d^part by and by, she tarieth by the
sepulcher still: that her mind might be further satisfied. Wherefore also, it
is worthy to be marked, that like as Mary was specially careful above any
other: so (as was said before) our Savior does vouchsafe her a special
favor. First, in showing her a vision of Angels, that by them he might prepare
her mind to be the more fit to receive the assurance of the resurrection: and
then also, in that he represents and makes himself (being now risen)
perfectly known unto her. John continue the text of the holy Story unto us?

It follows in ^he later part of the 11. verse, where we left before, and so
forth to the 18. verse of the same chapter, in these words. And as Mary wept
she bowed her self into the Sepulcher, And she saw two Angels in white
sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where the body of
Jesus had lain. And they said unto her, woman, why weepest thou? She said unto
them, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.
When she had thus said, she turned her self back, and saw Jesus standing,
but knew not that it was Jesus. Jesus says unto her, Woman why weepest thou?
whom seek thou? She supposing that he had been the gardener, said unto
him, Sir if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I
will take him away. Jesus says unto her, Marie; she turned her self and said
unto him, Rabboni, which is to say Master. Jesus says unto her, Touch me not:
for I am not yet ascended to my Father, but go to my brethren and say unto
them, I ascend unto my Father and to your Father, and to my God and your God.

Here is indeed a report of two singular favors, vouchsafed to Mary Magdalene
from our Savior Christ, Explication.
as a singular blessing upon her special care, and unweariable zeal, in
seeking after him. Whereby it may be evident unto us, how graciously God is
minded to crown his own graces in those that have care to use them well. Yea
that even according to their care (as it is in special measure) so will he
answer them the more graciously; in giving them that have, yea in giving them
more abundantly, etc. But it may be said, that Mary's seeking was amiss; and
that all her mourning was without cause, if we look duly into that she
mourns for, and into that which she intended, yea though she might have
attained her desire. It is true: and in these respects Mary is not to be
commended, seeing Mary both sought the body of our Savior in the grave, and
also wept for it being out of the grave, in forgetfulness of the doctrine which
our Savior Christ taught touching his resurrection, while he was yet living.
Nevertheless, in that all this proceeded of an exceeding dear and reverend
regard of our Saui^u^; this her affection is in it self, most commendable; how
soever by these actions, she took not the best course, to manifest and
exercise the same. And herein the merciful goodness of our gracious Savior, is
so much the greater; by how much he passes by any the more great infirmities,
and yet accepts of the holy desires and purposes of his servants: when they
proceed from singlenes of heart, and from a mind willing to be informed in that
truth; from the which it does for a time, in some action or opinion, through
ignorance go astray.

But let us come to consider of the double blessing, which our Savior vouched
safe to bestow upon Marie (he prosecuting his love now to her singular
consolation, like as he had at the first received her, in singular pity and
compassion over her woeful estate) seeing she is careful in the remembrance
thereof, to be constantly dutiful and thankful for the same. And first let
us in a few words consider of the former of these favors; to wit, the vision
of the holy Angels.

Marie Magdalene received hereby?

It was a blessing unto her in that she was hereby prepared, and made the more
fit, to receive the assurance of the resurrection of our Savior, from that his
appearance unto her, which followed immediately after.



First by that brightness and glory, wherein the Angels appeared unto her.
Secondly by their situation, or placing* the one at the head, the other at the
feet, where the body of our Savior had lain. And thirdly, by their speech,
why weepest thou?

Explication.
It is ^^ry true. All these were excellent inducements, to lead her to change
her thoughts. The cheerful brightness, to lead her from the uncomfortable
thoughts of death. The seating of themselves as they did; in that thereby they
gave a most sensible demonstration that the body was gone. Their words,
because they contained a gentle reproof of her weeping, as being causeles. For
the Angels were not ignorant why she wept; but they point Mary to her
ignorance; which was the cause that she wept so as she did. The same is to be
said of the same words of our Savior, immediately after. So that there is no
doubt, but that though Mary (good woman that she was) had her heart wonderfully
set this way; desiring that she might yet once more have a sight of the body of
Ch: though remaining still dead as she thought: yet no doubt, by these means,
the strength of her thoughts were abated, and made more pliable to admit the
truth of our Savior his appearance unto her. The manner of which his
appearance and manifesting of himself unto her is next to be considered of us.

How was that?

First, our Savior shows himself; but he does not discover himself, to the
knowledge of her eye. Secondly, he speaks to her; but withholdeth her
understanding, that she could not discern his voice. Thirdly, he calls her
by her name, and even thereby makes himself known. Fourthly, he instructs
her how she was to be affected, and in what sort she was to behave her self
toward him. Last of all, he gives her a most sweet and comfortable message to
carry to his disciples.

Explication and proof.
These things, are all of them evidently expressed in the Text: and they are
very worthy our diligent and reverend observation. And first of all (to speak
generally) we may see a lively representation, of the manner of our Savior
Christ his ordinary dealing, in his making of himself and his holy truth
known. For he never reuealeth all at once, but by degrees; like as he dealt
in his cure done upon the blind man in the Gospel, in that he caused his
sight to return by certain increases: that so, when he had received it to
the full; he might the more clearly discern, how greatly he was bound to
glorify God in that behalf. The which duty likewise, all of us ought to
learn to perform, better then we have done: both for our enjoying of our
bodily and natural sight; and also, yea chiefly for the gift of that
spiritual light of heavenly knowledge and understanding, which our Lord Jesus
Christ has bestowed upon us, by his revealing of himself in his most holy
word and Gospel unto us.

But let us come to the particulars, concerning the appearance of our Savior
to Mary Magdalen: which was the first proof, whereby he made it known, that
he was risen again from the dead: as has been already observed.

In the first place therefore, of this first appearance of our Savior; he did
not (as was answered) forthwith make himself known unto this Marie. For so
the text says, that though, she hearing one to come behind her turned her
self back, and looked upon him, yet she knew not that it was Jesus.

Yea, more then this, the text shows further; that albeit our Savior spoke
to this Mary, using the same words which the holy Angel uttered, saying, Why
weepest thou? And again, Whom seek thou (The first words admonishing her to
leave weeping: the other tending to put her in hope, that she should find
him, whom she sought) yet she did not for all this, know our Savior. But
still, her mind was carried, in a longing after his dead body: so strong is
affection, when it is once possessed with an error. Sir (says she) if thou
have borne him hence, tell me, etc. Whence we may justly admonish our selves,
to take heed, how we give liberty to our affections, without good reason, or
ground and direction from the word of God. For if we do so; we shall easily
fall into sorrow, and in sorrow keep no measure, even for that we ought not
to be any whit sorry at all: or contrariwise, to be merry and pleasant at
that, wherein there is no cause, why we should take the least pleasure or
sport. Yea without direction from the word of God, we shall under an opinion
of religion and godly sorrow, fall through blind devotion, into superstitious
or needeles sorrow: we knowing in truth, neither why nor wherefore, as we use
to say.

But it may be demanded, what the reasons were, why Mary did not know our
Savior Christ, seeing we cannot think, but his stature, countenance and
voice, were answerable to that they were before? we answer, that the chief
reason was, that her eyes were withheld and restrained for a time, by the
divine and retentiue power of our Savior himself, that she could not know
him: like as it is said afterward in express words, concerning the two
Disciples Luke, 24.16. that their eyes were holden, that they could not know
him. Secondly, here it is manifest, that our Savior appeared to Mary in
another habit or kind of apparel, then he had accustomed to wear: so that he
was induced to think, that it was some Gardener that was to ouersee or dress
the garden, who spoke unto her. Thirdly, it is to be considered, that our
Savior spoke to her hitherto, as it were a loofe, in general terms only:
Woman, why weepest thou, etc. These therefore may be the causes, why Mary did
not yet know our Savior, though he was the man, whom she saw and heard to
speak unto her.

Now if any should further inquire in this place, how our Savior, rising naked
out of the grave, got that apparel wherein he thus strangely appeared to
Marie? we may well answer, that it is a vain question to be stood upon:
considering the almighty power of him, whose resurrection we now speak of; who
had all things both in heaven and in earth at his commandment: and could by
his word create what pleased him in a moment, and again turn what he would
into nothing; so soon as it should seem good unto him.

Finally, if it be asked, why our Savior would not at the first instant, make
himself known to Mary? we may well conceive, that he took this course, to
the end he might affect her the more, with the greatness of the blessing which
he vouchsafed her; when afterward, he should make himself known. And that then
it might work the more deep, and assured impression in her heart.

But leaving these things, we come now to the third point; to wit, how our
Savior made himself known: and that was, as the text of the holy Scripture
shows; by his calling of her more familiarly, by her proper name, Mary. And
the same, no doubt in such gracious and kind manner, as he had used to do
before his death: he thereby showing himself also to be that good shepherd, who
knows his own sheep, and calls them by name, John chap: 10.3.

Hereupon* Mary (though as it seems, she was minded to go some other
whither, to see whether she her self could peradventure spy out where the
body of our Savior should be laid) she turned back again. And by this voice
(the spirit of our Savior, no doubt, inwardly inlightening and chearing her
heavy heart) she is encouraged to answer, Rabboni: that is to say (as the
Evangelist interprets) Master. Whereby it is evident that now she was
brought to the knowledge; yea to the accknowledgement, of him that before had
spoken to her, to be Christ; both her, and our Rabbie, Master, and Teacher.
And hence also may we well conceive, that it is no marvel though the
ministry of the word of our Savior Christ (no more then the outward sound of
his own voice to Mary) can work no true knowledge and faith in him to
salvation: unless it please him by his holy spirit, most lovingly and
particularly to apply it to every one of us; as it were by the calling of us
severally, by our own proper names. Verily, no general discourses, with our
selves in our own minds, or with others in wandering conferences, will do
it. The word must be applied and embraced in the secret; and as it were closet,
of every man's own heart and conscience. And touching Mary, that she, upon our
Savior his particular naming of her, (not so much by his outward voice, as
internally by his holy spirit) did know him to be he, the very same, and no
other: it may appear plainly by her behavior toward him; in that casting her
self down before him at his feet, with a desire no doubt to kiss them,
(with like affection to that whereof we read to have been, as it is like, in
another like good and godly Mary, Luke, 7.38. and as we read to have been in
those other women, Mat: 28.9) she gives him that divine reverence and worship
though with some weakness which surely she would not have yielded to any other
man.

Hence therefore it is, that our Savior Christ (as was answered in the fourth
place) takes the occasion to instruct Mary: and by her, us also; how both she,
and we, and all other, ought to be affected toward him. That is to say, not so
as we should linger after his bodily presence: but rather that we should be
careful to know and embrace him, spiritually, and with the arms of our
faith. For seeing Mary Magdalene was to do so, while yet our Savior was upon
the earth, and not ascended up into heaven; then much more ought we now, as
well as all other ever since his ascension, so to do: that we may say in
truth, with the Apostle Paul in the 2. Epistle to the Cor: chap: 5. verse 16.
Henceforth know we no man after the flesh, yea though we had known Christ
after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more: to wit, in any
carnal or weak manner, but according to his divine grace and godly power etc.
in a more clear measure. So that they, who at this day, dote after a real
presence of the body of our Savior Christ, either in Sacrament, or other wise:
they do show themselves to be altogether far otherwise minded; then our
Savior himself, would have them to be. We are all of us, to lift up our minds
to him in the heavens, whither he is long since ascended: and not to look to
have him bodily with us on earth, as he taught Mary Magdalene immediately after
his resurrection; in that he said unto her as we see here. Touch me not, for I
am not yet ascended to my Father, etc. Nevertheless, we are herewithall to
understand, that our Savior had a more particular intent in the same words:
namely, to signify thus much unto Mary, that she for her part, should have a
further time of filling her mind, with the comfort of his humane presence for
a few days, before he would ascend and leave this world. And therefore, that
she should for the present, without any further delay, so much the more
willingly, leave him now; and have with all speed to his Disciples, to do that
message, which it pleased him to send unto them, by her. For so it follows
(as we have already seen) Go to my brethren (says our Savior to Mary) and
say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and to you^ Father, and to my God and
your God.

Now the message, is the last thing to be considered, concerning this first
appearance of our Savior. Wherein sundry most high points; and the same also
most sweet and comfortable to all true believers: are to be reuerendly weighed
of us.

And first of all, this message, thus committed by our Savior to a woman,
though to be delivered in a private manner: as it is a great honor to Mary,
and as a blessed fruit of her former godly care, and reverend regard toward our
Savior, as was said before: so is it a gentle kind of reproof unto the
negligence and unbelief of those most choice Disciples of our Savior, to whom
he sends her.

Secondly, this message sent by Mary, concerning the ascension of our Savior:
conta^neth in it a proof of his resurrection (which must needs go before his
ascension) as well as it is a prediction and foreshewing of the ascension it
self.

Thirdly, this message sent by our Savior to his Disciples, under the name of
brethren: it decla^^th the most dear and admirable love of our Savior unto
them. Wherein also, is bewraied, the like his affection in general, toward all
the elect of God: as we may plainly perceive by comparing that which we read,
Mat: 12.48.49.50 and Heb: 2.11.12. with the words of this message. For in those
places, our Savior extends the name of brethren to all the adopted children
of God, whosoever do hear and keep his word. This is also, an evident
confirmation of that which the Evangelist John has written ch: 13.1. that
those who^ our Savior loves, he loves to the end. Yea that he loves them
so, that nothing can alienate ^is love from them. For as we know, great were
the infirmities of his Disciples, in their forsaking of him, etc. And
therefore, whereas our Savior does most graciously pass by all their grea^est
weaknesses, and failings in good duty; though he might have taken just
occasion, to have utterly rejected and forsaken them: this shows undoubtedly,
that his love was most constantly, and vnremoueably confirmed toward them.
Blessed be his most holy name therefore, for ever and ever. Amen.

Fourthly, in that our Savior (in the words of this most sweet message)
calls God his Father and his God, he speaks therein, as he is in our
nature a mediator betwixt God and us; and thereby points us upward to behold
the supreme cause of all our happiness and welfare. And in that he calls him
the Father and God of his Disciples, and so consequently the Father and God of
all true believers; he teaches us all, with good assurance of faith to call
God our Father: and so shows what are the singular effects of his mediation,
on our behalf: even our adoption, reconciliation, peace and salvation, with
all other blessed fruits and benefits, whatsoever both the most tender and
fatherly mercies, and also the almighty power of God our heavenly Father,
either is able of himself: or willing for his Son our Lord Jesus C^rists
sake, to bestow upon us. To this God therefore our heavenly Father together
with his Son our Savior, and the holy Ghost our Comforter, be all eternal
glory and praise. Amen.

Fifthly, our Lord Jesus Christ, in sending this his message so earnestly, and
with all expedition to the comforting of his Disciples; (who were at this time
in great heaviness, as we read Mark, chap: 16.10.) he shows and professes
plainly thereby, that he is exceedingly desirous, that both they and every
true Disciple of his; should both know and believe, and also enjoy and hold
firmly this great prerogative; that we are by his means the children of such
a Father, and the servants of such a God, as God our heavenly Father is.

Finally, as the Disciples of our Savior, to whom Mary was sent (yea
notwithstanding they were the Apostles elect of our Savior) were to receive
this message gladly, and thankefully, even from the mouth of a private woman:
so, yea much rather, ought we, from the mouth of the poorest public minister
of the word of God, receive gladly and dutifully, the same message in their
preaching thereof; and every other point and Article of the whole embassage of
the Gospel of Christ and of God.

That which is furthermore to be considered, concerning the comforts and
fruits of the ascension of our Savior: it shall by the grace of God, be more
fully laid open when we come to that Article.

Hitherto, of the first appearance of our Savior Christ, for the first proof
and confirmation of his most holy and blessed resurrection. Now, as touching
the performance of this message, delivered by our Savior to Mary; it is
expressed by the Evangelist John, verse 18. of this 20. chap: For (says he)
Mary Magdalene came and told the Disciples that she had seen the Lord, and
that he had spoken these things unto her. And Mark 16.10. She went and told
them who had bin with him (that is with our Savior before his death) who
mour^^d and wept. Thus Mary was for her part, a faithful messenger, even of
the things of the best preservation, according to the holy Proverb. A faithful
messenger is preservation. ch: 13.17. but the Disciples, to whom she did her
message, were for a time, very unfaithful receivers of the same, as appears
in the 11. verse of the same 16. ch: of S. Mark. For though they heard it
reported unto them, in such notable manner as our Savior commanded Mary: yet
they believed it not, as the Evangelist affirms.

NOw therefore, from the first appearance of our Savior, let us pass to the
second: the which was manifested to sundry other women.



In the 28. chap: of S. Matthew, in the first verse of the chapter. And then
verses 5.6.7.8 9.10. Likewise, Mark. ch: 16. from the beginning of the
chapter, to the 9. verse of the same.

And Luke ch: 24. from the first verse to the twelfth.

Explication
From these words of the holy Evangelists we have already considered of the
time of the resurrection of our Savior. Likewise of the place from whence he
arose, so that we will not now treat of them again. Moreover, we have from
the same words, considered the testimony of the holy Angels, concerning the
certainty of the resurrection of our Savior, but very briefly. Let us
therefore now here in this place, weigh them somewhat more fully. Yet not so
much in respect of their testimony, simply considered in it self: but only
so far forth, as the women were prepared, and made thereby the more fit, to
be further confirmed and established in the faith of the resurrection of our
Savior, by his second appearance, The proof of his resurrection by his second
appearance.
which did shortly ensue upon the same.

And to the end we may the better understand the report of the Evangelists; we
are to observe thus much (to begin withal) that whereas these two Matthew
and Luke do so speak of Mary Magdalene, and of the other women, as if there
had been but one vision and speech of the holy Angels; and likewise, but one
appearance of our Savior Christ unto them all jointly and together: the
Evangelist John does make it plain chap: 20. verse 11. etc. 18. that Mary
Magdalene, did both see the vision of the Angels, and also the first appearance
of our Savior, before the other women did see either the one or the other.
Save, that it may be, they, as well as Mary Magdalene, saw a far off, some
appearance of that Angel, which did sit upon that great stone which was the
covering of the sepulcher. The glory of which Angel (as the Evangelist
Matthewe does testify) did astonish the soldiers: and as it may seem caused
them to betake them to their heels, as we have once seen before; and shall
have occasion to note again by and by.

And that our Savior first of all, appeared to Mary Magdalene: the Evangelist
Mark accords with John, as we read in the Gospel written by him, chap:
16. verse. 9. in. these words. And when Jesus (says he) was risen again, in
the morning (which was the first day of the week) he appeared first to Mary
Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven Devils. And she went and told them
that had been with him* etc.

But this being so; how comes it then to pass (may some say) that the other
two Evangelists, yea and Mark also, do speak jointly of all these women in
one and the same history, as touching the coming of them all to the grave of
our SAVIOVR, early in the morning: and the same also with one and the same
mind, Optime consentiunt Euangelistae, quod mul^ere, sancta quiet defunctae,
ad^uc inter noctis tenebrasdomo egressae sint, vt sub primum diluculum ad
sepulchrum accesserint. Calum. Harm. Man: 16.1. Lucas and Iohann^s ^oquuntur de
^tineris suscepti intio Marcus vero d^ fine. Imo and ^pse quoque initium
^tineris significat, cum a^t eas venisse valde mane.
to imbalme the body of our Savior. For so all these three of the Evangelists
do write; saying that the rest of the women set out very early, and came
betimes in the morning to the sepulcher: as well as the Evangelist John writes
of Mary Magdalene, that she did so. When the day began to dawne, says Saint
Matthewe. Early, (says Saint Mark: speaking of their setting forth) so that
they came thither at the Sun rising. And Luke, Early in the morning, they
came to the sepulcher (or throu bathees) profundo diluculo. And as Tremellius
translateth the same words of Saint Luke out of the Sirian Testament. Dum
adhuc essent tenebrae, while it was yet dark. And Luke again, verse, 22. They
came early to the Sepulcher.

Quest. How therefore should it come to pass, that she should see the Angels,
and also our Savior himself; before all other?

Answ. I have been taught, that we may well conceive in our minds, that all
the women (as has been already declared) setting forth, all of them very
early, to go to the Sepulcher together: yet by reason of the earth quake,
while they were well onward on the way, and also because of the fearful
appearance of the glorious Angel, who having removed the stone of the
Sepulcher, and sitting upon it might easily be seen of them, while yet they
were some good distance frrom the same: it may, (I say) be well cunceiued, that
hereupon, they were afraid, and so made some stay. Yet so, that Mary
Magdalene, being of better heart, and more zealously affected then any of the
rest, went alone; unless peradventure she was accompanied only with the
other Mary ( as it seems by the words of Saint Matthewe) to see what the
matter meant, and so saw the grave opened, and the body of our Savior to be
removed out of it Whereupon also, Mary Magdalene strangely affected hereat,
hastes with all speed, that she might make it known to the Disciples; and
with like speed comes back again with Peter and John: yea and also staieth
still by the sepulcher, after that they were gone back again: and then
forthwith saw the vision of the two Angels sitting in the sepulcher; yea and
also immediately upon the same, was made a beholder of our Savior at his first
appearance.

Explication.
All this is very likely indeed, to have been so.

Q^est. But what then (should we think) became of the other women all this
while? The proof of his resurrection by his first appearance.


An. It is very likely also (as I have been further instructed) that the other
women stood all this while a loofe for fear. Yet so, as by that time our
Savior had appeared, and made himself known to Mary Magdalene, and delivered
that his message unto her; which she was, by his commandment, to carry
speedily to his Disciples: that they ouercomming their fear, do also draw
near to the sepulcher, by that time our Savior had withdrawn himself from
Mary Magdalene: and so saw the second vision of Angels, and after that also,
the second appearance of our Savior.

This is most likely to have been, as you say.

Mary Magdalene, after that she had received her message from our Savior, at
that his first appearance?

I have heard it very probably coniectured, upon a diligent pondering of the
holy Story, that so soon as Mary Magdalene had received her message, she
went forthwith to deliver the same: and that after this; the other women
coming to the Sepulcher, and being likewise assured of our Saviors
resurrection, both by the second testimony of the Angels, and also by the
appearance of our Savior after the same: do second the former message of Mary
Magdalene, according to the commandment, both of the Angel, and also of our
Savior himself. Yet not with so great speed, but that they were prevented by
some of the company, who for fear fled from the sepulcher before the rest: as
we may perceive, Luke, 24. verses 22.23. as we are hereafter further to
observe.

Explication
It seems to stand with good reason, that it should be so. For thus the holy
Evangelists may well be accorded: and the course of the holy Story, orderly
and distinctly considered, in the natural course of it; by the mutual
testimony of al four of them. Neither does it make any thing against this,
that Saint Luke chap: 24.10. reckons Mary Magdalene, with the rest of those,
who did the like message to the Apostles: because (as we said before of the
visions) so here we are to understand, that he speaks jointly of the
messages, though according, to the report of the Evangelist John, it is most
like, that these messages as well as these visions, are to be distinguished of
us.



Ye^* as I have heard you teach, it may well stand with the assurance of faith,
and with all ho^y and commendable obedience thereof; firmly to believe those
things to have been verily d^ne whatsoever the holy Scriptures do affirm:
although we (through weakness of judgment, or feebleness of memory)
cannot for the present di cerne, or remember, the perfect manner or order of
the performance of them: but do rest in that, which, so far as we can
perceive is nearest to the truth, until it may please God to let v^ by some
means, see more clearly into all the circumstances of the same.

Explication
It is indeed, well agreeable to the holy doctrine of faith, and to that
modesty also, which well beseems every scholar in the school of our
Savior Christ.

And herein: faith is (as we may say) so much the more faithful, and dutiful,
both before God and men; when it believes without all doubting, the substance
and truth of the matter it self: notwithstanding any scruple that may arise,
either from a circumstance thereof, or from a diverse interpretation, or
understanding, which the text it self, may seem to admit. For it is the
pleasure of God, no doubt, to exercise the obedience of our faith this way: and
to stir us up, to use the more diligence, in our study and search after his
truth: and to teach us to hold our selves fast to that knowledge, which we have
already received, as to a very precious inheritance, etc.

It is only the property of infidels and hypocrites so to stumble and to be
offended upon such occasions, as these may be, The proof of his resurrection
by his second appearance.
that thereby they be confounded, and fall away. All true believers, stay
themselves upon this sure foundation, that all things contained in the holy
Scriptures, are most certainly true in themselves; and consonant each thing with
other, yea every circumstance with circumstance: howsoever we cannot for the
present, in this or that, see what is most exactly to be resolved upon.

So that worthily may every Christian hold, and the learned divine maintain
and defend, as a question worthy the commencement: that Sancti Euangelistae
eodem Spiritu sacro-sanctissimo, Spiritu sc. veritatis dictante, omnia
verissime sumaque cum concordantia euangelicam historiam Domini nostri Jesus
Christi, conscrip^e^e. That is to say, that the holy Evangelists, guided by one
most holy Spirit even the Spirit of truth, have most truly, and with perfect
concordance and agreement, penned the holy Story of the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Now therefore (these things thus observed for the clearing of the course of
the holy story (so far as God vouchsafed us his grace) let us come to the words
of the text. Wherein we have to consider, first the coming of these women to
the sepulcher, and then the second vision and speech of the Angels to them so
soon as they were come: and thirdly, that second appearance and speech of our
Savior, whereby, he made himself known, to them also, as well as he had done
before, to Mary Magdalene.



Their coming to the sepulcher, is with some specialtie recorded by the
Evangelist Mark. The vision and speech of the Angels, is most fully reported
by S. Luke The second appearance or manifesting of our Savior* and his second
speech, are only set down by the holy Evangelist Matthew.

So it is indeed. But let us hear their several words: and so shall we
more fully inform our selves concerning the whole.

Mark?

Therefore (says he) early in the morning, the first day of the week, they
came unto the sepulcher, when the Sun was yet rising.

3. And they saiae one to another, who shall roll us away the stone from the
door of the sepulcher.

4. And when they looked, they saw that the stone was rolled away, for it was
a very great one.

Explication and proof.
These words indeed, show us the coming of these women to the sepulcher: yet
so as the first coming of Mary Magdalene is included in the same, as it is
evident from the first verse. And as touching these words, who shall rowl^ us
away the stone from the doere of the sepulcher? This consultation was also
while Mary Magdalene was yet with them. Concerning the which consultation, two
things may no^ be a little marueled at. First that they did not think to
provide for this, before they would set forth out of doors. Secondly, that
they do not do^bt much rather, how they should come to the sepulcher; because
of the watch of soldiers, that was set there even of purpose, to see that none
should come unto it.

But as touching the first, so would God have it to be: that it might be
evident in the sight of all, that these women had no purpose to steal away the
body of our Savior; but only to imbalme the same, if happily by any means
they could attain to come unto it. And touching the second thing; this first
care of theirs, being the only thing which occupied their minds: declares
plainly, that partly through their godly care in bending their minds to
sanctify the Sabbath, and partly by reason of the close dealing of the chief
Priests, and Elders, in gathering, setting and charging of their watch; that
these women did not once hear of it. For certainly, they would then have bin
much more careful, how they might have gotten to the sepulcher at all. Or
rather they would have been afraid once to have set foot out of doors, to
have gone to the grave.

But that these latter women came to the sepulcher, though they took a longer
pause by the way, then Mary Magdalen had done: it is evident, in that Saint
Mark says, That they came so near, that they saw the stone to be rolled
away; and in that (as after it follows in the next verse) they went into the
sepulcher, etc. And in that (as the Evangelist Luke says, chap. 24.2.3.) They
found the stone rolled away from the Sepulcher. And went in but found not the
body of the Lord Jesus. Thus much therefore, for the coming of these women,
the which (as was said) is in more special manner recorded by the Evangelist
Mark, then by any of the other. The vision and the speech of the Angels to
these women, is (as was further answered) most fully reported by S. Luke.



It follows thus, chap. 24. ver. 4. and so forth to the ninth. And it came to
pass, that as they were amazed thereat, two men suddenly stood by them in
shining vestures.

5. And as they were afraid, and b^wed down their faces to the earth, they
said to them, why seek ye him that lives among the dead?

6. He is not here, but is risen: remember how he spoke to you, while he was
yet in Gal^le.

7. Saying, that the Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful
men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again.

8. And they remembered his words.

9. And they returned from the Sepulcher, and told all these things to the
eleven, and the remnant.

Explication
Thus in deed, is the Evangelist Luke, most large in this point. Nevertheless,
we must not neglect the report, either of Mark or Matthew: because either of
them, have something more special, over and beside that which Luke has set
down. Mark?

So they went into the sepulcher (says he) and saw a young man sitting at the
right side clothed in a long white robe: and they were afraid.

6. But he said unto them, be not afraid, ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, who has
been crucified: he is risen, he is not here: behold the place where they put
him.

7. But go your way, and tell his Disciples, and Peter, that he will go
before you into Galile: there shall you see him, as he has showed unto you.

8. And they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulcher, for they trembled
and were amazed: neither said they any thing to any man: for they were afraid.

Explication
These are the words of S Mark, wherein he is more special then S. Luke, in
diverse things. First, in that he shows how the Angel incourageth the women
against their fear. And he speaks but of one, because but one spoke unto
the^; the which also seems to be that Angel, which Matthew spoke of before:
even he that at the first, sat upon the stone without the sepulcher. Secondly,
he is more special in showing that the Angel did bid the women, to take good
view of the absence of the body of our Savior, from the very place where it
was laid. Thirdly, he reports the message which the Angel sent, to be
directed not only to the Apostles in general; but also to Peter by name. And
last of all, Homil. 3. in Hist. Resurrec. Sect. 15. Et Hom. 4. Sect. 5. Et Hom.
9. Sect. 1.
that the women were so afeard, that they said nothing to any man: but for
fear forgot their message as one would think. And therefore it seems to M.
Beza, in his Homily upon these words, that these were a sort of women among
the rest; who for want of longer stay, lost a great part of the fruit of their
journey: till (as he says) they were better instructed afterward. But other
think rather; that these words, Neither said they any thing to any man: are to
be understood; as signifying that they stayed not to tell these things to any
in the way; but hasted to the disciples. Yea, and that their fear indeed, was
so great, that they could not have been fit to have done their message,
unless God had graciously recovered them, out of their fear, and made them
fit thereunto. And it is true. Nevertheless, if we look to that which Saint
Luke writes, chap. 24. ver. 22.23.24. we must needs admit that (as Beza
observes) some of the women fled for fear of the vision of the Angels, and
went before the rest, and did not meet our Savior in the way.

Such therefore is the report of the Evangelist Mark.

Show likewise what the words of S. Matthew are.

Question. How writes he?

Answer. Chap. 28 verse, 4. For fear of the Angel (says he) the keepers were
astonished, and became as dead men.

5. But the Angel answered, and said to the women, Fear ye not, for I know
that ye seek Jesus who was crucified:

6. He is not here, for he is risen, as he said: come see the place where the
Lord was laid.

7. And go quickly, and tell his Disciples, that he is risen from the dead:
and behold he goes before you (...) Galile: there ye shall see him: lo I have
told you.

8. So they departed quickly from the Sepulcher with fear and great joy, and
did run to bring his Disciples word.

Explication. and proof.
These are the words of the Evangelist Matthew. chapter 28. verses. 4.5.6.7. Wherein
he accords with Mark, in the most of those things, which he has specially
above that which the Evangelist Luke has. And yet this one thing Matthew has
special above Mark, that he does more plainly describe unto us; how the
women were affected, in that he tells us, that though they were all greatly
feared, yet that some of them were for all that, greatly comforted and
rejoiced: yea and that though they made such speed in the way, that they stayed
not to tell any man; yet they went with a purpose to do their message, to the
parties unto whom they were sent: specially, they that stayed longer then such
of them as fled first away. So Matthew makes Mark more plain.

Now let us come to the second appearance of our Savior, wherein he manifested
himself to those that remained still behind: and therewithal, to the speech
which he used with them at the same time, like to that which the Angel of our
Savior had used to them before. These things are only recorded by Matthew.

It follows verses, 9. and 10. of the same 28. chap. in these words.

9. And as they went to tell his Disciples, behold (says S. Matthew) Jesus
also met them saying, God save ye, And they came and took him by the feet, and
worshipped him.

10. Then said Jesus unto them, be not afraid, Go and tell my brethren, that
they go into Galile, and there shall they see me.

Explication and proof.
Thus then, we have the full report, both of the second appearance, and also of
the second speech of our Savior, to the rest of the women that stayed longest
at the sepulcher, after that he had showed himself, and spoken before, to Mary
Magdalen. And we have seen also, the report of the second vision, and speech
of the Angels, to the same women, after that Mary Magdalen had seen them.

Now, let us (as briefly as we can) consider what instructions we are to
gather for our own use, and the edification of our faith: from every part of
this story concerning the second appearance, and speech both of the Angels,
and also of our Savior, to these women, after that he had appeared first to
Marie Magdalen.



We learn more generally, that the mercy and clemency of our Lord and
Savior, is exceeding great toward those, that bear a true love and desire
toward him; though otherwise in some things, they are weak, ignorant, and
forgetful: so as they be not willingly ignorant, and sottish; but do
unfeignedly desire truly to know, believe, and obey the will of God, as these
godly women did.

Explication and proof.
It is true. For so it is evident by the gracious behavior and speeches, both
of the Angels, and also of our Savior himself, as well to these women in the
latter place, as to Mary Magdalen before: though all of them did, even in their
dutiful and loving purpose, greatly forget themselves, concerning that speech,
which our Savior had used to foretell them, and the rest of the disciples, of
his resurrection, that it should be as it was now come to pass.



We may perceive likewise, both from the speeches of the Angels, and of our
Savior: and also from that alacrity and chearefulnes, which did evidently
appear in the women, that the resurrection of our Savior is a matter of
singular joy.

Explication. It is easy to be perceived in deed. For both the Angels, and
also our Savior, bid them be of good cheer: and to put away all troublesome
confusion and fear, out of their minds. Either of them, speak as comfortably
in this ca^e, as the Angels did to Zacharlas Luke. 1.13. Fear not Zacharias,
etc. thou shall have joy and gladness, and many shall rejoice at his birth, to
wit, at the birth of John Baptist, the forerunner of our Savior Christ: And
as he did to the virgin Marie concerning the conception of our Savior, in the
30. verse of the same chapter, Fear not Mary: for thou have found favor with
God, etc. And to the Shepherds concerning his birth chapter ^.10. Be not afraid:
for behold, I bring ye tidings of great joy, that shall be to all people, etc.
So here (says the Angel to these godly women) Fear not. And our Savior
himself, Rejoice: or peace be to you: Fear not. etc. The reason of this like
encouragement, is because the resurrection of our Savior is no less matter of
joy, then the conception and birth of our Savior, and the other joyful
things, belonging to the same, were. And therefore also, the like effect is
here mentioned. For as Zacharias rejoiced, and as Marie, and the Shepherds,
and many other rejoiced at the birth of our Savior: so did these women rejoice
at his resurrection, though at the first, it was mixed also with fear; by
reason of the divine majesty and glory of God, appearing in this great and
strange work of his. And like as the virgin Marie hasted into the hill Country,
to her cosen Elizabeth, to be confirmed in the word of conception: and the
Shepherds to Bethlehem, to see our Savior newly borne: so do these women go
in have to the disciples; to carry them this joyful news, that our Savior
was now risen again: and likewise the two disciples afterward, hasted to
carry the rest word, yea though it were then night. Luke. 24.33.35. These
things are thus more generally to be observed in this part of the holy story,
concerning the second appearance and manifestation of our Savior. Let us
consider likewise of some things more particularly.

In that (notwithstanding the terror of the earthquake, and the glorious
appearance of the Angel of the Lord, had so astonished the soldiers, that they
were as dead men for the time, and therefore were glad to be gone as soon as
they could) yet the Angel bids these godly women not to fear: hence we may
first of all, evidently see, how happy a thing it is, to be in the number of
those that love and reverence Christ; in comparison of those that oppose
themselves against him. Insomuch as we shall have comfort against the terror
of the Lord, when he shall confound them for ever, from his glorious presence:
specially at the day of the last judgment.

Secondly in that the holy Angel (to induce the women to believe that our
Savior was risen) does not only show to their outward sense the place, where
the body of our Savior was laid, to be now empty and void: but chiefly
stands to confirm them from the words and doctrine of our Savior himself;
the which he does will them to remember and call to mind; and he himself
remembers them of the place, where he spoke it unto them, even while he was
yet in Galile: that is, some good space of time brfore it came to p^sse: hereby
we learn, that the word and doctrine of our Savior is a more excellent ground
and stay of our faith, then the witness of our own eyes could be; though these
had their good use, as also the sensible touching and handling of our Savior
had, to prove that he was, after his resurrection, a bodily substance, as well
as he was before.

Thirdly, in that the Angel reproves these women, for that (notwithstanding
our Savior had told them of his resurrection plainly before his death, yea
that he would rise again the third day) yet they forgot it; and therefore came
to seek the living among the dead: we see that forgetfulness of holy doctrine,
and neglect of due care to understand it, which is a forestalling of memory;
they are sins to be sorrowed for, and to be watched against, etc.

Fourthly, in that the Angel (as also our Savior himself) did command, and
encourage these women to go with speed to the disciples: the tender care of the
Lord appears, who would not have us continue long, but speedily to break off
unprofitable and causeless sorrows; yea to comfort our selves, according to
all causes of comfort: specially according to those of our eternal salvation,
which he is most careful to make known unto us.

Fifthly, in that the holy Angel makes special mention of Peter; the same
tender and merciful care of the Lord toward sinners, does yet more lively
appear: because he would have Peter in special manner comforted against his
special discomfort; even against that most deep sorrow, which no doubt, yet
lay in his bosom for his grievous fall.

Sixthly, in that both the Angel, and also our Savior himself, bids the
women tell his disciples; that according as he had promised before his death,
so he would now go before the^ into Galile; and that there they should see him:
this shows that the Lord is like minded now, as he was before; even to
delight to show himself, and to further his work, rather in mean places, and
among the poorer of his people, where his Gospel is more willingly embraced:
the^ in places of greater reckoning in the world, and among the richer sort of
men; where both he and his Gospel it usually most contemned and rejected: as
it was at this time especially, in the City of Jerusalem.

Finally, in that the women, fall down at the feet of our Savior, and worship
him: it is manifest, that they did perfectly know, and discern him, from all
men in the world, as we may say; to be our Savior, and no other but he.

Explication. and proof.
It is manifest indeed. For otherwise, they would not have fallen down before
him, and worshipped him: and that, with such a religious mind (I doubt not) as
it is not lawful to yield to any creature, but to him only, who being true
man, is also the very true and eternal son of God. This therefore (among the
rest) may justly be a certain confirmation unto us; even upon the certain
knowledge of these faithful and godly women: that our Savior is undoubtedly
risen again.

And touching the other branches of your answer. First of all, it is likewise
out of all question; that they who with a dutiful affecti^n seek after the
knowledge and faith of our Sa: Ch: are a thousand fold more blessed, then the
wicked adversaries, who any way set themselves against him: as the gracious
dealing of the Lord with the^ (even here in this world) does show: in that he
comforts all such by his holy Spirit, and gives them inward peace of
conscience. But at the last day, he will most perfectly declare it; when all
such shall see the Lord in his glory, to their unspeakable comfort: and the
rest shall be so terrified, that they would gladly, that the huge mountains and
rocks might fall upon the^, to hide them from his presence. Revel 6.16.17. For
seeing the glory of the resurrection of our Savior, was so great, by the
ministry of one Angel: how infinite shall the glory of his coming to judgment
be, when he shall show himself in his perfect glory, accompanied with the
thousand thousands of his Angels? Math. 2^.31,

Secondly, according to the second branch of your answer, our Savior
pronounces them blessed, who believe, though they see not. John. 20.29. But of
this more afterward.

Touching the third branch, the admonition of the Apostle to the Heb. ch
^.1.^.3.4. is worthily to be harkned unto; in that he says, Wherefore we ought
diligently to give heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we
should let the^ sl^p, etc. Certainly, if our Sa: Ch: had not bin so gracious,
as to show himself, and to renew the doctrine of his resurrection: the
knowledge of it, was likely to have perished, through the forgetfulness, not
only of these women, but also of all the rest of the disciples. In like manner,
our own forgetfulness is ready to endanger us to loose the fruit of much holy
doctrine, from time to time: if we be not careful to call to god for his
grace, to the succoring of our memories against the weakness thereof.

Answerable to the fourth branch, is that gracious commission of the Lord.
Isai. 40.1. etc. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my people will your God say: Speak
comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished,
that her iniquity is pardoned, etc. Likewise, the practice of the Apostle,
guided by the Spirit of God. 2. Cor. 2.1. etc. in that he labors to comfort
the Corinthians against their former sorrow. And again, chapter 7.3.4. etc. 13.
Read also Phil. 2.26.27.28. and chapter 4 4.

To the fifth branch, agrees the like gracious dealing of our Savior, in
showing himself to Peter, before he appeared to any of his men-disciples, Luk,
24.34. Likewise his often demanding of him, whether he loved him or no: John.
21.15.16.17. But of these, more in their due places afterward.

The sixth branch, is according to that answer which our Savior gave to the
messengers of John Baptist, Math. 11.5. The poor receive the Gospel. and chapter
18.1. etc. Our Savior has care of his little ones.

Hitherto of the second appearance of our Savior to the manifesting of his
resurrection. The proof of his resurrection, by his third appearance.


LEt us come to the third.

Question. Where is that recorded unto us?

Ans. In the 24. chapter of the Evangelist Luke, verse ^4. The Lord is risen indeed
(say some of the eleven, as they were gathered together) and has appeared to
Simon.

Explication.
This is upon special occasion set down by the Evangelist, after the narration
of the appearance of our Savior to the two Disciples, that were going to
Emmaus. But that it was a thing performed by our Savior before that, at the
least before they came from Emmaus to Jerusalem, the Evangelist himself does
make it plain. For as he says, when these two Disciples came to report unto
the eleue^, that they had seen our Savior: at the same instant that they came
in, some of the eleue^ were talking, and said, that he had appeared to Simon.
It was as it is most like, that appearance which the Apostle Paul writes of,
1. Cor. 15.5. He was seen of Cephas. For Cephas, as we know, as well as
Simon, were diverse names of one and the same Peter.

Of this appearance of our Savior to Peter, there is little written: and
therefore we will briefly pass it over. Only let us here call to mind
again, that which was once mentioned before; that the most merciful
disposition of our Savior, is hereby declared, in that he vouchsafes to show
himself first to him, who of all the rest was most unworthy to see him at all:
if he should have judged Peter according to his desert. As touching that which
the Papists do, upon such sandy grounds as this is, go about to gather, that
Peter should be the Prince of the Apostles; and that he should leave that
principality of his to the Pope; whom they will perforce needs have to be his
successor: it is so strange, that it is wonder that they should ever have bin
so sottish, as not to see the extreme vanity of all such absurd conceits.
Wherefore, leaving them with their most fond conceits: we come to that which
we reckon to be the fourth appearance of our Savior Christ.



The Evangelist Luke does set it down unto us, in a large narration, chap. 24.
beginning at the 13. verse, and so forth to the 36.

It is very true. And he does it in the order following.

Explication.
First, he shows to how many he appeared, at this fourth time: and he names
the one of them by his name.

Secondly, he shows the time when he appeared.

Thirdly, the place where.

Fourthly, the occasion of his appearance.

Fifthly, the manner how he made himself known.

Sixthly, after what manner he departed from them.

And last of all, what were the effects of this his fourth appearance. Let us
therefore consider all things, from point to point, as they lie in the text.



They were only two: even the least number that might be; yet sufficient to
testify in a matter of earnest importance. The one whereof was called Cleopas,
as the Evangelist expresses. The other he names not.

Explication
So indeed we read, verse 13. Behold (says the Evangelist) two of them, etc.
And verse 18. The one was named Cleopas. Who (as it is very like) was the
husband of that Marie, which is called of Cleopas, John chap. 19.25. The which
name of the one gives to understand, that though these two were the Disciples
of our Savior: yet neither of them were of the eleven. And this is yet more
clear and manifest, verse 33. where the Evangelist says, that these returning
to Jerusalem, found the eleven gathered together.

The time when our Savior appeared to these two, is next.



Answer. It was the same day that he arose from the dead: The proof of his
resurrection by his fourth appearance.
and in the afternoon of that day.

Explication
This also is evident in the same 13. verse, Behold, two of the^ went that same
day etc. And ver. 29. It is toward night, and the day is far spent: when they
come to the end of their journey, while yet our Savior was with them. This
circumstance is worthy our special consideration, compared with the former
appearances, even from the morning thereof very early, till within the evening
of the same. And touching the afternoon; a good part of it (no doubt) was
spent about this one appearance: as will be more manifest, when we come to
consider the l^rge communication of our Savior with these men. So that our
Savior Christ has not obscurely signified hereby, (as the very use of the
christian Churches ever since that time, shows also, that so his meaning was
understood of them) that he would have this day, in special manner holy, to
the memorial of his resurrection. And therefore aptly is it come in stead of
the Sabbath and Lords day of the Jews, to be the Lords day and Sabbath of us,
and of all christians: from the time of the resurrection, when our Savior
appeared to these two Disciples; even to this day. The place of the appearance
is next.



It was in the way, as they walked from Jerusalem to Emmaus.

It was likewise in the house wherein they rested themselves, when they came to
their iournies end.

Explication.
The evidence of this, reaches from the latter part of the 13. verse, to the
latter part of the 31. The distance also of Emmaus from Jerusalem, is expressed
by the Evangelist, to be about threescore furlongs, which is by estimation
about 6. miles, containing a walk of three hours, or thereabouts.

But when our Savior came unto them, it is not mentioned: save only, that the
largenes of the communication, may well declare, that he spent a great part of
this time with them. But leaving the very point of the time in suspense: let us
draw more near to the matter it self.



The occasion is expressed in the 14. verse, in these words.

And they talked together (says St. Luke) of all those things that were done.

Explication.
These words show, that their godly care was in conferring one with another,
about the sufferings of our Savior; partly mourning together, and partly
comforting themselves, as well as they could, (as will appear afterward)
insomuch as they heard by the first report of Marie Magdalen, and also by the
testimony of Peter and John, (who were at the sepulcher betimes in the morning)
that the body of our Savior was removed out of the sepulcher: and likewise by
some other of the women, who had seen a vision of Angels; which said that he
was alive: though as yet these two Disciples (desirous to know and embrace the
truth) could not firmly and comfortably believe that it was so.

This then was the occasion, whereupon it pleased our Savior, to show himself
to these poor souls, thus talking and conferring one with another, with heavy
hearts, as they walked on together in their journey.

It follows now, that we consider of the manner of his showing of himself
unto them.

St. Luke describe that unto us?

It follows in the ^4, chapter, 15, 16, and 17. verses, in this manner.

15 And it came to pass (says the Evangelist) as they communed together, and
reasoned that Jesus himself drew near, and went with them.

16 But their eyes were holden, that they could not know him.

17 And he said unto them, What manner of communications are these, that ye
have one with another as ye walk, and are sad?

Explication. Touching the manner of our Savior, his showing of himself to
these two of his Disciples; we see first of all, by these words, (and so it
will further appear afterward) that he did it as a stranger, by concealing as
it were, and hiding the knowledge of his Person from them, for a while.

This concealing, or hiding, was two ways. First, because (as Saint Luke
says) our Savior withheld their eyes: that is, the discerning power of them,
that they could not know him. Whereby it is evident, that the cause why they
knew him not: was not any change of the stature, or gate, or countenance of our
Savior, now after his resurrection, from that which they were before.

The first cause was therefore, that the power of their sight was defective in
discerning the object, that was before it: like as the eyes of the Aramites
were restrained that they could not discern Elisha; nor that he led them into
Samaria, till they were in the midst of it. And as the eyes of these two
Disciples were thus holden: so we may proportionably conceive, that their
ears, were also so restrained, that they could not distinctly discern the
sound of his voice, from the voice of one that was a stranger unto them. Thus
then we see the first means, whereby our Savior concealed himself, from the
knowledge of these his Disciples. And it is a good thing for us well to
consider from hence, that we have not an absolute power, no not over our own
natural senses: no more then Hagar could see the well of water, that was near
to her, until God opened her eyes to see it. Genesis 21.19. And therefore much
less have we any such power over our inward understanding, judgment, memory,
will, and affection: and least of all, concerning heavenly things. And
therefore also, that we are to acknowledge all these, to be in the dispositiue
power of God, either to diminish and restrain, or utterly to take away, any or
all, at his pleasure: and therefore likewise, that we are always to entreat
him to give us grace and power, that we may be careful to use them as we
ought, to his glory, etc But this as a note by the way.

The second way or means, whereby our Savior concealed himself; was that
which the Evangelist Mark tells us of, chapter 16.12: insomuch as he did not
show himself, in such apparel, as he had used before his death; but came unto
the^ now, as if he had bin a traveler to go a journey (it may be) with a
walking staff in his hand, etc. like to themselves. Yea, though he had before
appeared to Marie Magdalene, in such manner as if he had been the gardener,
appointed to dress and keep that garden, where the sepulcher was. Wherein
this our second Adam shows himself (after a sort) answerable herein, to that
part of the calling and condition of the first Adam. Genesis 2.15. But concerning
the appearance we now speak of, the Evangelist Mark writes thus: After that
(says he) he appeared unto two of them in another form, as they walked and
went into the Country. In another form; not that he changed his countenance,
(as was said before) but that he had on him another kind of apparel, etc.

Now let us return again to Saint Luke, who prosecuting the narration of this
appearance of our Savior; says, that he joined himself to these travelers,
as a wayfaring man: and that after he had approached near, and gone a while
with them; he entered talk, demanding in friendly and familiar manner, two
things of them. First, what that earnest talk was, which they had betwixt
themselves. And secondly, why they were so heavy and sad, as no doubt their
countenances did evidently bewray, as the word (scuthropoi) which the
Eu^ngelist uses, gives us to understand: as we may see further, Matthew. 6.16.
Nevertheless, this we must know; that our Savior did not ask these
questions, as though he was ignorant what they talked on: but to give them
occasion, to lay forth their grief, and the error of their thoughts at the
full; that so he might take the occasion, more fully to direct, satisfy, and
quiet their minds.

It follows therefore, as an appurtenance hereunto, that the holy Evangelist
shows, what answer one of these, (he being also herein as the mouth of the
other) gave to our Savior, to the full satisfying of either part of his
demand: as well, what their communication was; as what was the cause of their
sadness.

Let us hear the words of the Evangelist.



He reports it in the 24. chap from the beginning of the 18. verse, to the
end of the 24. in these words.

18 And the one (says the Evangelist) named Cleopas, answered and said unto
him, Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and have not known these things,
which are come to pass therein, in these days?

19 And he said unto them, What things?

And they said unto him, Of Jesus of Nazaret, who was a Prophet, mighty in
deed and in word, before God and all the people.

20 And how the high Priests and our Rulers, delivered him to be condemned to
death, and have crucified him.

21 But we trusted, that it had been he, that should have delivered Israel:
and as touching all these things, to day, is the third day, that they were done.

22 Yea, and certain women among us, made us astonished, who came early unto the
Sepulcher.

23 And when they found not his body, they came, saying, That they had also
seen a vision of Angels, which said, that he was alive.

24 Therefore certain of them, who were with us, went to the sepulcher, and
found it even so as the women had said, but him they saw not.

Explication.
This is indeed the full report of the answer, showing, (as was said) both
what their communication had been: and also what the cause of their sadness
was.

Their communication (as Cleopas answers) was of Jesus, (c^^monly surnamed as
it were, from the place of his education) Jesus of Nazaret. Whom indeed,
Cleopas does describe honorably; though somewhat defectiuely from one part of
his office and calling only; as one being among his Disciples reputed a most
holy Prophet: and also from the effects or signs thereof, in that he showed
himself mighty in word and deed, both before God and men, God himself from
heaven giving witness thereunto. Thus I say Cleopas does describe our Savior
honorably, though as yet, he did not know, either his Person, or his Office,
perfitly.

That which they communed concerning this Jesus our Savior: was first, of his
late sufferings and death, even that his death upon the Cross: which their
most envious and malicious Governors had cruelly put him unto, but two days
before.

The which also, as they say, was done so publicly, and in the open sight of
all; that even in the beginning of this answer, Cleopas tells our Savior
(who not only best knew, but also alone felt the smart of all) that he
marvelled, that any one about Jerusalem, could be ignorant of it.

Secondly, they talked (as Cleopas further reports to our Savior, though as
yet unknown to Cleopas) of that more private, and as yet very secret news,
which was brought unto them, being among the Disciples at Jerusalem, the
present morning, before they, (upon necessary occasion) brake company, and left
them somewhat early: to wit, before that Marie Magdalene returned the second
time. The which news was this; that certain women, and namely Marie Magdalene
going early to the sepulcher, found not the body of our Savior there; no nor
yet they of the Disciples, (to wit, Peter and John) who went to see whether it
were so or no. Yea more then this; this news was brought by some other of the
women, most likely, by them who at the sight of the Angels, fled first from the
sepulcher for fear, (of whom Mark seems to write, chapter 16.8.) that they saw
a vision of Angels, who affirmed that Jesus was alive.

And thus; Cleopas has ingenuously declared, what the communication of
himself and his companion was: without any fear, who it might be, to whom
they spoke; whether he were an enemy or a friend. They cannot but profess
themselves to have an honorable opinion of him, whom their Rulers had most
odiously and unjustly pursued to the death; as if he had been a deceiuer or a
traitor, etc.

Now, he does therewithal likewise, simply and plainly open unto our Savior,
(though as yet he little thought that it was he) the very cause or causes, of
his and his companions grief; yea of the common grief of the rest of the
Disciples.

First, because whereas they trusted before, that he should have delivered
Israel; now by reason that such a death fell upon him; they began to call
their former thoughts into question and doubt.

Secondly, because notwithstanding the news that was brought, began to cheer
up their hearts; in that they had an inckling that he should be alive again:
yet they could not be persuaded that it was so, because (no doubt) they
imagined strongly, that if it had been so, it should have been done in
another manner of sort: that is, in more pompous magnificence then was
reported; or could yet be found to have been performed.

Such was the answer of Cleopas: he therein laying forth at large, both what
was the communication of himself, and his companion; and also what their
grief was.

Now let us hear the reply of our Savior, though hitherto he thought it not
meet to discover himself.

Luke lay this forth unto us?

This is contained in the 24. chap. verses 25, 26, 27. as it follows thus.

25 Then he said unto them, O fools and slow of heart, to believe all that the
Prophets have spoken.

26 Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?

27 And he began (says Luke) from Moses and all the Prophets, and interpreted
unto them, in all the Scriptures, the things which were written of him.

Explication
In this reply of our Savior, we have three things of most worthy observation
to consider.

First, the earnest reprehension which he gives his Disciples, verse 26. O
fools, etc.

Secondly, his like earnest, short, reprehensiue, and interrogatory affirmation
of the truth, called into question by them.

Thirdly, a large proof and confirmation of the same truth, from all the holy
scriptures of the old Testament, as the Evangelist plainly testifies: though
for breuities sake, (insomuch as he has every where mentioned them in the
history of the Gospel of our Savior, as occasion was offered before) he does
not repeat them now again.

All these things are exceeding profitable for our instruction: let us
therefore stand a while to ponder and weigh them.

And first, let us well know, and willingly suffer our selves to be admonished
of; that it is a great sin in the sight of God, and our Savior: to be
dullards and sluggards in the knowledge and belief of the holy scriptures of
God. Yea, that it is a great sin in us, not to be ready and cheerful, in
the understanding and faith of them all, without exception: seeing God by his
holy Spirit spoke in the ministry of his holy Prophets, both by their speech,
and also by their writing: whosoever of the^ have either spoken, or written any
thing from the beginning of the world. For otherwise, our Savior would never
have bin thus earnest, in calling his Disciples fools or dullards, for want of
the knowledge hereof: seeing they were not altogether ignorant and unbelieving;
and the rather, seeing they were not of the eleven, but of the more ordinary
sort of his Disciples.

Wherefore I pray you let us diligently mark, that all the excellency of our
wisdom, consists in the knowledge and faith of the holy Scriptures; yea,
both of the old, and also of the new Testament: ever since that God has of his
singular mercy, caused them to be written and added to the old, for the
further instruction and edification of his Church, in the knowledge and faith
of the same his truth. Without this; we are but fools and dullardes, as our
Savior tells us: how sharp and quick witted, or how grave and profound so
ever, any of us may seem to be otherwise. Yea, though we were as wise as
Ahitophel, or as subtle as Herod, etc. And therefore also, let us not only
mark; but even stir up our selves to perform it: that we give our selves,
to be most ready, and cheerful, in the embracing of the knowledge and faith
of the holy Scriptures; infinitely above all things in the world beside. Let us
not be negligent readers and drowsy hearers, etc: but most diligent and
always waking, as good scholars and profitable students, under so excellent a
Schoolmaster as our Savior is: that we may not only understand with our
mind, but also believe in our hearts, as our Savior requires, in that he
says, O fools and slow of heart to believe, etc.

This reproof is to be understood, and taken as most sharp against those, who
having had the best means of knowledge and faith, have made the least
profiting: according to the reproof of the Galatians. chapter 3.1. Let such
therefore especially, lay this rebuke of our Savior to heart; and learn to be
more wise and diligent, for ever hereafter: lest at the last, they feel the
everlasting discommodity and smart of it; when our Savior shall come again,
to take heavy vengeance, upon such unprofitable truants: as they are threatened.
2. These. 1.7.8, etc. Thus much concerning the first branch of the reply of our
Savior.

Touching the second branch of it, we are to consider, that he does briefly
abridge, and comprehend in two heads, all that the holy Prophets have written
of him in the old Testament: to wit, those things which concern his sufferings
first, and then those which do concern his glory, which was to follow after
the same. According to the which abridgement of our Savior; the Apostle Peter
writes, that it was the search and inquiry of the Prophets, chiefly and
principally above all other things, after the sufferings that should come unto
Christ, and the glory that should follow. 1. Epist. 1.11. The same abridgement
also, does the Apostle Paul make of his doctrine. Act. 26. verses 22.23.

So then, that which these Disciples of our Savior, ignorantly took an
occasion to stumble at; and thereupon to begin to doubt, whether he were the
true Messiah and redeemer of his people: it ought to have been a special
confirmation unto them; insomuch as the prophesies of the holy Scriptures,
given forth of the true Messiah, were evidently performed therein. Herein
therefore, (as was said) our Savior Christ is very earnest, reprehensiuely,
and interrogatiuely, to affirm and assure the truth of these things; as being
most meet and necessary that they should come to pass; even as they fell out,
because God had so decreed and spoken. For this is the manner of the Spirit of
God; by such a kind of asking the question, to affirm a thing more earnestly,
to the awaking of the dull affection of man, then by a simple and categorical
proposition, as the Logicians spoke. Let us therefore learn this wisdom,
from the instruction of our Savior; that we for our parts do confirm and
establish our faith, from that which is a stumbling block even to this day,
unto all unbelieving Jews, and foolishnes to all unbelieving Gentiles: to wit,
his sufferings and death upon the cross And let us well consider this point of
our Saviors speech; that so it ought to be: not only that the scriptures might
be fulfilled; but also because it stands with all holy reason, that it must be
so. For how could it be, that man having sinned against God, and so deserved
death: should possibly have his sins forgiven, and be deliue^ed from Gods wrath;
unless by man the justice of God were satisfied? which could not be, unless such
a man should die, as were worthy to work so great a work.

To this so excellent a purpose, let us furthermore (according to the third
branch of the reply of our Savior) diligently acquaint our selves with that
which is written of him, from point to point, through out all the Scriptures of
the old Testament: even from the beginning of Genesis, the first book of the
Prophet Moses, to the end of Malachie, the last of the Prophets. For this (as
the Evangelist Luke testifies) did our Savior, to the end he might establish
the doubtful and staggering hearts of these two of his Disciples. And not
without cause: seeing the holy Scriptures are given of God, to be the ordinary
outward stay, and foundation of the faith of his Church.

One would have thought, that the word of our Savior by his lively voice,
might have been, of it self, absolutely sufficient: seeing he was not only
the most faithful witness of the truth, but even the truth it self. But
behold, he thus far honors the holy Scriptures of God, that he makes
them, the canon, and rule, and determiner of the truth. He interprets the
Scriptures indeed: (for as the godly Eunuch says to Philip, who asked him, if
he understood what he read: How should I understand, unless I had a guide?)
nevertheless it is plain, that he makes the holy Scriptures themselves, the
ground of all that he said unto them. Wherefore seeing our Savior himself
did so, how shall any that comes in the name of a Minister of Christ, and his
Gospel, dare presume to take any other course, then his Master and Lord has
taken before him, as being the only lawful course for the grounding and
establishing of faith? Verily it is the duty of a servant, to tread in his
Masters steps; for the ordering of all such things, as he has (as it were in
his own ste^d) made him ruler of: and wherein he has of purpose, given him an
example, how he should follow him.

But touching our present endeavor, it may be said for the staying of it, that
though Saint Luke testifies thus much, that our Savior interpreted, out of
all the holy scriptures, those things which were written of him, concerning
both his humiliation, and also his exaltation: yet he does not rehearse the
interpretation which our Savior gave; nay nor so much as the texts of
scripture themselves. How then should we know how to do it? Or why should we
think it to be necessary, to stand upon the rehearsal of them? We answer,
that the Evangelist omitteth them in this place, for breuities sake, as was
said before: insomuch as he has already alleged them from point to point,
in the course of the Gospel, which he has diligently set down unto us. We
may and ought therefore from thence, and from the writings of the other
Evangelists, and of the Apostles, to take our light and direction. And though
we cannot do it so excellently and exactly, as our Savior himself did: yet
it is our duty to endeavor to do it, by the help of his grace; so well as we
can.

The order which we will follow herein, shall be no other, then the order of
the books of the holy scriptures themselves. The which also, it is most
likely, was the order that our Savior Christ himself observed: beginning at
Moses, as the Evangelist Luke tells us. Like as saint Stephen, (though upon a
contrary occasion) does orderly prosecute and collect the principal heads of
the holy story, beginning at Genesis, and proceeding so far forth as he could
be suffered: both to prove himself to be a witness of the truth, in testifying
of Christ: and also to convince the wicked Jews, to be resisters of the truth
of God, in opposing themselves against Christ. To whom, as he concludes, all
the Prophets gave witness. Act. 7.1, etc. and verse 52. saying, Which of the
Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? and they have slain them, which
showed before, of the coming of that lust one, of whom ye are now the
betrayers and murderers, etc.

Genesis.
First therefore, to begin at Genesis, the first book of Moses: we have even
shortly after the fall of Adam and Eve; together with the pronouncing of the
curse upon them for their sin, the promise also of mercy and salvation, through
Christ that should come: both for them, and for all their posterity, whosoever
should repent of their sins, and believe in him. So we read Genesis 3. verse
15. in these words, He shall break thine head: that is, the seed of the
woman, shall break the serpents head: to wit, the power of the devil, who is
the common adversary of mankind.

Now, that he should vanquish the Devil by sufferings; and therein, by
satisfying the wrath of God bent against man's sin, etc. the Lord himself
gave Adam to understand, in that immediately upon this promise, he gave him
also his ordinances of sacrificing, to figure and assure the same unto him, and
his posterity: as it follows chapter 4. verses 3.4. For both Abel and Caine, as
they had learned of their father Adam, did offer sacrifices: Caine of the fruit
of the grounds; and Abel of his sheep. And this, Abel did by faith, as the
Apostle declares: yea even by faith, looking to Christ. Heb. 11.4. By the
which faith also, he was accounted righteous before God: as our Savior
himself gives to understand, Mat. 23.35. By faith Noah built the Arc, a type
and figure of our baptism into the name of Christ; by the washing of whose
blood we are saved: 1. Pet. 3.21. By the which faith also, he offered
sacrifice, looking to Christ the Messiah to come, wherein God was pleased. Genesis
8.20. For this faith in Christ, all the Patriarks and Prophets etc. are
commended by the Apostle in that 11. chapter to the Heb. And of Abraham, our
Savior himself says; that he saw his days: that is, his coming into the
world, and rejoiced. Abraham no doubt, saw this day of Christ, no otherwise,
then by the eyes of faith. Ioh. 8.56. Meichi-sedech was a type and figure of
Christ: in which respect, Abraham paid him tithes. Ge. 14.18, 19, 20. Heb. 7.1,
etc. Iaakob also prophesied expressly, of the coming of Christ: and gives to
understand plainly, that he should take our nature, and be borne after the
manner of all other men; and that he should be the great King and Governor of
the people of God. Gen 4^.10. For he says, The scepter (or tribe shall not
depart from Judah, nor a lawgiuer from between his feet, until Shi^o come,
and the people shall be gathered unto him.

Yea, the chief scope and argument of the whole book, is (after the general
promise of the Messiah) to show unto what people, the coming of this Messiah
was peculiarly restrained, until the fu^nesse of the Gentiles should come in:
as also of what tribe he should descend, according as it is written John 4.22.
in a conclusion uttered by our Savior himself, Salvation is of the Jews. And
it is most worthy to be observed, even from the beginning; that insomuch as he
that was promised to come of the natural posterity of man, and to be borne of
a woman, should be able to vanquish the mighty power of the devil, (that great
wicked Angel, and all his company, who through sinful conspiracy, and
lifting of themselves up against God, fell from their first estate, and lost
all that goodness and bles^ing which they had, though they do still retain a
mighty power to do much mischief, so far forth as they be not restrained by
the almighty and gracious power of God, and of our Savior Christ) it is, I
say, most worthy to be observed, that it is not obscurely signified from thi^
very beginning; that he is the Son of God, more mighty then all Angell^: and
therefore also very God; insomuch as of all creatures, the Angels do excel
in strength: as we read Psalm. 103.20. This eternal Godhead of our Savior, was
figured in Melchisedech, according to the interpretation which the Apostle
gives thereof, Heb. 7.1, 2, 3. Likewise, that Angel called Jehovah, to whom
also Abraham prai^d, Genesis 18.13, 17, etc. he was our Savior Christ, the
eternal Son of God, though not yet at that time manifested in the flesh. And
it was the same Angel with whom Iaakob wrestled by prayer, with tears: and
whom he calls by the name of God, Genesis 32.24, etc. and Hos. 12.4. it was
Christ. Thus in Genesis, Moses writes of our Savior Christ.

Exodus.
In Exodus, the Passover, beside that it was ordained for a memorial of Gods
mercy, in his sparing of his people the Israelites, when he smote the first
borne of the Egyptians, to the end he might deliver the^ out of their cruel
bondage: it was to them, a type and figure of christ, by whose blood (to be in
due time offered up unto God) they did by faith obtain forgiveness of their
sins: according to that of the Apostle; Christ was the Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world. And again. Behold the lamb of God which takes away
the sin of the world. According also to that of the Apostle Paul. 1. Co. 5.7.
Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. And Ioh. 19 36. Not a bone of him
shall be broken. And therefore also it is said, Heb. 11.28. that Moses through
faith, ordained the Passover, and the effusion of blood.

Moreover, the moral law was given, to show men their sins and damnation;
and consequently to point the Israelites, and so our selves also, to Christ,
for our deliverance. And therefore it is said, to be our Schoolemaister, to
bring us to Christ. Gal. 3.24. And Romans 10* 4. Christ is the end of the law. To
the same purpose also, was the whole ceremonial law more directly given to the
Israelites: both sacrifices, and sacraments, the Tabernacle first, and after,
the Temple, with all the furniture thereof: Arc, Mercy-seat, Cherubims, etc.

Finally, the Angel in whom was the name of God, and is called Jehovah, who
went before the people out of Egypt, and led them through the wilderness, etc.
he was our Savior Christ the second Person of the holy Trinity: chapter 13.21.22.
and ch: 14.19. and chapter 23.20.22.23. and 1. Cor. 10.9.

Now of the sacrifices, Leuiticus the third book of Moses, Leuiticus.
is a more clear declaration, in setting down the laws of the sacrifices, and
of the offering of them by the Priests: yea and by the high Priest himself,
who was a special type or representation of our Savior among them.

The which sacrifices, in that they were slain; they were not only shadows of
the death of our Savior: but also of the fruit of his death, in that the blood
of the beasts was sprinkled, to assure the people, of the remission of sins
by faith, through the blood of Christ. Heb: 9, 13, 14. etc. Read also Exodus
24.4.5.6.7.8. And further, in that, with these slain sacrifices; some were
adjoined to be offered at certain times, which were go let away alive, so to
carry away the sins of the people: as the escape Goat: Leuit. 16.5. etc. 22.
and the live sparrowe, chapter 14.49. etc. 53. The which (as it seems) did point
unto the resurrection, and reviving of him that was indeed to die for the
sins of the people: but should thence-forth live for ever, an intercessour,
to make good unto his Church, whatsoever he should purchase by his death. They
had also sacrifices of thanksgiving, and peace offerings tending to the same
end. Thus much for a taste, how Moses writes of our Savior in the book called
Leuiticus. Let us come to Numbers.

In Numbers, Numbers.
the rock which Moses writes of (out of the which water flowed for the
refreshing of the people in the dry wilderness) it was a type of our Savior
Christ, and of that spiritual refreshing, which the souls of his people have
by him. Like as also, was the Manna, to declare unto us, that he is, and was
from the beginning, to all true believers, the perfect food and nourishment of
them, both bodies and souls, to everlasting life. For thus the Apostle Paul
interprets the signification of these things, the which no doubt were known
to the faithful in Israel, though not so clearly as they be now. 1. Cor.
10.1.2, 3, 4.9. It is true, that many did not believe, and therefore made not
the right use, as appears in the same place: and John, 6, 32, etc. But all
were not such.

The brazen serpent also, which Moses writes of; yea, and set up in the
wilderness, according to the commandment of God: it was a type of our Savior
Christ to be crucified; showing also the fruit of his death, in our
deliverance from sin and Satan: represented by the healing of the serpents
stinging, to the recovering of all those, that should look up unto it. Number.
cha. 21.8.9. and John, 3.14.15.

Moreover, chapter 24.15.16.17. Moses has recorded a prophecy of our Savior
Christ, concerning his coming into the world, and of his glorious government
over his Church: from the mouth of Balaam, even a holy prophecy, though this
Balaam himself, was a profane man.

In Deuteronomie, Moses sets down a prophecy, Deuteronomie.
even the holy promise of God, that he would send our Savior Christ to be a
most high and holy prophet, to teach and command the whole Church: and that he
would give him such a sovereign authority in the same, that whosoever would
not hear and obey him, should die the death. ch: 18, ver: 18, etc: and Act: 3,
21, 22, etc.

In the book of Joshua, ch: 5, 13, 14, 15. Joshua.
The Angel which appeared to Joshua, and whom he worshipped, was the son of
God, the second person in the Trinity, even he that is our Savior, the Prince
both of men and Angels. Judges. The Judges, in the book of the Judges, are
called Saviors: as being to the Jews, figures of Christ that great Savior:
appointed of God to nourish in them, the hope of eternal salvation by him.

Ruth.
The book of Ruth, directs to that family, of the which our Savior was to
come according to the flesh: in that he was to be man.

Samuel. Kings. Chronicles.
The books of Samuel, Kings, and Chronicle; they also do determine the family,
even the house of David, of whom our Savior was to come. And of him, was King
David, and King Solomon, special types and figures, as may appear, Psalm. 2.
and Psalm. 45. and Psalm. 72. Read also Psalm. 132.10. and Hos. 3.5. where our
Savior is spoken and prophesied of, under the name of David. And the Prophet
Samuel, is reckoned among the chief of those that spoke before of Christ. Act.
3.24.

Ezra. Nehemiah.
The reedifying of the Temple, was a pledge unto the people of God, that the
Lord the redeemer, should come into it: as Malachie prophesies: cha. 3.1. Yea,
and in this respect it is, that Haggai prophesies, that the glory of the last
house, should be greater then that of the first was. chap. 2.10.

Job.
The ancient and comfortable profession of Job: cha. 19.25. saying, I am sure
that my Redeemer lives: it must needs have a respect to Christ: insomuch as
God is not the redeemer of any, but through him.

Psalms.
The book of the Psalms, is a plentiful treasury of prophesies, concerning
our Savior Christ. Of his z^ale for the glory of God. Psalm 69.9. Of the
preuailings of his kingdom, from very small and contemptible beginnings: if we
look to the judgment of the wicked of all sorts, both Jews and Gentiles. Ps.
2. Of his betraying by Judas. Psa. 41.9. Of his crucifying and reproaches upon
the cross, Psa. 22. Of his thirsting upon the cross, Ps. 69.21. O^ his
resurrection, Psa. 2. ver. 7. as the same verse is interpreted by the Apostle
Paul, Act. 13.33. And again of the same his resurrection, Psa. 16. Of his
ascension, Psa. 68.18. as it is interpreted, Ephesians. 4.8 And more jointly of his
coming into the world, of his ascension up into heaven, and of his royal
government over his whole Church, both Jews and Gentiles: we have a most
lively, and as we may say, a graphical description and prophecy, Psalm 47.
Likewise of his sitting at the right hand of God, and of the perpetuity of his
most victorious and triumphant kingdom, Psa. 110.1. etc. Read also Ps. 4^.6.7.
compared with Heb. 1 8 9 And Ps. 102.25.26 27. compared with Heb. 1 10.11.12.
And Psa. 1 ^8.22 The stone (says the holy Psalmist) which the builders refused
is the head of the corner. This was the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in
our eyes. And Psa. 132.11 G^d has according to his promise and oath, set him
upon the throne of David Y^a, he is the Lord and King of Angels also. Psa 97 7.
Heb. 1.6.7. Thus (as wa^ said) we may perceive, that the book of the
Psalms, is full of very direct and plain prophesies of our Savior Christ,
both concerning his humiliation, and sufferings: and also concerning his
exaltation and glory.

Proverbs.
In the 8. chapter of the Proverbs, the eternity of the Son of God, our Lord Jesus
Christ, is notably argued, from a comparison with the works of Gods creation,
before all which he was: yea, before there was any time at all for them to be
created in. And in the last chapter but one, he is prophesied of (as good
interpretres do not lightly deem) under the names of Ithiel and Vcal.

Song of Songs.
As for the Song of Songs, it sings altogether the affiansals and espousage of
his Church unto him, which he vouchsafes to take unto himself, in that most
near conjunction and spiritual bond: to the end he might deliver it from all
spot, that he might adorn it with perfect beauty, yea that he might make it
eternally happy: the which things are such as none but God himself can
possibly do. And therefore we may conclude, that this Song is an undoubted
proof of the Deity of God our Savior Christ, according to that Hos. 2.19 I
will marry thee for ever unto me, etc. Let us now come to the holy Prophets.
And first of all to the Prophet Isaiah.

Isaiah.
The Prophet Isaiah, is not without cause esteemed above all the rest, the most
Euangelical Prophet.

This holy Prophet does in the 4. cha. of his prophecy, ver. 2. etc. foretell
of the coming of our Savior Christ to his Church; under the name of a bud or
sprout: and therewithal, what excellent fruits shall grow, to the
everlasting benefit of it, by him.

In the 14. ver. of the 7 cha. we read how he prophesied in plain and express
terms, of his conception and birth; and that also miraculously by the holy
Ghost of a virgin: whose name also he there foretells, showing that he
should be called Immanuel; that is to say, God with us: and thereby plainly
signifies, that he should be both God and man, in one Person of a mediator
for us; and so, the ground and foundation, of all our help and stay.

Likewise, he prophesied of his birth, so certainly, as if he had been at
that time already borne: and therewithal he describes the most high and
divine excellency of his Person, and the eternity of his spiritual and
heavenly kingdom. cha 9. verses 6.7. And cha. 11.1. etc. he foretells the
family, of the which he was to descend, and take the nature of man: together
with the most excellent and divine virtues, which he should be endued withal,
even in that he was to be the Son of man.

In the 42. chapter 1.2. etc. he describes the most mild manner of his
conversation; and that he should nevertheless mightily prevail by the
preaching of his Gospel, both to Jew and Gentile: and that not only by his
own most holy ministry, but also by the ministry of his servants.

In the 53. cha. he prophesies of his sufferings; even as if he had seen them
inflicted upon him, before his eyes. And with the same, he does most sweetly
lay before us, and to the view of the eye of our faith: what should be, and so
still are, the mighty and effectual fruits thereof, to our eternal comfort.
And in the same chapter, he speaks of the miracles, which our Savior should
work: as the Evangelist Matthew does interpret the meaning of the holy Ghost,
speaking by his servant the Prophet, chapter 8. verses 16.17.18. The which thing
also he does before, ch: 35.5.6. And beside all this: he does in that 53. chap.
foretell the burial of our Savior, as it is evident in the 9. verse of the
chapter.

In the 55. chapter verse 3. he prophesies of his resurrection; and therein, of
his prevailing against death: to the end he might perform to his Church, the
fruit and blessing of Gods most gracious covenant. The which he could not have
done, if he had perished by death: as this part of his prophecy is interpreted
by the Apostle Paul. Act. 13.34.

And chap. 61. verse 8. etc. Isaiah prophesies again of the preaching of our
Savior, and what shall be the singular fruit thereof. The which his holy
prophecy, was performed in part, as our Savior himself certifieth us, at
such time as he preached at Nazareth. Luke 4.16, etc.

His prophesies are many more, concerning our Savior, as every where is to be
read in his book of his prophesies, even as they have been of ancient time,
compiled and laid together: that is, even from the time, that it pleased God to
publish them to his Church by his holy ministry; in the days of the reign of
Vzziah, Iotham, Ahas, and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah. But these shall suffice for
our present purpose. We haste to the rest.

The Prophet Jeremiah prophesies likewise, Jeremiah.
of what family our Savior Christ should take man's nature: and of that
justification, and salvation, which should come by him. ch, 23.5.6. and chapter
33.15.

The Prophet Ezekiel prophesies, Ezekiel.
that the Kingdom shall be taken out of the hands of usurpers, and given to
our Savior Christ, as of right belonging to him. chap. 21. verses, 26, 27.
Moreover, all the visions of Ezekiel, from the 40. chapter to the end of the book
of his prophesies; they are typical adumbrations, or shadowings forth, of the
excellency of the kingdom, and government of our Savior Christ, by an
allegorical allusion to the Land, Temple, ceremonies, Laws, Commonwealth,
etc. of the Jews.

The Prophet Daniel, in the 9. chapter ver. 24. etc. he foretells the death of
our Savior: yea the year of his death, and the time of the year: if we mark
well that computation which the Angel of God numbered and delivered unto him.

Hosea prophesies of the victory of our Savior, over our last enemies, death,
and the grave, Hosea.
chapter, 13, verse, 14. Yea so, that we in him, shall likewise overcome for
ever. 1. Cor. 15.54. etc.

Joel.
Joel prophesies of the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, which God
would give to his Church, immediately after the ascension of our Savior up into
heaven. chapter 2.28. etc. and Act. 2. verses. 14.15.16.17. etc. And Joel again,
chap. 3.16. etc.

Amos.
Amos foretells the calling of the Gentiles, as a fruit of the ascension of
our Savior Christ, and of the preaching of his Gospel. chap. 9.11. and Act.
15. verses, 15.16.17.

Obadiah.
Obadiah, likewise, does prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles: and of the
covniting and conioyning of them, with the Jews, to be one Church, unto our
Savior Christ, verse, 17. etc. to the end.

Jonah.
Jonah was a prophetical type, of the burial and resurrection of our Savior,
in that he was three days and three nights in the belly of the Whale: as our
Savior himself shows, Math. 12.39.40. and chap. 16.4.

Micah.
Micah prophesies of the place of our Saviors birth: and therewithal, of his
kingdom, and of his eternal Dietie, assuming unto it the humane nature. chap.
5.1.2.

Nahum.
Nahum prophesies, that the Lord should return with the excellency of Jacob:
that is, with our Savior Christ, the Son of God, on the behalf of his
Church, against the Assirians: as Iunius interprets, posteriori Bib:
editione. cha. 2. verse. 2.

Habbakuk.
Habbakuk sets down the excellent doctrine of our justification by faith in
Christ: chap. 2.4. as the Apostle Paul does interpret those words of the
Prophet, Romans 1.17. and again, Gal. 3.11. and Heb. 10.38. The just shall live
by faith.

Zephaniah.
Zephaniah, prophesies of the calling of the Gentiles, and of the sanctifying
gifts and graces of the Spirit, which should be given them, through the grace
of our Savior Christ, and by his Gospel: to wit, faith, and repentance, with
forgiveness of sins, and everlasting life.

Haggai.
How the Prophet Haggai prophesied of our Savior, we have partly seen before,
in that the second Temple should be made more glorious then the former, by the
coming of him (being the Lord of glory) into it: and by his preaching in it,
etc. Moreover, he prophesies of the mighty power of the Gospel, in the
conversion of the Gentiles to God, under these significant speeches of shaking
the heaven and the earth. And that the kingdom of our Savior, shall overthrow
all the kingdoms of the heathen: chap. 2. verses, 3.4.5.6.7 8. And verses,
22.23. And all this, under the name and person of Zerubbabel, a Prince of
Judah, one of the Ancestors of our Savior; who was also by the appointment of
God, a type and figure of him.

Zechariah.
Zechariah in the first chap. of his holy Prophecy, ver. 8. etc. he shows,
that in a vision, our Savior Christ represented himself unto him, in the
form of a man: and as an Angel of the Lord, to whom other Angels do serve,
for the help of the Church, against the adversaries thereof. And in the same
chap. he shows further, that this chief Angel, is a mediator unto God for
mercy, in the behalf of his Church. In the 2. chapter he tells us that he had
another vision, wherein this Angel informed him by another Angel, that the
Gentiles should be called to be one Church with the Jews, in the faith of the
Gospel.

In the third chapter, he saw in another vision, the same Angel: even our
Savior in the likeness of an Angel, rebuking Satan for hindering the peace
and prosperity of the Church. And he shows also that he used the ministry
of the other Angels his servant, to further the prosp^^itie thereof. Yea
the Prophet shows, that this Angel assured Iehoshua the high Priest, The
proof of his resurrection by his first appearance.
and all that should faithfully serve God, in the ministry of his holy
ordinances: that the Lord would give them a blessed estate after this life,
like to the holy Angels, verse. 7 And finally, that in due time, the Lord would
send our Savior Christ to his Church in man's nature; of whom he speaks,
under the name of a branch, I will bring forth (says he) the Branch my
servant. v 8. Likewise in the 4. ch: the Prophet declares that the same Angel,
Jesus Christ the Son of God, shows him in an other vision, the prosperous
success of Zerubbabel the prince of the people, (a figure and type of Christ)
in building the material Temple of Jerusalem, after their return out of
Babylon: notwithstanding all the contrary endeavors of their malignant and
malicious adversaries. And therwithall, figureth out the everlasting favor of
God toward his church, through Ch: and the spiritual gifts and graces, which
he minded to bestow upon it continually: like as the olive branches, which the
Prophet saw, nourished the lamps of the golden candlestick, to burn and give
light without ceasing. For this is fulfilled only in and by our Saui: Chr:
from whose light, we have all our light; and of whose fulness alone, we receive
grace for grace, as the Evangelist John affirms. ch: 1.16. In the 6. ch:
verse. 12.13. the Prophet shows, that under the type of Iehoshua the high
Prist, who was a figure of the man, whose name should be Natzrath: that is, a
branch or sprout: he was informed again, of the coming of our Sa: Ch: the
Son of God in the natue of man, and of the uniting of the whole Church
together in one by him. This was fulfilled, in that he being brought up in
Nazareth, did thereof (patronimically as we may say, and from the place of his
education) take a kind of Surname to be called a Nazaritane: in that, from
thence, he proceeded to preach the Gospel of salvation, etc. as has bin
declared before. In the latter end of the 8, ch: he prophesies of the calling
of the Gentiles, to be one Church united with the Jews, by the preaching of
the Gospel mentioned even now.

In the 9. ch: verse 9. he prophesies of the princely coming of our Savior
to Jerusalem to reform the abuse of the Temple: and thereby to declare his
sovereign authority over his Church: the which was fulfilled, as the
Evangelists do all of them testify, with great power and glory; though not
after a worldly pompous manner: Mat:: 21.1.2, 3. etc. 16. Mark, 11.1. etc. 12.
Luke 19.29. etc. 40. John, 12. verse 12, etc. 16.

In the 10. ch: he prophesies of the mighty prevailing of the kingdom of our
Savior Ch: that should be by the Preaching of the Apostles v. 6.7. etc.

In the 11. ch: he prophesies of the most intolerable ingratitude of the
Jews, argued by their buying and selling of our Savior, at so vile a price as
Judas the traitor sold him, and as the chief Priests and the other Rulers of
the Jews bought him. verses 12.13. fulfilled Mat: 27.3.4, 5. etc. 10.

In the 12. ch: he prophesies of their crucifying, and piercing of him on the
cross with the spear. verse 10. fulfilled John, 19.34.37. But yet so, as
therwithall he prophesies also, of the true repentance of the faithful: in
that they with godly sorrow for their sins, should look up to him whom they
had pierced. And in the beginning of the 13. chap: he prophesies of other
fruits of the coming of our Savior, both to Jew and Gentile, whosoever
should truly believe in Christ, and repent of their sins: namely, that they
should have remission of sins, through that fountain of blood and water,
which issued from the hands, and feet, and sides; yea from both the body and
heart of our most blessed propitiatory and peacemaking Savior. Moreover,
that our Savior Christ (as he had prophesied in the former chap:) should cut
off, and rid his Church of false Teachers: and restore a sinceare and faithful
ministry unto his Church; the which he would bless, to the seperating of
those that be his, from the rest: so as he of his free grace, professing and
declaring himself to take them for his people; they should likewise by fa^^
profess and acknowledge themselves, to take him for the Lord their God.

Finally, in the last chapter, Zechariah, The proof of his resurrection by his
fourth appearance.
prophesying of the destruction of the Jews by the Romans, because of their
rebelion against our Savior Christ he does therwithall, comfort the remnant of
the faithful among the Jews, and all believing Gentiles: that God would have a
most merciful regard of the^, as the allegorical descriptio^s of the holy
Prophet, do notably give the understanding Reader easily to conceive. Malachie.


Malachie, the last of the Prophets of the old Testament, foretells the
coming of our Savior into the Temple, as being the very true Lord of it; and
that most holy Angel of the covenant of God, who had in the person of an
Angel, and in the likeness of man, so often represented himself to his
servants the Patriarchs, Princes, and Prophets, from time to time. The manner
and end, and effect of his coming in the very true nature of man; he likewise
foresheweth: chap: 3.1.2.3.4. And also of the coming of John the Baptist
immediately before him, chap: 4. verses 5, 6. Like as the Prophet Isaiah had
prophesied many years before this. chap: 40.3.4. The which was fulfilled by
the testimonies of the holy Evangelist Mat: 4. verse 3. Mark, chap: 1. verses
1.2.3. etc. Luke chap: 3. verses 3.4.5.6. And by the testimony of John the
Baptist himself, as the Evangelist John witnesses, chap: 1.23. And our
Savior Christ, Mat: 17.9.10.11.12.13.

Thus then, we may plentifully perceive, (yea though we have not called to
mind all that Moses, and the rest of the holy Prophets have written of our
Savior Christ) that our Savior might (as he did) very justly reprove his
Disciples; for that they had made no better use of their reading, and hearing
of the holy Scriptures read and interpreted unto them: yea if it had been for
no more then their neglect of his own most sacred and diligent preaching unto
them. Whereby doubtless, if they had well attended and marked; they might have
been abundantly relieved, and furnished against every scruple and doubt,
which caused them to call into question, whether he were the true Messiah or
no: and namely, against that offense or scandale, which arose from his
sufferings, and death. For as it appears plainly, by that which has been
rehearsed; Moses and the rest of the Prophets, aim at these two points: first
to foretell the sufferings of our Savior, and then the glory which was to
follow the same: yea even his sufferings unto the death; and after that, his
resurrection and ascension, etc. And thenceforth also, the calling of the
Gentiles, his princly government over his whole Church, and whatsoever else
belongs to the glorifying of the name of God, through the same our blessed
Lord and Savior: to whom be all praise and glory. Amen.

And thus we do se, how large a field as it were, our Savior Christ had to
hold out a good long walk, with his two Disciples; and what a large fruit,
they reaped from that care, which they themselves had, to talk and confer
together: to the end, that as well as they could, one might help another
against the doubtings of their faith, and against the heavy sorrow and grief
of their heart. For behold, our Savior, of his most tender compassion,
steppeth in, and breaks off this their heaviness, and gives them a clear
direction, to the chasing away of every scruple out of their minds, from the
warrant of the holy Scriptures. Let us beloved, have the like care, to seek
for instruction and comfort, always as our necessities, and the matter it
self requires, for the bettering of our knowledge, and faith in our Savior
Christ: to the quieting of our minds in the peace of a good conscience before
God, in the comfortable assurance of our salvation, above all other things. And
then assuredly, we shall find our Savior in due time to be as gracious to us,
as he was unto them, while he shall find us walking in his ways.

But all this while, (as the Evangelist gives us to understand) our Savior
had not yet made himself known to these his Disciples. How then comes it to
pass, that immediately, v^on this holy discourse of his being ended, he
makes as if he would have presently departed from them, and not to have made
himself known to them at all. For so it follows in our text, verse 28. They
drew near unto the town which they went unto: and he made as though he would
have gone further. But they constrained him, saying, Abide with us: for it is
toward night, and the day is far spent. So he went in, to tarry with them.
For this was indeed the purpose of our Savior, when he came unto them at the
first, to take his opportunity, to make himself known unto them.



It may be thought that he did so for two causes.

First, to let us to understand that the word of God, is of it self, a
sufficient stay to our faith and therefore that these his Disciples ought to
have rested fully satisfied, albeit our Savior had not made himself bodily
known unto them to be risen again.

Secondly, it may likewise be thought, that our Savior made an offer of
departure, to the end he might hereby prepare them, to take so much the better,
and more sure knowledge of him afterward: and to leave so much the more deep
an impression, in their hearts, that he was verily risen again.

Explication
Nothing lets indeed, why we may not think so. Herein therefore, let us
reuerendly observe the singular wisdom, and most tender love of our Savior,
toward these his Disciples: and in them to us, and all other of his people,
whosoever will yield to be Disciples and scholars unto him. As for that, which
some make question of, how it may agree with the perfect simplicity and truth
of our Saviors dealings; that he should pretend to depart from his Disciples,
before he had made himself known to them, when he came to them with a purpose
to make himself known before he would depart from them: it may easily be
answered from that which has bin said already. And beside, we may well think
that our Savior did not so lightly offer to depart, but that it might well
stand with his purpose, to depart indeed; if his Disciples had not earnestly
entreated him to stay with them: though he had in the evening, or the next day
come to them again. So we read that the holy Angels refused to go with Lot
into his house; until Lot was very earnest with them. For as the text says,
Gen: 19.2.3. they said we will abide in the street all night. Yet when Lot
pressed upon them earnestly, they turned unto him, and came to his house, and
abode with him. Moreover, when we do not blame Joseph, but rather marvel at
his wisdom; in that he did not by and by make himself known to his unkind
brethren: what reason have we, why we should not conceive most honorably of
the course of our Saviors dealing, in the present case. Simplicity and
vprightnes does not take away godly policy and discretion, from the actions of
our Savior Christ, or his servants. They must both go, as it were hand in
hand together. Simplicity without godly wisdom, is in many cases, no better
then mere folly: like as wisdom or policy without godly simplicity and
vprightnes of heart, both toward God and his people, it does easily degenerate
into extreme craft and devilish subtlety. And therefore our Savior
himself, gives his precept in most excellent wisdom: Be wise as serpents,
and simple as doves. But enough of this, upon the present occasion. For it
might seem a dishonor to our Savior that we should be much in this point: as
though his dealing were such, as that it needed any long, or great labored
defense.



Ch: 24. The Evangelist shows us how he did it, in the 30, and 31. verses, as
it follows thus in the text.

30. And it came to pass, that as he sat at table with them, he took the
bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave it to them.

31. Then (says the Evangelist) their eyes were opened and they knew him: but
he was taken out of their sight.

Explication.
In these words, we have not only the gracious manifestation of our Savior
recorded, but also his miraculous departure.

Let us therefore consider of either of them. In the manifestation of our
Savior, we are to observe two things. First the action of our Savior, whereby
he made himself known. Secondly the opening of the Disciples eyes. And both
these concurred and met together, so that they knew, both by their sight, and
also by their hearing, that it was verily our Savior, that was then with them,
and who had all the while in their journey, talked with them before. But let us
stand to consider a little of these things, from the words of the text. And
first, of the action of our Savior.



The action, whereby our Savior made himself known, was no doubt
principally, his most reverend thanksgiving: which he gave unto God, in
breaking of bread, when they sat down to supper.

Explication and proof.
No doubt it was so. For so do the Disciples themselves acknowledge, as we read
in the 35. verse of the chapter. They told the rest of the Disciples (says
the Evangelist) how he was known of them, in breaking of bread: that is, when
he brake bread. Not by the breaking of bread it self; but by that principal
action of thanksgiving, which our Savior, according to his most reverend and
gracious manner, did then perform, as was answered. For as touching the
breaking of bread it self, it was an usual thing among them, and had no
specialtie in it. It is therefore a synecdochicall speech, a part put for the
whole. Neither is it to be doubted, but our Savior in the same most reverend
and holy manner, used those words of thanksgiving, which were familiarly
known and heard of the Disciples, very often before his death, while he was yet
conversant among them. The which example of our Savior Christ ought to be of
singular authority with us, to confirm us in the careful and religious
practice of this Christian duty of blessing and praising God, both when we sit
down, and also when we rise again from our meat. And as it ought to be of
singular authority with v^, to confirm and encourage such as have learned
already to make conscience of the duty: so it ought of the contrary, to be of
exceeding great authority, to rebuke; yea even to shame those that regard not,
to acquaint themselves with it: but like brute beasts that have no
understanding, do sit down, and fill their bellies with Gods good blessings,
and rise up again, with out any profession of thankfulness to the author and
giver of them. For seeing our Savior Christ the proper heier of all things;
both before and after his resurrection, goes before us by his example: surely,
we who have no interest to one morsel of bread, but through him; ought much
rather to acknowledge our selves thankful to God, for his manifold benefits;
and for that good and healthful nourishment, which he gives unto us
abundantly by them. Master Beza Hom: 10. in Hist. Resurrect:
Verily, whosoever of us do it not: we make our selves as guilty of theft
before God; as he is before men, who sits down and takes his dinner at the
Inn, and goes away before he has paid the Inne-holder his due. Yea and we
do as justly deserve, that God should take away all his good benefits of
meat and drink from us; as the tennant does forfeite his Copy to his Lord,
when he paieth not that rent, or yields not that service, which is due by
the tenure of his Copy, Master Perkins in his exposition of the Creed.
etc. Besides, what a shame is it, (as a godly learned man says) that the
mouth which opens it self to receive the creatures of God, should never open
it self to bless and praise God for the same? Much more might be said to this
purpose: but I will cease for this time, with this one saying: that the
practice of the duty, is more excellent then the largest speech, that might be
used to move unto it. And would to God, that this consideration might move
those yt have hitherto bin undutiful herein, to take a better course hence
forward: more to the glory of God, and so more to their own Christian
consolation and comfort. It is a common saying, that a word to the wise is
enough. God grant that we may be found, in the number of such, even for our
Lord Jesus Christ's sake, Amen. Thus much concerning the action, whereby our
Savior Christ made himself known.

Now touching the opening of the Disciples eyes, in the time of the breaking of
bread, and namely the action of thanksgiving.

Quest. How is that to be understood?

Ans. The opening of the Disciples eyes, was nothing else, but the restoring of
them to their natural power of discerning the object, that was before them:
touching the which, they were by the divine power of our Savior, restrained
before.

Explication and proof.
That the opening of their eyes, was no other thing, but that which you have
answered; it may appear, by that which was said before of the contrary
shutting or closing of them up: which was no more, then the withholding of
them, from the discerning of the particular object: and so was indeed, rather
a miraculous then a natural restraint. For if it had bin natural, either in
the outward or inward sense and imagination: it would have failed in the
discerning of other objects, as well as only of that one. So then, by this
supernatural restoring of the natural use of their sight, to discern this
particular object: yea and the discerning power of their hearing; and by them
both, of their inward understanding also: they did perfitly know, both by
favor, and gesture, and speech, and every other external thing; but chiefly by
the inward work which his holy spirit had in their hearts (as we are by and by
to consider) that it was undoubtedly our Savior that was now with the^: even
he that was crucified, dead, and buried before.

And thus we may evidently discern, from the opening of the eyes of our own
understanding; what a singular blessing God vouchsafed upon the care of these
two Disciples, in their mourning under the discomfort of these doubts and
sorrows which fell upon them, by reason of the sufferings and death of our
Savior Christ. And namely their earnestnes in their loving constraining of our
Savior, to stay with them: with a mind no doubt, to show all the kindness they
could unto him, (howsoever he for his part, stood in no need of it) it was a
very blessed work of the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ in their hearts,
whereunto also belonged the singular blessing of God to come upon them. For as
all earnestnes in good things; so in the practice of the fruits of true
Christian love, it is very pleasing unto God, and our Savior Christ: as the
present instance does notably declare, in that thereby they obtained the
company of our Savior to their singular benefit. Let it therefore, I beseech
you, be of special authority in our hearts, to prouok us to the imitatio^ of
so blessed an example.

Yea, though we cannot perform it to our Savior himself: yet let us do it
to those that are sent, and do come at any time willingly unto us, in his
name. According to the example of that Christian silkewoman Lydia: Act: 16.15.
who after that the eyes of her heart were opened, by the preaching of Paul: she
besought him, and his company, saying. If ye have judged me to be faithful to
the Lord, come into my house, and abide there. Yea (as the Evangelist Luke
says) she constrained them. To the which end, let us remember, what our Lord
Jesus Christ himself says, of those which he sends forth to preach his
doctrine, (even this doctrine of his death and resurrection, of his sufferings
and of the glory that followed) that all such do receive himself. Yea and yet
more generally; that whosoever do receive any righteous man, even the least of
those, that do profess his name: that they shall not loose their reward. But
on the contrary, let us take heed, that we be not like the swinish Gaderenites,
who would in no wise have Christ come unto them: nor like that town of the
Samaritanes, which would not give lodging to our Savior and his Disciples:
lest the Lord do justly turn his back upon us, and for ever refuse to make us
partakers of his salvation and heavenly kingdom. Certainly, all such are in
great danger hereof, whosoever stand thus indifferently affected, that they
care not greatly, whether they enjoy the Gospel or no, to whom neither good
Preaches of it, or good Professors, are at any time heartily welcome.

Let us therefore (I pray every good Christian) diligently beware, we
entertain not this hoggishnes into our hearts; even as we do tender the
salvation of our souls: that is to say, let us avoid it as charily, as with
all possibility of prevailing against our unkind selfe-louing and profane
nature, we may through the grace of God, attain unto.

Hitherto of the gracious appearance and manifestatio^ of our Savior Christ to
these his two Disciples, for the confirmation of his resurrection unto them:
and by them also, and by the holy record hereof, unto us, and to all Christians.

But now that we may proceed: let us come to the second point of our text,
which concerns the departure of our Savior from his Disciples. The which
departure of his, was, both strange and speedy; yea sudden: immediately after
that he had made himself undoubtedly known unto them.



Two reasons may be rendered.

First, to let it appear; that although our Savior rose again, with the same
body: and showed himself verily and truly in the same humane nature, which he
had before his death; never to lay the same down again: yet that it was now
in a more excellent state and condition, then it was before, as being all
ready entered into the first degree of the eternal glorification of it, by
his resurrection.

Secondly, that he might give those his two Disciples, and all other to
understand, even to the end of the world; that we are not now since the
resurrection, to seek to know, or behold him bodily: but rather spiritually
and by faith, only by such helps of his word and Sacraments, as he has given
and sanctified to the same end, until his coming again at the end of the
world.

Explication.
These reasons indeed, may well be rendered of it: and they do minister very
good inctructions unto us, to the edification and comfort of our faith. They
do likewise, fitly answer, to either point of the question demanded: first,
touching the strangenes of the departure, which was miracle-wise: secondly,
touching the sodainenes of it above the expectation, no doubt, and desire of
the Disciples.

Nevertheless, neither the one, nor the other of these points; nor both
considered together: most cause us to think, that though our Savior Christ was
suddenly taken out of the sight of these two Disciples, and ceased to be seen
of them as the words of the text are (aphantos egeneto, apparere desijt) or
though (as afterward we shall see) he did suddenly, and as it were in a moment,
show himself to other of his Di^ciples: that therefore he had a vanishing and
invisible nature, and no firm corporal substance. But we are rather to impute
this, to his divine power: like to that sudden translating of the body of
Philip the E^angelist, out of the sight of the noble Eunuch, whom he baptized:
even so soon as he had baptized him, from about Gaza to Azotus, so as the
Eunuch saw him no more, Act: 8.26.39.40. The distance betwixt Gaza and Azotus,
as some Geographers estimate, is about 36. of our English miles. And
herewithall likewise, it may be thought, that at this instant, ^he eyes of the
disciples were held, as they were before: so that they could not discern the
manner of his departure from them.

Hitherto of the appearance of our Savior to these his two Disciples, with all
the circumstances thereof, and also of his departure from them.

The effects of this appearance are now only behind.



They are set down by the Evangelist Luke, ver. 32.33.34.35. of the same his
24. ch: as it follows in this manner.

32. And they said between themselves (says the Evangelist) Did not our
hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and when he opened
to us the Scriptures?

33. And they rose up the same hour, and turned to Jerusalem, and found the
eleven gathered together, and them that were with them,

34. Who said (that is, some of the eleven who were talking together.) The Lord
is risen indeed, and has appeared to Simon.

35. Then they (that is the the two Disciples) told what things were done in
the way, and how he was known of them, in breaking of bread.

Explication.
In these words indeed, the effects which followed upon the former appearance
of our Savior, are contained. And they are three in number.

First, the hearts of the two Disciples, as they themselves do mutually
acknowledge, were exceedingly affected. For did not our hearts within us, burn
(say they) while he talked with us by the way, and when he opened to us the
Scripture?

Secondly, upon the departure of our Savior Christ from them, they do
forthwith return to Jerusalem; yea though it was now within night (and
therefore must needs be very late, before they could walk thither) wi^h a
mind to communicate and report this appearance of our Savior, unto the
Disciples there.

Thirdly, as soon as they come unto them, they perform that which they
intended: the sum whereof, the Evangelist comprehends in two branches.
First, that they reported, what things fell out in the way, as they walked
toward Emmaus. Secondly, how our Savior was known of them, in breaking of
bread. What may these things teach us?

In the first of these effects, we learn what the nature of the word of God is
in the interpretation and preaching thereof: namely to inlighten, warm, and
cheer up the hearts of the reverend hearers of it. In the second and third, we
see the end wherefore it pleases the Lord, to reveal his truth to any of his
children: to wit, that they should communicate, and make the same known, to the
rest of the brethren. Yea, and that it is to be done cheerfully, and with all
good expedition.

Explication and proof.
So indeed, does the example of these two Disciples teach us: yea so plainly,
that there needs not many words to confirm the same. The words and doctrine
of our Savior were as fire in their bosom. Fire (I say) to inlighten their
minds: fire to warm and cheer up their hearts: fire to chase away the
errors and doubts of their former troublesome thoughts. For these are three
special properties of the holy fire of the spirit of our Savior Christ;
answerable to the properties of natural fire, familiarly known unto us: to
wit, to give light, to warm that which comm th near unto it, and to consume
every drossie thing, which is put into it. Thus the meaning of the disciples is
easy to be understood.

But for our selves, to chase away, the drowsines and frozen coldness, of our
own hearing of the holy Scriptures, when they are interpreted and preached unto
us: and to stir up our hearts, to show forth so great a fruit of our zeal
to Gods glory, and of our love to our Christian brethren: as of parents to
children, of husband to wife, the one to the other, of masters to servants, of
one neighbor to another, of one traveler with another, as they walk by the
way, etc. this is the worthy work, this no doubt, cannot easily be obtained of
us (partly, because of the former long neglect of the most of us, and partly by
reason of the great intermission and neglect of many other among us) but with
earnest prayer to God, and diligent and painful labor. Would to God
therefore, that the example of these two, thus set as it were before our eyes,
and the present admonition and exhortation sounding now in our ears: might at
the least, move us all even this day, as we go from Church, and in the
evening when we shall be together in our houses; to begin to talk of the
things we hear out of the word of God, for the instruction and comfort of our
souls. We might then be of good hope that God of his mercy would give us to
feel a like blessed effect as these Disciples did. For no doubt our Savior
himself, would be so graciously present with us by his holy Spirit to warm
and cheer up our hearts; that we should be moved ever after, to make a more
diligent and constant practice hereof, then hitherto we have done: and so to be
partakers of far greater comfort then we have hitherto had experience of.

Moreover, from the words of our text, we are diligently to observe diverse
other things.

First* the great mutual love of the Disciples, in that they kept together in
this troublesome and uncomfortable time, for their mutual comfort. For so the
Evangelist shows, that these two Disciples returning so late in the night (no
doubt about midnight) found the eleven and other gathered together. Whereby we
see evidently, what the work of the spirit of God is; and what the effect of
^ffl c^i n is, through his gracious blessing: namely, to knit the hearts of his
(...) children, more near together. The spirit of God therefore, is a
g^t^^^ing and binding spirit: it is not a spirit of division and scattering.
Neu^rt^^^es, there is some thing (as I take it) to be reproved in the
Disciples, specially in ^he eleven. Not that they are now thus together, (and I
doubt not but well exercised in reading and conferring, as well as they could,
of the holy Scriptures, and of those things which God brought to their hearing,
by the visions and speeches of the Angels, and touching the former appearances
and speeches of our Savior in the day time before; for so the Evangelist says
expressly, that when the two Disciples came in, they were talking how our
Savior had appeared to Simon) they were not I say therefore, to be reproved for
this; that they were now thus together: but for that they did not upon the
direction of the Angel, and also of our Savior, forthwith go together toward
Galile, that there they might have seen him, as he sent them word that they
should. For this, it seems, that they are justly to be blamed. But it may be
said, to their excuse against this; how then should they have heard the report
of these two Disciples? etc. I answer. This shows the tender love of our
Savior, even vsque ad miraculum, miraculous wise, as we may say: that he,
(notwithstanding their neglect of obeying his commandment) deals so
graciously with them, in the time of their heaviness, and uses no delays, etc.
though they through excessive sorrow and unbelief delaied the time. But it
does nothing excuse them, insomuch as therein, they took the course (though of
infirmity, and at unawares) to harden their hearts, and to increase their own
woe, above that they needed: seeing they had already the word of our Savior,
showing them a sovereign remedy against it, if they had so duly regarded it,
as they ought to have done. Herein therefore the Disciples are not to be
followed: but when we have the word of God to go before us, it is our bounden
duty to follow that diligently, whatsoever we neglect beside. This no doubt
shall be best for us. And so should it ce^tainly have been to all the
Disciples at this time. Their unbelief should have been more speedily
succored and helped, if they had so far overcome themselves. But now their
doubtings are so great (notwithstanding all the former reports) while they sat
still, and used not the means appointed; that they could give no credit to
that which these two Disciples testified. For so the Evangelist Mark says
expressly, upon their report of that which they had heard our Savior speak;
and of that which he did in their certain knowledge and sight, chap: 16, 12.13.
that the rest believed them not for all that. Yet so are we to understand the
Evangelist Mark; that we do not conceive, that all were alike unbelieving.
For the words of Saint Luke show that some of them were better persuaded then
other, that our Savior was risen indeed. The Lord is risen indeed (say some of
them) and has appeared to Simon. Though doubtless the weakness and coldness of
the faith of the best, may be reckoned to be for the time a kind of unbelief.
So that they might well have said at this time, as one had said to our Savior
before, Lord we believe, help our unbelief. Et forte (inquit Calu:)
dilatione, eorum torporem Christus mulctare voluit, quia non statim ex suo
mandato in Galilaeam eodem die profecti erant. Harm: Euang: in Lucae Cap: 24.49.

It may be, (says Calvin) that Christ by his deferring, punished their
slouthfulnes, because they did not go speedily the same day into Galile
according as he had commanded them.

Secondly, beside all that which we have hitherto observed; the words of our
text show us, that it is a blessed thing, for one Christian to make an other
partaker of that knowledge, which GOD gives us for edification. For the two
Disciples going to the rest, to tell them of this appearance of our SAVIOVR to
themselves: they are certified of his appearance to Peter, etc. to their own
more full and settled confirmation.

Last of all, The proof of his resurrection by his fifth appearance.
let us observe that the breaking of bread here spoken of (in the which, the
two Disciples reported, that their eyes, and their ears, and all, were opened,
perfitly to know our Savior) does here, as in other places, note the usual
taking of meat for bodily sustenance. And namely, Act. 2.46. Where it is
said, That the Disciples brake bread at home, and did eat their meat
together with gladness, and singlenes of heart, Praising God, etc. Though
elsewhere, the same phrase of breaking bread, signifies the sacramental
distribution of bread, in the Lords Supper: as at the first institution of it,
our Savior is said to break the bread, etc. And Act. 2.42. it was noted by
breaking of bread. So again, chap. 20.7.11. Read also. 1 Cor. 10.16. The bread
which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?

The reason why this phrase of breaking bread, is used to note the usual
taking of meat, (one part of the meal or victual being put for the whole)
is, for that the Jews, made their loaves cake-wise, thinner, and (as it is
like) harder and more brittle then our loaf bread: and therefore did usually
break it, with their hands, and not cut it into pieces with knives. But in the
Supper of the Lord, though this was done according to the common use: yet the
breaking of the bread, as well as the bread it self, was sanctified to a
special signification, of the break^ng; that is, of the crucifying of our
Savior, and of the sorrows thereof. According to that of the Prophet Isai,
53.10. The Lord would break him, and make him subject to infirmities, etc. And
as the Apostle Paul speaks of the breaking of his body. 1. Corinthians. 11.24.
But here in our present text of the Evangelist; it is of it self evident,
that our Savior Christ brake bread in the common manner, and not
sacramentally: because these two D^sciples, not being of the eleven, had yet no
knowledge of the institution of this holy ordinance of our Savior, which was
not instituted but the evening before he suffered: and that only with the
eleven; save that Judas was with them at the beginning, though likely he went
away before the distribution.

Thus much therefore, concerning the fourth appearance of our Savior, after
his resurrection: even upon the same day that he rose again, with all the
circumstances, and appurtenances belonging to the same.

LEt us now come to the fifth appearance, wherein (as has been answered
already) our Savior showed himself the same night unto the eleven, only
Thomas being absent: and the same also, after these two disciples had made
report of his appearance to them.



It follows in the Evangelist Luke, from the 36. verse of his 24 chap. to the
50. verse of the same.

Likewise Mark, chap. 16. ver. 14. And in the Evangelist John, chap. 20. from
the 19. verse to the six and twentieth.

Let us hear the words of these holy Evangelists: and first of Saint Luke.



And as they spoke these things (says he) Jesus himself stood in the midst
of them, and said unto them, Peace be unto you.

37. But they were abashed and afraid, supposing that they had seen a Spirit.

38 Then he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and wherefore do doubts arise
in your hearts?

39. Behold mine hands and my feet: for it is I my self, handle me, and see
me: for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

^0 And when he had thus spoken be showed them his hands and feet.

41. And while they believed not for joy, and wondered: he said unto them,
Have ye here any meat?

42. And they gave him a piece of broiled fish, and of an honey comb.

43. And he took it, and did eat before them.

44 And he said unto them, these are the words, which I spoke unto you, while I
was yet with you, That all things must be fulfilled, which are written of me in
the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms.

45. Then opened he their understandings, that they might understand the
Scriptures.

46. And he said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to
suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day.

47. And that repentance, and remission of sins, should be preached in his
name, among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

48. Now ye are witnesses of these things.

49. And behold, I will send the promise of my Father unto you: but tarry ye
in the City of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high.

Thus in deed does S. Luke continue the holy story. Show likewise, what S.
Mark writes, concerning this fifth appearance.



That which he writes of this appearance of our Savior, it is all contained
in one only verse, the 14. of the 16. chap. after this manner.

Finally (says he) he appeared unto the eleven as they sat together, and
reproved them of their unbelief, and hardness of heart, because they believed
not them which had seen him, being risen up again.

Explication
This is briefly that which S. Mark writes of this fifth appearance. And let us
mark, that though he says thus, Finally he appeared, etc. Yet it is not his
meaning that this appearance which he speaks of, was the last of all; but the
last of those so often renewed appearances, wherein our Savior showed himself
to some one or other of his disciples in one appearance after another, from the
morning until this time late in the night: almost without intermission. Non
respexit temporis seriem Euangelista (vt inquit Beza in mayor: annot:) sed
narrationis distributionem, quam facit triplicem: prima quomodo mulieribus
apparuerit, secunda discipulis, tertia Apostolis. The Evangelist (says Beza)
did not respect the order of time, but a distribution of the narration, the
which he makes threefold: first how he appeared to the women, secondly to the
disciples, thirdly to the Apostles. And therefore he uses the word Finally, or
last of all, though the Lord appeared oftentimes after this.

To the which purpose also, more fitly does Piscator after Beza, as also Calvin
before him, translate the Greek word hysteron used of the Evangelist Mark by
the Latin word postea, that is, afterward.

But leaving the brief narration of Mark, let us come to the Evangelist John,
who is more copious and large then he.



The same day (says S. John chap. 20. verses, 19 20.21.22.23.) then at night,
which was the first day of the week, and when the doors were shut where the
disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews; Jesus came and stood in the
midst, and said to them. Peace be unto you.

20. And when he had so said, he showed unto them his hands and his side. Then
were the Disciples glad when they had seen the Lord.

21. Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: as my Father has sent
me, so send I you,

22. And when he had said that, he breathed on them, and said unto them,
Receive the holy Ghost.

23. Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them: and whosoeuers
sins ye retain, they are retained.

Explication.
Thus we see, that John is more large then Mark: yea, and that he has
moreover, somewhat of special weight, which the Evangelist Luke (though he be
more large then John) has not.

And yet further, the Evangelist John has a most memorable appendix, or
appurtenance, to this part of the Story, which we must in no wise omit.

Question. What is that?

Answer. It follows thus, verses, 24, 25.

24 But Thomas one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus
came.

25. The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord: but
he said unto them, Except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put
my finger into the print of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will
not believe it.

Explication
Thus then, we have before us, the whole history of this fifth appearance;
together with this most memorable appurtenance, as was said. Let us therefore,
accordingly consider, as orderly as we can, of all things. First, of the
history of the appearance, from the report of the other three Evangelists: and
then of the appurtenance unto it, from the test^monie of S. John alone.

In the history of the appearance, we have to observe many things.

First, the time when. Secondly, the place where. Thirdly, the persons to who^.
Fourthly, the manner how it was, that our Savior came and appeared. Fifthly,
how he behaved himself both in word and deed, the whole time of his
continuance with those to whom he appeared. And last of all, what effects, both
the miraculous manner of the appearance it self; and also the speeches and
actions of our Savior Christ: had in the senses and hearts of the same
persons, to whom he thus showed and manifested himself. In this order
therefore, let us consider of this fifth appearance.

The first four of these things, being the circumstances of this appearance;
they are couched together, in the first verse of the text of Saint Luke: and in
the first verse of the text of the Evangelist John: yea, and beside these, the
first speech also of our Savior, is contained in the same first verse, of
either of these two Evangelists.

But that we may particularly consider of them: and that as briefly as we
may, touching these circumstances:



Herein, the exceeding tender mercy, and compassion of our Lord and Savior,
is to be blessed and praised for ever: in that notwithstanding the manifold
infirmities and sins of those, to whom he at this time showed himself; had
deserved, that he should have utterly call them off: Yet he does without delay
make himself known unto them to the end be might succor them against their
unbelief; and thereby also, comfort them against that causeless sorrow and
confusion, which they had given place unto.

Explication
It is true. Wonderful in deed, was the tender mercy of our Savior herein:
and he himself most worthy to be blessed and praised for ever, for the same.
For he was not only merciful to those, to whom he then appeared; but also,
by them, and in them, to his whole Church, to the end of the world: as we
shall have further occasion to consider, when we come to that their office,
wher^vnto he did, by this his holy compassion and tender care, sit and prepare
them. The manifold infirmity; yea, the great sin of these persons, is
evident by that which has been declared already, in that they did so soon
forget the doctrine of our Savior, concerning his death and resurrection, so
often times taught them, before his sufferings: in that they refused also to
harken to the means, whereby it pleased him, to bring it to their remembrance
again: yea to certify them, that the same was now verily fulfilled, which
he had so often told them of before: and that also, by many testimonies of
very credible persons, by whom he had made the same known unto them.

Thus (I say) their infirmity (yea their sin) is many ways evident
already, as was said: and it will further appear by and by. Wherefore, the
greater the sin was: the greater was the mercy and clemency of our Savior
toward them. And the rather, because (as was said) he did make no longer
delay, but showed himself unto them, even the night after the same day, on the
which he rose again: so that, though they were forgetful, yea and wayward in
their forgetfulness; yet the Lord would not forget his promise, which he had
made unto them, John. chap. 16. verse, 16. saying, Yet a little while, and ye
shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me: for I go
to my Father, etc. And verse, 20. etc. Verily, verily. I say unto you, that ye
shall weep, etc. but your sorrow shall be turned to joy etc. I will see you
again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you.
The which promise we shall see to be in part performed, by this appearance,
and afterward more fully, Luke, 24. verses, 52.53. And thus also, we have a
notable president, that (as the Apostle Paul has set down the axiom) our
Lord will not suffer any of his, ^o be tempted otherwise, then that he will
give the issue with the tentation. 1. Cor. 10.13.

Thus much therefore concerning the time. The place is next to be considered.



The place was answerable to the time: that is to say, as secret as might be,
in respect of those to whom our Savior appeared. The reason whereof, the
Evangelist John rendereth, in that he says, that it was at such time of the
evening, as doors were wont to be shut in, and in such a place, as they thought
most safe, for fear of the Jews.

Thus much in de^de, does the Evangelist John give us more particularly to
understand, Explication
then did the Evangelist Luke. And herein, the wisdom and circumspection of
those that were assembled, is not to be misliked; considering the malice of the
adversaries of the truth, who cannot abide, that any of those that dissent
from them, should come together, for their mutual instruction and comfort. The
wicked deal wisely in their generation, as our Savior elsewhere speaks.
And therefore it behooves the children of God, having to do with them, to
deal as circumspectly as they may, to prevent and defeat their malice, so
far as may stand with godly simplicity, and that they may be free from the
betraying of the truth, and true profession of the name of God.

B^t heerewithall, let us learn by this occasion, how great a mercy of our
good God it is; when the Church may meet publicly to worship God, without
fear of any evil, which their malicious adversaries can procure, or work
against them. And herein, let us for our parts remember, in special manne^ t^
bless and praise the name of God, not only for this liberty: but so much the
rather, because he has of his infinite mercy, continued it so many years
unto us. Neither let us forget to crave mercy and forgiveness in most humble
and hearty manner, for that we have neither glorified God, nor profited our
selves in this behalf, as we ought to have done.

Thus much concerning the place.

Now let us come to the Persons, to whom our Savior appeared.



They were the eleven most choice Disciples of our Savior, and diverse other,
gathered together with them.

Explication.
So we have seen before, in the 33. verse of the 24. chapter of Saint Luke. And
hereunto served the secrecy, both of the time, and also of the place, before
declared. For these no doubt, gave encouragement to the greater assembly. And
the rather also, did our Savior, at this time, show himself to the eleven:
that therewithal he might certify many of the rest likewise; being assembled
together with them.

But it may be demanded, why he did not first of all show himself to the
eleven: seeing he minded to use them, in his special service of preaching and
publishing his resurrection, yea in the preaching of the whole doctrine of his
Gospel, above all other.

Q^. What may be the reason hereof?

Ans. We have seen it in part before; insomuch as it pleased our Savior* so
to bl^ss^ that singular ca^e, which the women had in seeking after him: yea
though it was not without some weakness and error of judgment.

And now we may furthermore well conceive, that our Savior would leave his
chief Disciples for a while vnt^ themselves; to the end that they having
experience of their own flownes and hardness of heart to believe: they might
the rather from thence learn, to have compassion ou^r others, and to be the
more earnest, in preaching and testifying the Gospel, unto all those to whom he
shall send them; that so, many poor souls might be confirmed in the faith by
them.

Finally, the difficu^ty and hardness of the establishing of these chief
Disciples, in the faith of the resurrection; yea after many testimonies given
thereof: does more clearly confirm unto us, that their testimony, is no
fained or over credulous report; but a witnessing of that truth, which was most
effectually, and above all that they looked for confirmed unto them.

Explication
These reasons, may well satisfy the former demand. I^ is true that the will of
our Savior ought to be a sufficient reason to us for his fact; although we
could see no other reason of it: yea, though our vain reason should imagine it
self to have great reason against that which is done. For to control the
divine wisdom of God, in any thing which he does, were to show a man's self
most foolish and presumptuous, when he would think himself most wise. It were
no better, then to boast of reason in extreme and frantike madness.
Nevertheless, when God himself shall vouchsafe to show us any light of holy
reason, to discern of his divine works and the ordering thereof: it stands
with good duty then, that we should reuerendly consider and weigh the same; to
our more fall instruction, or admonition and comfort, as the matter it self
shall req^ire. And touching the present argument: it may justly be, both for
instruction and adm^nition, and comfort thus. For instruction and admonition;
because (insomuch as it is a matter of so great difficulty, and contrary to al
humane reason to believe, yea to believe the resurrection of our Savior
Christ: and consequently, to be persuaded of the fruits and benefits thereof,
and namely of the resurrection of our bodies through him) hereby we are
admonished that we do therefore, cast away all negligent drowsines, in hearing,
reading, meditating, praying, etc; yea that on the contrary, we do use all
diligent and godly care, both in preaching and hearing, etc. that so happily we
may attain unto faith, and the blessed increases thereof. For certainly,
faith is no gift of nature, neither will it grow and increase of it self,
unless it be as it were watered with dewes from heaven: that so i^ may
fructify, and have all meet increases from God; like as it comes at the
first, even from him alone.

Thus therefore, as was said, the present argument serves for instruction and
admonition. Now for comfort it serves also excellently well; in that (the
chief Disciples being at the the first most incredulous, and yet were
afterward most fully persuaded of this truth) we in believing it from their
testimonies, do not give credit to a matter of forgery and colorable
compact: but to that which has most divine evidence for the undoubted warrant
and confirmation of it. And this shall suffice us for the present, concerning
the persons, to whom our Savior Christ appeared, this fifth time, that we now
speak of.

The manner of the appearance comes next to be considered.



It was in very miraculous and strange manner* both in respect of the
sodainnesse* and also of the stilnes of it: insomuch as, though the doors were
fast shut, yet they heard no noi^^ or ^inne, before his coming in among them.

Explication
So indeed does the Evangelist give us plainly to understand, as we may
remember, f om that which was alleged, concerning the place where our Savior
at this time, showed himself.

Qu. But how are we to understand the miracle of this his appearance?

An. I have bin taught so to understand it, as we must in no wise, prejudice
the truth of the humane nature of our Savior, now after that he is risen:
seeing that were to preiu^ice, yea in effect to disanull the resurrection it
self.

Expli. It is very true. And therefore you have been taught a very good rule
to go by: even as the truth it self, requires of you. The which also, is the
rather, to be diligently and religiously regarded of us: because the neglect of
it, has been a cause of confirming many, in sundry gross errors: contrary to
the express doctrine of the faith. For they misconceiuing the miracle, as if
it had been in the nature of the body of our Savior now glorified: they have
imagined, that he came bodily among them, by a penetration or piercing through
the substance of the doors, without any opening of them. And thereupon also,
have fancied an vbiquitary, or euery-where presence of the body of our S^uiour
Christ, by an omnipotent and unlimited power of his Godhead. And therefore, say
they further, Why may not his body be really present in the Sacrament, where,
and whenever, even in so many places as it pleases him, when the Sacrament
of his body is administered; as well as he was thus strangely and miraculously
present, even at an instant, with his Disciples, though the doors were fast
shut? The rule therefore which you speak of, is most necessary to be duly
observed of us: to the end we may avoid these gross and erroneous
misconstructions. For it is most ce^tai^e, from all the grounds and articles of
our christian faith, rightly vnde^stood: that albeit our Savior is almighty,
in that he is God; and also is in the same his Deity, every where present,
always, and at once: yet that his humane nature does by his own most holy
will and settled decree; constantly re^aine the natural pr^perties of it. Yea
since the glorifying of it, as well as before: so far forth, that it can be,
but in one place at once; neither can pierce, or move i^ self through any
bodily substance; but it must caus^ it to remove, or to sunder and divide it
self, that it may have, passage. And therefore does our Savior himself, tell
his Disciples, that in respect of his bodily presence, they should not have him
always: though by his divine spirit, and the graces ^hereof, he would be
present with them for their time; and with all the faithful Ministers of his
Gospel, from time to time, to the end of the world. And the Angel of God
affirms plainly, that touching his bodily presence, the heavens must
contain him, even from the ti^e of his ascending up into heaven, until his
coming again to judge the world. To this very end no doubt, did our Savior
at the first, take and unite the true humane nature to the divine, in one
person; that it might so remain, as touching the truth of it, to the benefit
and comfort of all the elect of mankind, for ever: though ever since the
resurrection, it has laid down all the natural infirmities, and vileness, or
dishonor of that condition, which the sin of man had brought upon the same.

For these causes therefore, we are not to esteem the miracle of our Savior
his coming in among his Disciples so suddenly; even at such a season as the
doors were now shut in, that is to say, in the night time: to consist in the
deifying, or spiritual alteration of his humane nature; but in his divine
power, whereby, either at his immediate comm^ndement, the doors opened unto him,
and shut again without any noise: or at the least, ^he hearing of the company
was so restrained, that they could not hear the same: like as the eyes of the
two Disciples were held before, so that they could not know our Savior Or
else, he used the ministry of his Angel hereunto; like as by an Angel, he did
afterward open the doors of the prison, to let out his Apostles, and shut
them again: no one of the keepers or watchmen, once hearing the same. Acts
5.17, 18, 19, etc. and chap. 12.4, 5, 6, etc. And thus is our Savior described
generally, to be such a one, as opens and shu^teth, both hearing, and seeing,
and understanding, and affection, and all things, by his most sovereign and
divine authority, according to his own holy will and pleasure. Revel. 3 7.
This therefore is the true manner of the miraculous and strange appearance of
our Savior: altogether without any deposition of the natural properties,
which do concern the nature and substance of a true body. The which will yet
further be manifest, from the words and actions of our Savior himself; in the
time of this his appearing and abiding with his Disciples. And therefore,
leaving it for a while, we come now in the fifth place, to the behavior of our
Savior both in word and deed, in this time of his fifth appearance. And
therewithal also, to the effects thereof, as was set down in the last place.
For insomuch as these things are intermingled in the text: we will accordingly
speak of them, as the text it self shall give the occasion. The speeches and
actions of our Savior are sundry, and so are the effects also in the hearts
and senses of the Disciples, as was said before: and as by the grace of God we
will consider, in the particulars of them.



The first speech of our Savior to his Disciples, was this. verse 36.

Peace be unto you.



How are these words of our Savior to be understood? Are they only to be
taken, as words of a common and ordinary salutation, and nothing otherwise?

Yes, they are not only words of loving and familiar salutation, whereby our
Savior wishes the welfare of his Disciples: but they contain in them, the
virtue of a commandment, and warrant, of all spiritual peace and prosperity to
the^, through faith in his name.

Explication and proof.
So they are to be understood indeed, even in a sense far exceeding the
salutation of David, sent to Nabal by his messengers, 1. Sam. 25.6. or that
common holy salutation used among the people of God, The Lord be with you: or,
The Lord bless you. Ruth. 2.4 Psalm. 129.8.

They are to be understood here, like as our Savior spoke them before his
death, when he sent them forth to preach for a time in that cursory course of
ministry, which was a preparatiue to their great and general Apostleship. At
what time he directed them to pronounce peace to that house, which should give
them any entertainment: and promises, that peace; even more then ordinary
peace, should rest upon every such one, as should so receive them. Mat.
10.12.13. And that we are to understand the words of our Savior, in such
sense as was answered: it will be furthermore evident unto us, if we duly
consider: first, who he was that makes the promise: even the Prince of peace,
promised and given to the Church of God: yea that Prince of peace, the peace of
whose government shall increase, and have no end: Isai. 9. verses 6.7. And if
we shall yet further consider, what his promise and bequeathement (as it were)
was to his Disciples, a little before his death. John 14.17. Peace I leave with
you: my peace I give unto you: not as the world gives I do give unto you. Let
not your heart be troubled, nor fear. And if we shall consider herewithall,
how it is said by the Apostle, that he came and preached peace both to Jew and
Gentile. Ephesians. 2.17. Likewise, if we do call to mind, and consider, that
salutatorie prayer of the Apostles, Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ: the which, as we know, is usual in
their holy Epistles. Moreover, if we weigh well with our selves, that the
birth of our Savior, was as it were a chariot of peace, sent from heaven down
to the earth: as the Angels of heaven declare, Luke chap. 2. verse 14.
Finally, if we shall consider, that the kingdom of God is righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost: it will then every way be manifest unto us,
that our Savior, in saying to his Disciples, Peace be unto you: does not
after a common manner salute them, or wish them outward and worldly prosperity,
or carnal rest and security in earthly pleasure: but a most holy, spiritual,
and heavenly peace. For as touching carnal and worldly peace, he says
professedly on the contrary, that he came not to bring peace on the earth, but
rather a sword, to arm all that be his, against all peace in the pleasure of
sin. Only he pronounces and assures that peace of conscience, which
passes all understanding, to his Disciples, and all other; whosoever shall
truly believe in him, that has died and rose again to the same end for them:
even peace in assurance of reconciliation with God, of the forgiveness of
sins, of everlasting happiness and salvation in the heavens: then the which,
nothing can possibly be more, nay nothing like, joyous and comfortable. This
speech therefore, ought to have wonderfully rejoiced the hearts of the
Disciples, to whom our Savior thus spoke. But by reason of their present
ignorance, forgetfulness, and unbelief: both it and the appearance of our
Savior himself, had upon the sudden a clean contrary effect.



They were abashed and afraid (says the Evangelist Luke) supposing that they
had seen a spirit, verse 37.

Explication.
This so contrary an effect, must indeed needs show their great ignorance, and
forgetfulness, and unbelief, as was said. For had they given credit to the
former testimonies, that our Savior was risen again, and had showed himself,
and spoke to diverse other before. And had they remembered the great power which
our Savior had declared, and that diverse years together. And namely, if they
had remembered how before his death he had walked upon the Sea, when they
likewise, thought they had seen a spirit, but were deceived, as themselves
well saw by and by at that time. Matthew. 14.22, etc. 33. If, I say, they had
remembered these and many such declarations of hi^ divine power in opening the
eyes of the blind, and in opening the ears of the deaf, so that so soon as
he said, Be opened, it was so: they could not then, have given place, to this
erroneous conceit, to think they had seen some spirit: much less an evil
spirit, as it seems they began to think; because they heard no doors to
open when he came into the house, nor any noise at all, till he was in the
midst of them: as though, all locks, or bars, and boltes, had not beeene
at his commandment, to open and shut, as well as the secret faculties, and
wards, or ginnes of the eyes and ears of men: or as well as he could make
the Sea to bear him, without deminishing any the least part of the weight,
either of his own, or of Peter's body, etc. Finally, if they had but
remembered, what a power of working miraculous works, he had before his death,
given to themselves for a time. Matthew. 10.1. Mark. 3.14.15. and chap. 6.39.
Luke 9.1, etc. verse 10. And likewise to the other his seventy Disciples, in
their cursory ministry, Luke 10.1.17. they would not then have been either
so easily troubled, or so hard to believe as they were. Such therefore was the
first effect, even a strange effect, of this strange and sudden appearance of
our Savior, and of his first most gracious speech used unto his Disciples. The
which strange effect, (clean contrary to that which it ought to have had)
caused our Savior thenceforth, to take such a course of behavior toward them:
both in further speech, and also in action; as might best remove that
erroneous conceit of theirs; and so make way, to plant the true faith of his
resurrection, in their hearts.

Let us therefore proceed still, to the further consideration of these things;
according to the order of our text. Our Savior uses diverse remedies, to help
against this error of his Disciples, and to make known the truth of his
bodily appearance among them. The first remedy, was by a second speech unto
them: that is, by an earnest and reprehensiue speech, to show them the vanity
of their error.



It was this. verse 38.

Why (says he) are ye troubled? and wherefore do doubts arise in your hearts?

Explication.
It is true. Thus indeed does the Evangelist Luke report it. And it is the same
reproof, which the Evangelist Mark has also recorded, chap. 16. verse 14.
writing thus, He reproved them, (that is, the eleven as they sat together) of
their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which
had seen him being risen up again. And there was very great cause, wherefore
our Savior should thus earnestly reprove them, as is sufficiently evident,
from that which has been observed before. Hereby therefore, let us yet again
admonish our selves, that as it is a fault to be credulous in matters that want
meet proof; and which, love would rather wish us to doubt of, when it tends
to evil: so on the contrary, it is a great sin, not to believe that which is
testified by meet and convenient witnesses, in matters concerning the glory of
God. And further also, hereby we are admonished, so to give credit to every
truth avouched of God; that we do cut off all doubtings at the very beginning,
and give no ear at all unto them. For so says our Savior, Why do thoughts
arise in your hearts? Likewise, we may hence be admonished, that want of faith
is the very cause of all trouble and distraction of mind. For faith, gives
quiet peace, and stay to the heart: but unbelief makes it in all things
wavering and uncertain, according to that of the holy Prophet Isaiah, If ye
believe not, ye shall not be established. And here, our Savior makes the
unbelief of his Disciples, the ground of their disquietment and trouble.
Finally, from the example and practice of our Savior, let us hence observe:
that the right way, to plant true faith; is by reproof, to chase away all
erroneous opinions, and doubts, contrary unto it. And this is the first
remedy, whereby our Savior does most lovingly relieve his Disciples, against
their unbelief: even by an earnest speech of tender rebuke. The second remedy
was not only by word of mouth, but also by outward action, in that he shows
them his hands and feet, yea and his side also: as Saint John writes, chap.
20. verse 20. as having in them (no doubt) the plain mention of the piercing
of the nails; as the same Evangelist Saint John expressly declares afterward.
And as it may appear in that he gives them leave, yea commands and
incourageth them, to take trial by the handling of him. And finally, in that
he rendereth a sensible reason, to persuade them of the truth of his
appearance, and that it was not a Spirit that they saw.

Luke report these things unto us?

Behold my hands and my feet (says our Savior) for it is I my self: handle
me and see: for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have.

40 And when he had thus spoken (says the Evangelist) he showed them his hands
and his feet.

Explication
Here you see it is plain, that for a second remedy and succor against the
infidelity or unbelief of the eleven: our Savior first (as was said) shows
them his hands and his feet, yea and his side also; they all bearing mention
that they were the same, which were nailed and pierced upon the cross.

Secondly, we see that he gave them leave; yea commanded them, for their own
better assurance, to take a sensible trial, that they were not deceived by any
counterfeit illusion.

And thirdly, we see further, that he helps them also by an infallible
reason, against their own fantastical conceit, to the contrary. In all
which things, the wonderful love of our Savior is exceedingly commended unto
us: in that it pleased him, not only to come among them thus graciously,
before he would ascend in his full glory; but also to tender their weakness
so far, that he would be handled of them. Yea, which is more, that he
vouchsafed, for a help against their doubtfulnesse, to bear the marks of his
wounds, both in his hands, and in his feet, and also in his side. For
notwithstanding, the prints thereof, might justly be a glory to our Savior,
infinitely much greater then the Apostle Paul might well account it a singular
credit to him, that while he remained in this corruptible estate, he did bear
in his body, the marks of the Lord Jesus: that is to say, the prints of his
scourgings, etc for his names sake. Gal. 6.17. Yet to speak simply, they do
not (without consideration of this circumstance) agree to the glorified estate
of our Savior, after his resurrection. And therefore both in this, and in the
rest; the love of our Savior, both toward the eleven, and his whole Church,
and therein even toward our selves: is so much the more exceedingly gracious,
as was said.

A little before (as we saw) our Savior forbade Marie Magdalene to touch him,
because she was in no doubt of his appearance: but here, to remove the doubt of
these, he gives them good leave to touch and handle him, to their full
contentation: which also they did, as the Evangelist acknowledges. 1. Ep.
chap. 1. verses 1, 2, 3.

But as touching these chief Disciples; every thing makes the matter plain
against them: that their weakness was every way passing strange, yea even as
absurd as might be. They are more untoward then Marie Magdalene, or the other
women, or the two Disciples that went to Emmaus. For as it is most likely; they
gave place so far to their fear, that they continued their imagination, as it
it had been some evil, and illusorie spirit, appearing in the bodily shape of
our Savior among them, to make them to believe falsely, that he was risen
again: much like to that illusion, which the witch deceived King Saul by, in
representing Samuel, as if he had been come out of the earth from the dead to
speak unto him. But that it was not so in the present instance, as they
timorously imagined: our Savior takes the best course that might possibly be
used, to satisfy them therewithal. For as touching the wicked Angels, or
evil spirits; which was the matter it seems that they most feared, it is not
easily to be thought, that they are permitted of God, to take any true body, in
likeness either of man or any other creature, made only for that purpose,
that he should make any appearance thereby: howsoever (it may be) that the good
Angels have sometimes both received bodies by an extraordinary creation from
the hand of God, which they have by an extraordinary dissolution, laid down
again. Nevertheless it is likely that their bodies were of a differing
quality from ours: like to those which we shall have after the resurrection,
more pure and spiritual, then such as we have now, palpable and easy to be
handled and felt: yea differing from the constitution of the body of our
Savior; such as he would have it to be till his ascension, though it was
already glorified in a great part or measure, even from the first moment of his
resurrection.

From the familiar dealing of our Savior, we may justly reason against all
vbiquitary or euery-where presence of his body: and namely, against all
transubstantiaitng of the bread into the body or co^substantiating of the body
with the bread of the Sacrament thus, Wheresoever the body of our Savior
Christ is present, there it may be seen and felt: but it is not seen nor felt
in the bread of the Sacrament. And therefore, it is not present there. But of
this enough for this time.

Let us come to the third remedy, which our Savior used, to expel this false
conceit of his Disciples; and to show that he appearing at this time, suddenly
and miraculously among them: was no spirit, but a very true and natural man,
like to themselves.

What remedy was this?

Our Savior called for meat, and did eat before them, as St. Luke continues
the holy Story in these words following.

41 And while they believed not for joy (says he) and wondered, he said unto
them, Have ye here any meat?

42 And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honey comb.

43 And he took it, and did eat before them.

Explication
In these words, we have not only the third remedy, which our Savior used;
but we have also (and that in the very first words) the effect of the second
remedy. Let us therefore, first consider of that a little, and so proceed to
this third remedy.

Quest. What was that effect?

Ans. It was sudden joy and wonderment: yet without settled faith, touching
this particular point of the resurrection of our Savior.

Expli. So it was indeed. For so says the holy Evangelist Luke, and also the
Evangelist St. John, chap. 20. verse 20. He showed to them his hands and his
side. Then were the Disciples glad when they had seen the Lord. And this is
well worthy to be observed, that not every joy, or more then ordinary
affection, or admiration, concerning either the person or word and doctrine of
our Savior, is by and by of a true and lively faith. Nay rather, vehement
affection, either of joy, or grief, not proceeding of faith: is for the time,
a let and hinderance to faith, the which of all graces, is the most wise and
temperate in it self, and does best quiet and moderate every affection that is
in the heart of man. Nevertheless, considering who they were, that at this
time, thus ioyed and wondered: (ioyed I say, to think that it should be our
Savior indeed, but wondered, as being in some doubt, by reason of the
strangenes of the matter) we may well think, that their joy and wondering,
was not altogether void of faith, though in this point, they were not yet
settled as was answered. Thus then, having seen the effect of the second
remedy: let us come to the third, which immediately follows, in the text
rehearsed already. The which was this, that our Savior called for meat, and
did eat before them.



Yes, very much; seeing it is certain, that howsoever a wicked Spirit, may by
Gods permission appear in the outward shape of a man: yet he cannot take unto
himself a true body, neither true teeth to chew meat, nor a throat to swallow
meat, etc. as the good Angelis of God, by a special creation of God, have for
a time received true bodies, for the performance of some special service of
the Lord, toward mankind, as was by you declared before.

Explication.
It must needs be so: whether we understand it of good or of evil Spirits. For
otherwise, the reason of our Savior should not be of that demonstratiue force,
which out of question it carries with it. It may be, that wicked Spirits may
make as if they did eat, etc: but they could never show any man clearly, and
without fraud, that they did so indeed. Neither can any man say, that he has
at any time, sensibly felt any wicked Spirit, to have any bodily substance of
his own, in the time of his appearance. For as touching his possessing of men,
or abusing any other creatures, in manner of possessing for a time, to serve
his turn: as the devil did the serpent at the beginning, and as he seems
to do in witch craft, etc. they are not belonging to this point that our
Savior now speaks of. And touching the good Spirits; what kind of bodies it
is likely they have taken unto them, sometimes by Gods appointment, we have in
a few words touched before.

But that we may return to the gracious dealing of our Savior with his
Disciples: behold, in this that he eats in their sensible view and undoubted
perceiuance, his singular great love; in desire that they should be established
in the faith of his resurrection; like as we observed before, concerning his
retaining of the print of the nails in his hands and his feet to the same
end. For he did no more stand in need of meat, now after his resurrection;
then he needed in that his glorified estate (though not then fully glorified)
to have borne the marks of those wounds. For after his resurrection, our
Savior neither hungered nor thirsted, nor felt any more weariness, neither
could be touched with any fear, or sorrow, etc. Neither stood he in need of
nourishment, or was nourished by it, neither had that which he did eat, any
natural passage through his body, as before: but of it self most likely,
resolved to nothing, though he did truly eat it.

Thus much of the third remedy, for relief against the unbelief of the
eleven: wherein (as was said) action was joined with the speech which our
Savior used unto them.

Now a second speech, without any such action; which we may call a fourth
remedy and succor against their unbelief, is to be considered of us in the
next place.

He said unto them (says the Evangelist Luke.)

44 These are the words which I spoke unto you while I was yet with ye, That
all things must be fulfilled, which are written of me in the law of Moses, and
in the Proph^ts, and in the Psa^mes.

Explication
This may well be reckoned for a fourth remedy. For it is a secret token, (and
as it were a watchword) which our Savior had given unto them before his
death. The which speech of our Savior, containing the full scope of all his
doctrine, concerning the accomplishing of the prophesies of all the Prophets,
from the beginning, to the end of the old Testament, is most worthy to be
con^^dered of us. And so it was, not long since, by occasion of his talk with
the two Disciples, in his former appearance.

Let us therefore here in this place, call it from thence to our remembrance
again* Neither let us neglect, that we have here a more full and plain
distribution of the holy Scriptures of the old Testament, into th^se three
branches. 1. The Law of Moses. 2. The Prophets. 3. The Psalms. By the Law of
Moses, he meane^h all five books of Moses. By the Prophets, he means all
other books of the old Testament, beside the Psalms.

He ^peaketh of Moses first, because he was the first in t me, of all those,
whose holy writings we have: and because he writes the holy Sto^y of the first
ag^s of the world; even from the creation of mankin^e, and of all other of the
creatures of God, as we all know. He meant on^th the Psa^mes apart by
themsel^es, because they are more full of the sundry prophesi^s, which are
given forth most plainly of him, under the most lively type and figu^e ^f ^im;
^u^n Daui^, that most princely Prophet, above any other part o^ ^he old
Testament: as may be called to mind from that which is re^earsed out of them
before. And h^ does it also, because they are a portion of the old Testament,
pr^ncipally ser^ing for the manifold instruction and comfort of the faithf^ll,
ever since they were written: even to ^heare up their hearts, in the
expectation of our Savior Christ, both by reading, and preaching, and praying,
and singing, and medita ing of them and if there be any other way.

So ^ha we see plainly here, as well as by many other places of the new
Testament, that our Sa^iour Christ does autorise the old Testament, and all
the books thereof, to be the authentica^l ground and rule or C^non of ou^
faith. Whence also it follows, that all christians ought religiously to
acquaint themselves, with the reading of them, etc: yea with the reading of
every part of them, for the edification of their faith. For according as the
Apostle Peter, and the rest of the Apostles have learned by this assurance
which our Savior gave them: so have they taught and preached to us, and all
other; that these things thus recorded, are no fables, etc. 2. Pet. 1.16. And
from the same accomplishment of all prophesies in our Savior Christ from the
beginning of the world till his coming, and at his coming, and ever since:
all Athiests are palpablie convicted of their most devilish iniquity, in
denying the divine autori^y of the holy Scriptures; though they themselves are
so blinded and benumbed, that they can neither see nor feel the same.

These things thus observed, and reference being made, to that which was
collected, and set down from the Scriptures of the old Testament; for the
opening of that speech, which our Savior had to his two Disciples, immediately
before: that being in effect all one, with this which our Savior Christ
repeateth here to the eleven, and to the rest that were gathered together with
them, and to the former two again, they also being among them. We will come to
a fifth remedy, which our Savior used in this fifth appearance, both by speech
and action jointly together, to chase away the unbelief of his Disciples,
specially of the eleven.

Qu. How is this fifth remedy laid forth unto us?

An. For the full declaration of this remedy, we must as I have heard you
teach, consider jointly of the report of St. Luke and St. John.

It is true. Yet so jointly, as we must labor to distinguish the parts of
their report, as orderly as we can. And it seems to be most orderly, that we
do begin first with the first words of St. John, concerning this point.



They are these, as we read them chap. 20. verses 21.22.

21 Then said Jesus unto them again, Peace be unto you: as my Father sent me,
so send I you.

22 And when he had said that, he breathed on them, and said unto them, Receive
the holy Ghost.

Now after these words may follow the words of St. Luke, chapter 24 verses 45, 46,

They are these: verse 45.

Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the
Scriptures.

46 And he said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to
suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day.

47 And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name
among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

48 Now ye are witnesses of these things.

After these words of St. Luke, we may not unfitly return again, to the
Evangelist St. John: as it follows in his 20. chapter in the 23. verse.

John in that verse?

They are these.

23 Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whosoeuers
sins ye retain, they are retained.

Now, for the conclusion of this most excellent narration of these two holy
Evangelists: we may yet again commodiously return to St. Luke, as it
follows in the 4^. verse.



He reports the words of our Savior thus.

4^ And behold, I will send the promi^e of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in
the City of Jerusalem, until ye be endewed with power from on high.

Explication
Thus then, we have the whole narration before us; so orderly as God has
vouchsafed us his grace, to guide us: for a help to our interpretation, and
for the more clear and full understanding of the whole. We will not urge this
order of the words of our Savior, recorded by both the Evangelists, over
precisely and stiffely. Only we will observe it, till we may learn wherein it
may be amended. This we are sure of, that our Savior, both spoke and did, all
that the Evangelists set down, at this one and the same appearance: I mean in
this one time of appearance, and continuance with them.

Now therefore, (this cau^ele prefixed as touching the order) let us come to
the words themselves, and the doctrine thereof: which is no less certain by
the authority of our chief Master and Teacher, then most profitable for us,
very reuerendly to consider of.

The whole narration contains a preparatory institution, or ordination of the
eleven, to the Apostolical function and ministry: as it is evident, by
com^^ring the last words of Luke, (concerning the promise of the holy Ghost, to
the perfect furnishing of them thereunto, after the ascension of our Savior)
with the first words of Saint John, touching the holy and sacramental
breathing of our Savior upon them, as a sign and seal thereof.

Not an idle sign and seal; but that which was effectually accompanied, with
a more clear inlightening of their understanding, then they had before: as the
Euang: Luke does further declare, in that he writes expresslie, that our
Savior opened their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures.

This being as it were the whole sum, we may more particularly consider of
the narration of the holy Evangelist, in these several parts following.

First our Savior repeateth the words of salutation, or rather pronouncing his
blessing upon his disciples saying again, Peace be unto you.

Secondly, he does assure the eleven of their Apostolical and high calling,
by word of mouth, in that he says, As my Father sent me, so send I you.

Thirdly, for their further confirmation, he uses a Sacramental sign of
breathing upon them, with the interpretation of his divine meaning therein,
saying, Receive ye the holy Ghost.

Fourthlie, the effect of these words (answeable to the sacramental sign) is
recorded, in that it is said; that our Savior opened their understanding, that
they might understand the Scriptures.

Fiftelie, our Savior did from the scriptures declare unto them these things,
by the which they might be established, in the faith, both of his death and
also of his resurrection: to the end they might preach the some to other, to
the working of faith in them likewise; in that he said to them, Thus it is
written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead
the third day.

Sixtlie, our Savior declares unto them, the principal fruits and benefits
of his death and resurrection, which he would have them also to preach in his
name: that is to say. Repentance and remission of sins. And therewithal, he
declares unto them, the largenes of their Apostolical commission, extending
it self to all nations, beginning first at Jerusalem, and from thence into all
the world. For so are the words of our Savior, That repentance and remission
of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at
Jerusalem.

Seuenthlie, he does autorise them, to be authentical witnesses, in the
preaching of these things. Now (says our Savior) ye are witnesses of these
things.

Yea, further, in the eighth place, he assures them, that their ministry
shall be effectual, both to the salvation of those that will believe and obey
their doctrine: and also to the condemnation of all such as shall harden their
hearts against it. Whosoeuers sins ye remitt (says our Savior) they are
remitted: and whosoeuers sins ye retain, they are retained.

Finally, our Savior promises these his Disciples, all meet gifts, in a more
full measure, then yet they had received, for the execution of this their great
and high office of Apostleship: and to the same end, commands them to
resort to Jerusalem, after his Ascension; and to tarry there, till he should
perform this his promise unto them.

These are the several parts of this excellent portion of the story
concerning the fifte, even the most ample and effectual remedy which our
Savior used, to chase away the unbelief of his disciples: yea eue^ of these
the chief of them, for the benefit of the rest, yea even of his whole church.
It contains, as we see, many most excellent things. Let us therefore,
accordingly dispose of our minds, to ponder and weigh them. And the Lord give
us grace so to do. Amen.

Touching the first of these particulars; to wit, the repetition of these
words, Peace be unto you: I will not stand to make rehearsal of the
interpretation, which was so lately given of them. Only let us observe the
reason why our Savior repeated them: the which as we may well conceive, were
these. First, because the disciples through distraction and trouble of mind,
made little use of them before. Secondly, because our Savior minding to enter
into a new speech unto his disciples, makes a new entrance or preface, as it
were. Then the which, nothing could be more fit, for the quieting of their
minds,; and so conseqventlie, for the preparing of them, attentively, and
advisedly, to hear that which he would say unto them. To the which purpose,
we are to understand the words as com^^ing in them a commandment, that they
should put away all distraction of mind; and likewise, that our Savior
himself, by his divine power, together with commanding, does give that peace
to their minds and affections, which was necessary thereunto. And not without
cause; seeing unless the mind of a man be well quieted, and freed from
disordered and turbulent affections: he can not well mind that which is said
unto him; specially so great and weighty things as our Savior was now to
speak of, Explication
to his chief Disciples. These things observed, concerning the first
particular; let us come to the second that is, to the words which our Savior
uses, concerning their preparatorie calling, or ordination to the Apostolical
office and ministry. They are these. As my Father sent me, so send I you.
John: chapt* ^0. verse 21. What is the meaning of our Savior in these words.

He sheeweth what is the ground of the Apostolical ministry of the Gospel,
yea even of the holy ministry of the Gospel in general.

Explication and proof.
He does so indeed. And it is plain from the words of our Savior, that the
ground of the whole ministry of the Gospel (first of the immediate
institution of the extraordinary Apostleship by our Savior himself, and then
of the ordinary Pastorship afterward, according to the commandment of our
Savior, as it is evident by the practice of the Apostles, in their ordaining
of them, recorded in the book of their Acts) that it is of all other
ordinances of God, most heavenly and divine. And in this respect, our Savior
himself promises to be with this his ecclesiastical ministry, to
maintain, assist, and bless it, even to the end of the world: so as though
the Devil does with might and maine oppose himself against it; yet he shall
not prevail, as we shall have occasion to consider again hereafter. Matthew:
28.20.

It is true, that there are many great differences betwixt the office of
Apostleship, and the successiue ordinary ministry of Pastors and Teachers:
the Apostleship being immediately from our Savior Christ, and of those that
with their eyes saw his Majesty and glory, as the Apostles John and Peter
speak, Gosp: 1.14. and 2. epist: 1.16.17. And as the Apostle Paul says, Am I
not an Apostle? have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? 1. Cor: 9.1. It being
endued with most excellent gifts of the holy Ghost, for doctrine and
exhortation, and also with special power to work miracles, and to execute
extraordinary censures of some, for the terror of the rest. It being appointed
for the laying of the foundation of the christian Churches, and that without
limitation through the world, etc. John 14.24. Mark 16 15, etc. 2. Cor. 10.1,
etc. and chapter 12. verse 12. But the ordinary Ministry and Pastorship, is
limited both in gifts, and also to particular congregations, having calling and
ordination from men, upon trial and examination of their fitness to minister:
from the Apostles of Christ first, and then successively from other Ministers,
and christian congregations, in an orderly course.

And they are likewise more restrained, to an ordinary execution of censures;
neither have they the power of working miracles, etc. Act. 14.23. and chapter
20.28. and Ephesians. 4.11. and Tim. 3.10. and chapter 5.19, ^0, etc. 1 Pet. 5.2.3.
Matthew. 18.1^, etc. Nevertheless, all holy ministry, both extraordinary and
ordinary, appointed to preach the same word, etc: it is from God the Father,
and from our Savior Christ through the holy Ghost. And therefore, unto all
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, these words of our Savior may justly be
extended, As my Father has sent me, so send I you. And chapter 13.20 Verily
verily, if I send any: that is, whom soever I do send, he that receives him,
receives me, and he that receives me, receives him that sent me. And Matthew.
28.2. I am with ye always to the end of the world.

Thus then, the ordinance of the whole ministry of the Gospel; it is in
special manner, a most divine ordinance of the Lord. All power of civil
government, both of private family, and of weal public, (as we know) is of the
Lord. To. 13.1, etc. But it is not of the Lord, in such a special manner, as
the ministry of the word and Gospel, and of the Sacraments, and of
ecclesiastical Discipline. For the light of nature, and humane experience has
taught, even the heathen, every where at all times, that civil government is
necessary, for the maintenance of common peace, justice, and honesty, even in
worldly respects. And that to this end, there must be certain commodious
laws, for the restraining of the unruly, and for the defense of the rest, etc.
But the light of nature, never taught men, that there must of necessity be a
ministry of the Gospel, for the instruction of men, to the attaining of faith
and salvation: no more then it could teach men, that the Son of God must be a
mediator betwixt God and man, and that he must dye, and rise again to this
end, etc. Nay, this is not only above the reach of humane reason, but also
clean contrary to it. And therefore says our Savior. As my Father has sent
me, so send lion.

And that the ministry of the Gospel, and the Gospel it self; yea that the
Whole medi^tion of our Savior, by his death and resurrection to save us, and
to raise up our bodies at the last day: is contrary to natural reason,
experience has showed, and does still prove till this day. For did not the
heathen esteem the preaching of Christ crucified, to be foolishnes: 1. Cor:
1.23. and that the doctrine of the resurrection, was but a matter of scorn
unto them. Act: ^7.32. Yea and would to God, there were not at this day, not
only multitudes of heathenish and profane persons, but also many among those
that profess themselves Christians, who make no due reckoning of ^he preaching
of the Gospel: but think, yea speak too, as if we had too much preaching,
and that it might well enough be spared. For natural and worldly minded men
(such as all of us are, until God by his holy grace renew and reform us)
look for no more then to live in outward peace; that they may trade and
traffic, that they may eat and dri^ke and be merry; and all in carnal and
worldly manner. And these things they think, may be sufficiently provided for,
by humane policy, by the will and industry of man, without Christ and his
doctrine. As touching their souls, and eternal salvation, and the means and
way thereunto: they reject them as fables, and imaginary matters. A bird in
the hand, say they, is better then two in the bush.

But whatsoever the profane and wicked of this world do think, let us (beloved
in the Lord) who are taught of God, and seeing the necessity of the knowledge
and faith of our Lord Jesus Christ to our salvation; let us, I say, esteem
highly of our Savior, above all things, and of the ministry and preaching of
the gospel; as of that one thing, the which our Savior himself assures us,
is specially necessary, Luke 10.42. and is both the wisdom and power of God
to our salvation. 1. Cor: 1.24. Our Savior Christ as the author: and his
Gospel in the ministry of it, as the instrument. 1. Tim: 4.16.

Yea so necessary is the preaching of the Gospel, in the ordinary ministry
of it: that it is necessary, that every congregation should have his Pastor to
preach unto it: and that as he stands bound to watch over them, at the peril
of hi^ soul; so they upon like peril, stand bound to hearken to him in all
things which he speaks to them, according to his duty in the name of the
Lord. Yea every people to their own proper minister: and every minister to his
proper charge, by a special bond of duty in the Lord. 1. These. 5, 12, 13, 14.
Heb: 13, 17. and in many other places as was partly mentioned a little before.
So that, even as it were in vain, for chi^dren to make a show of good
behavior abroad, if they should be stubborn and disobedient to their own
natural and godly Parents at home: or for the wife to deal courteously to her
neighbors, but to live churlishly with her own husband: or if the husband
making show of a kind man abroad, should use his own wife and family hardly,
etc. so shall it be in vain before the judgment seat of Christ, for any
Christian, whether Parent, or child, etc. to pretend a liking and love to other
ministers of the word and their gifts: if they shall despise their own godly
and faithful Pastor which God has set over them. By the like bond, every
Pastor or Minister of the word, is tied to the special care of his own people
or flock. And for the maintenance of this ministry of the Gospel, every
Christian Prince and Magistrate stands bound to be specially careful, as of
that which our Savior commends to their special trust, as to the foster
father of his Church: by all that external and civil power, which he has
given them, the which also by his Gospel he does sanctify unto them, and
makes the meanest Prince many degrees more honorable in those respects, then
is the government of the most pompous Kings among the heathen. And that also to
their eternal salvation, while they submit their scepters, and persons, and
whole government, to the scepter of the Lord Jesus, their Lord and Sa: who is
to be blessed of al, for ever and ever. Amen.

Yet when our Savior says, that he sent his Apostles, as his Father has sent
him; we most not understand his words so, as if he did communicate to them, an
equal dignity, or authority with himself: or that they had any part at all
with him, in the reconciliation and redemption of the world, etc. b^t that he
gave them, (in such sort as was described before, and as we shall shortly have
occasion, to consider again) a like dignity and authority, immediately from
him, as he came immediately from the Father, etc. Yet with like outward and
worldly abasement and affliction also; as to servants of special trust from
him, and for the same cause endued with singular grace and power in his Church,
for the spiritual government and ordering thereof; above all mortal men, yea
above that which he himself in his own lifetime, and before his resurrection,
had put in execution: as he promised before his death, John 14.12. as was
alleged before. And thus, though he gave them not the honor of reconciling
the world: yet he put into their mouths the word of reconciliatio^. 2. Cor:
5.19. And has made them workers together with himself, in the great and
wonderful work of his grace, to the conversion and edification of his people
in the faith; as it follows in the beginning of the next chap: of the same
Epistle. and 1. Ep: 3.9. We together are Gods laborers. And as workers
together, we beseech you, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain, etc.
Yet not so that their work is internal (for that is only the office of our
Savior by his holy spirit) but external and instrumental by the word: as also
by the external ministry of the Sacraments on their part: the which together
with the word, is on the part of our Lord I^: Ch: accompanied with the
internal grace of his holy spirit, as John the Baptist acknowledges and
professes John. 1.26.27. Luke 3.16. And the Apostle Peter, 1, Ep: 3 21.22.

Thus by this second particular, which is the speech of our Savior, and the
last remedy used to cure the unbelief of the eleven in this his fifth
appe^rance: we see plainly from the words of our Savior, that the ministry of
the Gospel is no humane, but a most heavenly and divine ordinance. Of the which
I have spoken so much the more, because it is a very necessary point, whereof
every of us ought to be well persuaded: principally indeed, concerning the
extraordinary ministry of the holy Apostles, both in their preaching and
committing to writing the holy Scriptures of the new Testament: but then also
in regard of the ordinary ministry of the same by our Saviors appointment, so
to continue to the end of the world. To the end, that we for our parts,
learning how to esteem and use it, both in preaching and hearing, and in every
other part of ministry, might reap the everlasting fruit and benefit of the
same holy ministry and obedience to the same. The which God of his infinite
mercy grant unto us, even for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

But now before we proceed any further, some may peradventure ask after the
reason of this strange course of our Sa: in that he having to deal with those
that seemed for the time so incapable of these so great matters (they being as
me^ amazed or against) should nevertheless enter into the discourse of these
things unto them? I answer, that we may well think, that by this time, wherein
our Sa: had this speech, they had by the grace of God, something well recovered
themselves, and began to be better settled in their minds. And further also we
may affirm, that it was the wisest course that our Sa: might use, even to
rouse them up, and by a certain holy violence to chase their unbelief away: by
letting them understand, that he as their sovereign Lord, was in the greatest
good earnest with them that might be; and that therefore, they were accordingly
to stir up themselves, with their best earnest, to attend upon that which he
spoke.

We may conceive of that I say, from a like case, though in a diverse respect:
to wit, if an offender should be brought before a Magistrate, who would seem
not to be persuaded that he is a Magistrate, or to have any power to examine
him. For in this case by what better way might the Magistrate suppress this
fancy of such a one, then by telling him, that he should well find that he
had authority to examine him; for if he should not quite himself the better,
he would forthwith send him to the Iayle. This latter, being the greater,
would confirm the former. Thus in effect, does our Savior, in excellent
wisdom, though in a diverse respect, as was said before.

Now therefore leaving the second particular, let us come to the third: that we
may see further, how our Savior proceeded, not only to suppress the
unbelief of the eleven, but also to raise up their hearts to an undoubted
assurance of his resurrection.



And when he had said that, he breathed, (says the Evangelist) and said unto
them, Receive the holy Ghost. John, chap: 20. ver. 22.

Explication
In this particular, our Savior deals not only by word, but also by a
certain action.



He does by the outw^rd and visible sign, familiarly express that spiritual
and invisible grace, which he minded, most graciously and bounteously, to
bestow upon the eleven, his most choice Disciples.

Explication. and proof.
That our Savior does so, the words which he uses, together with the sign,
does plainly declare: in that so soon as he has breathed upon his Disciples,
he says, Receive the holy Ghost.

Now the outward breathing upon the Disciples, bears the most lively, and
proportionable resemblance, that might be: to represent their inward
inspiration, with the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost: shortly to follow
more abundantly: yea and no doubt presently with some measure of increase,
above that which they had before. Our Savior Christ therefore, minding by the
Apostolical ministry and Preaching of those his Disciples, to work a new
work in the world. yea to make, as it were, a new spiritual creation of the
Image of God (as touching the purity of the qualities thereof decayed, yea
rather extinguished in man) he takes the like course, which God took at the
beginning, in making man a living soul, by breathing into his face the breath
of life: insomuch as he was but a dead lump of earth before. Neither does our
Savior take this course in vain, seeing we are al, both Jew and Gentil,
ever since the fall of man, as dead (touching all true wisdom and spiritual
life of godl^n^s, until we are revived and quickened by the sanctifying grace
of the Gospel, and that through the inspiration of the holy Ghost) as Adam was
void of all natural life and sense, till God breathed the spirit of life into
his dead and insensible corpse. Whereupon, well says Elihu, in the book of
Job: chap: 32.8. Surely there is a spirit in man, but the inspiration of the
Almighty gives understanding And our Savior himself also, John, 3. verse.
3.5. Except a man be borne again of the spirit, he can neither see, nor enter
into the kingdom of God. In which respect also, the holy Scriptures (the
instrument of this new birth) which are spiritual, are said to be given by
divine inspiration. 2. Tim: 3.16. and 2. Pet: 1.21.

Herein therefore, as in the whole course which our Savior takes in all that
follows in his speech to his Disciples, at this time: his divine power and
Godhead is very clear. For none but God can give the holy ghost. None but God
can forgive sins. None but God can give so great power, to the Disciples in
their ministry, as to bind and loose sins: which yet our Savior gives
unto them. This therefore, is a point, specially to be observed of us, touching
this appearance.

Moreover, we may from hence see, what the common nature of all sacraments: to
wit, by an outward sign, to present, yea to give assurance of some inward and
spiritual grace: not by changing, or mixing of the sign, with the thing
signified; but by virtue of the faithful promise and covenant of God. For the
natural breath of our Saui: was not changed into the holy Ghost; but was only,
a lively seal and assurance, of the gifts. of the holy Ghost, to be given unto
them.

Nevertheless, though the breathing of our Savior at this time was to his
Disciples a sacramental sign: yet it was so appropriated unto their
Apostoli^cal vocation and ordination; and also so personally agreeing only to
our Sa: Ch: in that he is God; that no creature may, without intolerable
presumption, once attempt to take upon him, to breath upon any and so to utter
these words, at the ordinary ordination of any minister, as our Savior did at
this extraordinari^ ordination of his Apostles. For there is no commandment
given hereof, that any creature should do this,, as the commandment is given
for Baptism: Go into all the world and Baptize: and for the Lords supper, do
this etc. For it cannot (to speak properly) agree to any creature, to give the
holy ghost. How then? like as God did once breath the breath of the natural
life, into the face of Adam, whence as from a fountain it is derived unto all
his posterity; through the natural generation, as the isntrumental cause
thereof: so our Savior Christ, having once said to his Apostles the spiritual
Fathers of all Churches, as the instruments of Christ's spirit, Receive the holy
Ghost: he gave it to them, not only for themselves; but also that by their
ministry in preaching and writing, his spirit might be succe^ lively given to
the end of the world, in a spiritual manner, as it were from hand to hand. The
sacrament therefore of this order, was only proper to the holy Apostles, and
is not again to be reiterated to any. But in stead of this extraordinary
breathing of our Savior, and these commanding words of his divine power: the
imposition of hands, whereof we read in the holy Scriptures, together with the
prayers of the Church, is the ordinary ceremony, lawful to be used, in the
ordinary setting a part of all ministers of the word, to their office and
ministry, after that, upon due examination and trial, they be found fit to
minister.

It cannot be denied, but that God deals extraordinarily to this day, in
extraordinary, and confused, and degenerate times, as he himself thinks good:
raising and sending, whom he will, and in this, or that manner, as pleases
him. But man has no authority to do so. This only belongs, as a sovereign
prerogative, to our Lord Jesus Christ. It is true also, that many times, the
Churches of God, are so hindered, that they cannot take the ordinary course,
which they ought, and gladly would. Nevertheless, it is the duty of those that
be faithful, to aim still at the ordinary ways of God: and to hold themselves
unto the^, as much as possibly they may. Thus much more generally, concerning
the words of our Savior. Receive the holy ghost, added to his actio^ of
breathing upon his disciples.

But that we may the better understand them, let us consider a little, of either
of them a part. And first, concerning the holy Ghost.



By the holy Ghost, in this place (as I have bin taught) our Savior does not
mean the third Person of the holy Trinity, simply considered, and in respect
of his essence and personal subsistence, as though that were given to his
disciples; but in respect of the effectual working of the holy Ghost, in their
hearts: in that he proceeding from the Father, and the Son; is the only
immediate fitter, and furnisher of them, to their holy ministry, by conferring
all spiritual gifts and graces meet thereunto.

Explication and proof.
It is so indeed. And so are we to understand the holy Scriptures in many
places, where we read of the sending, giving, or communicating of the holy
Ghost, to any man. Or when the holy Ghost is said to come upon any, or that
any are said to be filled with the holy Ghost. Read 2. Chron: 24.20. Luke 1.67.
Act. ch: 2.4. and, 6, 3, 5, and ch, 8, 14.15.16, 17. and. ch: 19.6. And in
respect of this fitting and furnishing; the holy Ghost is called sometimes the
hand and finger of God, as 2. king: 3.18. the hand of God came upon Elisha* and
Luk, 11.20.

And in this place, we are, further to understand, that by the holy Ghost, is
not meant, so much the gifts of the spirit to sanctification of life (such as
are simply necessary to salvation as Act: 10.47. the which these Disciples had
in part already, themselves having been Baptized) but more properly, those
gifts of the spirit, which belong to the Apostolical function of Preachers, as
1. Cor: 12. the which also they had for a while in some measure, not long
before: when our Savior sent them forth to Preach, as we observed a while
since. Thus much, for the meaning of these words, holy Ghost.



By this word, Receive, our Savior notes his giving of the holy Ghost.

Explication.
He does so indeed. For they could not possibly have received, unless it had
been his pleasure to give.



By this word, receive (which is a word of authority and commandment, not to
the holy Ghost, but to the Disciples) our Savior does, both stir up, and
frame their hearts, to be capable of that gift, which he minded, in some
measure, presently to bestow upon them; and also to rai^e up their hearts, to
a further expe^tation of the increase thereof, to the perfect furnishing of
them to their most weighty and difficult office and Ministry.

Explication.
It is very true. For when he breathed upon them, he did not give them a bare
and naked sign: neither spoke idle and vain words; but his divine power made
them both effectual.



Yes, if it had so pleased our Savior. Nevertheless; to help the weak faith
of his Disciples: he thought good in his most gracious wisdom, to give them an
outward and sacramental sign.

Explication.
Herein therefore, the tender compassion of our Savior, does again singularly
appear: like as we have observed diverse times before.

Now, let us come to the fourth particular: to wit, the effect which followed
upon this sacramental sign and speech of our Savior.



The Evangelist Luke, may well be the most holy Interpreter of it, in that he
says.

45. Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the
Scriptures.

46. And said unto them, thus it is written, etc.

Explication
We have seen already, that our Savior Christ has used many notable remedies,
in this his fifth appearance to help against the unbelief of these his
special Disciples. But that we may see, that all means are ineffectual,
until God give blessing: it is said here, that the Disciples remained still,
without faith in this point of the resurrection; till our Savior opened their
understanding, as it were with the key of knowledge, through the grace of his
holy Spirit. And it is most certain, that we are all, so blind; that by no
means, can we understand any thing, that belongs to the kingdom of God:
unless God himself, by his holy spirit, do reveal it unto us. The natural
man perceives not the things of God, 1. Cor: 2.14.

Nevertheless, we must not understand the words of the Evangelist: as if the
Disciples were utterly void of all knowledge, and altogether destitute of the
spirit of God. For it is evident, by that which is testified in the Gospel
before, that they being scholars to our Savior, even two or three years: yea
having been employed by our Savior, to preach for a certain season to the
people of Israel, Mat: 10.5.6.7. etc, must needs know and believe many
excellent things, concerning the kingdom of God. Verily, if our Savior Christ
had not given them his holy spirit, in some measure; they would not at the
first, so speedily have embraced him for their Master and Teacher: nor
afterward, so constantly have followed him, and left the ordinary trade and
worldly gain of their callings. When others forsook him, they would not have
cleaued unto him, ^s we read in the sixth of John that they did: acknowledging
that he alone had the words of eternal life. They could not have known and
professed him, to be the Christ, the Son of the living God, as Peter does in
the name, and with the consent of all the rest. Matthew: 16.16. Finally, now at
his death (they being so greatly shaken as they we^e) would forthwith have
given over all; and betaken themselves* every one to their worldly affairs
again, if there had not been the grace of God given them; and if it had not
been secretly remaining and abiding in them.

We are therefore to understand these words, with some restraint, concerning
the matter principally in hand: that is to say, concerning the truth of the
resurrection of our Savior, and the right use both of his death and
resurrection, as was a little touched before, and as we are by and by further to
consider. For these were the principal points, wherein the Disciples were at
this time, utterly to seek.

The instruction which we are from hence to r^ceiue, is this: that when we have
learned one point of knowledge or Article of our faith; yea though we have
learned to understand and believe diverse of them; yea all that we have heard
of before (as the Disciples no doubt, knew and believed, that our Savior was
borne of the Virgin Mary, that he had lived a most righteous life, taught a
most perfect doctrine, wrought infinite divine works, and saw his glory, so as
they discerned it to be the glory of the only begotten Son of God, etc) yet if
God do not continue still, to enlighten us by his holy spirit: we should be
ignorant, and unbelieving, touching those points yet remaining; as even these
chief disciples were for a season. And therefore, we learn further from hence
that we are still continually to crave of God, that he will vouchsafe to open
our eyes, that even as he has lincked together, all the Articles of our faith,
as in a golden chain; so it would please him, to renew from time to time, the
gracious light of his holy spirit; that we may from point to point, attain to
the true understanding, and faith of every one of them. For assuredly, look
where the Lord leaves teaching: there, of necessity, shall we cease
learning. And therefore, let us be always very careful, not only publicly
but also privately) every one by our selves, and with our families) to pray
earnestly to God, for the daily illumination of his holy spirit, in every point
of his most holy and divine truth. This, have the excellent servants of God,
done before us: namely the Prophet in the 119. Psalm: verse 18. Open mine eyes,
that I may see the wonders of thy law. And the Apostle Paul, he prays in the
behalf of such, as had already profited excellently well in the knowledge and
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ: that the eyes of their understanding might be
yet more and more enlightened. Ephesians. 1.16.17.18. and Col. 1.9. Wherefore, we
much rather ought to do it; as they who stand insomuch the more need then
they: by how much we have less profited. Questionles, the cause why many (even
of such as have heard the word a long time, and enjoyed all other the holy
ordinances of the Lord) do remain still very ignorant (of whom it may be
said that they are ever learning and never come to the knowledge of the truth)
it is, for that they be not instant with the Lord by prayer both in public
joining with the preacher, and also in private by themselves, attending
diligently upon the ministry of the word and entreating his blessing upon the
same. For no doubt, if the most ignorant in the congregation, would pray
fervently to God for grace; they should find the Lord true in his most holy and
gracious promise. Ask, and ye shall receive, seek, and ye shall find knock*
and it shall be opened unto you. For (as our Savior assure ^ us whosoever
asks, receives: and he that seeks finds: and to him that knocks, it
shall be opened. For what man is there among you, etc. Mat: 7.7. etc. read also
Luk, 11.^. They that are ch^ldren in knowledge, and stand in need of milk,
should grow in time fit to be fed with more strong meat, as the Apostle
speaks, 1. Co: 3.1.2.3. and Heb: ^.12.13.14. and. 1. Pet: 2.1.2. For as we
read. Psalm: 19.7. The Lord gives wisdom to the simple, yea, Prou: 1.4.
sharpnes of wit, and to the child, knowledge and understanding.

Thus much concerning the effect of the breathing of our Savior upon his
Disciples saying, Receive the holy Ghost: in that hereby their understanding
was opened. And this is the fourth particular. But that which is annexed unto
it, is no less worthy to be observed of us, touching the subject matter of
their understanding; namely the holy Scriptures: for so says the holy Euang:
that our Sa: opened their understanding that they might understand the
Scriptures. Our Savior could by immediate revelation have given them
knowledge, without the written word: but to cut off all occasion of seeking
after fantastical revelations beside the word (as many proud spirited men do
attempt, and in the mean while set not a flock by the Scriptures) it pleased
our Savior (even of purpose no doubt) to honor the Scriptures thus far, as to
make them the ground and guides of the understanding of his most choice
disciples. Yea, he himself, though all that he spoke was as authentical as
the Scriptures (for he was the very truth it self) yet he had always his
recourse to the Scriptures of the old Testament, to ground his doctrine on
Moses, and the prophets: as it is plentifully recorded by the holy Evangelists.
And as it follows in the very next words, containing the fifth particular.



And he said unto them. Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to
suffer, and to rise again^ from the dead the third day. Luke 24.46.

Explication
How the sufferings and resurrection of our Savior are written of in the holy
Scriptures, we have showed before. Here let us observe diligently, that
insomuch as our Savior stands so often, in the rehearsal and confirmation
of his sufferings and resurrection: that they are matters of singular weight;
not to be posted over, as children do, in saying the Articles of their faith:
but to be most seriously minded, both of young and old, with the best
discretion, and most advised judgment, that all of us can attain unto. They
are two of the principallest things, which our thoughts and meditations, ought
to have recourse unto: in the morning when we rise, in the evening when we go
to bed, yea in the night as we lie upon our beds. We ought to talk of them,
as we walk abroad with our neighbors, and as we sit at home with our wives
and children, etc. Verily, none of us, have yet ever sufficiently and deeply
enough pondered and weighed them. Whose heart should not be wonderfully
affected, both with godly sorrow for sin; with zealous hatred against sin;
with insatiable love toward God our heavenly Father; and toward the Son of
God our Lord Jesus Christ himself: considering that he would, (according to
the will of his Father) most willingly suffer for us; yea even to the death,
the death of the Cross, as we have heard at large before? And who duly
considering, that the same our Lord Jesus Christ, who dyed for our sins, is
verily risen again for our justification; cannot but be unspeakably
rejoiced, and stirred up to rise from the death of sin, to serve the living
God: as we are after to consider, in the comforts and duties belonging to the
faith of the same? Here also, we see which are the principal things, which our
Savior commends to the faith of his Disciples, as the chief grounds and
pillars thereof: and which were to be most carefully preached of them, as the
chief grounds of the common faith of all Christians. There are many other
Articles indeed, in no wise to be neglected of us: but if we should study
never so long, we could not name two Articles of like necessary respect; yea
of like, both respect and prospect, as we may say: the one pointing us back,
yea containing, in a manner, all the humiliation of our Savior, even from his
birth to his death: the other pointing us forward, to his full and perfect
glorification: it being as a most triumphant entrance into it, never to fall
from the victory and conquest once atcheiued by the same.

Finally, here we learn, both, who be the true preachers of the word, and who
also be true Scholars of our Lord Jesus Christ. Namely, such Preachers, as do
principally aim at these points, to the establishing of the faith of the
people of God: and such scholars, as do most gladly embrace, and most
studiously search after the knowledge and faith of these grounds, from the
holy Scriptures; laying aside, yea casting away all questions, and ^angling
about unprofitable discourses. That is, even such both preachers, and hearers,
as make the word of God alone, the whole ground and stay of their faith: and
do not stay upon things rawly, as it were by roate, or upon the customarie
loose profession of others, or upon their own blind devotion and good meaning.
If any shall object, that the Scriptures are dark, and of doubtful and
uncertain interpretation: we answer, that touching such places of the holy
Scriptures, as be hard to be understood: it is our duty to use the more
diligence, in seeking by prayer and all other good means, to understand them.
We answer further, that the most dark places are made plain by other places
more easy to be understood: so as we may truly affirm, that the Scripture
does clear it self, and gives understanding to the simple. And finally, we
answer, that all the doubtfulnes of the interpretation of any place of holy
Scripture; rests either in our own ignorance of the holy languages, or in
the weakness of our judgment, or in the rebellion of our own carnal reason,
whereby the truth is as it were forestalled against our selves.

This shall suffice at this time, touching the fifth particular.

The sixth is now to be examined.



It is contained in these. And that repentance and remission of sins should be
Preached in his name, among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

Explication
As our Savior had before instructed his Disciples, concerning those two
principal grounds of faith, which they were to believe themselves; and after,
to preach unto others, for the establishing of their faith: so here in this
place, he notes out two principal fruits and benefits, flowing from his
death and resurrection, to all that do truly believe in him. The which also
(as our Savior informs his Disciples) they were to preach in his name: to
wit, that they are such fruits and benefits, as none, can by any means be
partakers of, but through faith in him alone.

The greatness of these benefits is incomprehensible. Sin, we know (which
is the transgression of the law, either in thought, word, or deed,) has made
us justly subject to the infinite wrath and vengeance of God, both in this
life, and for ever: as we have learned from the interpretation of the Law.
Neither can we possibly escape it, but by the death of our SAVIOVR CHRIST. For
his blood alone, cleanses us from our sins; both from the guiltiness, and
also from the punishment of them: in that he has thereby, purchased eternal
redemption for us. For without sheading of blood (as the Apostle teaches)
there is no remission of sins, Heb: 9.22.

Repentance also, (the doctrine whereof we have heard laid forth at large) it
is in sum and effect, the renewing and repayring of the Image of God, the
which is utterly defaced in us. And it cannot be performed, but by the divine
power of GOD; even by that power, whereby he has raised up our Lord Jesus
Christ; and whereby our SAVIOVR has raised up himself, from the dead. For
as by the virtue of the death of CHRIST, apprehended by faith, sin is
crucified in us: so by the power of his resurrection, we are raised up to
newness of life. Yea, we are thereby, renewed in our minds, unto God, Ephesians.
1.16.17.18.19.20. etc. Colos. 2.12.13. Romans 6.3.4.1. Pet. 3.21.22. But of the
fruits and benefits of the resurrection of our Savior Christ: more
afterward. In the mean season, this is evident; that the sufferings, and
resurrection of our Savior (mentioned before) are matters of the greatest
importance that may be: insomuch as these benefits, of repentance, and
remission of sins, cannot be obtained but by them: or rather, by our Savior
himself, and through faith in his name; in that he had dyed for our sins,
and rose again for our justification: that is, in that he rose again, to the
end he might apply the benefit of his death, and to give us the assurance of
our justification by him; to wit, by the forgiveness of our sins, and by the
imputation of his righteousness unto us. Yea so do these most excellent
benefits depend, both upon the death and resurrection of our Savior; that
none can possibly be partakers of them, but such as do believe, that he dyed
and rose again to the same end. And according as the faith of any herein, is
weaker or stronger: so is their repentance less or more perfect; and the
forgiveness of sins, more or less comfortably assured unto them.

The order also of preaching these notable fruits and benefits, is not to be
neglected of us. For repentance is first to be Preached, and first of all to
be labored after: and thereupon follows forgiveness; that is, the
assurance of forgiveness. For so is this Scripture to be understood. For
howsoever God is appeased first, and therewithal forgiueth sins (even so
freely as if they had been never committed, like as if a creditor shoud
forgive his d^btor, and for a proof thereof, should cancel his obligation, as
may appear, Colos: 2.13.14. and then he gives repentance also, as a fruit
of the same his free grace accepting us in his Son. Act: 11.18.) yet as
touching our selves, how can we have assurance, that GOD has forgiven us our
sins; if we be not sorry for them, yea sorry to repentance: unless we will
willingly tempt God in our hearts, and wantonly presume of his mercy; as if he
were not perfectly just, in hating those, that take pleasure, and lie securely
in sin.

Now, unto the Apostolical preaching of these two excellent benefits,
repentance and remission of sins: our Savior adds two circumstances. The
one declaring the largenes of the Apostolic commission, for the preaching of
them; namely, in all nations. The other prescribing the order that they must
take: that is, by beginning at Jerusalem. In the first of them, (whereby our
Savior declares the largenes of their commission, touching the isntrumental
means of calling us the Gentiles to the faith of the Gospel, and the
prerogatives of the Gospel by their preaching) we are pointed to the efficient
cause of our adoption, and calling to the hope of eternal life. Which is no
other, but the free grace o^ God, and our Savior Christ: who has of his
eternal mercy, appointed and sanctified the same isntrumental cause or
means, to be extended even to us. For the which, what praise and thanks may
we render, answerable to this inestimable grace and mercy of God, toward us,
miserable and sinful G^ntils? yea even toward our selves at this day; who
should never have heard of our Savior Christ, and the fruits and benefits of
his Gospel: nor enjoyed any ordinary ministry and preaching of it; had it
not been by the means of this most blessed and Apostolic commission, granted
to these disciples to that end. For as touching the Apostle Paul his calling
and commission; we may well reckon it to be but for a time as it were, of this
grand charter, if I may so speak. In the second of the circumstances: that is,
the order of their proceeding, which our Savior prescribes; is an effect of
the constant love of God toward his peculiar people the Jews: who though they
had deserved to be forthwith rejected; yet insomuch as in his rich mercy, he
had reserved a remnant of his election to himself, he would honor that city
of theirs, wherein he had placed his name and his Temple, with the calling and
gathering together of the first Christian Church: yea even from among them that
were persecutors and murderers of his Son. And to And to the same end, does
our Savior himself, magnify his mercy toward them, in that he commands
his Apostles to preach first at Jerusalem: as also that the holy prophesies
might be fulfilled, which gave forth long before, that the Lord would send
forth the rod of the power of our Savior, out of Sion. Psalm. 110.2. Isai.
2.2.3. Michah. 4.1.2. And so it came to pass, that even many of all sorts,
were converted, not only in Jerusalem, but also of other Countries: such as
were Proselytes, etc. by the first preaching of the Apostles: as we read in the
2. chapter of the Acts, etc. For at one Sermon, three thousand were converted,
and called to the faith of Christ: and after that, many more by Peter and the
rest.

Hitherto of the sixth particular, belonging to the last remedy which our
Savior used, against the unbelief of his chief disciples: it consisting of
diverse branches, as we have seen. Let us proceed to the seventh.



Now ye are witnesses of these things, says our Savior.

Explication and proof.
In this seventh particular, our Savior authoriseth his Disciples, to be
authentical witnesses, both of his sufferings, and also of his resurrection:
and that repentance, and forgiveness of sins, was granted, generally to the
Gentiles, as well as to the Jews. In which respect, they are called witnesses
chosen before of God, as was observed from the sermon of Peter to Cornelius,
and the assembly gathered together in his house. Act. 10.41.42.43. and in many
other places, as they were alleged and set down before. Neither were they
appointed to be witnesses; that they should only report things, which they
knew to be certainly performed; and so to leave the hearers to themselves,
whither they would believe them or no: but so to report them, as they might by
effectual signs and wonders, and by the mighty power and evidence of the holy
Ghost, confirm unto them, that the most joyful message which they preached,
did belong unto them: even to so many of them, as would give credit to their
testimonies, delivered to them in the name of our Savior Christ, and of God,
to their salvation.

But as touching the effects, and uses, of this their Apostolical testimonies
and preaching: our Savior expresses them more purposedly, in that which we
reckoned for the eight particular of the dealing of our Savior, in this his
last and most effectual remedy, which he used against the unbelief of his
disciples, in this his fifth appearance.



It is that which the Evangelist John has recorded in these words of our
Savior* chap. 20.23.

Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them: and whosoeuers
sins ye retain, they are retained.

The powerful effect here promised, and assured to the Apostolical
ministry, Explication.
is general: like as their commission was. For as they were aucthorised to
preach to all nations, repentance, and remission of sins, in the name of
Christ: so here our Savior, for their further encouragement, gives them his
warrant, that whosoeuers sins they should remit, should certainly be
remitted, and whosoeuers sins they should retain, should verily be retained.

Thus therefore, the effect of the Apostles ministry, is assured to be as
general, as their commission was. But the effect is not all of one sort, or of
like kinds, as we see. For to some, it is healthful and saving: to other it is
not so; but contrariwise, hurtful and damnable, according to that of the
Apostle Paul. 2. Cor. 2.15.16. We are unto God, the sweet savor of Christ in
them that are saved, and in them which perish: to the one we are the savor of
death unto death, and to the other we are the savor of life unto life, and who
is sufficient for these things? The reason of which contrary effect, is not in
the Gospel, which is in the own nature, one and the same: but in respect of
the contrary disposition of those, to whom it is preached. Insomuch as the one
sort through the grace of God, do in hearing, believe and obey it: the other,
of their own stubbornnes, either altogether despise it, as a doctrine unworthy
to be received, and so profanely reject it: or else they are such, as unto
secure contempt do add presumptuous rebellion, and opposition against it. Like
as the sun (though of one and the same nature in it self) melts wax, but
hardneth clay: makes a sweet thing to smell the more sweet, but causes carrion
to stink the more. And therefore, as the same Apostle says further, in the 12.
chap. of the same 2. Ep. to the Cor. ver. 3.4.5.6. Though we walk in the flesh,
yet we do not war after the flesh. For the weapons of our warfare, are not
carnal, but mighty through God, to cast down holds, casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of
God, and bringing into captivity, every thought to the obedience of Christ: and
having in a readiness, vengeance against all disobedience, when your obedience
is fulfilled. Answerable also, to that 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.8.9.10. The Lord Jesus
shall show himself from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire
rendering vengeance unto them which do not know God, and which obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: which shall be punished with everlasting
perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, when
he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made marvelous in all
them that believe, because our testimony toward you was believed in that day.

Now, that we may understand these contrary effects, of the Apostolic
ministry, the better, contained in these words of remitting and retaining of
sins: we are to consider two things.

Sin (which is the transgression of the law of God, as has been declared
before) is in the holy scriptures compared to debts; the which in strict course
of law every debtor stands bound to satisfy his creditor for: or else, he
forfaiteth the penalty of the obligation, how great so ever it be. To remit
sin therefore (when it is referred to God) it is of free grace and mercy to
forgive sin, as if it had never been committed, and therewithal to cancel
the obligation, that is to say, to put away the guiltines, and to stay the
punishment du^ to the forfaiture for ever.

On the contrary to retain sin, is in justice to hold the obstinate sinner
guilty; and to enforce the punishment due to the same, by virtue of the
obligation, bearing full strength still: to the utter conviction and overthrow
of him, by the just sentence of the Judge: according to the tenure of the
obligation; how great so ever the forfaiture be.

Explication.
This in deed, is the meaning of these words of remitting and retaining of
sin, which our Savior here speaks of: as it is evident, in that (as was
said) sin is in the holy Scriptures, likened to a debt. And that it is so,
the fifth petition of the Lords prayer, does plainly confirm. Forgive us our
debts (for so is the Greek word, opheilemata) as we also forgive our debtors.
Tois opheiletais emon: Math. 6.12. and Luke. 11.4. For even we do forgive
every one that is indebted to us, panti opheilonti emin. Likewise, in the
parable of the forgiving of the ten thousand talents, Math. 18.23. etc. And
in the parable of the two debtors, whose debts the Creditor forgave, to the one
less, to the other more. Luke. 7.40.41. etc. These debts, the Evangelist Math.
calls offenses, our trespasses, immediately after the Lords prayer. chap. 6.14
15. paraptomata. Such therefore, is the most tender mercy of God our heavenly
Father, that he does most freely as touching our selves (even for our Lord
Jesus Christ his sake) pardon the sins of all, that do truly repent, and
believe the Gospel: and sets us free, both from the guiltines, and also
from the punishment of our sins, both temporal and eternal: like as a
Creditor should free his debtor from his debt, by cancelling the obligation, as
was touched before. According to that Coloss. 2.13.14. God has quickened you
together with Christ, forgiving you all your trespasses, and putting out the
handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary unto us, he
even took it out of the way, and fastened it upon the Cross, etc. Read also
Romans, 3.24. and chapter, 3.4. and Isai. 43.21.22.23.24.25. and Job, 34.31.
In either of which places, both Isai and Elihu do make it a sovereign
prerogative, belonging to God alone, to take away sins: and to say: I have
pardoned, I will not destroy.

On the contrary, such is the perfect justice of God, against every impenitent
and obstinate sinner; specially such as despise grace offered by the Gospel,
and be cruelly bent against their br^thren: that he will exact the uttermost
farthing at the hands of all such, as we read Math. 6.14.15. and chapter
18.32.33.34.35. Read also Math. 25. ver. 24. etc. 30.

And this also, does the Lord challenge as proper to himself, in that he says
oftentimes, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay. Romans 12.19.

Hitherto concerning the meaning of the words of remitting and retaining of
sin.

But now in the second place, insomuch as both the forgiveness of sin, and
also the punishment of sin, belongs properly to God, and he is so minded,
(as it is most meet) that he will give his glory to no other. Isai. 48.11.



That which our Savior Christ promises and assures to his disciples, in this
behalf: is to be understood only of a ministerial service, and not of any
absolute power, which he minded to give unto them.

Explication and proof.
It must needs be so. For otherwise, our Savior should displace himself, and
set them upon his throne; which for us once to speak of think, were most
blasphemous and absurd. Neither could it ever come into the thought of our
Savior so to do. His meaning is therefore, only to assure them, that while
they shall (according to his will and commandment) either publicly preach to
many, or more particularly pronounce to any one (whosoever he be that truly
repents) remission of his sins: whither it be at his first calling, or upon
the renewing of his repentance, after that he has by some tentation fallen into
any sin, and has been reproved and censured (yea though the occasion should
require, that he should be excommunicated and cut off from the Church, for the
same) that the sins of all such shall be forgiven them, according to the
preaching of his Ministers, and according to that most gracious promise which
he has made. Ezech. 18.23.27.28.29.30.31.32. And 1. Ioh. 1.9. and chapter 2.1.2.
And on the contrary part, the meaning of our Savior is, that while his
disciples (executing their office of Apostleship) shall according to his will
and commandment, either publicly preach to many, or more particularly upon
any special occasion, pronounce the wrath of God and eternal condemnation,
against any impenitent and obstinate sinner, in a just course of disciplinarie
proceeding and censure: that they shall accordingly perish, and be damned for
ever. This is no other thing, but that which our Savior had told the same his
chief disciples of, before this time: though they did not then, so clearly
conceive and consider of it, as we read Math. 16, ver. 18.19. where our Savior
spoke thus concerning the^ all (as appears in this place of John) though by
name to Peter then, upon that special occasion, which was given by Peter: our
Savior there saying, I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this
rock: Our Savior it may be pointing to himself, as Ioh. 2.19. but assuredly
meaning himself, who^ Peter in the name of all the rest had professed to be
the Christ the Son of the living God. verse. 16. I will build my Church
(says our Savior) and the gates of hell shall not overcome it. And I will
give unto thee, the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall
bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose
upon earth, shall be loosed in heaven. That is to say, the effect shall
certainly follow, while Peter or any of all the rest (as we have seen
before) shall either bind or unloose, open or shut the Kingdom of heaven, in
such sort as our Savior himself prescribes.

For otherwise as our Savior speaks of himself, Reu: 3.7. He alone has the
key of David, who opens, and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man
opens. He reuerseth all unjust proceedings, so as we need not fear the
censures of any, that proceed not Apostolically, and according to the mind
and will of our Savior himself, made known unto us, in h^^ Gospel. And
hence it is, that the churches of Christ, at this day do securely despise all
Popish excommunication and curses: though they be with book, bell, and
candle, as they say. Thus then we see, what the meaning of our Savior is; in
that he says to his disciples, in regard of their Apostolical function and
ministry, in his name, and by virtue of his divine commission: whosoeuers
sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whosoeuers sins ye retain, they are
retained. And accordingly no doubt, they did, through the grace of our Savior,
most discreetly and faithfully, fulfill their office and ministry: and the
effects here promised and assured, did out of question, follow the same: as
the holy story of the Acts of the Apostles, written by the Euang: Luke: and
their own holy epistles, do make it very evident and plain, both from their
more public and general preaching; and also from their more private and
particular proceeding.



No. We may in no wise think so. For as the ground and foundation of the
ordinary ministry it self, was laid in their extraordinary ordination and
calling: so likewise, was the ground and foundation of the ministerial power
and authority thereof, in the name of Christ laid in that extraordin^rie power
and authority, which was committed to them.

Differunt pastores ab apostolis non quod ad substantiam ministerij attinet,
positam in doctrina et sacramentis, sed quod ad modum vocationis et
authoritate^. Piscator in Math. 28.10.20. That is, Pastors differ not from
Apostles as touching the substance of Ministry, which consists in doctrine
and Sacraments: but in respect of the manner of their calling, and in the
measure of their power and authority.
It is undoubtedly true. For so not only does the promise of our Savior
declare, in that he says, He will be with his Apostles, to the end of the
world, (which of necessity, must be understood of his presence with them, to
make good and uphold that ordinary ministry, which they should by his
appointment ordain and plant in all Churches) but it appears also, by that
which our Savior had said before, that he would so su^ely build his Church,
that the gates of hell should not vanquish it. Math. 16. And by that which we
read, chap. 18.15.16.17.18.19.20. Where he establishes a perpetual power to
the Church, for the staying of offenses and trespasses: or as need should
require, for the censuring and correcting of them, with spiritual corrections:
even to the cutting off of obstinate persons, from the communion and fellowship
of Saints.

It is true in deed, that the apostolic office, had diverse things proper to
it, as we have seen before: namely, that they were sent immediately from
Christ: that they were appointed to be the first founders, and the very chief
or master builders of the Churches of our Savior Christ: and that also over
all the world.

To the which end, they were furthermore endued with an extraordinary measure
of spiritual gifts and graces: and likewise, with a power of working miracles,
more then ordinary. Finally, they were ordained, by the sacramental breathing
of our Savior Christ upon them, to the end they might be every way authorized
above all exception. In all which respects, none can be said to succeed them.
Nevertheless, that the ordinary Ministers of the word and sacraments (even to
the end of the world) should not have the like authority in their limited
places, succeeding in the like office, appointed by one and the same Ie: Ch: to
the same end of gathering together the Saints, for the work of the ministry,
and for the edification of the body of Christ; till we all meet together in
the unity of faith and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the age of the fulness of Chr. etc. Ephesians. 4.11.12. etc. it is
without all reason; what differences our limitations so ever there be, between
the one and the other in some circumstances, either in number, or in measure of
gifts, or in particularity of place, or residencie, or in any other thing. It
is of necessity, that the ordinary and perpetual ministry of the word and
sacraments, should have an effectual power and authority given unto it: even
such a power as is derived from the grand commission of the Apostles, and is in
substance all one with theirs: insomuch as they must so feed and govern the
flocks and congregations committed unto their care and charges, as they may
uphold and maintain the same doctrine and sacraments of our Lord Jesus Christ,
delivered at the first to the Apostles, among them: and seeing they must so
order the persons and lives of the same their flocks and congregations (as much
as in them lies) that they give no public offense, nor bring any evil report
and slander upon the Gospel of our Savior Christ. It is not, as many think;
that the Minister of the word, has nothing else to do, but generally to
deliver his doctrine: and then to leave his people to themselves, to do as
they think good, without reproof of their disobedience to that doctrine,
which he in the name and authority of God has taught unto them. For the word
is given by divine inspiration, as well to improve errors of judgment; and to
correct disorders of life: as to teach the truth, and to instruct in
righteousness. 2. Tim. chap. 3. verse 16. It is not a formal and outward
worship only, which the Lord requires, but a worship to be performed in
spirit and truth, joined with the power of godliness of life. And this will
not be obtained without a powerful ministry, to the subduing of the devil,
and the strange rebellion of our nature.

To this purpose, though we cannot stand (neither does it belong unto us) to
determine all things belonging to this so great and weighty a matter: yet thus
much we may, and ought to teach and affirm; that of Ministers of the word, and
of people committed to their several charges, (of what degree and condition
soever they be, whether King or Kesar, as they say, noble or of mean degree)
neither the one, that is the Ministers of the Gospel, through any ambition and
pride, do either arrogate too much unto themselves, or of a servile and base
mind, prostitute that authority which our Savior has given them, to the
contempt and reproach of any whosoever: nor that the other, that is, any of the
congregation, either of profaneness do esteem too lightly, of the ministry
of those whom God has set over them, as if it were of no power and authority,
or of a superstitious and slavish fear, to attribute more then is meet; as if
they had an absolute power over their souls and consciences, to rule and
reign over them at their own will and pleasure. That these extreamities are
carefully to be avoided, both of Ministers of the word, and also of all sorts
of people, both experience and reason, may plainly confirm unto us.

And first for experience, yea even woeful experience, both of ambitious and
proud arrogating of too much, and also of servile and superstitious yielding
too much: the Romish, both prelacie and laity, are most palpable and gross
examples. The one, in obtruding their infinite laws, and ceremonies, and
censures, upon the consciences of the people: with confessions, penances,
satisfactions, and superstitions above all number and measure, without any
regard of the pure laws and liberties of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The other, in yielding their necks, and souls, unto the same, in most blind
and superstitious devotion: as if they must otherwise, go into their fained
fire of Purgatory, and as if they could not otherwise possibly be saved. And
on the contrary, for experience of profane contempt of the ministry, and
ministers of the Gospel, at the hands of their people: and likewise, of too
timorous and abject a course of ministry; yea, and of too base and
contemp^ible Ministers, to the emboldening of wicked contemners, to harden
themselves in their contempt: would to GOD that we our selves, and our people,
professing the Gospel, were not in either respect, two unworthy examples.
Albeit we cannot excuse all Ministers, neither, for presuming above that they
have good warrant, from their Lord and Master, to do. For the which they shall
no doubt give an heavy reckoning, at the day of account, whosoever they be.
Thus verily common experience shows every way, exceeding great extreamities
both on the one hand, and on the other: as well among the Ministers of the
word, as among the people committed unto them. The world is commonly evermore
in extreamities. But oh how happy are they, both Ministers and people; whether
Magistrates and Princes, or any other: who have learned from the Gospel, to
walk in the true faith and oobedience of the Gospel: when neither Minister of
the word, requires neither more nor less, of the people, then his Lord and
Master Christ Jesus, the Lord of life and glory, has commanded him: that is,
no more then may serve best to the glory of God, and furtherance of their
salvation: neither people, nor Princes and Nobles, refuse to yield that to
their faithful Ministers of the word, and to their ministry in the Gospel,
which their Lord and Savior does in his Gospel command them, for his sake, and
for the honor they bear to them: that is dutifully to be taught and guided by
them, according to the word of God. For then surely, shall the faithful
Minister be encouraged to do his duty, with singular joy to himself, and to
the unspeakable comfort of his people. He should teach them the truth purely,
he should reprove sin without bitterness, he should encourage and comfort
them without flattery, he should boldly admonish and warn them to take heed
of dangers, he should always be in good hope of victory against sin and
Satan, that they should not prevail among his people. Then surely would the
God of peace, and our Savior Christ the Prince of peace, the hope and glory of
his people, and the holy Ghost the Spirit of all truth and true consolation, be
among them: yea they should dwell among them, even in the hearts and minds,
both of Minister and people. The word should be profitable, the Sacraments
should be helpefull, prayer should be effectual, every part of the ordinance
of our Savior should further the salvation of every one that should
christianly: that is, sincearely, and without hypocrisy submit themselves unto
the same. But contrariwise, when the people despise their Minister, thinking
too well of themselves, and hating to be rebuked for their sins: and
likewise, when the Minister does bitterly and prowdly lift himself up against
the people, or debaseth himself too far, for fear or flattery; and so
gives place to wicked ones, that rebel against the Gospel: then all things
tend to the eternal destruction of all, and not to the salvation, either of
Minister, or of people. Then all preaching, prayer, Sacraments, and all things
else, are made deuoid of all saving health. And these are the reasons, beside
common experience, which may justly move all, both Ministers and people (either
of them in their places) to approve themselves faithful and dutiful to the
Lord Jesus Christ, even as they tender his glory, and their own salvation.
Otherwise, if we perish, our destruction shall lie upon our own heads. For the
Gospel in the own nature, is given for edification, and not for destruction.
And therefore, in the name of God, let us (calling upon God for his grace)
labor unfeignedly, and in all subjection of our souls unto God, and our Lord
Jesus Christ, to make our best use and profit of all his ordinances, to our
salvation. Let us hold our selves to the excellent moderation of the holy
Apostle, 1. Cor. 4.1, 2. Let a man so think of us, as of the Ministers of
Christ, etc. And 2.1.24. Not that we have dominion over your faith, but are
helpers of your joy. Read also 1. These. 5.12.13. and Heb. 13.17. and 1. Pet.
5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. The which great and manifold grace, God of his infinite
mercy, even for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and by the effectual working of
the holy Ghost, grant unto us, even for his own glories sake. Amen.

These things of singular weight and importance, are very deeply to be weighed
and pondered of us, in this eight particular.

The last particular is yet behind: to wit, the promise which our Savior made
to his Disciples, that he would furnish them with all meet and suff^cient
graces, to the performance of their Apostolic office, before he would employ
them in the same.

Qu. In what words is this promise expressed? Let us hear them again.

An. The Evangelist Luke records the words of our Savior to be these.

49 And behold, The word is apostello,
I will send the promise of my Father upon you, but tarry ye in the City of
Jerusalem, until ye be endewed with power from on high.

Thus indeed we read in the 49. verse of this last chapter.

Explication
In the which last particular, belonging to this fifth appearance of our Savior
after his resurrection: we have first to call again to mind, the Deity of
our Savior Christ; in that he promises to send the holy Ghost. For the holy
Ghost cannot be sent by, or from any, but by, and from God: to wit, from the
Father by the Son. And though, as has been observed before, that by the
holy Ghost, is meant the gifts of the holy Ghost, and not his personal
subsistence: yet the gifts are not given, or inspired, but by the holy Ghost
himself.

Secondly, we are to observe, that our Savior Christ calls the holy Ghost,
(of whom he speaks) the promise of his Father; The gracious promise of the
Father, is the fountain from whence salvation and all the means thereof do
spring.
because the Father had promised to send the holy Ghost in his name, and from
him; as he had taught his disciples before. John 14.16.17. and verse 26. And
chap. 15.26. And chap. 16.7. And this he does for their further encouragement,
insomuch as hereby they might be assured, that the whole Trinity, both Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, do jointly consent in sending them forth upon this
great and strange embassage. And the rather also, because our Savior had
taught before; that in respect of his humanity, he was inferior to the Father:
as John 14. the chapter alleged even now, verse 28. That thus, they might the
more clearly see the divine ground and warrant of their calling.

Thirdly, he describes the holy Ghost, to be the power of God from on high:
in such sense, as he is called, Luke 1.35. the power of the most High: to this
end, that whereas they were in themselves frail creatures, timorous and
fearful: he might let them understand, that among other graces, they should
be indewed with a notable courage and fortitude of mind, to preach his Gospel,
even before the stern countenances of Kings and Princes: as 2. Cor: chapter 13.10.
And indeed, all graces of the holy Ghost, may well be noted by power from on
high: because every virtue is a spiritual power, inspired into the minds of
men: without which, there is nothing but weakness, and dastardness in us,
specially touching the profession of the kingdom of God. And verily, whosoever
has not this power and grace, given them in some measure from above, to preach
the Gospel: they have no warrant, to be Ministers of Gods holy word.

Fourthly, our Savior tells them, where this promise should be fulfilled:
namely, in the city of Jerusalem, where (as we have seen before) they were to
begin the execution of their ministry. And therefore he commands them, to
tarry there, until the promise should be performed: not that they should not
depart from Jerusalem, from the time that he now spoke unto them, until that
time (for after this they went into Galile as our Savior himself had
appointed them, Mat: 28.16. and he led them also into Bethania, before this
promise was accomplished, Luke, 24.50.) but his meaning is, that they should
tarry at Jerusalem, after his ascension, as the same Evangelist does declare.
Act. 1.4. And touching the time when, and in what manner, our Savior Christ
performed this his promise: we read of it in the second chap: of the same book
of the Acts of the Apostles, from the beginning of the chapter.

And last of all, from all these put together, let us here consider, how our
Savior Christ in the most extraordinary calling of all other proceeds by
many degrees as it were step after step. And the rather shall we perceive
it, to be a matter of great consideration; if we call to mind all his former c
urs^, even from the beginning to the present time: as we observed in some
p^^t^^u^^rs not long since. The use whereof may justly be these: that insomuch
^s the Lord would proceed so pedetentim, even step after step, (as was said)
in t^is case; when he could have made them perfectly fit all at once: we for
our parts are hence to learn, to take heed of all rashness, in thrusting our
selves into any special service; until upon deliberate trial, we evidently
perceive the Lord to go before us; Nihil tentandum nisi vocante Domino Vt
site Call. Qua^ licet pub^ice d^cendi non d^ sit f^cu^tas se t^men pri v^ti
homines in s^^ntio co^tin^ant donec eos sua m^^n, in theatrum produ^^t. Harm
Luc: ^4.4^.
and that after all good means used, for the ordinary preparing of us.
Contrary to the groundless practice of these phantasticke spirits, who under
pretense that many of the Apostles were fishermen, etc. they think that all
means of learning should be neglected, of those that are to be pre^chers of
the Gospel: nothing considering the space of time, how long they were trained
up: nor how many means our Savior used; and by what degrees he proceeded to
prepare and fit them thereunto. Let us therefore, upon better advise, show our
selves more wise, even from the course of our Saviors dealing: thus evident
before our eyes. That is, nothing is to be attempted, but at the calling of
God. So that though a man have a gift whereby he is able to teach publicly:
yet being a private man, he is to be silent, till God by his own hand do bring
him forth to speak in the assembly.

And this shall suffice, for this l^st particular: and so for all things
incident to the fifth appearance of our Savior.

NOw unto this fifth appearance, there belongs, as was noted before, an
appendix (as it were) concerning the absence of Thomas, one of the eleven:
which the Evangelist John ad^eth in this part of the holy story. The which, (as
wa^ also said) m^st in no wise be omitted of us. Here therefore, seeing the
place is proper unto it. Let us come to the consideration thereof.

John writes of it?

But Th^mas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them, (says saint
John when Jesus came.

25 The other Disciples therefore said unto him, weee have seen the Lord: but
he said unto them, Except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put
my finger into the print of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will
not believe it.

Explication
In this appurtenance of the former story, we have two things recorded. First,
the good fruit and effect of this fifth appearance of our Savior to the ele^en;
after that he had most graciously, and by many helps and remedies, relieved
them against their unbelief, touching his resurrection. Secondly, the absence
of Thomas, at this time of our Saviors appearance, and the evil event which
followed upon the same.

The good fruit and effect, unto all that were present, was this in few words:
that they were now persuaded, against all their fancies and doubtings; that our
Savior was verily risen from the dead, and that it was he that appeared unto
them. For so they testify unto Thomas, so soon as he comes among them, and
that no doubt with great joy in their own hearts, and of love unto Thomas,
saying, We have seen the Lord.

This Thomas, which the Evangelist John speaks of, is described: first, to be
one ^f the number of those, who were the chief Disciples of our Savior.
Secondly, ^e is described by his name, whereby he was called in the Greek
language Didymus, which signifies a Twinne, and is of the same signification
with the Hebrew name Thomas, coming of Taam geminauit: whence Twins are
called Te^mim, or, Tomim, Genesis 26.24. Rebeckah had Twins in her womb. And
chap. 38.27. Tamar had Twins in her womb. And thus it is not unlike, that
Thomas was borne a Twinne; and thereof did bear this name.

The evil event which did follow upon his absence from the rest of his
companions, at such times as our Savior appeared unto them, was this: that he
wanting the help and remedies against his unbelief, which they enjoyed:
continued still in his unbelief. Yea he grew so wayward upon it; that from the
corruption of his heart, he hardens himself against the testimony of the
rest: and professes very presumptuously and obstinately, (for we cannot well
in this case, use any milder terms) that he will not believe it, unless he
should see in the hands of our Savior Christ, the print of the nails, etc:
yea and to make up the measure more fully, he continues in this obstinacy, by
the space of seven or eight days; making no reckoning of all the testimonies,
which had been given: as we shall have occasion further to consider anon.

This obstinacy and solomnes of Thomas, is the rather to be considered, as it
is amplified in all the circumstances of it, and namely in this, that he
presumes to prescribe our Savior a law, what he must do, or else he will not
believe. It is (I say) so much the rather to be considered, for two causes of
very great importance. First, that from hence we may the more fully discern,
the infinite clemency and mercy of our Savior; in that, whereas he might
justly have taken vengeance of his great sin, and cast him off for ever: yet
he refuses not to tender him so far, that (as it follows in the holy
Story) he does for the same cause, not only show himself again to his
Disciples, when Thomas was present with them: but also suffers him to have
his own mind, so far forth as he would; yea, and blesses that, which might
justly have been accursed unto him. For bodily feeling could not have chased
away his unbelief, and established his faith: unless our Savior had loosened
and softened the hardness of his heart by the finger of his holy Spirit. But
of this more afterward. Secondly, the obstinacy of Thomas, is to be considered
of us; as that which ministers unto us a most lively and serious admonition:
to take heed, how we neglect the fellowship of the brethren, or any means
which God vouchsafes for the help of our weak faith. Yea it may justly
admonish us, to take heed against all drowsinesse, in such times, as the
weighty occasions of danger, (especially of the danger whereunto our souls
are subject, through the devil) do require that we should be most waking: as
at the hearing of the word, and in time of prayer, etc. For verily, I persuade
my self that it was no other thing, but heaviness of sleep, and want of
natural rest, which caused Thomas at this time, to withdraw himself from the
rest. For the Story gives us to understand, that was no long while till
Thomas came unto them: yea it may be, the same night before the morning.

But here, from this absence of Thomas, two doubts do arise. First, how the
Evangelist Luke may say, that our Savior in that his fifth appearance shows
himself to the eleven: seeing Thomas one of the eleven, was then away: as we
understand by the Evangelist John. Secondly, how Thomas may be reckoned for
one of the Apostles, seeing he wanted the Apostolic ordination, which our
Savior gave unto the rest; when Thomas was not with them.

What may be answered to these doubts?

To the first, we answer that it is an usual thing, when any special company
or corporation is spoken of: to attribute the name of the whole, to the greater
number of them.

To the second, we may answer well, that the absence of Thomas at this time,
not being of contempt, could no more hinder him from being an Apostle, then it
could hinder Mathias, who was afterward chosen into the room of Judas
Iscariot, or Paul after him: seeing it pleased our Lord and Savior, to take
them into that most holy and high order.

It is true. Neither could that kind of Thomas his absence, frustrate the
former election of our Savior. Explication
He renews his calling also, being with the rest. Matthew. 28. But that which
puts the matter out of doubt, is the gifts of the holy Ghost, bestowed upon
Thomas, as well and in like measure as upon any of the other at Pentecost. Act.
2. At what time our Savior did give them all their full authority and power.
This may teach us therefore; that the outward sign, or ceremonies, is not
absolutely necessary, when the inward grace is bestowed upon any, according to
that we use to say: Not want of Baptism, The proof of his resurrection by his
sixth appearance.
but contempt of Baptism is damnable. It is profane contempt, which
frustrateth all; yea though the ceremony be present: as the example of profane
Ishmael and of profane Esau, who despised his birthright, do show.

And that the greater part of a company of the same order or degree, etc.
bears the name of the whole: it is so usual, that we need not stand upon
it. So that, as indifferently may the Evangelist Luke say, that our Savior
appeared to the eleven, though Thomas is was away: as the Evangelist John
describes Thomas* to be one of that number which had been called the twelve,
though Judas Iscariot (who had been of them) was now utterly cut off from
them. And thus does the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 15.5.

T^us much shall suffice, for that which was said, to be an appendix, or
appurtenance, to the former story of the fifth appearance of our Savior. Yet
with this further addition, that as it is an appurtenance to that fifth
appearance: so ^t is a very sp^ciall occasion, containing (as it were) a
transition to the sixth appear^nce of our Savior.

LEt v^ therefore, from this so special an occasion, proceed now unto that.
How does the Evangelist John continue the story in this behalf?

And eight days after (says the Evangelist John) his Disciples were with him,
and Thomas with them.

Jesus came when the doors were shut, and stood in the midst and said, Peace
be unto you.

2^ Afterward he said to Thomas, Put thy finger here, and see my hands, and
put forth thy hand* and put it into my side: and be not thou faithless, but
faithful.

28 Then Thomas answered, and said unto him. O my Lord and my God.

29 Jesus said unto him, Because thou have seen me, thou beleeuest: blessed
are they that have not seen* and have believed.

Explication.
These are the words of the Evangelist John, chap. 20. verses ^6, ^7, 28, 29.
They cont^ine the sixth appearance of our Savior: the first of those, which
were removed some distance of time, from the day of his resurrection. For so we
reed, that this was eight days after. In the which, we are to observe, a most
wonderful mirror, of the most gracious favor and mercy of our Savior,
toward Thomas* yea, and in him a representation of his exceeding great mercy
toward the rest of the Disciples; and toward us, and all christians to this
day, and to the end of the world: to be considered in diverse branches.

Which are they?

First, in that our Savior restrains and holds in the waywardnes and
presumption of Thomas that he keeps him from falling away, or departing,
either from himself, or the society of his fellow Disciples and brethren.

Sec^n^^y in that he vouchsafes (for Thomas sake and in pity of him) to show
himself to his Di^ciples again, when Thomas was with them: and that in like
manner as he had done be o^e, both for the miracle of his strange and sudden
pres^nce, and also touching the words of his g^eeting, or rather blessing:
Peace be unto you.

Thirdly, in that he gives leave unto Thomas, for his satisfaction, to feel
both his hand, and his si^e if he would.

Fourthly, in that he does very gently, and nothing roughly and severely,
rebuke and direct him.

Fifthly, in that he gives him victory against all his waywardness, and
unbelief: yea in that he gives him grace to make an excellent profession of
his faith.

Finally, in that he does graciously encourage him to believe, by showing that
he has pardoned his wilfulness: yet so as he does gently again rebuke it,
and yields a more special commendation to such as shall yield themselves
more teachable and tractable then he has done.

Explication
All these things, do indeed notably declare, and set forth unto us; the
wonderful mercy of our Savior, toward his poor and frail Disciple: as they
are evidently contained in the present text. Wherein also, Thomas thus singled
alone, may well be a looking glass to show us all, our own natural
corruption, and unfitness to believe the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven:
like as the other Disciples were more jointly, in that appearance which went
before: insomuch that not without many helps and remedies, (as we have seen)
they could be brought to believe that principle of religion to be true, which
was evident before the view of their bodily eye. And verily, such is the state
and condition of us all. For until the Lord vouchsafe in mercy to look upon
us: whether at the eight day, after we have neglected the means of our
salvation, or eight or eighteen years after that we remain still the same:
that is, crooked and perverse, and altogether unapt to believe and understand
the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. But let us consider the mercy of our
Savior toward Thomas, a little more fully in the particulars.

And first, that Thomas had entered, yea had waded very far, and more then over
his shoes; into a most wayward and dangerous course: it is of it self very
plain. Yea so, that if our Savior had not been exceeding gracious unto him:
he should no doubt have easily fallen away, and come to have bin an Apostate
infidel. But our Savior, to the end he might confirm the word which he had
once spoken: that of all, that the Father had given him, he had lost none, but
the child of perdition, which was Judas the traitor: he would not suffer
either Thomas or Peter, or any of the other besides, utterly to fall away from
him. And therefore it was, that he gave Thomas a heart to keep with his
brethren, and to continue his society with them: until he might be convicted
of his sin, and so be brought to believe this Article of the resurrection. The
same grace also, may be a comfort unto our selves, though we are in many
things ignorant and weak. For so long as any hold fellowshippe with the rest:
there is hope, that though they be very ignorant and weak, yea full of many
great infirmities: that the Lord will in time cure and heal them all. But if
any should by waywardness, separate themselves, utterly from their brethren;
they do then, take the very high way to endless and woeful destruction: as
the Apostle teaches in the 10. chap. to the Heb. ver. 25, and 39. For the
avoiding whereof, let us take heed of the beginnings: that is, of wilful or
willing neglecting of any one sermon, or prayer, that we may be at. We know
not, what a blessing we may loose, etc. It is an excellent saying of M. Beza:
Certissimum est, and experientia comprobatum, semel sponte neglectae co^cionis,
alterius, and tertiae co^temptum sequi, tandemque ta^ procul a via recedentes,
vix in illam posse regredi: and sane nimium frequentia and ordinaria sunt eorum
exempla, qui praecipites in haec pericula feruntur. That is, It is a most
certain thing, and confirmed by experience, that one sermon willingly
neglected, causes the contempt of a second and of a third to follow upon it:
yea so that at the last, men go so far out of the way, that they hardly
return into it again. And verily the example of such as are carried headlong
into these dangers, are too ordinary. Hom. in Hist. Resur. 17. This therefore
was the great mercy of our Savior to Thomas, that he gave him a heart to keep
still with the rest of the Disciples, how wayward soever he was.

Secondly, it was a further fruit of his pity and compassion over him, in that
it pleased our Savior, after a few days, to show himself again, in like
manner as he had done before: that Thomas might be confirmed from his own
sight, as well as the other were. In like manner I say, (as was answered) both
for the miracle of his strange and sudden presence, (in that, as the text
says again, he came when the doors were shut, and stood in the midst of the^)
and also, touching the same words of his salutation: Peace be unto you. Of the
which, both his divine action, and also of his gracious speech, (insomuch as we
have spoken of them before, and here is no other thing to be observed,
concerning either of them) we will not stand to set the^ down again, but choose
by reference at this time, to move every one, to call the^ to mind. Only let us
observe, how like our Savior is unto himself; and how behoofeful it is, that
we should by the same words and means, be edified in the faith: rather then to
hunt after that curious variety, which our vain minds, through that
lightness which is in them, are inclined unto.

And now thirdly, how wonderful is the mercy and compassion of our Savior, in
giving wayward Thomas, leave to take that proof of his very true bodily
presence, which he himself, presumed (after a sort) to prescribe unto our
Savior: or else said flatly, that he would not believe. For our Savior said,
Thomas, put thy finger here, etc. The which words, we call giving of leave, and
not containing an absolute commandment: because we do not read; that Thomas
did so much as our Savior offered, and was ^eady to permit him. Neither does
our Savior afterward, speak of Thomas his touching his hand, or his side; but
only says thus, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou beleeuest. It may be
therefore, our Savior gave Thomas the grace to be ashamed of himself,
presently upon the offer and sight of the print of the nails: like as the
child wained from the breast, seems some long time after to be fond of the
mothers bosom: and yet when she shows it the dugge, is ashamed to suck.
This, I say, it may be, that Thomas, having the grace given him, to consider
the divine manner of our Savior his coming among them; and his divine
knowledge of his words spoken, when our Savior (as he knew well) was bodily
absent: was ashamed of himself, and saw his former error, and rash, wayward,
and fond childishness: even by the gentle and gracious rebuke of our Savior,
saying, he thou not faithless, but faithful. And therefore would proceed no
further; but cries out, as one both professing himself overcome, to believe:
as also craving forgiveness and pardon of his former unbelief, saying, Oh my
Lord and my God. As though he should have said, what needs any further
proof? I do acknowledge thee to be my Lord and my God: even thee, whom I see,
and know to be very true man before me. But howsoever it was, whether Thomas
did proceed to feel, either hand or side, or neither of them: this may
certainly well be concluded, that he in the uttering of these words,
enlightened with a singular grace, to make a most lively profession of the true
christian faith, concerning both the Person; and also the office of our
Savior; with a particular application of the fruits and benefits of either
of them to himself: in that he believes in him, as being his Lord and his
God: wherein rests the nature and very esse, or being of the true justifying
faith.

And it is certain also, that whether Thomas proceeded to put his finger into
hand or side or no; yet it could not be, that any touching or handling could
have had this operation: had not our Savior touched him most effectually, with
the finger of his most holy Spirit, as we have touched once before. All was
therefore, of the wonderful grace and mercy of our Savior, toward this most
poor and frail incredulous and unbelieving Thomas. And thus the third,
fourth, and fifth branch of the mercy of our Savior toward him, are lincked
together in one: to wit, the permission, rebuke, and correction of that gross
error, wherein Thomas had slept securely a whole week before. Nevertheless,
touching the rebuke, let us more particularly and very carefully observe, that
our Savior, bidding Thomas not to be faithless; notes therein, the woeful
estate of a faithless man: and in saying, but be thou faithful; he shows
wherein the happiness of a man consists. Yea let us well note, that our
Savior, in speaking these words: did both cure, and remove the evil; and also
gave and co^ferred the contrary grace: as it is evident by the fourth and fifth
branch.

And now finally, in the sixth place: as it was a singular mercy of our Savior
to Thomaes, to pass by his gross sin, so gently and patiently as he did: he
looking only to the cherishing of that grace, which now he had vouchsafed
upon him, in that he says, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou beleeuest;
(as though he should say, thou have received a great mercy, in that thy great
sin being covered, thou have the gift of faith bestowed upon thee, infinitely of
more worth, then all thy bodily seeing or feeling could have brought unto thee)
as this (I say) was a great blessing to Thomas as our Savior gives to
understand: so he does therwithal plainly affirm, that it is yet a more
blessed thing, and a more excellent obedience of faith; for any to believe from
the bare and naked testimony of the word, which is the most kindly instrument
of faith, though they have not to that end, the bodily sight of Christ, nor the
print of the nails and spear in his flesh to look upon. For this knowledge
of our Savior Christ from the word, is the most excellent and pure knowledge:
as the Apostle Paul gives to understand, 2. Cor. 5.16. And accordingly, that
faith which rests it self sheerly, upon the word rightly understood: is the
faith which is much more precious then the gold tried in the fire. 1. Pet. 1.6,
7, 8, 9. This most precious faith, no doubt, but Thomas had, and so the rest of
the Apostles. Yet because it had as it were, a more carnal beginning;
therefore, in that respect, our Savior humbles the^ all, by showing them the
imperfections of their weak and feeble faith: as it were from the cradle, and
first swaddling bands thereof. So then it may justly be a notable encouragement
to us (whosoever of us do truly believe) concerning that great blessing, which
God has vouchsafed us, in giving us this grace, to believe in our Savior
Christ, at this day, though we never saw him bodily: seeing it is no whit
inferior to their blessing, who did so behold him; if happily we shall be
found truly thankful and dutiful to the Lord God our Savior, as we ought to
be. For not only were they blessed. Math. 13.16.17. but we also are blessed,
as this saying of our Savior to Thomas shows. Yea, a thousand fold more
blessed are they, that never saw, and yet believe: then they that saw every
day, and yet had not the grace to believe: according to that excellent
admonition of our Savior. Luk, 13.24 etc. Strive to enter in at the straight
gate, etc. For otherwise (as our Savior says there) it shall be in vain for
any to allege, and say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou
have taught in our streets* etc. Thus our Savior Christ divides his
blessing; in that he professes himself to be not only a blessing to his
Church, while he was bodily present upon the earth; but much rather, after his
ascension into heaven, though he be bodily absent: insomuch, as from that time,
he was, and still is, more abundantly present by his holy Spirit, and the
manifold graces thereof. According as he had told his disciples before. Ioh.
cha. 16.7. I tell you the truth, it is expedient for ye, that I go away: for
if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you, etc.

These things thus considered, and namely that our Savior pronounces those
blessed, whosoever believe in him, according to all that is written of him, in
the holy Scriptures; though they never had the bodily sight, either of him, or
of the print of the nails and spear in his flesh: yea, though they never saw
him either before his resurrection, or since. It is clear, that they which
would extend these words of believing though we see not, either to the mystical
transubstantiation of the bread in the Sacrament, into the very true body of
our Savior Christ: or to the consubstantiation of the body with the bread; or
to the invisible presence of the body every where, without the Sacrament: do
most grossly and erroneously misapply these words of our Savior, insomuch as it
is so far off, that those monstrous opinions have any warrant in the holy
Scriptures; that they are directly contrary to all that which the articles of
our faith do teach and assure us concerning the truth of his natural body,
that it is but in one place at once: and that wheresoever it is or has been,
that it is and has been always both visible and touchable, as our Savior
himself, has plainly given us to understand, both in this, and also in his
former appearance.

Moreover, we considering duly of the holy ends, wherefore our Savior
retained the print of his wounds, in his most glorious and holy body, for a
time (namely to give assurance of his resurrection, and thereby also to assure
us, of the blessed fruit of his death, and enduring of those wounds themselves:
which was to satisfy Gods wrath justly bent against us, etc.) and considering
also, the holy use, which Thomas made of the seeing of them; it cannot but be a
most horrible thing, for us to think of the cursed blasphemies of those, which
in their fury, or otherwise profanely and wickedly, swear by these wounds of
our Savior. Thus much briefly, concerning the proof of the resurrection of
our Savior Christ, by his sixth appearance.

And unto this, the Evangelist John (drawing toward the conclusion of his
book) adds a certain advertisement (as it were by the way) giving to
understand, that whereas he (even as he was directed by the holy Ghost, The
proof of his resurrection, by his seventh appearance.
whose Secretary he was) had set down, but a few appearances of our Savior;
and accordingly, but a few of the miraculous works, which he had wrought for
the confirmation of his resurrection, and minded to set down but one
appearance more: that yet nevertheless our Savior showed himself oftener,
then he minded to rehearse, the rather because he knew well that sundry other,
were mentioned by other of the Evangelists. And he gives to understand
likewise that he wrought many other signs, then he would speak of. According
to that of the Evangelist Luk, Act. 1.3. He presented himself alive to his
chosen Apostles, after that he had suffered, by many Tecmeriois certis seu
indubitatis signis et indicijs. Eiusmodi namque signa, quae necessaria^ et
demo^stratina^ consequentiam habent Tecmeria vocantur.
infallible tokens, being seen of them by the space of forty days, etc. And
therwithal, the Evangelist John does very notably show in few words, the
principal ends and uses, both of the resurrection of our Savior, and also of
all the proofs and confirmations thereof: namely, that we, and all other, to
whom they are reported, and recorded; might thereby be brought to the faith, and
so be saved. So that hereby, he manifests unto us, the excellency of this
hi^tory, of our Savior his resurrection, most worthy to be diligently regarded
of all Christians. But let us hear the words of the Evangelist himself, to
this purpose. Question. Which are they?

And many other signs also (says S. John) did Jesus in the presence of his
disciples, which are not written in this book.

31. But these things are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the
Christ, the son of God: and that in believing, ye might have life, through
his name.

Explication.
From these words, we may see plainly, that the meaning of the holy Evangelist,
is such as has bin already expressed. As if he should preocupate, or prevent,
and meet aforehand, with that which might be objected; either against him self,
because he spoke of so few appearances of our Savior, or to the prejudice of
the other Evangelists, for setting down somewhat more: affirming that both by
them, and by him, there were appearances and signs enough set down, for the
confirmation of faith unto salvation: which is the end and scope of all signs
and appearances; and also even of the resurrection it self. The which being
obtained, there is no further need of appearances, or signs, whatsoever. Yea,
and therwithall, the Evangelist, does with like breuity, very notably show us,
the sum of that, which we are to believe: namely that Jesus is the Christ, the
son of God. In which words is contained a plain declaration, both of the
most divine person, and also of the most holy and blessed office of our
Savior, on our behalf. For by the name of our Savior Christ, the Evangelist
does not mean, the bare titles, whereby he is called: but all, whatsoever is
signified by them, in the holy scriptures; the which he assures us to be fully
verified in him, whose resurrection he reports unto us. And thus also, we
put a difference betwixt these words, the last of this 20. chapter and those in the
end of the book, in the two last verses of the next chap. like unto the^:
because these do more specially concern the particular history of the
resurrection of our Savior: but they are to be extended to the history of the
whole book; and to all the works which our Savior did before his death, as
well as after that he rose again.

THese things thus inserted, we come now, to the seventh appearance of our
Savior: as it follows in the next chapter; which is the last of the
Evangelist John. Concerning which, let us first of all, hear the words of the
Evangelist.

After these things (says the Evangelist) cha. 21.1. Jesus showed himself
again to his disciples, at the sea of Tiberias: and thus he showed himself.

2. There were together, Simon Peter, and Thomas, which is called Didymus, and
Nathanael of Cana in Galile, and the sons of Zebedeus, and two other of his
disciples.

3. Simon Peter said unto them* I go a fishing, They said unto him, we also
will go with thee. They went their way, and straightway they entered into a
ship, and that night caught they nothing.

4. But when the morning was now come, Jesus stood on the shore: nevertheless
the disciples knew not that it was Jesus.

5. Jesus then said unto them, Paidia pueri, children.
Sirs, have ye any meat? They answered him, No.

6. Then he said unto them, Cast out the net on the right side of the ship, and
ye shall find. So they cast out and they were not able at all to draw it, for
the multitude of fishes.

7. Therefore said the disciple whom Jesus loved, unto Peter, It is the Lord.
When Simon Peter heard, that it was the Lord, he girded his coat to him (for
he was naked) and cast himself into the sea.

8. But the other disciples came by ship (for they were not far from the
Land, but about two hundredth cubits) and they drew the net full of fishes.

9 As soon then as they were come to the Land, they saw hot coals, and fish
laid thereon, and bread.

10. Jesus said unto them, Bring ye of the fishes which ye have now caught.

11. Simon Peter stepped forth, and drew the net to Land, full of great fishes,
a hundredth fifty and three: and albeit they were so many, yet was not the net
broken.

12. Jesus said unto them, come and dine. And none of the disciples durst ask
him, Who art Thou? seeing they knew that he was the Lord.

13. Jesus then came and took bread, and gave them, and fish likewise.

14. This is now the third time, that Jesus showed himself to his disciples,
after that he was risen again from the dead. And so forth to the 24. verse.

The history of this appearance of our Savior (as well says that godly
learned interpreter M. Beza) is left unto us, by the son of God, as an
inestimable Treasure, containing in it a more express testimony of his
resurrection, and divine power, etc. then all the former. Let us therefore, use
all good diligence, in searching after the right understanding and use of it,
as after a jewel of an unknown price. To the end we may the better reap the
fruit of it, we are to consider of it, as well in regard of the circumstances,
as of the appearance it self; in the same order, which the text it self,
prescribes unto us.



First, the time is noted, when our Savior made this appearance. Secondly, the
persons to whom. Thirdly, the place where. Fourthly, the manner how, which also
includes the occasion. Fifthly, the end and scope of the appearance, which is
to be gathered from the speeches and actions of our Savior together with the
several effects of the same.

This is the order of the text in deed. Let us therefore, accordingly consider
of them. And first, concerning the time.



The time was such as gave; or rather wherein our Savior himself, both gave,
and also took the most fit occasion that might be; not only to show himself
again, but also to declare his most gracious and divine power and providence:
For it was in a certain morning, when his disciples had been fishing all
night, but could get nothing.

Explication
It was so in deed; as we shall have special occasion within a while
hereafter, to observe: when once we shall come to speak of the occasion of
this appearance, contained in the third and fourth verses. Otherwise, as
touching the time, the Evangelist John speaks indefinitely; saying, that it
was after the eight day mentioned before, when he appeared the second time to
the eleven. But it was the first time to Thomas, and so he makes it now the
third time that he appeared to some of his choice disciples: and with them to
Thomas the second time, as it is plain in the second and fourteenth verses. It
may be also, Quicquid vno ^ie gestum fuerat, sub manifestatione vna
complectitur.
that (as M. Calvin observes) the Evangelist John reckons all the
appearances of the first day for one, because they were upon the same day: and
that also without any long intermissions. But this hinders not, why we should
not reckon it for the seventh appearance, in our comparing of all the
Evangelists together, in a more particular account. Neither is the judgment of
M. Beza, to be lightly esteemed, concerning the times of his appearance: who
thinks that it was near (though I know not whether altogether so near as
he speaks) upon the time of the ascension of our Savior. For so it is very
likely, Hom. 8. in histor. Resurr. Paulo post initiu^.
by comparing the Evangelist John, not only with him, but with the rest of the
Evangelists. With himself, because (as we have seen in the conclusion of the
former chapter) his words tend to this end; that he would not stand upon many
particulars: and therefore hastes to this special one, one of the very last:
the which with the rest, might suffice for the confirmation of the truth of his
report, concerning the certainty of the resurrection of our Savior. And in the
latter part of this chapter, the speeches of our Savior to Peter, are
speeches, tending (as we may say) to a holy farewell; in that he so
earnestly admonishes him of his duty, in feeding his sheep, after that he
should be gone: and in that he tells Peter before hand, what kind of death
it was, even the death of martyrdom, which he was to prepare himself unto.
Such likewise, is the answer of our Savior to Peter's question about John: in
that he says, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?
Follow thou me. Thus I say, if we compare John with himself; it is very
likely, that this appearance of our Savior, was near upon his ascension. The
likelihoode of the same, may likewise appear, as was further more said, by
comparing the Evangelist John, and the rest of the Evangelists together. For
all of them, have to the ascension of our Savior; after they have set down
the proof of his resurrection, by those manifold appearances of his, on the
same day that he rose again. And more particularly, like as Saint John
tells us, that the place where our Savior appeared at this time, was in
Galile: Saint Matthew reports. chap. 28.16. that our Savior a little before
his ascension, appeared to the eleven, on a mountain in Galile. Which also,
was likely to be shortly after this time of the fishing of diverse of them,
being now in Galile: even so soon before the ascension, as they might
conveniently return back again to Jerusalem, and thence to Bethania, and to
the mount of Olives; from whence at the last, our Savior ascended up into
heaven: as partly the Evangelist Mark, chap. 16.19. and then Luke, chap.
24.50. and Acts. 1.12. give to understand. Of the which more afterward.

Thus much concerning the time of this seventh appearance of our Savior.

The persons, to whom he appeared, are next to be considered of us.



The Evangelist John tells us, in the first verse, that they were the same
disciples of our Savior, to whom he had appeared before. And in the second
verse, he shows, who the most of them were, even by name.

Explication.
It is true. For reckoning seven, he names Simon Peter first: Secondly, Thomas
to whom our Savior so graciously showed himself before, and who (as the
Evangelist rehearses again) was called Dydimus. Thirdly, Nathanael, even
Nathanael of Cana in Galile, to whom our Savior gave that singular
commendation, Behold an Israelite indeed in whom is no guile: Fourthly, and
fifthly, the sons of Zebedeus: that is, John, this Evangelist himself, and
his brother James. Sixthly and seventhly two other, whom he does not name: it
may be, for that they were not of the eleven, though likely enough they were of
Galile, as we know certainly, the most of these seven were: to wit, Peter,
James, and John, and Nathanael, as is evident. John, chap. 1.44. and Math.
4.18.19.20.21. And here in our present text, this 2. verse of the 21. chap. of
John. Moreover these seven, being of diverse sorts, and not all of the eleven:
they are, as it were an Epitome, of that former company of those that were
assembled together, at the appearance of our Savior in the evening of the same
day, that he rose again. For they were more then they of the eleven. So that
our Savior, both then and now, showed again his merciful regard of every
sort of his Disciples; both men and women, Apostles and others: that they might
by his personal appearance among them, be confirmed in the faith of his
resurrection. Let this suffice for a while, touching the Persons, to whom our
Savior appeared: for we shall have occasion to speak of them again anon.

We come now to the place of our Saviors appearance:



It was (as Saint John says) at the Sea of Tiberias (as we read in the first
verse) and on the shore by the sea side (as he says further, verse, 4.) Jesus
stood on the shore. This sea was also in Galile.

Explication.
So in deed we read chap. 6. verse, 1. of the same Evangelist John, and
Matthew: 4.18: and Mark 1.16. It was called the Sea of Tiberias, in respect of
that part of it, on which the city called Tiberias (builte, as they write by
Herod and called after the name of Tiberius then Caesar and the Emperor of
Rome) was situated. It is the same sea, which in some other respect, is called
the Lake of Genezaret, Luke, chap: 5.1. A lake, because (though it was the
gathering together of much water, even ouerflowing in breadth six or seven
miles, Joseph: Antique: Iud: lib: 18 cap: 3.
and running in length about 16. miles, as Geographers describe, and therefore
called by the name of a Sea) yet it was not ebbing and flowing, as many parts
of the Sea, nor a salt water but rather sweet, and as a standing poole: save
that it was fed by many rivers, and the winds did many times make it
troublesome because of the wideness and length of it; as in other parts of the
History of the holy Gospel it does appear. In this respect therefore, it was
called a lake. And the lake of Genezaret, because the ancient and strong city
of Cinnereth mentioned Josh: chap: 19.35. and 1. King: 15.20. and in other
places; was situated near to a part of this great lake: in the place whereof,
Herod the Tetrarch builte the city Tiberias, mentioned before, as Authors of
good credit do write. There are many other things coniectured, concerning the
name of this Genezaret; but that which is principal above the rest, is in
these few words expressed. So much therefore shall briefly suffice,
concerning the place of this seventh appearance of our Savior. Only this
observed, that the consideration of the place; affords a reason why this
company was gathered together in the same: namely, because they were the most
of them fishermen, and most likely (as was supposed before) all of them of
Galile. For thence were the most of the special Disciples of our Savior, as
may appear by the speech of the Angel Act: 1.11. Ye men of Galile, why stand
ye looking up into heaven, etc.

The manner of the same appearance of our Savior is next to be considered of
us: the which also (as was answered) does include the occasion.



The Occasion is expressed in the third verse of our text, in that the
Evangelist John writes, Simon Peter said unto them (that is, the other of his
fellow Disciples mentioned before) I go a fishing. They said unto him, we
also will go with thee. They went their way and strait way entered into a ship,
and that night caught they nothing.

Explication
Here indeed is the occasion of this apearance of our Savior expressed;
insomuch as at this place, (so convenient for fishing) the Disciples of our
Savior, being by their former trade of life fishermen, and the greater part of
them dwelling near to this sea; were here gathered together. Yet though we
say, that their former trade of life was fishing, we are not to understand,
this to be now the ordinary practice of these Disciples: but that they were
driven unto it at this time, for the necessary relief of themselves, and
their brethren and families, in the time of their interim and vacation from
entrance upon their office of Apostleship: until our Savior should ascend,
and power down the gifts of the holy Ghost in full measure to furnish them
thereunto. For otherwise, they would not, neither could they have had this
leisure. They should have found business enough, about that other kind of
fishing, which our Savior minded to employ them about: according as he told
them, at their very first calling, that he would. Matthew: 4.19. and Mark,
1.17. Jesus said to them, follow me, and I will make you to be fishers of
men. And more particularly, he says to Simon Peter: even to him that was the
first motioner to this Seafaring fishing, Luke, 3.10. Fear not Simon: from
henceforth, thou shall catch men. Nevertheless; we may not say, but for relief
of necessity, they might lawfully have done as much as this, even after their
full calling: like as Paul, and other, for a time, and upon special occasion,
wrought with their hands; both for their own relief, and also for the succor
of some other that were with them.

Act: 20.34. and 1. These. 2.9. and 2. These. 3.8.9. 1. Cor: 9.15. and 2. Cor:
11.7.12. The proof of his resurrection by his fifth appearance.
And such like (no doubt) was the occupatio^ of the present fishing of Peter:
and of the rest of his company. Otherwise, in a settled estate of the Church,
or in an usual course ( sordide, and for filthy lucres sake) it had not been
meet: either for an Apostle then, neither for any minister of the Gospel now;
ordinarily to follow any manual occasion: but to give himself continually to
prayer, and to the ministration of the word. Act: 6.4. and to reading and
study. 1. Tim: 4.13.16. But we cannot stand now, to treat of these things,
any thing largely. It may suffice us, at this time, to see the occasion of our
Savior his appearance: to wit, the assembling of his Disciples, and their
travel in getting nothing all the night long. The which, as was said, is
included in the report, which Saint John makes to describe the manner of it.



Thus (says Saint John) he showed himself. There were together, Simon Peter,
and Thomas etc as was rehearsed before. But when the morning was now come,
Jesus stood on the shore: nevertheless the Disciples knew not that it was Jesus.

Explication
Our Savior, who is other where called the great shepherd of the sheep (of
the which, we shall have occasion to speak afterward) he shows himself at
this time, after the manner of the chief fisher master, over these his
fishermen. For so his words give plainly to understand. First, in that, he
standing thus on the shore, calls out unto them, and says, Sirs; (or
children, as the word (Paidia) which he uses, signifies) have ye any meat?
wherein, he speaks as one being privy to the cause of their fishing, which
was want of necessary food and victual: not as providing to serve any common
market; but for the private relief of the family. Yea he speaks, as if he
himself their Master had set them about the present business, to that very
end. For the word child^en, according to the Hebrew p^rase, is attributed
usually to servants; as the word (Nehharim) (all one in signification with the
Greek (Paidia) that is to say children) does declare. And so we read. 1. Sam:
25.5, 13. where the holy Story reporting, how David sent his servants to
Nabal, and how they did their message unto him; and what answer Nabal gave
again to them: the word nehharim is often repeated, in that narration. And so
Exodus: 33.11. Joshua (though of man's age) is called Moses nahhar, that is, his
child, or young man etc. and. 2. King 4.12. Gehazi the servant of Elisha, is
termed by the name of his child, or young man; And Psalm: 119 9. By what means
shall a young man, (yea such a one as is in the flower or strength of his
years) redress his ways, etc. It is true, that the word (Pais) does likewise
sometimes signify a servant, whether younger or elder in years, whether a boy
or a man: Nevertheless, we are rather to think, that our Savior respected the
use of the Hebrew language. And so he speaks to them, ever as Moses should
have called out, and spoken to his servant Joshua; or E^isha, to Gehazi; or
David to his ten servants, whom he sent to Nabal, etc. Thus then, in the first
place, these first words, of our Savior, are spoken after the manner of a
Master, to whom these fishermen were servants. The same is yet more evident,
in the 2. speech which he uses. For immediately upon their answer, that they
had none; he bids them, Cast out the net on the right side of the ship: and
tells them that so they should find. Whereupon, they obey him as servants
their master; or at least hearkening to the advice of one, whom they supposed
to be a man of good experience: and thought that it might be, that he saw some
sign of some skole of fishes gathered together there about; though indeed they
did not yet know him to be our Savior Chr: their Lord and master. This then,
was the manner of our Saviors showing of himself to his disciples, in this
his seventh appearance; as both the time, and the place, and his speeches
already interpreted; do plainly argue, and declare.

Now let us come to the fifth point: to wit, what the special end and scope
was, which our Savior intended, and aimed at, in this appearance.



Ans. I have heard you teach us, that (all things duly considered) it may be
evident, The proof of his resurrection by his seventh appearance.
that our Savior, did not so much show himself at this time, to confirm his
Disciples in the certainty of his resurrection: as to aximate and encourage
those whom he had chosen for his Apostles, to settle themselves the more
comfortably and confidently; to that most difficult and hard piece of their
Apostolical work and service.

So it seems indeed, both from all the circumstances before mentioned; and
by the manner of the appearance it self: and also by all the speeches and
actions of our Savior, which are hereafter to be considered of v^. We do not
say, that our Savior, did not at al propound to himself, to confirm his very
true and bodily resurrection, to his Disciples, yet more fully. For then he
would not have eaten with them. Only we say, that he principally propounded to
himself, the confirming of the hearts of his chief Disciples, to the work of
their holy ministry, in the preaching of the Gospel after his ascension: and
specially of Peter, for that there was cause, why he might be more easily
discouraged, then any of the rest, in the time of tentation: while he should
remember his former most grievous fall, in the denial and forswearing of his
Lord and master. In which respect also, our Savior of his singular mercy;
vouchsafed him the first sight of him after his resurrection: before yet he had
showed himself to any of the eleven. This verily, in respect of Peter was the
principal purpose of our Savior, in this his appearance: and in no wise (as
the Popish guides most blindly imagine and blasphemously teach) that our
Savior should intend to create Peter the prince of the Apostles; and to make
him his vicare general over his Church: much less to the end he might derive
it to the Popes of Rome in their succession, etc. Of the which more afterward,
when we come to that speech of our Savior, whence they would gladly father
that their ambitious and proud conceit.

In the mean season, let us consider, how it may be discerned, that the
principal scope of ou^ Savior, was to encourage his Apostles, (present at
this time) to the work and labor of the ministry.

Our Savior, to this end, works three miracles In the first whereof, his
dealing is so answerable to that course which he took, at the first calling of
some of these his chief Disciples, to be special followers of him, in that he
called the^ from Sea faring fishing, to be fishers of men: that it is more then
seeming, that he would draw them at this time, to the same consideration
again; and to encourage them thereunto.

Yea, the latter words of our Savior to Peter, after dinner; do plainly
declare: that this was the chief scope of all, both the words, and the works,
which he wrought before.

Explication
It may well be affirmed, which you say. For first, if we compare that which we
read, Mat: 4.18. etc, and Mar: 1, 16. etc. wi^h the 5. ch: of Luke v. 1. etc.
we shall find, that these very persons, Peter, James, and John, were in the same
sea, fishing; and Peter's ship the^, was the same likely, that Peter fished with
now. They had then fished al night, and could take nothing, even as they had
done now. They did cast their nets yet once again at the commandment of our
Sa: as they did at this time. They took then a great multitude of fishes as
they did now, etc. All things therefore agreeing so nearly; how can we but
think, that the mind of our Sa: was likewise at both the times, even one and
the same? That is, (as was said) even to encourage those whom it did chiefly
concern, to go cheerfully about that other kind of fishing of men: by casting
forth that draw-net of the kingdom of God, which our Sa: told them of in the
13. of Mat: And whereas these things might chiefly discourage; Want of
maintenance; or outward provision, and fear of ill success: our Sa: does by
one work of his divine power: yea by a double and threefold work of like
miracle, give encouragement against either of these doubts or fears: yea
against al doubts and fears which might any way dismay them. For to this end,
whereas they were in present want, see how presently he does furnish the^ with
abounda^ce: he causes a multitude of great fishes, to come together into the
net: he strengthens a weak net, to hold them all, without breaking any mask:
he prepares upon the land both fire, and fish, and bread, for them, to refresh
them withal: showing thereby, that all things, both by sea and by land, are at
his commandment and appointment.

So that, how unprovided, or weak soever, they may seem to themselves to be,
and likewise how weak soever the net of the Gospel might seem to be, to catch
men, who are as shie of the word, as the fish is of the net: yet our Savior
gives to understand, that as he was with them, when he sent them forth for a
little while to preach the Gospel in Israel, (so that though they took no
provision with them, nor scrip, nor bag for provision, as he commanded them,
Mark. 6.7.13. Luke 9.1.6. and chap. 22.35. yet they wanted nothing, neither
wanted their ministry good success and effectual blessing) so he would be
with them, yea much more powerfully, when they should perform their office of
general Apostleship to all Nations, whereunto he had already set them apart.
This (I doubt not) but is the sum of all. And so the Evangelist Luke says
expressly, Act. 1.3. that our Savior after his resurrection, spoke to his
Disciples, by the space of forty days, of those things which appertain to the
kingdom of God. But let us consider of the words of the text: that is, of the
divine speeches of our Savior, and of the effects thereof, somewhat more
particularly. These speeches of our Savior, together with the effects of them
are as was touched in the answer: either such as were spoken, and effected
before dinner was ended, or after that the Disciples had dined with our
Savior. And of the former two speeches of our Savior, the first, (Sirs, have
ye any meat?) And thus upon the answer of the Disciples, that they had gotten
never a fish, the second being this (Cast out the net on the right side of the
ship, and ye shall find) we have spoken before. Only let us observe this
one point further, that our Savior did not ask that question, as being
ignorant of that which he asked; but to stir them up, the rather to consider
the miracle, which he minded to work immediately after. And therefore also,
when he says. Cast out the net, etc. and ye shall find; he does not speak
by conjecture, or by any experimental sign, etc. (though as was said, it
might seem so to those fishermen) but he speaks by divine authority, and
upon his al seeing knowledge, in that he was God: yea he works a work of his
divine providence and power, in commanding the fishes to come, and attend (as
it were) the casting forth of the net.

Now let us come to the effects, which followed upon these words of our
Savior: and so to the rest of his speeches, and actions, before dinner.

The effects of this speech of our Savior, Cast out the net, etc, they were
four.

The first was, that the net had taken a multitude of great fishes, so that
they were not able to draw it.

Secondly, that John (upon this miraculous effect) discerned that it was our
Savior, who had spoken before, to give them that direction and commandment to
cast out their net.

Thirdly, Peter being imboldened hereby; fears not to swim to the shore,
that he might show the zeal of his love to our Savior: and peradventure
also, that he might so much the more commodiously, help to draw the net to
land.

Fourthly, the other Disciples, continuing in the ship, do what they can to
row: that they may help the ship, and hale the net with fishes to the shore.

These were the effects, but let us hear them from the report of the holy
Evangelist.



So they cast out (says the Evangelist, himself being one of them) and they
were not able at all to draw it, for the multitude of fishes. verse. 6.



Therefore said the Disciple whom Jesus loved unto Peter, it is the Lord, verse
7. in the beginning of it.

Explication
This Disciple whom Jesus loved, was this, John the Evangelist: so that it is as
much as if he had written thus, John said to Peter. And in that which John
says to Peter, he reasons well from the divine work, which followed upon
the speech of our Savior; that it was the Lord: seeing no creature, could by
humane knowledge, have given them that certain and effectual direction. For
whom might he think it to be, rather then our Savior: who had before appeared
unto them, with like manifestation of his divine power?

Now therefore, what says he, for the third effect?

When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girded his coat to him (for
he was naked to wit: to his shirt as it were) and cast himself into the sea:
as it follows in the 7. verse.

Explication.
This, no doubt, was a further effect, upon the apprehension of Peter, from the
words of John: (yea rather from the work it self, which our Savior wrought)
that it was the Lord. For hereby (as was said before) he himself took
boldness, to do that he did: as one nothing doubting of good success; seeing
the Lord himself had begun this gracious and mighty work. For this is
indeed the property of God, to finish that good work which he begins. And
it is said concerning our Savior; that whom he loved to the end he loved them.
And therefore also there was just cause, that Peter should for his part, love
him again with a most earnest love. The which (no doubt) was a chief cause of
this his hasting to the shore. Nevertheless, it may well be a question, whether
( Peter presuming of his skill to swim, yea though thus far also being well
advised, that he girded his clothes about him, lest by the losenes of them,
they might be a hindrance unto him) whether, I say he might not have been
better advised, before he had done so: namely, to have stayed till he had
known the will of our Savior, as he did once before, when he attempted to
walk toward our S^uiour, coming to their ship, walking on the sea. And
hereunto seems our Savior to have respect in his speech to Peter after
dinner; admonishing him to try his heart, whether he loved him more then the
rest: according as he showed himself most venterous and earnest, in coming
first unto him. But of this more afterward.

The last effect of the former speech of our Savior, Cast out the etc. that is
yet behind.



It was more general, concerning all the rest to whom the words were spoken.
For they using the ordinary means to serve the providence of God, came by
ship (for as the Evangelist says, they were not far from land, but about
two hundredth cubits) and they drew the net with fishes. verse. 8.

Explication
This indeed, was a more general and common effect. But yet considering what
was said before; that the net was so full of fishes, that they could not draw
it at all: we have good reason to think, that even in this their drawing of
the net, so heavy with the fishes, the Lord put to his hand, and made them
able to do it. And therefore also, may we well think that the Lord would use
their diligence and labor in this work, (though indeed it was altogether
his) that they might the rather thereby be led to consider, that in the work
of the holy ministry and fishing for men, to catch them out of the sea of this
world, (wherein they drink up sin as fish do swallow water) that so he might
draw them into his heavenly kingdom by the preaching of the Gospel, he
would use their service: howsoever it is true, as they had experience, even in
this their seafaring fishing; that unless God do give blessing, Paul's
planting, and Apollos watering, shall be all in vain. And thus much,
concerning the effects of that second speech of our Savior, Cast out the net
etc. and therein of the first of those miracles, which our Savior wrought in
the time of this his seventh appearance; namely, the gathering together of such
a multitude of great fishes into their net, as was above all expectation or
reason.

The second miracle is next to be observed.

John report it?

As Soon then (says he) as they were come to land, thy saw hot coals, and
fish laid thereon, and bread. verse. 9.

Expli. This is indeed a second miracle; a very divine work. For this fire,
and fish, and bread, came not by any humane provision; but by the almighty
power of our Savior: by whom, as all things were created at the first, so are
they continually ordered, and governed by him, to this day, and for ever. He
that fed many thousands with a few loa^es, and a small number of fishes: at
one time, more then five thousand with five barley loaves and two fishes: and at
an other time, above four thousand, with seven loaves and a few little fishes;
yea so as more remained after the multitudes were satisfied, then there was at
the beginning: as we read in the Gospel, by multiplying the substance
thereof, in the hands of his Disciples, by a miraculous creation Matthew: 14.15.
etc. and chap: 15.32. etc. He the same Creator made this strange manner of
provision for these his Disciples: whom he knew now after the labor and
watching of the whole night, to be very hungry. Wherefore (doubtless) he would
let his Disciples understand; yea sensibly show it before their eyes: that he
was able to provide for them, not only by one means alone, but by as many
ways and means as should be best pleasing to him, and most meet for them.
For all things (as they might plainly see) both by sea and by land, were at his
beck and commandment: as well now after his resurrection, as before; as he
had given them infinite proofs, even before his death. The which also he did
at this time, give them just and very comfortable occasion, to call to mind
again. And even therefore may we persuade our selves, that he wrought the like
works after his resurrection, which he did before his death; that from the
like works, they might learn to acknowledge and believe the same his divine
power.

Let us now come to the next speech of our Savior, which he uttered before
dinner.

Jesus (says the Evangelist) said unto them, Bring of the fishes which ye
have now caught, verse. 10.

Explication.
As by the power of the former speech (Cast out the net, etc.) the fishes were
gathered into the net: so by the virtue of this speech (Bring ye of the fishes,
etc.) the dis^iples were enabled to draw them to land: the which also, that it
was not done without a third miracle; the Evangelist declares in the very next
words.



Thus it follows. Simon Peter showed forth, and drew the net to land, full of
great fishes, a hundredth fif^ie and three: and albeit there were so many, yet
was not the net broken. v. 11.

Explication
This may well be reckoned for a third miracle indeed, For certainly, though the
mask of the net, had bin of great coard, yet had it bin weak enough, to have
held in so great a number of so great fishes, as were enclosed, and haled to
the land in it. In the 5. ch: of Luke v. 4. etc (unto the which miracle there
reported, this answers, as was before observed) the net brake through the
multitude of fishes so that they were feign to call for more help. Here
therefore, in that the net brake not at all, and that the small company of
fishers, did prosperously draw so many great fishes to land: the miracle is in
that respect, so much the more amplified; and might justly minister so much the
more comfort to the D^sciples, as touching the ends wherefore our Savior
wrought it; even such as have bin declared before. That which is written here,
of Peter his stepping forth to draw the net to land; shows that (as was said
before) although the zeal of his affection toward our Sa: constrained him to
swim to the shore, yet it is like also (even as the effect declares) that he
did it partly for some more commodious help, which he might by that means,
yield to the business in hand.

This business well ended: we are now to consider of the next speech of our
Savior, which he uttered immediately before dinner: namely that his speech,
whereby he (as the master of these fishermen) invited them to that miraculous
dinner, which he had prepared for them, without their skill or labor. Rehearse
the words of our Savior, They are these, Jesus said unto them, Come and dine,
verse, 12. in the beginning of the verse.

Expli. Our Savior, (no doubt) spoke these words with like affection that he
had in the wilderness over the people, when he said, I have compassion on this
multitude, etc. Mat: 15.32. For he knew that his Disciples must needs be
hungry, after their labor all the night: the morning also being well spent.
And in this provision which was prepared, we are to consider of our Savior,
both as of the baker or rather maker of the bread: and as of the fisher of the
fish that was now a broiling: and as of the Cook which kindled, yea altogether
made that fire, wherewith they were broiled. Yea we are to consider of him, as
being all in all, the only master and maker of this feast. Wherein, all
things were so admirable to the Disciples, and so evident declarations of the
divine power of our Savior; beside that knowledge which they had of his
person; that they wrought this effect in their hearts, that (as the Evangelist
says as it follows in the 12. verse) None of the Disciples durst ask him,
who art thou? seeing they knew that he was the Lord. Yea even their Lord and
master indeed; according to that his first speech, wherein he called them by
the name of his children, or servants as was declared before. And thus we may
easily see, that there was no cause, why they needed to ask our Savior, who
art thou.



He gives thereby to understand, that although there was some remnant of
doubtings in their minds: yet that their doubtings were now so weakened, by the
former appearances of our Savior, and by his present divine works; that they
durst not, for fear of the just rebuke of our Savior, give place unto them.

Explication and proof.
And not without very just cause. For seeing their own hearts reproved them,
they might well know that he that was greater then their hearts, might by all
right, have more sharply rebuked them. And verily, it ought to be a shame to
every Disciple and scholar of our Savior; much more to those that are of the
head form, as it were: to be always learning, and not to profit by the
excellent instructions that are given unto them, Heb: 5.12. It is very meet,
that faith enjoying the means of increase, should grow more and more, and not
always be a like infirm and weak. We ought not to bear with such sloth in
our selves: much less may we think, that the Lord will endure it, and not
reprove and chastise us for it. Such therefore was the cause of the Disciples
fear.



Jesus then came (says Saint John) and took bread, and gave them, and fish
likewise. ver. 13.

Explication
The taking of bread, which the Evangelist speaks of, and likewise of fish; it
is in such manner to be understood, as has been else where more particularly
described: to wit, as being accompanied with thanksgiving, after the most
holy manner, constantly used by our Savior. And so must the giving both of the
bread, and of the fish also, be understood: not after the common custom of
the householder, who allows to every one of the family his portion; but as
from the author and giver of all things, even from the God of heaven and earth:
like as if our Savior should have said to his Disciples, behold my dear
children and servants; I give ye, a visible sign and plain proof, that I am
both able and also willing, while ye shall perform a faithful service unto
me; to prepare and furnish you a table, in the midst of your enemies,
wheresoever ye shall become; even as I did to David my servant, as he
acknowledges, Psalm: 23. The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want, etc. Thou
do prepare a table before me, in the fight of mine adversaries, etc. Such
no doubt, is the meaning of our Savior, by making his Disciples, this
extraordinary banquet. And it may justly teach us all, this common and
uniform lesson; that all whatsoever we receive, either for food, or for any
other relief, of our frail estate here in this life: it comes not
originally from our own industry and labor, or by any other means; but from
the good hand and blessing of God our Savior, who pitieth us, and knows
wherereof we stand in need.

And therefore, that we are to receive all things, as from his holy hands: and
to use all the good blessings of God, soberly and purely, as becomes his
guests invited by himself to be partakers of them, etc. Specially, may the
faithful Ministers and preachers of the Gospel, take their comfort from these
declarations of the divine care and providence of our Savior, over his
Disciples. For out of all question, he retains the same care all ways, ever
since he ascended into heaven, which he at this time expressed thus
graciously, while he was on the earth. It is he that gives bread to the
hungry, etc. Hitherto, of all the gracious speeches, and actions, together with
the effects of them; such as were said to be considered of us, in the time
before dinner. And as for that which the Evangelist says, verse 14. This was
the third time that Jesus showed himself, etc. we have showed already, how
Saint John is to be understood: and that it does nothing hinder, why we in our
more particular account may not reckon it for the seventh appearance, etc.

Now let us come to the speeches of our Savior, such as he uttered after
dinner. We may for orders sake, reduce them to the number of four.

They are all of them, directed indeed particularly to Peter, though not for
his instruction and admonition alone.

The first speech, has six branches: consisting; first in three questions,
and secondly, in a threefolde charge and direction, following upon a threefolde
affirmative answer of Peter, all of them tending to one end and purpose which
our Savior intended thereby; and all almost in the very same words. Let us
therefore, first of all, consider of this first speech of our Savior to Peter.
How does the Evangelist report it?

It follows thus in the holy story, 15.16.17.

So when they had dined, Jesus said to Simon Peter, Simon the son of Iona,
love thou me more then these? He said unto him, yea Lord thou know that I
love thee, He said unto him, feed my lambs. He said unto him again the
second time. Simon the son of Iona love thou me? He said unto him, yea
Lord thou know that I love thee. He said unto him, Feed my sheep. He
said unto him the third time. Simon, the son of Iona, love thou me? Peter
was sorry, because he said to him the third time, love thou me? and he
said unto him, Lord thou know all things; thou know that I love thee.
Explication
Jesus said unto him, Feed my sheep.

This may well be reckoned for the first speech of our Savior after dinner,
though consisting of sundry branches; seeing all of them (as was said) are
tending to one and the same end: and all as we see, repeated almost in the
same words. Whether we look to the three questions of our Savior; or to the
three answers of Peter; or again to the thrice repeated charge and direction
of our Savior.

Now before all other things, it shall be to special good end and purpose,
that we consider diligently, of that end which our Savior propounded to
himself. First in his thrice propounded question; and then in his thrice
repeated charge and direction. For this being known, all things else will be
easy and plain.

The purpose of our Savior in his thrice propounded question, (Simon, the
son of Iona love thou me more then these? etc.) it was to put Peter to an
earnest trial, and examination of the truth of his affection toward him.

And in his thrice repeated charge or direction (feed my lambs, etc) it was his
purpose to give him a certain rule, how he should, both try, to the peace of
his own conscience in the sight of God, and also declare before the Church,
the truth of the same his love.

And all this, that he might be a common example for the admonition and
instruction of the rest of the Disciples, and of all other ministers of the
word to the end of the world.

Explication
This no doubt, was the very purpose of our Savior, in either part of his
speech unto him. And so does master Beza well expound the same. Simon
fili-Ionae, amas me: verba sunt non sciscitantis, itane seres habeat necne, sed
eum quem alloquebatur excitantis, ad serio de ijs cogitandum, and eliciendum ex
eius ore quae praesentibus condiscipulis inseruirent. That is Simon son of
Iona, love thou me. They are words (says he) not asking whether the thing be
so or no: but such as were to excite and stir up the party to whom they were
spoken to bethink himself earnestly of them, and that they might draw from
his mouth such things as might serve for the instruction of his
fellowe-Disciples present with him, The occasion whereof was (as we may
suppose) more immediately; even that late and not so well advised adventure
which he made, in casting himself into the sea, to swim unto our Savior,
before the rest could come by ship to land, his zeal carrying him upon a
sudden, thereunto. Yet not only upon that occasion, but also (as we have good
reason to think) because our Savior would point him a little further back, to
consider of that over bold profession which he had made a little before his
death, that though all should be offended by him, yet he would never be
offended, etc. In the which his high confidence in himself he altogether
deceived himself, as his thrice denial might have put himself in perfect
remembrance of: so that he ought to learn and remember from thence, never in
any thing to presume or boast above that is meet, as before he had done.
Nevertheless, we must not think, that our Savior puts Peter to this
examination and trial of his love, with a mind to vpbraid or shame him, with
the remembrance of his former fall, of the which he did speedily and most
earnestly repent him: as is evident in the last ver. of the same 26. chapter of S.
Math. Neither yet, that he would altogether discredit and reject this late
signification of his most fervent affection toward him; which surely was
nothing fained, or hypocritical: but (as was answered) to put him to an
earnest trial of the truth of his own heart, to his further comfort therein;
the which no doubt, our Savior saw to be very necessary, and also very
profitable for him and for us, and for all his fellow disciples with him.



To the end that upon the threefold sifting and trying of his heart; and from
his threefold protestation of his unfeigned love, as in the sight of God, whom
he knew to be privy to the work of his own grace therein: he might have the
more comfortable assurance of the truth, both of hi^ former repentance,
touching his threefold denial; and also of his present purpose, to cleave more
firmly and constantly to our Savior, then he had done before.

Explication
To this end in deed, it was both very necessary, and also very profitable to
Peter, and to us also from his example. For if he had not been notably
confirmed, against the guiltines of his former revolt: the devil would have
had great advantage, to discourage him in time of tentation, as if he above
all other had been unmeet to be an Apostles; seeing he had so shamefully
denied his Master. Like also as if Paul had not been in like special manner
called and assured; the guiltiness of his former persecuting of our Savior in
his Saints, which he often lamenteth: it would have been an exceeding
discouragement unto him, etc. Neither are we to doubt, but that our Savior
gave Peter grace to make very good use of it, so long as he lived. Yea, and
even presently to see more clearly, into the unadvised hastines of his nature,
wherewithal his holy zeal was not a little mixed and stained. And this was
the reason, why he answers not to the latter part of the question of our
Savior: but modest^y bears the gentle rebuke which he gave; his own
conscience telling him, that our Savior was as dear to the other Disciples,
and namely to John his beloved disciple, as ever he was to him. And so in
deed, he might well think, and acknowledge from his heart: insomuch, as that
love is not the greatest love, which is most earnest in a sudden heat, and
then more speedily slaketh again: but that which being sound and true, is also
most constant, and therewithal most wisely ordered, etc. In which respect,
there was better proof of the love of John, then there was of Peter's love,
before this time that our Savior put him to this trial, and examination of
it: and before that Peter gave this modest answer to him. The which modesty
of Peter, in leaving the comparison, and resting in the simple protestation of
his own unfeigned love (how greatly so ever failing in due moderation) caused
our Savior also, to let fall that part of his question; and insisteth only in
the former, for a further trial of that unfeigned love, which he professed
himself to bear unto him.

Moreover, let us observe in Peter's threefold profession, and protestation of
his love; and namely, in that he appealeth unto our Savior, as unto him that
knew his heart: yea, and with this amplification the last time, that he knew
all things; let us I say observe that he therein expressly acknowledges the
Deity of our Savior. For it belongs to God only, to know the heart, and to
be privy to all things: according to that in the Prophet Jeremy. chap. 17.10.
I the Lord search the heart, and try the reins. And according to the
protestation of the Apostle Paul. 2. Cor. 11.31. God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knows that I lie not. This
therefore, being by Peter attributed to our Savior, as also the Evangelist
John says, cha. 2.24.25. Jesus knew them all, and had no need that any
should testify of man: for he knew what was in man: it proves evidently, the
Godhead of our Savior. For otherwise, though these should have ascribed thus
much unto him: he would never have assumed and taken it unto himself, if he
had not been very God one with the Father.

But that we may return to the words of our Savior, in the first part of his
first speech to Peter: what is the reason, why he speaks to him after this
manner, Simon of Iona? meaning the son of Iona, as it is expressed by our
Savior, John, 1.42. Thou art Simon the son of Iona, and Math. 16. verse, 17.
Blessed art thou Simon the son of Iona, etc.



As our Savior, in his gracious wisdom; wrought the like works after his
resurrection, that he did before his death* so he used the like manner of
speaking, and even the same words; that he might the more clearly, and
familiarly, assure his disciples, that it was he, and none other, that was
risen again from the dead, and presented himself unto them.

Explication.
This was the reason of it in deed. And it proceeded of the great grace and
mercy of our Savior, in tendering the weakness of the faith of his Disciples:
yea, the weakness of us all, that there might be no cause of any scruple, or
doubt left. And that it was so as you answer; the comparison, which was a
while since made, between the first calling of Peter, James, and John, Luc. 5.
with the late confirmation of them, to the execution of the duties of the same
their calling, to be fishers of men, by a like miracle: may give to understand.
Likewise, it may appear by his strange and sudden coming to his disciples,
walking upon the Sea, before his death, when they thought it had been a
Spirit: compared with his sudden and miraculous coming to them, after his
resurrection, the doors being fast shut, at what time they were likewise
troubled with the same fearful thought.

Thus we may perceive that there was great likeness of his actions, both before
and after his resurrection. And touching the likeness of his speeches, if we
call to mind that which we have heard out of S. Luk, chap. 24.44. it may serve
well to that purpose. These (says our Savior) are the words which I spoke
unto you, while I was yet with you. And for one special instance, what need
we go any further, then to our present text? For as our Savior, at the first
calling of Peter, did give him a taste of his divine knowledge; in that speaking
to him (being yet a mere stranger, in all humane respects) he calls him by
his own name, and from the name of his father, saying, Thou art Simon, the
Son of Iona: thou shall be called Cephas, which (as the Evangelist John
adds) is by interpretation, a stone: so now, when our Savior will confirm
his calling unto him; he speaks in the like manner, Simon the son of Iona,
etc. And in the next part of his speech; like as he had been much before, in
describing himself to be the only chief, and universal Shepherd of the
Sheep, John. 10. so here in this text, he charge Peter to use all
diligence, for his part, to feed his sheep, as a special fruit and
confirmation of his love to him. But of this more anon. In the mean season,
concerning this first part of the speech of our Savior to Peter: are we to
understand it so spoken to Peter, as it did properly belong to him; and was of
no use to the rest of the disciples?

We may not think so; but that our Savior at this time, (as at many other
times) did most prudently take the occasion from Peter's infirmity, to admonish
all the rest of their duty.

Explication
We are so to understand our Savior in deed. Yea, not only, as minding to
give the Disciples present, their admonition; both Thomas, and James, and John,
and the rest with them: but also to instruct all ministers of the Gospel of
Christ, in their duty, to the end of the world. Yea, and all Christians
likewise; in that all stand in like manner bound, to love our Savior Christ
most dearly. For love is that, which must carry all, through fire and water,
for Christ his sake and his Gospel. No water can quench true love: neither can
any fire consume and wast it. But if there be not true love burning in us,
toward our Savior; as a fruit of the faith and persuasion of his love toward
us, according to that of the Apostle Paul, The love of Christ constrains us,
2. Cor. 5.14. then, every small thing, whether profit, or pleasure, or fear
and danger, will either draw or drive us away, from the profession and
obedience of his most blessed name. We have all great need therefore, to
remember the general admonition of our Savior to all of us, answerable to
this of Peter: He that loves Father or mother more then me, is not worthy of
me. And he that loves son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me.
etc. Math. 10.37. etc. The necessity of which love, yea even of this
matchless love, due to our Savior; he amplifieth more vehemently, Luc.
14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not his Father, etc. yea and his own
life also, he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever bears not his cross, and
comes after me, he cannot be my disciple. We have need also, to think
often, of that most zealous and worthy decree of the Apostle Paul. 1. Corinthians.
16. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be had in execration,
etc. For surely he is in a cursed estate, he is even a wretched person,
whosoever he be, that will not love the most glorious son of God: who left
his glory after a sort, and abased himself most low in our nature, to bear
our infirmities, and to suffer the punishment due to our sins, that we might
be delivered from eternal death; and made partakers of eternal glory, etc.

Now therefore, seeing the love of Christ, yea a peerless love toward him,
is so necessarily to be in every Christian; we may justly learn from this
trial, and examination, which our Savior puts Peter unto: that it is
necessary, that every one of us should very earnestly try and examine our
selves, whether his love be in truth in us or no. For verily, if we do not,
upon earnest examining of our hearts in the sight of God, find it to be
planted there (his Spirit bearing witness with our spirits that it is so) yea
so, that we can comfortably appeal to the Lord our God and Savior himself,
as Peter did; that he knows that we love him: otherwise, I say, it is
certain, that there is no true love in us toward him. We must try and
examine our selves, concerning our love to Christ, as the Apostle Paul tells
us, that every Christian must try his faith in Christ, 2. Cor. 13.5. Prove your
selves whether ye are in the faith: examine your selves: know ye not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in ye except ye be reprobates?

The reasons why we are thus to try our selves, are principally two. First,
because there is naturally in every one of us, too great looseness and
negligence, touching the matters of the Kingdom of GOD, and of our own souls
and salvation: as it is evident by the common speeches of all. Who though their
own consciences convict the^; that the hour is to come, that ever they
seriously settled their hearts to inquire and search after these things: yet
they will readily and boldly say, they are sure of their salvation; and that
they love God with all their heart, and that it were pity that any should
live, that love not Christ, etc. Thus every man is ready to give forth good
words. But love in words only, and from the teeth outward, as we say; is
condemned betwixt man and man: and therefore the precept is given, Let us not
love in word, neither in tongue only, but in deed, and in truth. 1. Ioh.
3.18. Much less may we think, that the Lord will regard bare words, how
near so ever the mouth draws toward him: when the heart is far from him,
as he complains by his holy Prophet. Isai. 29.13. Matthew. 15.7. etc. Lest
therefore this general loosenes and negligence should deceive us: it is
necessary, that every wise Christian, do take a more careful course.
Secondly, it is necessary, that we try our hearts, concerning our love to our
Savior; because there is a most hidden deceitfulness in every man's heart, to
think that much good is in it, which is not in truth: and that it is free from
much evil which it is tainted withal; until it be chased away by this
diligent inquisition, and by our putting of our selves as it were upon the
rack. Yea rather, until we, distrusting our own trial as being partial
therein, do after the example of David, entreat the Lord, (who only does
truly try the heart, and searches the reins, Ier. 17.10. as was alleged a
while since) that it would please him to try us; and both to make known unto
us that which is amiss, and also to testify what the work of his own holy
and secret grace is in us: according to that, Psalm. 26.1.2. etc. and Psalm. 139
verses, 23.24. Try me O God, and know mine heart: prove me and know my
thoughts, And consider if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead thou
me in the way for ever.

And although the Lord do at any time try us, by laying his word to our
consciences: according to that of the Prophet Isai. chap. 28.17. Judgment also
will I lay to the rule, and righteousness to the balance, etc. And Exodus ^0.
verse, 20. or by any affliction, as Deuteronomy. 8.2. or by any of his righteous
servants, Psalm. 141.5. yea, or though it should be by an adversary. 2. Sam.
16.1^.12. We are to take heed, that we be not therefore pettish and froward
against the Lord, after the manner of the wicked: but that we be sorry with
Peter, to remember that we have given the Lord just cause, to call us to so
narrow a reckoning. Neither are we to think, this to be contrary, to the
Lords most free grace and abundant mercy, so comfortably described, Psalm. 103
8. etc. Ier. 31.33.34. Micah. 7.18.19. and in many other places. God does never
call to his own mind, or bring the sins of his children, to their
remembrance, in his wrath; and with a purpose to take vengeance of them: but
only in mercy to better their repentance, and to stay them from further
sinning, even from the remembrance of his former mercies, in forgiving their
sins. Thus our Savior dealt with Peter. And the same course of the Lords
dealing, is very good for every one of us. For as it is truly said, concerning
the beneficence of one man to another; that he which gives the benefit should
forget it, but that he which receives it, should hold it in steadfast memory:
so though the Lord do for ever forgive our sins; and utterly forgets to take
vengeance of us for the^: yet we ought never to forget, neither how infinite
ways we have offended him; nor how great his mercy has been, and is
continually unto us in forgiving and forgetting the same our innumerable sins
and offenses.

Finally, from that modesty which Peter shows, in refusing to prefer
himself, before his brethren: let us also learn, not to put forth our selves
too far (as it were beyond our line) through any inconsiderate rashness, or
show of boasting, either in word or deed: but wisely and discreetly keep our
selves, within that measure of grace, which God himself has measured to every
of us: laboring always after inward truth, and not after outward show and
appearance, in giving honor going before all other, as much as we may in
truth attain unto.

Thus much concerning the first part of the first speech of our Savior Christ
to Peter; particularly directed to him indeed, but not uttered for his cause
only: but that all might in him receive their necessary instruction and
admonition, as was before truly affirmed.

Let us now come to the second part of the same speech, which is this, Feed my
Lambs, and again, Feed my sheep, Feed my sheep. The which words, (as has
been already observed) do contain a most notable charge and direction to
Peter, in that he was ordained to be an Apostle and Preacher of the Gospel:
how he should both best try his own love, toward our Savior Christ, to the
peace of his conscience, in the sight of God: and also best declare his love to
the glory of God, and profit of his Church and people, as was touched before.
And therein also, our Savior does by a similitude or comparison, taken from
the sheep and lambs of the flock, describe the properties of those, that be
the true members of his Church, and dutiful hearers of his word, etc. So that
the due consideration of these words, will be no less profitable both to
Ministers and Preachers of the word, and also to the rest of the people of God,
then the former were: and therefore let us in the name of Christ, with like
diligence, both inquire, and also harken unto it.



First, in them all jointly, Feed my Lambs, and then again, and again, Feed
my sheep, Feed my sheep verses 15.16.

Secondly, in a particular consideration of these words, lambs and sheep.

Explication.
You answer well. But before we come to the interpretation of these words, two
things are very requisite, to be presupposed of us, as you have been taught.



The first (as I remember I heard you preach) is, that our Savior is the only
chief Shepherd of the sheep; yea both of all his Ministers (the sheepheards
which he appoints over his flock) and also of all the sheep, over whom they
are set. For even the sheepheards themselves, are sheep, in regard of the
sovereign authority and universal watch of Christ.

Explication
The second is, that Peter is in special manner authorized by our Savior, to
be unto him, among the rest, one principal shepherd of his flock.

You remember well. And it may justly be affirmed, that these things are very
meet to be well weighed of us: before we come to the words themselves.

First therefore, that our Savior Christ is the only chief Shepherd of the
sheep, etc. according to your answer: it is evident, both by the testimony of
our Savior himself, before his death; and of the Apostle Peter, after our
Savior his ascension. By the testimony of our Savior himself, as we read
John chap. 10. verses 10.16. I am the good shepherd, etc. Other sheep also
have I, which are not of this fold; them also must I bring, and they shall
hear my voice: and there shall be one sheepfolde* and one shepherd. And here
in this our text, our Savior calls the sheep, his sheep, and the lambs,
his lambs, which he charge Peter to feed. Read also Matthew. 25.31. All
Nations shall be gathered before him, and he will separate them one from
another, as the shepherd seperateth his sheep from the goats, etc. And thus
are, and shall be fulfilled, the holy prophesies, Isa. 40.11. He shall feed
his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and
carry them in his bosom, and feed them with young. And Ezech. 34.23. I will
set up a shepherd over them, says the Lord, and he shall feed them, even
my servant David, he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd. And I
the Lord will be their God, and my servant David shall be the Prince among
them. I the Lord have spoken it. Thus by the testimony of our Savior himself,
according to these, and such other prophesies, he alone is the chief
Shepherd of the sheep. The Apostle Peter, to whom he spoke, as we read in
our present text; acknowledges and witnesses the same. 1. Pet. 5.4. When the
chief shepherd shall appear, ye (says the Apostle, speaking to the
Ministers of the word) shall receive an incorruptible crown of glory. And in
the same sense, he is called the great shepherd of the sheep. Heb. 13.20.
yea so, (as was answered) that the sheepheards themselves, are his sheep:
according to that which our Savior himself alleges out of the prophecy of
Zechariah, and applies to those whom he had chosen to be sheepheards of his
flock, I will smite the shepherd: that is, Christ the great shepherd, and
the sheep of the flock shall be scattered. Mat. 26.31. By all which
testimonies of the holy scripture, it is evident that our Savior Christ is so
the chief shepherd, as none can be, no not in any ministerial service. For
no creature can keep so universal, and so continual a watch, as that charge
requires. Neither is any able to stand under the infinite weight and burden
of it. He alone that neither sleeps nor slumbereth, must be this watchman:
and he only, that neither faints nor fails, must bear this charge. That
is to say, such a one, and no other, must be this watchman and shepherd, who
is not only man, but also very God: even that God, who will not give his glory
to any other. Neither is it meet, neither may it be attributed to any
creature, without blasphemy against the Creator and redeemer. We conclude
therefore, touching the first point of the answer: that our Savior only, has
an incommunicable sovereignty over the whole flock.

Nevertheless, (as it is answered in the second place) our Savior has his
ministerial sheepheards, and servants, to attend, and want upon this flock:
to wit, all the faithful Ministers of the word; among whom the Apostles of our
Savior, were the chief, in respect of certain prerogatives which they had
above other: and among them, our Savior advanced Peter to be one, whom he did
(by virtue of his charge committed to him together with the rest) authorize in
special manner, to be one of his principal sheepheards, to help feed his
flock.

Feed thou my lambs, Feed thou my sheep, Feed thou my sheep?

Our Savior did in this gracious manner, restore the office of Apostleship,
from the which he had deserved to be cut of, by his threefold denial of him.

First, for Peter's own particular comfort, and assurance of his calling,
against all fears and doubts which might assail his mind.

Secondly for the public credit and authority of his Apostleship, in the
Churches of Christ, to the end of the world: notwithstanding his former most
grievous and uncomfortable fall.

Finally, that our Savior might the more lively, and significantly express
unto him, that he would account his love and care of feeding his flock, so
much as lay in him, to be the most singular fruit of that love, which he did
profess himself to bear unto him.

Explication.
For these causes indeed, did our Savior thus often repeat these words, even
to make the matter more emphatical, as we use to speak: as if our Savior had
spoken as we may say, in the superlatiue degree. I will account this the most
excellent proof of thy love, that thou can show me: it shall be the
greatest credit in the midst of my Church and flock: and it shall yield
thee the most sweet and comfortable peace, to thy conscience, (in the
assurance of thy calling to this ministry, yea to thy eternal salvation)
that may be. And herein also, let us well observe to our comfort, the singular
care which our Savior has over the souls of his people; in that he will not
account, either Peter, or any other Pastor, and Minister of his word, to love
him: if they have not great care to further their salvation. These things are
so evident in themselves, that we need not stand to seek any further proof.

Now let us come to the meaning of the words which our Savior uses: first,
for Peter's feeding, then of his own lambs and sheep.



An. It is a word borrowed from the name of the sheepheards of the field, whose
office (specially in the East countries, of the which our Savior speaks) is
to guide their flocks unto the best pastures that may be found, in the more
barren and waste grounds, or desert places and wildernesses, appointed for
sheepwalkes: and to watch over them, lest they should be devoured of wild
beasts, (such as are the wolf, and the lion, or such like) either by night or
by day: and to do all other things necessary and meet for the preservation of
them, to the uttermost of their skill and power, to their Masters advantage and
profit.

Explication
It is true, as may be plentifully seen in the holy scriptures: in the stories
whereof, much is written of these kind of sheepheards, and of that singular
care, watchfulness, painfulnesse, wisdom, and many other pastoral virtues,
which they have used this way. And the rather, because the holy Patriarks of
the Israelites, (the peculiar people and flock of God) were partly sheepheards
to the behoof of others, and partly owners of flocks themselves. So we read
of Abraham and Lot of Isaac and Iaakob, and of his sons. Of whom, Iaakob is
described for the most wise and painful in this kind: first, as a servant to
his unkind uncle Laban; and afterward for himself, as we may see briefly, by
one or two testimonies, (that we stay not over long in this discourse) namely,
Genesis 31.38, 42. This twenty years (says Iaakob to his uncle) I have been
with thee: thine owes and thy goats have not cast their young, and the rams
of thy flock have I not eaten. Whatsoever was torn (of beasts) I brought it
not unto thee, but I made it good my self; of my hand did thou require it,
were it stolen by day, or stolen by night. I was in the day consumed with
heat, and with frost in the night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes. Thus
have I been twenty years in thine house, and served thee fourteen years
for thy two daughters, and six years for thy sheep, and thou have changed my
wages ten times. Except the God of my Father, the God of Abraham, and the fear
of Isaac, had been with me; surely thou had sent me away now empty: but
God beheld my tribulation, and the labor of mine hands, and rebuked thee
yester night.

Thus much for a proof of the painfulnesse of Iaakob. And touching his
wisdom and discretion, in the ordering of his cattle, read chap. 33. verses
13, 14. where Iaakob answers his brother Esau thus. My Lord knows, that the
children are tender, and the ewes and kine are with young under my hand, and if
they should ouer-driue them one day, all the flock would die Let now my Lord
go before his servant, and I will drive softly, according to the pase of the
cattle, which is before me, etc. Moses and Aaron were sheepheards also: Moses
to Iethro his father in law, Exodus 3.1. And Aaron among his own people. For
their trade in Egypt, as well as before, was to keep sheep, Genesis 46.32.34.
and Exodus 10.24.26. and chapter 12.31, 32. But afterward, God made both Moses and
Aaron, sheepheards and leaders of his people: as Psalm. 77.20. Thou did
lead thy people like sheep by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

Likewise, David in his youth, kept his fathers sheep; and was strengthened of
God, to kill both a Lion and a Bear, in the defense of his flock, 1* Sam.
17.34.36. And afterward, God set him up to be a sheepeheard of his people:
according to that which we read, 2. Sam. chap. 5. verse 2. and Psalm. 78. verse.
70.72. He chose David also his servant, and took him from the sheepefoldes.
Even from behind the ewes with young, brought he him, to feed his people in
Iaakob, and his inheritance in Israel. So he fed them according to the
simplicity of his heart, and guided them by the direction of his hands. That
is, he governed them most wisely. For the hand does usually note
administration or government: as the like speech shows in the end of the
former Psalm repeated even now, and is to be observed in many other places.

Moreover, Luke chap. 2.8 it is said of the sheepheards, to whom the Angels:
^ppeared at the birth of our Savior: that they were in the field keeping watch
by night, because of their flock.

Hence it is, (I mean from such singular examples, of wise, painful, and
every way excellent sheepheards in that kind) that it has pleased God in his
divine wisdom, to call all sorts of Governors, whose ministry ought to be
by his ordinance, to rule and govern his people wisely and faithfully,
(whether civil Princes and Rulers, or Ecclesiastical Governors and guides)
by the name of sheepheards. As Isaiah 44.28. The Lord says to Cyrus, thou art
my shepherd, etc. and 2. Sam. 24.17. O (says David) I have sinned, etc. but
these sheep what have they done? though most what, God gives this name to
those that have the care of souls, most properly and most immediately
committed unto them: and accordingly, the dispensation of the holy things of
God, word and sacraments, prayer, etc. In which respect, the name of a Pastor
is more restrictiuely appropriated unto Ministers of the word in the new
Testament. And as touching the prophesies of the old Testament: they do in
this behalf specially concern the spiritual government of our Savior Christ.

Now therefore in a certain proportion: whatsoever duties, together with the
wise, careful, and diligent performance of them; are requisite and necessary,
for the spiritual guiding and directing of men's souls to the glory of God,
and to the benefit and salvation of his people: all are comprehended under this
word of Feeding.



Publicly, they are in preaching of the word and Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, prayer, administration of the sacraments, and spiritual censures of
the Church: all as may stand best with the public welfare of the Churches or
Congregations: according to the ordinance of Christ himself, the chief
shepherd of the whole flock.

Privately private and particular instructions, prayers, admonitions, rebukes,
or comforts, as the necessity of every member of the Church and Congregation
requires, either in sickness or in health: and as may best further them both,
to enjoy the benefit of the public ministry, here in this life, so long as
they live: and also to attain to the kingdom of heaven for ever, after they
are dead.

Explication
It is very true. All these are the duties of the Ministers of the word: whether
Apostles, Prophets, or Evangelists, for their time; or those that ordinarily
bear the names of Bishops, Pastors, and Teachers, to the end of the world. Of
the which duties, we cannot stand to treat particularly, at this time: save
only, so far as we may perceive, that they are all comprehended under this
word of Feeding. To this purpose* we may not unfitly observe, that the
Evangelist in reporting the intent of our Savior: does not only in the first
place, use the word bosco, which is of more strict signification, concerning
bodily food, or as we may say, the provision and allowance of fodder for
cattle: but also in the second and third repetition, he uses the word
(poimaino) which is more generally applied in the Greek language, to all care
and wise skill of ruling and governing of cattle, or people, or any other
thing. For they do not only call those that keep sheep Poimenes probaton,
but also their Princes and Rulers, Poimenes laon: yea and Wagoners Poimenes
ochon: that is the rulers or guiders of wagons or chariots, etc. And so in the
old testament, the Lord does in this argument, not only use the word rahha,
properly signifying to feed cattle in pasture: but also the word nacha, to
lead or guide: yea many other words, to show that he comprehends, under that
word Rahha, to feed, all other duties of a good shepherd: and therein
consequently, that manifold wisdom, and diligence, that the Ministers of his
word are to use in the spiritual governing of his people. This may easily
appear, by gathering together a few testimonies, out of the holy Prophets. And
that, either where their office is described, and commended: or where the
neglect of the good duties, and practices of the contrary evils and vices are
reproved.

First therefore, t^uching the description of their office: we read, Ier.
3.15. I will give you Pastors Rohhim (says the Lord) according to mine heart,
which shall feed you ue rahhu eth chem, with knowledge and understanding. And
chap. 23 verse 3.4. I will gather the remnant of my sheep, out of all
countries, whether I had driven them, and I will bring them again to their
foldes, and they shall grow and increase. And I will set up Sheepheards over
them, which shall feed them: and they shall dread no more, nor be afraid,
neither shall any of them be lacking, says the Lord. Yea the Lord himself,
he does in his own person, describe the office of a good shepherd, Ezekiel
chap. 34. verses 11, etc. saying, Behold, I will search my sheep, and seek
them out. As a shepherd searches out his flock, when he has been among
his sheep that are scattered, so will I seek out my sheep, and I will
deliu^r them out of all places, where they have been scattered, in the clowdie
and dark day, and I will bring them out from the people, etc. I will feed
them in a good pasture, etc. where they shall lie in a good fold, etc. I will
seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and I
will bind up that which was broken, and I will strengthen the weak, etc. Thus
the Lord, in his own person, describes the office of a good shepherd.

But it may be said, who can do as the Lord says he will do? It is true,
none can do so. Nevertheless, he shows whereunto every faithful Pastor
and Minister of his word must aim, in his whole ministry: in such a
proportion as may answer to their commission, whereof we have heard before;
and to the necessity of the souls of those, over whom they are set: as it is
more plainly to be gathered from the description of the preaching of our
Savior Christ; who is, (as has already been declared) the one only chief
sheepeheard of the sheep. Luke 4, 18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because he has anointed me, that I should preach the Gospel to the poor:
he has sent me that I should heal the broken hearted, that I should preach
deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, that I
should set at liberty them that are bruised. And that I should preach the
acceptable year of the Lord. This kind of feeding, is that which every Pastor
of every flock of Christ, ought to perform toward their flock: according to
that charge of the Apostle Paul, in the name of the Lord, Acts chap. 20. verse
28. Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock, whereof the holy Ghost
has made ye overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased
with his own blood. Of the which feeding, he does at the same time, make
himself a pattern and example unto them: in that he kept nothing back, but
had showed them all the counsel of God, etc. Not ceasing to warn every one,
both night and day, with tears, etc. In regard also of which feeding, by the
preaching of the word: the word it self, in the preaching of it, is compared
to milk for babes, and to stronger meat for those that be of riper years. 1.
Pet. chap. 2, verses 1.2. Heb. chap. 5. verses 12.14. And in this respect, the
Apostle Peter himself, (being made careful of this kind of spiritual
feeding, by the admonition and charge of our Savior Christ) he does afterward
admonish all other in the name of Christ to do the like: as we read in the 1.
Epistle, chap. 5. verses 1, 2, etc. The Elders which are among ye (says he) I
beseech, which am also an Elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ,
and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed, Feed the flock of
God which depends upon you, caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly:
not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind. Not as though ye were Lords over
Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the flock.

Thus, by the description of the holy and commendable duties of the Pastors
office; we may perceive, what that feeding is, which our Savior speaks of,
in our text to Peter: even to Peter himself, who well understood it, being a
most faithful interpreter of the meaning of his Master.

The same, (as was said) may likewise be perceived, from the reproves of
those sheepheards, that either have neglected these good duties of Feeding; or
practiced the contray vices.

Let us therefore consider of a few places, where this is laid forth unto us.
And first, let us turn to the 56. chapter of Isaiah. verse 11. where the holy
Prophet reprooueth the sheepheards of Israel: that is, the Priests of the Law,
( whose lips ought to have preserved knowledge, so as the Law might have
been sought at their mouth, seeing they were the Messengers of the Lord of
Hosts. chapter 2. verse 7.) the Prophet Isaiah reproves them (I say) for that
they were sheepheards, yet they regarded not to teach the people; that is, to
feed them with the food of the holy word of God: as Tremellius and Iunius do
well translate the same: but every one (as the Prophet charge them) followed
his own intemperancie and greedy covetousness, etc. These sheepeheards
(says the Prophet) cannot cause to understand (Lo iadhgnu hauin) nesciunt
docere, they know not (or regard not) to teach. They feed themselves, and not
the flock. Likewise Ezechiel, chapter 34. verses 2.4. Son of man (says the
Lord) prophecy against the sheepheards of Israel, that feed themselves:
should not the sheepheards feed the flock? Ye eat the fat, and clothe ye
with the wool: ye kill them that are feade, but ye feed not the sheep. The
weak have ye not strengthened: the sick have ye not healed, neither have
ye bound up the broken, nor brought again that which was driven away, neither
have ye sought that which was lost, but with cruelty and with rigor have ye
ruled them. Like to that, which the Lord speaks by Jeremy the Prophet, in his
5. chapter verse 31. The Prophets, (that is, the false Prophets) prophecy
lies, and the Priests by their hand; that is, through them, (or, by their
corrupt teaching) bear rule: as before. Though it be otherwise in the common
translation, receive gifts: yet this does most fitly agree.

And therefore, like as the Lord by Ezekiel had pronounced the curse against
them: so does he likewise by his Prophet Jeremiah, chapter 23. verses 1, 2.
saying, Woe be unto the Pastors, that destroy and scatter the sheep of my
pasture, says the Lord. Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel, unto the
Pastors that feed my people, ye have scattered my flock and thrust them out,
and have not visited them: behold I will visit you for the wickedness of
your works, says the Lord. Read also Zechariah, chapter 11. verse 5. Their
own sheepheards spare them not. And verse 16. The foolish shepherd is
described as before, not to look for that which is lost, nor to seek the
young one, (Nagnar) (or tender Lamb) nor to heal that which is hurt, nor to
feed that which stands up: or rather, (nor to carry that which draggeth
behind, portare restitantem, the Hebrewe words are (hannitsabah lo iecalcel.)
For though the Verb Col, or Cul, is translated to sustain and uphold by
food: and so the quadrate, (Cci^cal) as Genesis, chapter 50. verse 21. and 1.
Kings, chapter 4. verses 7.^7. Yet it is in a more general signification, to
sustain or uphold, and bear up every way: as Psalm 55. verse. 22. where it
is opposed to falling down, or sinking under the burden. And in this place,
(insomuch as it is joined with another word, noting restinesse or
vnwilsomenesse to go forward with the rest of the flock) it may be best
taken for sustentation by bearing or carrying, as Tremellius and Iunius do
translate it. And then the Prophet proceeding, says further, that the foolish
and unconscionable Sheepeheard, eats the flesh of the more fat sheep, and
teareth the claws of the other in pieces: to wit, of those that are not so
willing to go forward as the rest; by dragging of them by their horns, etc.
Whereupon, (in a holy indignation, against such cruel and negligent
sheepheards) he cries out, verse 17. O idol Shepherd, (or thus, O thou my
sheepeheard of no value) that leaves the flock: the sword shall be upon his
arm, and upon his right eye. His arm shall be clean dried up, and his right
eye shall be utterly darkened.

Thus, by the reproof of wicked sheepheards; in whom is condemned all
voluptuousness, covetousness, slothfulness, and rigor, with other such
vices, answerable to that contrary charge of our Savior, Matthew. chapter 20.
verses 25, 28. and Luke, chapter 22. verses 25.27. and of Peter, 1. Epistle
chap. 5. verse 3. as was alleged but a while since: we may perceive what be
the virtues and duties of a good sheepeheard of our Savior Christ; even
according to the example of the Apostle Paul, and other good servants of God,
whom he points out unto us. 1. Thessal. chap. 2. verses 4.12. For though the
good sheepeheard may eat of the milk of the flock, 1. Cor. chap. 9. verse 7.
yet he will in no wise cruelly pluck off their skins, or couetously fleece
them, etc. That is, he will have care by no means to hinder, but every way to
further the salvation of their souls, as much as he may.

Hitherto of the second part of the first speech of our Savior to Peter after
dinner, in this his seventh appearance; all the words being jointly considered,
Feed my lambs, Feed my sheep, Feed my sheep. The which, as has been
declared, (and that so much the more at large; by reason of the excellency of
the matter) do contain both a charge concerning the duties belonging to
Peter's calling of the Apostleship: and also a direction or rule, whereby both
he and all other Ministers of the word, are to try and approve their unfeigned
love to our Savior: both in the sight of God, and of his Church, as well to his
glory, as to the peace of their own consciences.

Now let us come to the more particular consideration of the other words: lambs
and sheep.



We may under this similitude, or comparison, well observe, what manner of
ones they are, whosoever be the true members of the flock and Church of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Explication
We may do so indeed: and that both in respect of their own nature: and also
in respect of the gracious work of our Savior, in their hearts, by his holy
Spirit.



It teaches us, that they are by nature, even like to all other of the lost
posterity of mankind: apt to err and go astray, timorous and fearful to
do well subject to extreme peril and danger, and yet most secure and
shiftlesse to prevent or escape the same.

Explication and proof.
Such verily are we all by nature: wise to do evil, but to do well we have
no knowledge, Ier. 4.22. bold as lions to commit wickedness, Isai. 11. but of
no courage for the truth, Ier. 9.3. We may justly say as the Prophet Isaiah
teaches us, Isai. 53.6. All we like sheep have gone astray: we have every one
turned to his own way, etc. The poor sheep is not more subject to the wolf,
bear, and the lion: yea and to wilder it self in the most desolate
wilderness, without all food and pasture, to the famishing of themselves,
then we are to the devil, and his wicked, subtle and cruel instruments, here
in this world. And yet most secure are we, until the Lord by his holy word and
spirit, make us wary and watchful: according to that, 1. Pet. 5. ver. 8.9.
yea the children of God, though they watch as well as they can, yet at unawares,
they cast themselves into dangers: as Psalm. 119. verse 176. I have gone astray
like a lost sheep: seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy commandments.

Nevertheless, there is a great difference, betwixt that which they are by
nature, and that which they are by grace.



In this respect, our Savior describes his sheep, to be such as hear his
voice, and follow after him. For (as he says) they know the Sheepheards
voice. Neither will they follow a stranger, but fly from him: for they know
not, that is, they regard not the voice of strangers.

Explicati. So indeed does our Savior teach us, John chap. 10. verses 4.5.
The shepherd of the sheep goes before them, and they follow him: for they
know his voice, etc. And verses 27, 28. My sheep hear my voice, and I know
them and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. My father which
gave them me, is greater then all, and none is able to take them out of my
fathers hand. I and my father are one.

Hereunto agrees the doctrine of the Apostle Peter, as he had learned from
this charge of our Savior, in that he says to the Jews, no other thing but
that which agrees to us all, Ye were as sheep going astray: but ye are now
returned unto the shepherd and Bishop of your souls. 1. Epistle chap. 2.
verse 25. O therefore, most blessed is the estate of all such, as be in the
fold of our Lord Jesus Christ, and have good and faithful sheepheards: that
they may be continually fed and guided, and governed by them in his name. None
of them need to be in fear, of being in the habit of the sheep, because of
the wolf. It is the only safety of the people of God, to be first inwardly
and in truth; and then to show themselves outwardly, and in open profession, to
be of the sheepfold of Christ, yea though they should be in the midst of
woolues: according as our Savior told his Disciples, that he sent them forth
as it were in the midst of woolues. And therefore in this case it is worthily
to be rejected, as a wicked proverb, He that shows himself a sheep makes
himself a prey for the woolfe. For our Savior himself will watch over them,
and feed and defend them continually. And seeing all do stand in need of
continual feeding and guiding; yea even by such as be like to themselves,
though indewed with more especial grace to that end: behold our Savior has
appointed some to be Pastors and Teachers, to the end of the world. Wherefore
also, hence it appears, that all that be of the flock of Christ, ought to
show themselves teachable, and tractable, in respect of that submission which
they owe to their sheepheards; and peaceable and harmless among themselves:
yea, and to bring forth much fruit of godliness, to the honor and praise of
God, (according to the nature of the sheep of the field, which (being well
tended and guided) are very profitable to the Master of the flock) as they
that be humbled and meekened by the Spirit of God: according to that Isai.
chap. 11. verses 6, etc. The woolfe shall dwell with the lamb, etc. And verse
9. None shall hurt nor destroy in all the mountain of my holiness: for the
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that cover the
sea: that is, the deep gulf of the Sea.

Let us therefore accordingly dispose our selves, or rather seek to God for
his grace, that we may with comfort profess our selves, the flock of the
Shepherd of Israel: Psalm 79. verse 13. and Psalm. 80. verse 1. and 100.3.
And that the Lord may say unto us, ye my sheep, the sheep of my pasture, are
men, and I am your God, says the Lord God. Ezech. chap. 34. verse 31. And thus
our Savior Christ, describing the duties of all Pastors and Sheepeheards, the
Ministers of his holy word, whether Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, in
their more large fields and flocks, or ordinary Pastors in their more limited
walks: he does therewithal give all the sheep of his flocks to understand,
as well one as other, what belongs to their duties, both toward himself
first; and then also toward those whom he sets over them: and likewise even
among themselves one to another.

feed my lambs, feed my sheep?

To show, that as there will be always in his flock, some more weak and
tender then the rest; yea and even the very strongest also, to have their
infirmities, though more then other; of the which he himself has a most
discreet and tender care: so he requires, that all his Ministers, have a like
tender and discreet regard, putting difference betwixt lamb and sheep, yea
betwixt lamb and lamb, and sheep and sheep; that all may be preserved, and
cherished, to the use of their Master and Lord.

This, no doubt* was the meaning and purpose of our Savior, in putting this
distinction. Neither is it to be neglected, that he makes mention of the Lambs
first, Explication
who have need to be most tendered: specially the new caned, etc. according to
the description of the duties of good Shepherds, rehearsed before. In which
respect, the Apostle Paul (as he was taught by our Savior) frames his
instructions and exhortations, both to Pastors over their flocks, and also to
all Christians among themselves, that this difference be very wisely, and
religiously observed. And namely, 1. Thessa. 5.13.14. Be at peace among your
selves. We desire you, brethren, admonish them that are unruly: comfort the
feeble minded: bear with the weak: be patient toward all men, etc. And Romans
14.1. Him that is weak in faith, receive unto you, but not for controversies
of disputations, etc. And verse, 15. If thy brother be grieved for the meat,
now walk thou not charitably: destroy not him with thy meat, for whom
Christ died. etc. And chap. 15. verse, 1. etc. We which are strong, ought to
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves. Let every man
please his neighbor in that which is good to edification. For Christ also
would not please himself, etc. And Jude in his Epistle, verse, 22.23. Have
compassion of some, putting difference: And other save with fear, pulling them
out of the fire, and hate even the garment spotted by the flesh. To speak in a
word; such care, joined with all holy wisdom, is on all hands to be used,
that as our Savior is not minded to cast away any that come unto him: so none
be caused to stumble, by any indiscreete or unkind, and unbrotherly dealing
against them; remembering always, and carefully avoiding, the fearful menace
and woe, which our Savior denounces. Matthew. 18.6.7. saying, Whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones, which believe in me, it were better for him,
that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depth of the Sea. Woe be to the world, because of offenses: for it must needs
be, that offenses shall come, but woe be to that man, by whom the offense
comes.

And to this end, it is most safe, and much better, in regard of the manifold
and great infirmities of men; and of the infinite mercy and compassion of our
Savior over poor sinners: rather to offend in a little too much mildness,
and gentleness, so far as the word and ordinances of the Lord be not profaned
and despised, then to use over rough severity: though it must needs be
confessed, that the best moderation must be labored after; even that which may
least decline, either on the right hand, or on the left; and be furthest
removed, both from all bitterness, and also from all flattery. Read Leuit.
19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly
rebuke thy neighbor, neither shall thou bear with him in his sin. And 1.
Cor. 16.14. Let all your things be done in love. And 2. Cor. 13.10.11.
Therefore write I these things, being absent, lest when I am present, I should
use sharpnes, according to the power which the Lord has given me, to
edification and not to destruction. Finally brethren, fare ye well: be
perfect: be of good comfort: be of one mind: live in peace, and the God of
peace shall be with you. A most sweet and loving farewell, for conclusion of
his most holy and Apostolical letter. Wherewith we may also well conclude, the
first speech of our Savior to Peter: which, for the excellency of it (as it
was said before) has been in either part of it, interpreted and opened the
more largely. It being (as Beza well says) Ingens sane thesaurus, long ipso
coelo, and terra, totaque presenti vita, pretiosior, qui panculis istis verbis
continetur, pasce oues meas, and pasce meos agnos. That is, It is (as says
that learned man) an exceeding great treasure, of far greater worth, then all
things in this present world, yea then the earth, and heaven it self; even
that which is contained in these very few words, Feed my sheep, and feed my
lambs. Only, this let us add heerewithall, that as these words, (in themselves
duly considered) are a most precious treasure; so we ought to esteem of them,
and every one of us, according to our places, and callings, and gifts,
answerably to use; that is, to obey the same: even as we desire to have peace
to our souls and consciences, in good assurance, that we bear true love to
our Savior (who is most worthy of all our love) and as we would comfortably
look for any salvation by him. Never forgetting, what he himself has said,
for the trial of our love toward him, If ye love me, keep my commandments.
John, 14.15. And verse, 24. He that loves me not, keeps not my words. And
chap. 13.34.35. A new commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another:
as I have loved you, that ye love one another. By this shall all men know that
ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another. For thus must Pastors love
among themselves, and thus must Pastors and their flocks love together: or
else they cannot truly love our Savior Christ. Finally, forasmuch as the Lord
has commanded, that his sheepheards should have so great a hand and business
about his flock, both lambs and sheep: people must not think their Pastors
to be busybodies, while they keep this care, and watch over them, and
perform the duties which God has commanded them. But contrariwise, in
meekenes of wisdom, they are to submit themselves, acknowledging it to be
good and profitable for them so to do. Heb. 13.17. Now all these things duly
considered, concerning the true meaning and purpose of our Savior, in this his
whole first speech to Peter: How should we think, that it could ever come into
the mind of any (not deluded by the spirit of error) that our Savior thus
admonishing Peter, to try his love toward him, because his own heart had
unadvisedly, and through vain confidence in himself, deceived him before
(thus giving him a Touchstone as it were, to try his love by, and thus
earnestly charging him to look to the duty of his office of Apostleship, even
as he would answer him concerning the trust with he committed to him, for his
part among the rest.) How I say, should we or any other think, that our
Savior should intend thereby, to make him Prince of all his Apostles, and an
universal Bishop or Pastor, in his own stead, over all the world? And the
rather may we marvel, that it should, from this speech of our Savior, come
into the heart of any, to admit any such thought: seeing when the Disciples
themselves, did not long before this, expressly ask the question (whether of
ambition alone, or also for the avoiding of further contention about the
matter, if once our Savior should determine it) and our Savior does disclaim
their question, and determines the clean contrary. And therefore also, much
more may we marvel, that any, not bewitched with love toward the mystery of
iniquity; neither inflamed with the filthy lust of spiritual fornication, to
set up the whorish Antichrist of Rome prophesied of long before: should ever
imagine from this text, that the Pope of Rome should be Peter's successor, and
hold such authority, in pretense of his right; as he at this day claims:
and which the precedent Popes, have many hundred years both vulpishly or like
Foxes claimed, and also wooluishly or like Woolues executed, directly against
Christ and his Gospel, and all his both faithful Pastors, and also every true
sheep or lamb of his flock: save only, that they do most hypocritically
and blasphemously pretend his name, to cover all their abominations withal.
But leaving them, as sufficiently unmasked, by the large and learned
disputations of the true Pastors of our Savior Christ, against this false
Antichristian Pastor and Bishop; or rather Woolfe of Rome: let us now come to
the second speech of our Savior to Peter, at the same time; as it follows in
the Evangelist John.

Thus it follows in the 18. verse. Verily, verily (says our Savior) I say
unto thee, when thou wast young, thou girdest thy self, and walkedst whether
thou would: but when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thine
hands, and another shall gird thee, and lead thee whether thou would not.

This indeed may we reckon for the second speech of our Savior to Peter after
dinner before mentioned, containing (as we see plainly) a prophecy, or as we
may call it, a prophetical advertisement to Peter, concerning his death.
Question. What may be the reason, why our Savior should thus speak to Peter,
more then to any of the rest?

As our Savior foretold Peter of his fall, as of a just punishment, which
should fall upon him for his rash and carnal confidence in his own strength:
so now, to the magnifying of his grace, and mercy to Peter; he does not only
foretell, but also therewithal promises him strength, that he shall be able
to suffer martyrdom, for the testimony of his truth.

Explication
That this was the purpose of our Savior, it is easy to be discerned, of every
advised and teachable hearer. For our Savior makes it plain, by a familiar
comparison, betwixt the time of his youth, and the last point of his age:
showing the differing estate and condition of them both. The time, and state,
or condition of his youth, he describes by two adjuncts: the one of girding
himself; to wit, after the usual manner of those Countries, wherein men used
long garments: the other of walking to what place he himself minded to go.
The last point, and condition of his age, he describes by three adiunctes, of
a contrary nature to the former. The first is; that he should reach forth his
hands: to wit, as children do, when their girdell is put about them, when they
are dressed. The second; that another should gird him: our Savior minding
thereby, another kind of girding then before (though he use the same word)
that is, such a girding, whereby executioners do bind the hands of those,
that are to be put to death: whether by the lawful and just sentence; or by
some tyrannous commandment of the Magistrate. The third; that he should be
led, whether he would not: to wit, to the place of execution. Thus I say, the
meaning of our Savior is plain, from his own words, duly and advisedly
considered. And the manner of the speech of our Savior, (being very earnest)
shows that it was to singular good purpose, that Peter should be thus
certified: and that he should earnestly consider of this matter. If we desire
any further proof, concerning the meaning of our Savior: we have the
Evangelist John, a most faithful interpreter; as it follows in the very next
words.

And this spoke he (says S. John) signifying by what death he should glorify
God.

Explication
In these words, the Evangelist makes the matter very plain. First, that our
Savior spoke concerning the death of Peter. Secondly, of his martyrdom. For by
that kind of the death of his servants, God is especially glorified, First, in
that he makes his invisible power manifest: by strengthening his weak
servants, above all humane strength; to the confusion of the adversaries of his
truth. Secondly, that thereby, he confirms the stable truth of his promises,
made to the animating of his servants, to the enduring of afflictions, yea even
of death it self, for his truths sake. Thirdly, in that the weak Christians
are hereby greatly encouraged, to persevere in the profession of the Gospel.
Finally, in that many of the persecutors themselves, are hereby converted unto
God: while they behold the invincible faith, and patience, and joy of his
servants, notwithstanding all the extremities of their sufferings. And thus
also, Peter himself taught, before he died: that God is greatly glorified by
this kind of death: 1. Ep 4 verses. 14, 15.16. On your part, God is glorified,
says he. And again, If any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed:
but let him glorify God in this behalf. But how could Peter's sufferings
glorify God, if so be (as our Savior seems to tell him) that he should be
unwilling to endure them? For it is willingness and cheerefulnes, which makes
the virtue.



In that our Savior tells Peter, that he should in his old age, be led
whether he would not: it was not the meaning of our Savior to say, he should
suffer against his will: but to give him to understand, that he should die, not
a natural, but a violent death, by the hand of the persecuting Tyrant: the
which kind of death, no man would willingly make choice of; were it not for
that love and zeal, which by the grace of God, they bear to the glory of God,
and that in such conscience of their bounden duty; that they do most justly
prefer it, ten thousand times before their own lives.

This no doubt, was the meaning of our Savior. And so does the Evangelist John
interpret the same, in that he says, that our Savior did by the comparison
which he made, signify (as we saw before) by what death he should glorify
God. For seeing Peter did glorify God by his death, (as the Evangelist John
suruiuing Peter about 30. years, even to the fourth year of Traian the
Emperor, which was 64. years after the resurrection of our Savior, as the
Ecclesiastical history does testify, he lived to know and understand) it
must be acknowledged, that he died willingly for the Lords sake. And so it
appears plainly. 2. Epist. Peter, chap. 1.13.14. And yet nevertheless,
easily may we admit, that Peter, having still the remnants of humane frailty:
did not without mighty striuings, subdue all natural unwillingness, and
whatsoever fear might cause the same.

In smaller tentations, then such as belong to the enduring of cruel death;
the flesh is apt to draw back, as the Apostle Paul plainly teaches: he even
making himself the example, saying, I do not the good thing which I would,
but the evil which I would not, that do I. Romans 7.19. And verse, 21. etc. I
find by the law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me. For I
delight in the law of God, concerning the inner man, but I see another law in
my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive to
the law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am, etc. Now
therefore if in smaller tentations, the flesh is weak: how should there not be
sense of weakness in the greatest? according to that saying of our Savior, The
spirit in deed is ready, but the flesh is weak. Yea, even according to that
which he found in himself, though infinitely differing from our weakness,
seeing there was no home-dwelling sin in his nature, as is in ours: or
rather, because his nature was perfectly holy: and yet he having humane
infirmity, though without sin, could not but, for declaration of the truth
of his humane nature, show himself unwilling to die, especially such a death
as he was to die: had he not more regarded to do the will of his heavenly
Father, more then his own, simply considered in that he was man; as his most
holy prayer shows, Father not my will, but thine be done. No marvel
therefore, though we poor frail creatures, combred with the remnants of
sin, should in the flesh find unwillingness, yea a contrary lust of the flesh
against the spirit: though through the predominant, and ouerruling grace of the
spirit, we are strengthened to rejoice, as Peter was, with his companions. Act.
5.40.41.42. And so, no doubt, did he in the spirit rejoice at his death: in
that he was counted worthy, not only to be scourged, but also to suffer death
for the name of Christ.

The consideration of this humane infirmity, even in the most holy Martyrs
mixed with sin, is very profitable for us, in diverse respects. First, to take
away all opinion of merit in their sufferings, that this honor may remain
whole and entire only to our Savior Christ, whose alone it is. Secondly, to
comfort our selves or any other whom God at any time calls to Martyrdom,
though we cannot but have experience of great infirmities, in the fiery
tentation: seeing the dearest of Gods children, have bidden the assaults of
unwilling and timorous nature. In the which respect, worthy is the saying of M.
Calvin in his Commentaries upon this Scripture; that They who imagine the
Martyrs to have had no touch of fear, do gather matter of despair, when they
themselves do begin to fear. Qui Martyrs nullo metu tactos fuisse fingunt,
desperationis materiam sumunt ex proprio metu. And again, the Martyrs could
not have triumphed over the enemies of the truth, unless they had first fought
against themselves. Non possent nisi secum pugnando, de hostibus veritatis
triumphum agere.

And now further, touching Peter: insomuch as our Savior prophesied thus of
that kind of death which he should dye: we may be sure, that it came certainly
so to pass; though we cannot give credit, to all things that are written in
Ecclesiastical stories, concerning the fulfilling thereof. Neither do the
words of our Savior, (as some have imagined) describe, and determine, that he
should be crucified. We will not therefore look much unto humane stories in
this matter; seeing we have a more certain ground, in the undoubted prophecy
of our Savior; wherein we may safely rest. By virtue whereof no doubt, though
Peter was sore maliced (as we may perceive, Act: 12.3.4.) yet as it follows
in the same chapter, he was mightily and miraculously delivered, that the word
of our Savior might take place. So then, as this prophecy of our Savior, was
a warning to Peter, whereunto he was to prepare and dispose himself at the
last: so it was as it were a comfortable charter of his life, until old age
should come upon him. And even so does the time reported of his death, in the
last year of cruel Nero show; which was about. 36. years, after that our
Savior had foretold thus much to Peter. That which our Savior vouchsafed to
declare unto Peter: is in his secret counsel known and determined concerning
every one of us, and all other beside. Let us therefore, even from hence,
comfort our selves: that our times are in his hands: whether we live or dye,
in youth or in old age, whether we dye the death of martyrdom, or otherwise:
so that we walk faithfully in his holy ways.

Thus much concerning the second speech of our Savior to Peter, we come now to
the third.



After the former speech ended (says the Evangelist John) our Savior said to
him, Follow me.

Explication
This is a short speech, but it is a speech of great weight and importance. It
appears, by the next verse, (where it is said, that Peter following our
Savior, saw John also following) that our Savior speaking these words to
Peter (follow me) turned himself, as minding to go to some other place and
to take Peter aside with him alone. Nevertheless, there is no doubt to be
made, but he minded a further thing: that is, even to teach him yet more
familiarly, the former lesson that he had given him: to wit, that as it was his
duty to follow him bodily, step by step at his commandment; so he might
consider thereby, that it was likewise his duty to be willing to follow him
(that is, as we speak to the same purpose, to be an imitator of him) in his
death, as well as in his life. Thus much briefly, concerning this third speech,
until we come to the repetition of it again, in the fourth speech, where the
meaning of our Savior is made more plain: by occasion of a question, which
Peter demands of him.



Then Peter (says Saint John) turned about and saw the Disciple, whom Jesus
loved, following; who also had leaned on his breast at supper: and said, Lord,
which is he that betrayeth thee?

21. When Peter therefore saw him, he said to Jesus, Lord what shall this man
do?

22. Jesus said to him, if I will that he tarry till I come, what is it to
thee? Follow thou me.

Explication
In these words of the holy Evangelist, we have both the last speech of our
Savior to Peter, in this his seventh appearance; and also the occasion, which
Peter gave thereunto, by a question propounded to our Savior. Yea and also the
occasion which Peter took to ask this question, to consider of.

The occasion which Peter did both give, and also take; is contained in the
former two verses. The speech of our SAVIOVR is set down in the last of these
verses. The question which Peter demanded, was concerning John the Evangelist,
in these words, But this man, what? For these are the words. His meaning was,
to desire to know, either whether our Savior would have him also to go with
him: or else, what should become of him; whether he should likewise be put to
death or no. As though he should have said, But as touching this man, what? to
wit, shall he do: or what shall he suffer? But whether of these he minded; the
one or the other: the answer of our Savior will show, that it was a curious
and an unmeet question for him so boldly to propound.

The occasion of this question was (as the Evangelist John shows) because
Peter turning himself to look back, saw John also following our Savior. It
is true that John does not set down his own name: but the description can
agree to none but to himself: as chap: 13. verse 23.24. and the 24. verse of
this 21. chapter, does plainly declare. Whence also, we may perceive one
cause, why he does thus describe himself: that is, for the credit of the
whole history of this book, against all counterfeit Gospels: like as Paul,
for the same purpose, set his hand to all his Epistles, that they might be
known to be his, and to have an Apostolical authority, Col: 4.18. and 2.
These. 3.17. The occasion of which circumspection of the Apostle, read in the
same Epistle, chapter 2. verse 2. An other cause of this description which the
Evangelist makes of himself may be this; to imply a reason, why Peter was
moved to ask this question: insomuch as he thought it strange, that our
Savior should take him alone with him now, when he was wont to call his
beloved Disciple John also; when he went a part, as we read, Mark, chap: 5.37.
and chap: 9.2. and again chap: 14.33. And thus we may see, how literally (as
was noted before) our Savior bids Peter to follow him with his bodily
feet; though he intended to teach him an other kind of following: as we shall
see further by the answer of our Savior. This answer of our Savior has two
parts. The first is a reprehension of Peter's question; the second is a
repetition of his former commandment, Follow thou me.

By the reprehension, we may easily perceive that Peter's question was curious,
and unbeseeming him for to ask: specially at this time when he ought rather to
have held his thoughts, and meditations upon the revelation and commandment
which our Savior gave him, concerning himself. And I doubt not, but that was
one cause why he took him so aside. Whereby we may justly learn this lesson:
that it is our duty to be more careful of those things that do concern our
selves, and our own duties; how we may live and dye, as God may be glorified
in us and by us: then to be curious about others, how long they shall live, or
what death they shall dye. If I will that he tarry till I come, what is it to
thee, says our Savior? we see our Savior does sharply reprove him. And
therefore also, we may easily perceive, that it is no small sin for any to be
inquisitiue to know such things, as do rather concern others then our
selves: or at such time, as we ought rather, to try our own hearts, then to be
inquisitiue about others, etc. As in the bodily warfare, every man must keep
his own rank and standing, so it must be in the spiritual warfare of the
Lord. And every man stands bound in duty, to take up his own cross, to
stand to his own lot, and to bear his own burden, etc. No doubt, the Lord
will deal graciously both in life and also in death, with every one that
puts his trust in him, and continues to walk faithfully before him. It is
the duty of every Christian to be careful over other: the magistrate and
minister of the word over the people: the master of the family over his
children and servants; and every neighbor over other, as the cause shall
require, and as their callings will bear.

But none of these cares, must be with neglect of our own duties, nor
exceeding the limits or bounds of our several callings. It must be as
master Calvin says notably well, cura and non curiositas quae nos impediat:
that is, It must be care and not curiosity, which would be hurtful to us: the
busy bodies care is neither good to himself, nor to any other. Verily, every
man well minded, shall find so much to do, to keep himself in an even
course of good duty, that he shall have little leisure to pry curiously into
the state of other, and what may afterward become of them, etc.

And therefore it is that our Savior, in the second part of his answer, does
very earnestly repeat unto Peter his former commandment, which it had been
more meet for him to have looked unto: whether we consider his bodily
attendance upon our Savior, for a short time, in his going aside; or that we
refer it to his constant imitation of him, even unto the death: or that we
refer it unto both, not only according to the letter, but also according to
the intended allegory, in such sense as the Apostle Paul says. Be ye
followers of me, as I am of Christ, 1. Cor: 11.1. And as our Savior himself
had said before, both to Peter and to the rest. He that takes not up his
cross and follows after me, is not worthy of me. He that will save his life
shall loose it, etc. Mat: 10.38.39.

And as he said at the first calling, Follow me, and I will make you fishers
of men. Wherein no doubt, our Savior did not only respect their bodily
attendance, but also the fruit thereof, in embracing and following that
instruction which they should receive from him to the fitting and furnishing of
them for his service. Touching these words. (If I will that he tarry till I
come) I know not well whether our Savior meant only until he should return
unto the rest of the eleven, after that Peter had gone aside with him for a
while: or that they are to be understood concerning John's tarrying in life, and
so coming of Christ to be extended to his coming again, at the last day:
according to that, John. 14.3. I will come again and receive you to my self.
And Act: chap: 1.11. But from either circumstance, the rebuke might well agree
to Peter. And the latter sense would amplify the rebuke. Howsoever it was,
this we are sure of, from the testimony of the Evangelist John, that albeit it
may be, that our Savior would by these words intimate, that John should
outliue Peter: yet they did utterly misunderstand the mind of our Savior,
whosoever from those words imagined, that John should never dye. For so S.
John himself gives plainly to understand: as it follows in the 23. verse,
then (says he) went this word abroad, among the brethren, that this Disciple
should not dye: yet Jesus said not to him, he shall not dye: but if I will that
he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? In which speeches there is great
difference: the one being simple and enunciatiue; the other conditional, and
upon a supposition, or putting of the case as we may say. And besides: our
Savior might well mean, of his tarying till he came again with Peter. Yet,
so far (as the Evangelist says) prevailed the conceit of John's not dying;
that some of the brethren (not ill minded) were deceived in this point. Whereby
we may well take this profitable instruction; that in our good meaning we be
very careful to understand things aright, to the end we do not mistake one
thing for another: lest we embrace an error in stead of the truth, as without
good diligence and discretion, specially in speeches of doubtful
interpretation; we may easily do. And in this point, it is strange to see, how
the devil besotted one even in this age, (as master Beza reports) who
deluded by the devil under this pretense, as it is like; feined himself to be
this Evangelist John, as if he had bin then living. But he was not unworthily
burnt for his labor; at Tolouse a city of Narbon in France, as the same Beza
says, for if he had bin suffered to live: who knows how far he being a
fantastical deceiuer, might have deluded many poor souls, under the
pretended and feined authority of John the Evangelist. But leaving all
fancies, let us inquire somewhat more diligently, into that point following our
Savior, not bodily, but spiritually, whereof he chiefly speaks to Peter:
that so we may draw to an end of those things, which belongs to this seventh
appearance of our Savior.



It consists in these two things. First in godliness of life, both toward God,
and toward all men: according to the duties of our several places, and
callings, wherein we are placed of God.

Secondly in patient bearing of the cross for the truth and Gospels sake: or
otherwise; while we walk in the ways of God, every one according to that
measure of trial, which God shall think good to lay upon us.

That this is so: first, as touching godliness of life, from an understanding,
and believing heart; it is clear, in that our Savior Christ, does not only
in respect of his doctrine, but also of his most godly life, call himself the
light of the world: as John 8.12. I am the light of this world: he that
follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.
And chap: 9.5. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world: that
is, one specially appointed, to glorify God both in word and deed, And chap:
12.35.36. Yet a little while is the light with you: walk while ye have the
light, lest darkness come upon you, for he that walks in darkness knows not
whether he goes. While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may be
the children of the light. And John, 14.6. I am the way, and the truth, and the
life. No man comes unto the father, but by me. Thus by this general metaphor
of the light, our Savior Christ, which is the only true sun of
righteousness, as the Prophet Malachie calls him: is both for doctrine, in the
most clear revelation thereof; and for example of life, in paterning out the
same doctrine; a most perfect load-starre for us all to look unto. And more
particularly, read John, 13.12.13.14.15.16. where, after that our Savior had
washed his Disciples feet, he does from his own example teach them true love,
and humility, two special grounds of godliness. And therefore he says
expressly, I have given you an example, that ye should do, even as I have
done to you. Verily, verily I say unto you. The servant is not greater then his
master, neither the Ambassador greater then he that sent him. If ye know
these things, happy are ye if ye do them. And chap: 15.9 10.11.12. As the
Father has loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye in my love. If ye shall
keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love, as I have kept my Fathers
commandments and abide in his love. These things have I spoken unto you, that
my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full. This is my
commandment that ye love one an other, as I have loved you.

But it must in no wise be neglected, that (as you answer) our Savior must be
imitated and followed, only according to the duties of our several places and
callings, wherein God has placed us: and in the common duties of
Christianity, wherein our Savior has gone before us, in most perfect care
and conscience of obedience to every commandment of the law of God. For
otherwise, the calling of our Savior Christ, in that he was anointed to be
the redeemer, iustifier, sanctifier, and everlasting Savior of the Church of
God: it was so peculiar, and proper unto him, that no creature (neither angel
or man) can follow him in one step thereof. God has made him alone, to be
wisdom, righteousness, holiness, and redemption unto us, 1. Cor: 1.30. Neither
is there any other name, either in heaven, or in earth, whereby we may be
saved. Act: 4.12. In this respect, he alone both might and could, by his divine
power, work the works of God. And although the Apostles, whom he ordained to
be the most immediate and near followers of him, in the ministration of his
divine works; yea so as our Savior promised, that they should do greater
works then he did. John, 14.12. yet they did them not in their own name, or
by their own power, as they do confess. Act: 3.12.16. but only as the
instruments and servants of Christ, appointed by himself, and enabled by the
power of faith thereunto. For as touching those, that without the calling of
our Savior presumed to attempt such miraculous works, as they wrought: they
found by miserable experience, how vain their attempt was: as we read. Act:
19.13.14.15.16. To the end therefore, we may be true imitators of our Savior
Christ: every one of us, and principally the ministers of the word and Gospel
of Christ, must look diligently to the duties of their several callings: that
so they in their places, may shine as lights to the rest: and that all
Christians after their example may walk as children of the light, every one
following other, so far as any do follo^e our Savior Christ: according to
that of the holy Apostle alleged a while since. Be ye followers of me, as I am
of Christ. The reason thereof is, for that though there be many examples of
godliness, recorded in the holy Scriptures; and many also to be seen in the
Church of God, from time to time: yet there be very few, nay rather none at
all, wherein there be not some great sins, and blemishes in their lives,
wherein they ought to be shunned and not followed. And therefore we are always
to have a principal regard to the example of all examples; even our Lord Jesus
Christ: who alone (as was noted in the beginning) is the only clear and
perfect light, both for doctrine, and life, through the whole course thereof,
in every age and condition of the same both publicly and privately, under his
parents and otherwise, as has been declared before.

Now secondly, as touching our imitating and following of our Savior Christ,
in the patient and meek enduring of the cross; that is, of every kind of
affliction, while we walk in his holy ways: though not to such ends as our
Savior suffered (in that he was a mediator betwixt God and us, to make
satisfaction for our sins, etc.) yet to declare the truth both of our obedience
to God, and also of our love to our Savior and his Church: we read first the
instruction and encouragement of our Sa: himself hereunto. Mat: 11.28.29. Come
unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. Take my yoke on
you, and learn of me, in that I am meek and lowly in heart (to wit, in
bearing affliction from the hand of God) and ye shall find rest unto your
souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light: to wit, that measure of
affliction, which God will lay upon you while ye humble your selves unto him
through faith in my name: it shall not be above that strength which he will
give you. And Ioh, 15.18. etc. If the world hate you: ye know it hated me
before you, etc. The servant is not greater then his master, etc Read the
place and mark the sundry notable reasons, which our Savior alleges, to
harten and encourage us, to endure afflictions for his sake: as has bin
heretofore declared unto you, from the same words of our Savior. Call to mind
also, that which was rehearsed before, concerning their unworthiness to have any
part in Christ: whosoever love him not more then their outward peace, or
worldly wealth, or very natural life it self. And that we are to follow our
Savior Christ in his sufferings, on the behalf of his Church, and for that
love we bear to the brethren, in desire of confirming them in the faith of the
truth, even by our sufferings for it, and that even to the death, if need
should so require: Read, Philip: 2.17.18. Yea (says the Apostle Paul) and
though I be offered up upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I am glad
and rejoice with you all. For the same cause also, be ye glad and rejoice with
me. And Collos. 1.24. Now rejoice I in my sufferings for you: and fulfill the
rest of the afflictions of Christ, in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is
the Church, etc. And more generally, the Apostle John affirms, 1. Ep: 3.16,
that insomuch as our Savior has laid down his life for us: therefore we ought
also to lay down our lives for the brethren. And herein as the Apostle Peter
says, we are partakers of Ch^ists sufferings, 1. Ep: 4.13. yea and our Savior
himself says that he accounts himself to suffer in, and with all faithful
Christians, whosoever shall suffer for his truths sake: according to that
rebuke, wherewith the soul of persecuting Saul was pierced through, Act: 9.4.
Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? In this part of imitatio^ as well as
in the former; it is meet indeed that the ministers of the word should be the
first and principal: according to the speech of our Savior directed to Peter,
Follow thou me. Nevertheless it is also the duty of every one, that is a
Christian indeed and in truth, to account it his bounden duty, to put his life
as it were in his hand, and to be willing to give it for the testimony of
Christ, trusting in the grace of Christ, that he will (if need should so
require) strengthen him unto it. If we should not profess the name of Christ,
unless only so far as it might stand with our worldly profits and pleasures;
and but upon condition, we might enjoy peace, and friends, etc. as carnal
Gospellers do indent with God: The proof of his resurrection by his eight
appearance.
what love were this to God and our Savior? This were no better then
self-love. Nay it were worse. For we should herein go about to make the will
of God, subject to our will: which were the most unseemly and unreasonable
thing in all the world. It were also in vain, yea rather a miserable thing,
for any to suffer for ill doing, or for wicked heresy, etc. For such are no
better then the devils Martyrs, and such as shall be found like
selfe-murderers, guilty of their own blood, and most traitorous enemies to the
glory of God. But if we shall profess the name of Christ, and constantly obey
his Gospel, striving lawfully whatsoever affliction and trouble ensue upon it:
then behold as we do conform our selves in a right imitation of our Savior
in afflictions; so shall we be made comformable unto him, in his heavenly
glory. For so the Apostle says, Thou therefore suffer afflictions, as a good
soldier of Jesus Christ, etc. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him. 2.
Tim: 2.3. and 12. Read also, Rom: 8.17.18. If we be children, we are also
heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, if so be that
we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified with him For I account that
the affl^ctions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory that shall be
showed unto us. And verses, 28.29.30. Likewise, 2. Cor: 4.17.18. And 1. Peter,
4, 13. Rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when
his glory shall appear, ye may be glad and rejoice.

Thus much therefore, of the speeches of our Savior directed more particularly
unto Peter in this his seventh appearance: though not for Peter's admonition,
and instruction only; but also for the common instruction and warning of all,
as has been declared. And so we conclud this whole appearance of our Savior,
with all his speeches and actions, for this time: beseeching God, that, as we
have, some good space of time, continued in the laying open of these things,
which confirm the resurrection of our Savior: so our hearts may be more and
more confirmed in the Article of our faith concerning the same. For this is the
general use and end both of all these appearances, and also of those which are
yet behind; and of all the things done and spoken therein: beside the particular
uses, which we have seen in the handling of them. And verily me think, that we
hearing that our Savior has so often showed himself to his Disciples,
working so many great works, and continuing his speeches so graciously unto
them: but we our selves must needs be put out of all doubt concerning the
truth and certainty of it, together with them.

Now concerning the words of the Evangelist John in the last two verses of this
chap: which are a general conclusion of the whole history of the holy Gospel:
it shall not be amiss for us, to consider of them in a few words, before we
proceed to the other appearances mentioned by the other Evangelists, and by the
Apostle Paul: as has bin observed before. For they shall besides other
instructions give us a good passage unto them. Rehearse his words therefore.



This is that Disciple (says S. John) who testifies of these things, and we
know that his testimony is true. 25. Now there are also many other things
which Jesus did, the which if they should be written every one, I suppose the
world would not contain the books that should be written. Amen.

Explication
Briefly, concerning these words of the Evangelist: we have two things very
religiously to consider of. The first, we may call a justification of the
undoubted, yea even canonical truth; not only of the history of the
resurrection of our Savior Christ: whereby we are assured of our justification
by him (as we are afterward further to consider) but also of the like
certainty of the truth of the whole history, in such sort as it may justly be
reckoned in the catalogue of the holy Scriptures of God. This justification is
double. First, from the holy testimony of the Euang. himself, even the Euang:
John; as the former description of himself, compared with the present text,
does evidently declare: as has bin observed before. The which John, as he was
in especial manner approved of Christ, and sanctified to be a choice witness,
to bear record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and
of all things that he saw, Revel: chapter 1. v. 2. And verse. 4.

A brother and companion with other the faithful servants of God then living,
The proof of his resurrection, by his seventh appearance.
in tribulation, and in the kingdom, and patience of Jesus Christ, etc. so he
is accordingly to be esteem^d, and acknowledged in the Church of God. Secondly,
the justification of this most holy History, is made authentical, from the
testimony of many other faithful Christians; not only Apostles: but also
many other, of the which some were then living with the Evangelist John. Who no
doubt, knew the truth thereof by their eye, and earewitnes: partly by
themselves, and partly from those which did see and know the things contained
therein. Even such brethren, as the Evangelist makes mention of, as we heard
even now. In which respect also, he speaking in our present text, of his own
testimony, first, in the singular number; changes his speech by and by: and
says in the person of many other beside himself, And we know that his
testimony is true. This therefore is the first, the which (as was said) we are
religiously to observe, in this first part of our text, the 24. verse. The
second thing contained in the 25. verse, which is the last of the book: it is
the preventing of those either objections which me^ of cauilling spirits might
make: or of scrupulous doubts, which might rise in the minds of some not so
ill minded, to the weakening of the credit of the some his holy writing, or
the writings of any other of the holy Evangelists.

The objections of cauilling spirits (such as Atheists and others) are tending
to the rejecting of all things, under pretense that this Evangelist being a
pro^essed Disciple of Christ, yea a Disciple specially favored of him: has in
way of gratification, and for the credit of his master feined many strange
works to be wrought by him, etc. Al which objections the Evangelist preuenteth,
most wisely and fully; in that he says, he set down but a few things, in
stead of many; yea in stead of infinite works, which Jesus did: as we shall
have occasion to observe further, by and by.

The scrupulous doubts of other not so ill minded, who might be troubled in
their minds, at some diversity in the record of the same story, as it is set
down by him, and the other Evangelists, in that some make no mention of the
things which other do: John himself, though he record many both words and
works, which they do not in one word touch: yet they again report some other
things, which he is silent in, etc. For the preventing of these scruples, he
says, that the cause of such diversity, easily arises from the infinite
number of the works of our Savior Christ, and the manifold variety of the
excellent speeches which he uttered, according to the innumerable occasions
which were offered unto him, etc. For so many (says he) were the divine works
of our Savior; and accordingly, no doubt, his most excellent sayings were so
many, and so often repeated, with such variety, in regard of circumstances
especially, (though of the same kind with those mentioned) that if they should
be written every one: I suppose (says the Evangelist) that the world could not
contain the books that should be written. Nevertheless, as he has
testified before, concerning the history of the resurrection: so he gives to
understand, as touching every other part of the whole history: that so much is
written, and recorded by him, and the rest of the holy Evangelists, as do
contain a sufficient ground for the establishing of our faith, to the
attaining of eternal salvation And that in such sort, that we need not desire
any other history of that argument. And therefore it is a worthy annotation,
as the learned Beza and others have hereupon very religiously resolved of,
briefly set down in these words; Vera est Christi historia, nec hominum
curiositati sed saluti, sancto cum delectu praecepta. The history of Christ is
true, not written to serve men's curiosity, but for their salvation, and that
in holy discretion. The which sentence master Calvin utters more at large in
these words, Certe cu^ diuinitus nobis ordinati fuerint testes, sicuti
fideliter defuncti sunt suit partibus: ita nostrum est vicissim, ab eorum
testimonio, totos pendere, nec plus appetere, quam ab illis proditum est;
praesertim cum eorum calami certa dei prouidentia gubernati fuerint, ne
immodica rerum congerie nos onerarent, and tamen delectu habito tradere^t,
qua^^um expedire nouerat, qui solus sapiens est. and fons vnicus sapientia
Deus: cui lans and gloria in perpetuum. Surely (says Calvin) seeing they,
(that is the Evangelists) have been ordained of God to be his witnesses unto
us: like as they have performed, that which belonged unto them faithfully: so
it is our part again, to depend altogether upon that testimony, which they
have given: and to desire no more (to wit of any other pretended Evangelists)
then they have declared unto us. The rather for that their pens have been
guided through the providence of God, even of set purpose, so as they should
not oppress us with too great a multitude of things; and yet should make such
choice, that they should deliver so much, as he that is only wise, even God,
the alone fountain of all wisdom, did know to be sufficient: to whom be
praise and glory for ever. And touching the certainty of all things recorded
by him, the Evangelist concludes his book and earnestly affirms it by this
word, Amen. As though he should say, all is very true: even in such sense as
our Savior begins many of his sayings, with this same redoubled
affirmation, Amen, Amen, that is, verily, verily, I say to you that which is
most true.

But yet one word more, for the understanding of the meaning of the holy
Evangelist John, in these words of his; If every thing should be written which
Jesus did, I suppose the world would not contain the books which should be
written. We are to consider first (as was touched before) that the Evangelist
does metonymically comprehend all his particular speeches, with every one of
his actions and works in particular. Secondly, that he means, if they should
be all written, and set forth so largely, as the most high worthiness of them
deserves. Thirdly, we are to consider, that the Evangelist does not so much
respect the wide capacity of the world, as the slender capacity, and willing
tediousnes, whereunto the minds of the people of the world are apt: specially
concerning the words and works of God. For so the word Cosmos (that is the
world) is used by the same Evangelist often times, whether we respect the
better sort, that is the elect of God: as chap: 3.16.17. and chap: 12.19. or
the worse sort, even the wicked and reprobate, chap: 1.10, and chap: 17.9. And
so also may the word Choresai, (that is to contain or receive) signify as
cha: 8.37. My word (says our Savior) has no place in you, on chorei en umin,
and likewise 2. Cor: 7.2. Choresate emas receive us, says the Apostle Paul:
that is, be ye well affected toward us; do not exclude or shut us out of your
hearts, according to that straightness which he had spoken of in the 12. verse
of the former chapter. And Matthew: 19. verse 11. all men (says our Savior)
cannot receive this thing, Ou chorousi. And ver: 12. He that can receive it,
let him receive it. O dunamenos chorein choreito. And in this respect, well
says M. F. Iun: upon the Syrian translation by Trem: Sensus est, non esset
futurus in mundo quisqua^, qui ea omnia animo capere, and mente complecti
posset prae varietate rerum gestarum, ac multitudine. Not one in the world
should be able to comprehend in his mind (to wit, which our Savior spoke and
did) so many in multitude, and of so great variety of sorts were they. Master
Calvin upon these words of the holy Evangelist S. John, Non tantum (inquit)
numerus operum Christi considerandus est, sed pondus quoque, and magnitudinem
expendere conuenit. Diuina illic Christi Maiestas, qua sua infinitate, non modo
sensus hominum, sed coelum and terram (vt ita loquar) exhaurit, suum illic
fulgorem mirabiliter proferebat. In eum, si Euangelista oculos conijciens,
attonitus exclamat: iusta^ narrationem, ne a toto quide^ mundo capi posse, quis
miretur? That is, not only (says he) are we to consider the number of the
works of Christ, but it is meet, that we do therwithal, ponder the weight and
greatness of them. The divine Majesty of Christ, which draws, not only all the
understanding that is in man, but even heaven and earth dry (if I may so speak)
did in marvelous manner cast forth the brightness of it self in them. Now
therefore, who may think it strange, that the Evangelist casting his eyes upon
it (to wit, upon that brightness) should break forth as one astonished, and
say, that the whole world could not be capable of a full Narration? Finally,
though we do admit that the Euang. should more barely and simply, use an
Hyperbolicall, or excessive speech, according to that figure or trope, which is
in use in the common speech of men; The proof of his resurrection by his
eighth appearance.
as when we note a very great number by the word infinite, or the whole by the
greatest part of a thing: yet, as the same most learned and godly interpreter,
says, Minime reprehendendus est: si trita recepta figura, ad commendandum
operum Christi excell^nti (...) vtitur. Scimus enim, vt se ad communem loquendi
modum accomodes Deus, r^ditati^ nostrae causa, imo interdum quodammodo
ba^b^tiat. The Evangelist (says M. Calvin) is not to be found fault with,
though be die use a common received figure to commend the excellency of the
works of Christ. For we know that it is the manner of God, in respect of our
rudenes, to frame himself to speak after the common use, yea sometimes to
speak after a sort imperfectly, as Nurses use to speak to young children. But
of this enough, though (as I trust) not too much; least any should stut and
stumble too much, about this speech of the Evangelist: the which is
sufficiently cleared by as expedite and plain a pronunciation of the servants
of God, as may in this case be required. Now having finished the testimonies of
the Evangelist John: we proceed to some other appearances of our Savior,
recorded by other Evangelists, and by the Apostle Paul: and that with the good
leave and liking of this Evangelist (as was touched before) in that he
acknowledges, that there were more things done (yea and spoken also) then he
has reported, and that some of the same are set down with like faithfulness,
by such as God had sanctified, and appointed thereunto.

THe eighth appearance of our Savior is next, where is that recorded unto us?

Then (says the Evangelist Matthew, chap. 28. verse, 16. etc.) The eleven
disciples went into Galile into a mountain, where Jesus had appointed them.

17. And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted.

18. And Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me
both in heaven and in earth.

19. Go therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them into the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

20. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you: and
lo, I am with you always, until the end of the world, Amen.

Explication
This we have reckoned for the eight appearance; and so it is very like to have
been: so far as we can perceive. In the which appearance, our Savior used
some further speech to his disciples; more then that which the Evangelist
Matthew expresses, as we read in the Evangelist Mark. chap. 16. ver.
15.16.17.18.

Let us hear his words also: and so consider of them both. Which therefore were
the words of our Savior, as he reports them in some points, more fully, S.
Matthew?

And he said unto them (says S. Mark) Go ye into all the world, and preach
the Gospel to every creature.

16. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that will
not believe, shall be damned.

17. And these tokens shall follow them that believe: In my name they shall
cast out devils, and shall speak with new tongues.

18. And they shall take away serpents, and if they shall drink any deadly
thing, it shall not hurt them: they shall lay their hands on the sick, and
they shall recover.

Explication
Thus then it is plain, that the Evangelist Mark is in some part of his report,
more full then the Evangelist Matthew. But seeing both were guided by one and
the same spirit of truth, let us consider the texts of them both, even as if
they were but one.

First, the persons to whom our Savior appeared, are noted.

Secondly, the place where he appeared unto them.

Thirdly, how they were affected, and what they did, upon the sight of him
appearing unto them.

Fourthly, the speech which our Savior used to them, is recorded and set
down. Explication. The Persons to who^ our Sa: appeared at this time, were the
eleven, whom he had chosen to be his Apostles to preach the Gospel to all
Nations, after his ascension up into heaven. The which is the rather to be
observed, because the speech of our Savior following, could agree to none
other, but unto them. Here also it is not impertinent, to call to mind that
insomuch as Thomas was at this time, with the rest, when our Savior renueth
and confirms his Apostolic Commission unto them: that he is authorized, as
well as any of the rest, to be an Apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ: though he
was absent at that appearance, wherein our Savior first showed himself to all
the rest of the eleven.

The place where our Savior appeared at this time, is no more particularly
expressed then thus, that it was in Galile, on such a mountain, as our Savior
had himself appointed them. It may be, it was the mount Tabor, on the which
also, it is thought, that he was transfigured: and that therefore it is called
of Peter the holy mount. 2. Epist. 1.18. But because it is not expressed by the
Evangelist, what mountain it was; it is not meet that we should be curious
in desire to know what mountain it was. The appointment of our Savior, which
the Evangelist Matthew mentions, is the same (as it is most like) which he
had spoken of before, chap. 26.32. where he reports, that our Savior told
his disciples, that he would go before them into Galile, after that he should
be risen again. Of the which also, the Evangelist testifies again, in the 7.
verse of this 28. chapter: that the Angel told the women, that our Savior
did so, as he had promised, and willed them to tell the Disciples, that if they
would go into Galile, there they should see him. And Mark, 16.7
Nevertheless, the neglect of the disciples, to do hitherto, as the Angel had
insinuated unto them, by the message of the women, may sufficiently argue, that
our Savior revived this his appointment, before they went. But of this
negligence of the disciples, we have spoken before. Here only let us
furthermore observe, the constancy of our Savior, in performing this mercy to
the disciples which he had promised: though they had deserved, by their
negligence, not to have seen our Savior in Galile at all, or any where else.

Now thirdly, how the Disciples were affected at the appearance of our Savior,
upon the mountain; the Evangelist gives us plainly to understand, in that he
says, that they worshipped him: to wit, with religious and divine adoration
and worship, and not in a civil manner.

For this effect shows that they were religiously affected, in beholding, and
considering that his divine majesty and glory, wherein he showed himself
unto them. But how then is it said, that some of them doubted? This cannot
agree with religious worship, which must be done in faith, or else it cannot be
pleasing to God. It may be answered to this, that howsoever some of them
doubted at the first, whether it were he or no, while he was further off: yet
upon his approaching, they recovering themselves, got victory against their
doubting, and worshipped him with the rest: all of them being verily persuaded
that it was he.

And herein it may also be justly very profitable unto us, to weigh well with
our selves; how deeply, doubtfulnes and distrust is rooted in our nature: in
that it is so apt to return after many former victories, as it did here to
some of these Disciples. For that infirmity which was in them, concerning the
resurrection of our Savior, and the discerning of his Person, is daily to be
found in us, concerning the same and other matters of faith, recorded in the
holy Scriptures: even so often as we come to any serious examination, whether
we do truly and in deed believe them or no.

But let us come to that which you rehearsed in the fourth place: that is, to
the speech of our Savior which he used to his Disciples, in this his eighth
appearance.

Question. In what order are we to dispose of it; so as we may most
commodiously contriue the words, of both the Evangelists, as it were into one
text?

Answer. In the Evangelist Matthew, we are to consider.

First, that our Savior minding to renew, and to make more plain his
Apostolical charge and commission to his Disciples; uses certain words in
way of preface, both to declare his most just, and princely authority, which
he had to lay the same upon them: and also for the animating and encouraging of
them, to submit themselves to the willing undertaking, and performance of it,
in comfortable hope of all good and blessed success from him.

Secondly, we are to consider, that he describes and prescribes unto them,
what their charge and commission was, in the several parts thereof.

Thirdly, that he promises them, that while they should discharge their duty
faithfully; he would be present and assistant unto them: yea, so as he
extends this his promise inclusiuely, to all faithful Ministers of his holy
word and Gospel, to the end of the world.

And in the Evangelist Mark, our Savior does express after what manner, he
will be present and assistant.

First, more generally, both with them, and all faithful Ministers, to make
their ministry effectual, to the salvation of all true believers.

Secondly, and that more particularly, with the Apostles themselves, in some
special manner, for their time: not only to salvation, but also to the
bestowing of sondrie extraordinary gifts, for the effecting of many strange
things, to the honor of their ministry, and to the confusion of the
adversaries of his Gospel.

Explication
In this order, we may in deed, commodiously consider of this most holy
speech of our Savior, which he used in the time of this eighth appearance. Let
us therefore stay a while upon it from point to point.

And first, concerning these words which our Savior used in way of preface,
All power (or as the word signifies, All authority or preeminence) is given
unto me, both in heaven and in earth: they do manifestly declare, that he had
full authority to put his Apostles into that Commission and charge, which he
minded to lay upon them: yea, which he had already committed unto them,
though the time of the execution of it, was not yet come. And in as much as
their office, concerned not only the procuring of the peace, and welfare of
the souls, of all that should submit themselves to their ministry here on
earth: but also the procuring of their eternal salvation, in the heavens. And
contrariwise, seeing their ministry tended to the conviction and condemnation
of all unbelievers, and such as should rebel against the doctrine of the
Gospel (according to that which our Savior had before his death said to
them, under the name of Peter, I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom
of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven,
and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven: Matthew,
16.19. and according to that he had said expressly to them all, both before
his death. chap. 18.18. and John, 20.23. after that he was risen from the
dead, Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them: and whosoeuers
sins ye retain, they are retained. Hereupon (I say) our Savior does to
singular purpose certify his Disciples, that all power, both in heaven and
earth, belonged unto him: according to that, he had told them diverse times
before his death, Matthew, chapter, 11.27. All things are given me of my
Father. And John 3.35. The Father loves the Son, and has given all things
into his hand. And chapter, 17.2. in his prayer, Thou have given him power over
all flesh, that he should give eternal life to all them that thou have given
him.

And the rather also, he does so now; because he knows that his Apostles
should meet with the resistance of all kind of power, here on earth,
opposing it self even against his heavenly ordinances: both earthly power of
wicked men, and spiritual power of the devil, that Prince which rules in
the air. Ephesians. 2.1. and chapter. 6.12. such as are there called principalities,
and powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places, or in heavenly matters,
entois epouraniois.

Our Savior therefore, intending in these words, to authorize his Gospel, and
the ministry thereof: he takes the like course, which the Lord takes; yea,
which he himself, in that he is one God with the Father, did take at the
publishing and authorizing of the Law: before which were uttered the like
words of preface to the like end, I am the Lord thy God, etc. But this being
so, here a question arises, why our Savior should say, All power is given
me, and not rather, All power in heaven and earth is mine.



In these words, our Savior does not speak of himself, in respect of his
Godhead, simply considered: but as he is a mediator betwixt God and man; and
so not only God, but also man.

Whence it is, that although in respect of his Deity (wherein he is equal to
God) he might have said, All power is mine, properly and without gift* yet in
regard of his humanity (wherein he is inferior) he did choose rather to
speak thus, All power is given unto me, that is to say, from the Father.

Explication and proof.
So indeed is our Savior to be understood. Nevertheless, as the power of our
Savior, is hereby nothing contracted, seeing he that is man, is also God (and
therefore must of necessity, in that respect, have a divine, that is, a most
sovereign power, or authority, preeminence, and dignity, as the word (exousia)
signifies) so the comfort of these words, whereby the Gospel and ministry
thereof is authorized, is nothing the less to us, but rather much greater
hereby. According as our Savior, for the same cause does stand upon it
emphatically (as we may say) and in way of singular amplification, as we read,
John 5.26.27. As the Father has life in himself, so likewise has he given to
the son, to have life in himself, And he has given him power also, to
execute judgment, in that he is the son of man. The same amplification does
the Apostle Paul, verse, Act. 17.31. God has appointed a day, in the which he
will judge the world in righteousness, by that man, whom he has appointed,
whereof he has given assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the
dead. And Philip. 2.7. He made himself of no reputation, and took on him the
form of a servant, and was made like unto men, etc. Wherefore God has also
highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name. That at the name of
Jesus, every knee should bow, etc. Thus has God exalted him, even for that he
humbled himself to be man, etc. Read also, 1. Tim. 2.1. There is one God, and
one Mediator betwixt God and man, which is, the man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a ransom for all men, etc. And Heb. 2.9.10. etc. 16.17.18. And all,
according to the Prophecy of Daniel. chap. 7.13.14. As I beheld in visions by
right, behold one like the son of man came in the clouds of heaven, and
approached to the ancient of days, and they brought him before him, and he
gave him dominion, and honor, and a Kingdom, that all people, and nations,
and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, etc.
This therefore might; and no doubt, did notably serve to animate, and encourage
the Apostles to receive their power and authority from our Savior, even in
that he was man, and had received it of the Father, that he should impart, and
communicate it unto them: according to that he had said before. John. 20.21. As
my Father has sent me, so send I you. This also may justly be comfortable, to
all faithful Ministers of the Gospel, to the end of the world, as we shall
see good ground for it afterward, in another part of this holy speech of our
Savior. And the rather because he that gives this commission, and charge
(even the man Christ) he is the King of Kings, Revel. chap. 19 16.
etc. Now for the present, let us come to the second part of our Saviors
speech: wherein (as was answered) our Savior does both describe, and also
prescribe unto the Apostles, their commission and charge: as well touching the
largenes of the places, wherein they were to put it in execution; as the
limits and bounds of the principal duties thereof.

Qu. First therefore, How large was their commission, in respect of the places
and precincts of their jurisdiction, if we may so speak?

Ans. The places, and as we may say, precincts of their commission and charge,
were as large as the compass of the whole word.

Expli. It is true. So our Savior does measure it forth unto them; as was
figured by the Angel in Ezekiel, chap. 40, etc. in that he says, Go
therefore, and teach all Nations. Matthew. 28.19. and Mark. 16.15. Go ye into
all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature: to wit, to every
creature that has understanding, and is fit to hear the Gospel preached:
whether Jew, or of any other Nations under heaven. And herein, (beside some
other circumstances, as has been already observed) the commission of the
Apostles, differed from all other Ministers of the word, whether Prophets, or
Evangelists, or Pastors, and Teachers. This therefore is worthily inferred upon
the former universal power of our Savior; in that, after he had said, All
power is given unto me, etc. he adds thereupon, Go therefore into all
Nations, etc. As though our Savior should say, I will be with you, and stand
by you, and bear you out, and provide for you, and bless you in all places,
whethersoeuer ye shall go: seeing I am given for a light of the Gentiles, and
to be the salvation of God, to the end of the earth: that is, through all the
world. Isai. 49.6, etc. Psalm. 2.8. Such was the largenes of the Apostles
commission.



They were all comprehended in these two, Teaching and Baptizing: which are the
principal among the rest.

Explication.
So indeed it is evident by the express words of our Savior. First, in that
he says, Go ye and teach, etc. Secondly, in that he says further, Baptizing
them, etc. Touching either of these duties, there are diverse things to be
observed.



First, concerning teaching; our Savior shows, both what doctrine is to be
taught, and also in what manner, and to what end.

Secondly, concerning Baptizing; we are likewise from the words of our
Savior, to consider what the thing it self: to wit, Baptism is: and in what
form or manner, it is to be administered, and to what purpose.

Let us therefore consider a little of these things.



The Evangelist Mark shows, that our Savior expressed part of his mind in
this behalf, in other words then saint Matthew mentions, saying, Preach the
Gospel. But he makes a further supply in Matthew, in that he adds these
words, Teaching whatsoever I have commanded.

In these words indeed, our Savior shows plainly, what his mind was in
either respects. Explication.
For by the word Gospel, it is evident, that he would have the glad tidings of
salvation known, and assured to all, that would by faith embrace and
acknowledge him to be their Savior: and that even of the mere grace and
favor of God, through him, how worthy soever they be in themselves, of
eternal death and condemnation. In which respect, the Gospel is called the
word of reconciliation. 2. Cor. chap. 5. verses 18, 19, 20, 21. Not that our
Savior would not have the Law and the moral duties thereof preached: for he
himself commands, that every man be careful to obey them: but he shows
what that is which his Apostles, and so all other the Ministers and Preachers
of his holy word, should principally intend. And yet, as touching the Law,
it appears thereby, that though he came not (as he himself professes) to
destroy, or utterly to dissolve and loosen the authority of it: (catalusai)
but rather to establish it, as it is a rule of righteousness and obedience to
GOD: yet he would not have it preached otherwise, then as being to the benefit
of all true believers, fulfilled in him: so by him, who is the end and
fulfilling of the Law, in that the righteousness thereof is performed, the
curse is removed, and all transgression and guiltiness of sin, is perfitly
satisfied for, touching all such, as have truly repented and have unfeigned care
to serve God, in the obedience of it; though they cannot fulfill it, but in
many things (though to their godly grief) do sin against it: as elsewhere
has been more fully declared: and as we may read testified and confirmed,
Matthew. 5 17. And Romans 3.31. and chap. 10.4. and Gal. 3.24. and 1. Tim. 1.5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10.

Now, as touching the manner of teaching, the Gospel which our Savior
requires; that is contained in the word Preach: the which, according to the
use of the Greek word cerusso or cerutto, and more nearely from the Latin
word Praeco, which properly signifies a Crier, which utters things with a
loud voice; whether proclamations of laws and edicts of Princes, or of things
set forth to common sale. It is metaphorically, or in a borrowed sense applied
in the holy Scripture, to signify an earnest, and zealous, and audible
publishing of the gracious message and counsel of God, touching the salvation
of his people: according to that Isai 40.4. where John the Baptist, a most
earnest and zealous Preacher, is prophesied of under the name of a Crier in the
wilderness. And chap. 58.1. the Lord commands his holy Prophet, to cry
alowd. And Jonah, chap. 1.2. Go to Nineveh and cry against it, etc. And
again chap. 3.2. Cry out that outcry: that is, preach the preaching which I
bid thee. The which open and earnest publishing; our Savior expresses
elsewhere, when he says; What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in
light: and what ye hear in the ear, that preach you on the houses. Matthew.
10.27. And furthermore, what is meant by preaching, we may more fully
understand, by that which the Apostle of our Savior Christ Saint Paul writes,
2. Tim. 4.2. Preach the word (says he) be instant in season and out of season:
improve, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering, and doctrine. Preach the word,
says the Apostle. And because it might be demanded, But what mean you by
preaching? He adds, improve, rebuke, exhort, etc. as though he should say,
This is preaching, when the word of God, and holy Scriptures, are so
interpreted, that the truth is opened by collection of doctrine, error in
judgment is convinced, wickedness of life is reproved, slothfulness to good
duties, is by exhortation chased away, as much as may be, by the wise
ministry of the Preacher, etc. For to these ends are the holy Scriptures
given of God to his church, and put into the hands of his faithful Ministers;
as the same Apostle teaches, in the same his Epistle, in the end of the
chapter immediately going before. And all this must be done, not in curious
affected eloquence, after the manner of Heathen Orators: neither in affected
obscurity, under a color of profound learning, as some of the heathen
Philosophers have done: but in as much plainnes, and simplicity, as may both
best suit and answer the gravity of the holy Scriptures; and also be most fit,
for the edification of those, that be the most weak and simple of the whole
auditorie and congregation: according to the example and instruction of the
same excellent Apostle, 1. Cor. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. But of all that belongs to
the right manner of Teaching, time will not serve us to speak now. Such as
upon this occasion, desire to consider of this matter further, may have
recourse to that which is set down in the beginning of the former part of our
Treasury. Only let us here observe this one thing more, concerning Preaching;
that this is the gracious means, which the mighty Prince our Savior, uses
to subdue his people by: and that he differs herein, from all the Tyrants of
the world, who subdue people by fire and sword; even as much as heaven is
distant from the earth. For they destroy life, before they teach the right use
of it, or show the way to a better, etc.

The last point which we are for the present to consider of, is the end of
Teaching: the which, as our Savior gives to understand in the words of his
commission to his Apostles, is obedience; not in this or that instruction
only, with neglect of any of the rest: but in all things, so far forth, as
our Savior requires of every one, both generally, touching the common duties
of christianity; and particularly, touching the duties of every man, in
respect of his several estate, condition, and calling.

Qu. In what words does our Savior express thus much?

An. Teaching them (says our Savior) to observe all things, whatsoever I have
commanded you.

Explication
Our Savior means, whatsoever he had commanded them to teach every man, what
belongs unto him, in such respects as were even now mentioned. According to
that which the Apostle Paul writes concerning himself and the rest, in
testimony of their obedience to the commandment of our Savior. Col. 1.28.19.
We preach Christ the hope of glory, admonishing every man, and teaching every
man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus:
whereunto I also labor and strive, according to his working, which works in
me mightily. And 1. Thessal. 4.1, 2. And furthermore, we beseech you brethren,
and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that you increase more and more, as you have
received of us, how you ought to walk and please God. For ye know what
commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. And 1. Cor. 11.23. concerning the
supper of the Lord, I have received of the Lord (says the same Apostle) that
which I have delivered unto you. And the Apostle Peter, 2. Epistle chap. 3.1,
2. This second Epistle I now write unto you beloved, wherewith I stir up and
warn your pure minds, to call to remembrance the words which were told
before by the holy Prophets, and also the commandment of us, the Apostles of
the Lord and Savior. So then, as the Apostle James teaches, chap. 1.22. all
true christian hearers of the word preached and taught, they must be doers of
the word, and not hearers only, deceiving themselves, etc.

Thus much concerning Teaching, the first principal part of the Apostles
Commission.

Now touching the second part, which concerns Baptizing; we are, to the
understanding of the meaning of our Savior, as was answered, to consider:
first, what Baptism is: secondly, in what form of words it is to be
administered: thirdly, to what end and purpose.



The word Baptism, from the Greek word, signifying the putting of a thing to
be washed under the water, as I have heard you say: it is here, in those words
of our Savior, and in many places of the new Testament, (as I have been
further taught) to be understood of a holy and religious kind of washing, by
putting of the face, the chief part of man's body, under the water.

Explication and proof.
So the Greek word Baptizo signifies indeed: and thus it is of necessity to
be understood in this most holy speech of our Savior: as it is evident,
Matthew. 3.13.16. from the baptizing of our Savior himself, by John the
Baptist, whereunto our Savior submitted himself, and sanctified our Baptism
in his own flesh. For he went into the river Jorden to be baptized: and so
soon as he was baptized, it is said that he came out of the water again.
Likewise, Acts 8.35, etc. After that Phillip the Evangelist, had from the
prophecy of Isaiah, preached Jesus to the Eunuch: the Evangelist Luke
reports, that as Phillip and the Eunuch went on their way, they came unto a
certain water, and the Eunuch said, See, here is water: What does let me to
be baptized? etc. And then, verse 38. it is further said, that they went
down, both of them into the water, and that Phillip baptized the Eunuch. So
that it is plain, that the baptizing which our Savior Christ speaks of, is
a holy and religious, or sacramental washing; not of the clothes, but even of
the bodies, and persons of men themselves: yea even of their souls, according
to the spiritual signification, and use, whereunto our Savior has sanctified
the same. The which holy use, will more manifestly appear from the
interpretation of the form of the administration of it. Whereunto let us now
come.

Qu. In the next place therefore, after what manner, is this holy baptizing, or
sacramental washing to be administered?

The form and manner is this, that the Minister of the Gospel, do apply the
water, to the party that is baptized: In the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Explication and proof.
This is indeed, the very full and complete form, yea and the very substance of
this holy Sacrament. The which, the Churches of our Savior Christ, have in
conscience of this commandment of our Savior, constantly and dutifully
observed. And though we do not read this form of baptizing, usually
expressed in the holy Scriptures, (or it may be, not at all fully expressed,
where the administration of baptism is recorded, but synecdochically, under
the name of Christ alone) yet from the institution of it, we are to
understand, what the usual practice was, and how all those brief and
synecdochicall records, are to be understood. In which respect, it is very
worthy the observation, that at such time, as certain Disciples of Ephesus,
answered the Apostle Paul, that they had not so much as heard whether there be
any holy Ghost: he asked them, Unto what were ye then baptized? Act. 19.2, 3.
So then, the form, yea the essential form, as we may say, of christian
baptism: is in the name, or into the name of one only true God, three
distinct persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

The meaning of this form of christian baptism, will, as was further said, be
the more clear unto us, from the consideration of the ends and uses, of this
holy ordinance of our Savior: and therefore let us speedily come unto them.



Our Lord Jesus Christ, has ordained this Sacrament, to be an outward sign
and seal, of his adopting of every true believer, in his Son, the same our
Lord Jesus Christ: to be received into his most gracious covenant, of the
remission of sins, and of the inheritance of eternal life and glory, in the
kingdom of heaven.

And he has ordained it also, to be a profession of their and our, dedicating
and vowing of our selves to him, to his spiritual worship, and faithful
service alone, so to continue all the days of ou^ lives; yea even for ever and
ever.

Explication and proof.
That the baptizing which our Savior has commanded, is a sacramental or
outward sign, and seal of his most gracious accepting of us the profane and
heathen Gentiles, into his holy covenant, to assure us by his holy Spirit, of
his fatherly goodness and mercy, in the forgiveness of our sins, etc.
through the death and resurrection of his only begotten Son, the same our
Savior: it may be evident unto us, from that which was long before prophesied,
by the holy Prophets of God, being compared with the accomplishment thereof.
For whereas the Lord God has said, as we read, Hosh. 1.10. In the place where
it was said unto them, ye are not my people: it shall be said unto them, ye
are the sons of the living God. And chap. 2.23. I will say to them which were
not my people, Thou art my people. And they shall say, Thou art my God: he has
now long since fulfilled it to us, together with the holy remnant of the Jews;
according to the holy testimony of Saint Paul, Romans 9.24, 25, 26. And he has
confirmed it, by this Sacrament of holy Baptism, to the ends above mentioned:
so that it is our duty, to acknowledge, all thanks to be most due unto our
God, for that, as he promised by the same his holy Prophet, Hos. chap. 1.7. ( I
will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and I will save them by the Lord their
God: that is, by the Lord Jesus Christ, one God with the Father and the holy
Ghost) so he has performed it unto us. And it is the same thing which he
foretold by his holy Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 36.25, 26, 27. saying, Then will I
power clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: yea from all your
filthiness and from all your idols will I cleanse you. A new heart also will
I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away your
stony heart out of your body, and I will give you an heart of flesh, and I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments, and do them, etc. and ye shall be my people, and I
will be your God. In all which promises of the Gospel, we through our Savior
Christ, have our part with them: and this our baptism, is a seal of it to us,
as well as to the believing remnant of them: according to that which we read,
Acts 2.38, 39. compared with chap. 10.47, 48. Can any man forbid water, that
these should not be baptized, who have received the holy Ghost as well as we?
So he (that is, the Apostl^ Peter) commanded them to be baptized in the name of
the Lord. Likewise, Ephesians. 2.11, 12, etc. to the end of the chapter. In which
place also, we are worthily admonished, to consider the greatness of the most
gracious benefit, of our admittance into the covenant of God, who were
strangers from it before, etc: to the end we might provoke our dull hearts,
according to our bounden duty, to g^orifie the name of the Lord our God, with
all possible glory and praise, which we may yield unto him, for the same. For
verily, the benefit ought justly to be as great in our account, as it was
strange unto the Jews; yea unto Peter at the first, that it should be so:
until that he was admonished by a special vision, with this instruction
expressly added on the behalf of us the Gentiles, The things which God has
purified, pollute thou not: that is, see thou do not account them to be
unclean, and unlawful to have a holy communion and fellowship with ye. Act.
1^. verses 11, etc. 15, etc. In which respect also, the mystery of godliness,
is highly celebrated, in that among other things, our Savior Christ is
preached to the Gentiles; and believed on in the world. And all this, is
according to the holy prophecy of Isaiah, chap. 11.10. as it is alleged by
the holy Apostle, Romans 15.12. He shall reign over the Gentiles, and in him
shall the Gentiles trust. And again, according to that, Isai. 42.1, 2, 3, 4.
and Matthew. 12.21.

Now therefore, seeing the Lord our God, of his infinite mercy, does (according
to this blessed ordinance of our Savior, and for his sake) assure us, that he
receives us into his most gracious covenant, even to the remitting of our
sins, etc. Heb. 10.16, 17, 18, 19. as has been declared from the former part
of the answer: is it not clear of it self, according to the latter part of
the answer, that we ought most willingly, thankfully, and dutifully, to
dedicate and vow our selves wholly to the Lord, and to his holy worship and
service, yea with a mind never to depart from him? I doubt not, but the heart
and conscience of every one, that has grace to discern any thing at all,
cannot, but from the consideration of this so inestimable a mercy of God, say
Amen: acknowledging with all his heart, that it is his most bounden duty so to
do. We for our parts, cannot but say, as we have learned from the Prophet
Micah. chap. 4. verse 5. that insomuch, as all people will walk, every one in
the name of his God, yea though they be false gods: much rather, will we walk
in the name of the Lord our God, for ever and ever: insomuch as the Lord our
God, into whose name we are baptized, is the only true God, even God the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, three Persons, one only God: as the
holy Scriptures do plainly teach and confirm unto us.

The which obedience, that we may with the better conscience yield: let us well
consider what this means, to be baptized into the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Say therefore; What is the meaning thereof?

To be baptized into the name of the Father, is to have assurance given to
every true believer, which is baptized: that God the Father is through our
Lord Jesus Christ his Son, become his Father, and that for the same cause, he
stands bound, to perform the duty of an obedient child unto him.

To be baptized into the name of the Son, is to have assurance given, that
the same so baptized, is for his part, one of those whom our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of the Father, has redeemed, and reconciled to the same his Father,
through his blood: and therefore stands bound to obey him as the Lord his
redeemer.

To be baptized into the name of the holy Ghost, is to have assurance given,
that every true believer so baptized, is sealed up and sanctified by the holy
Ghost, against the day of his full redemption, to have his portion of perfect
glory, in the kingdom of heaven: and therefore that he stands bound to
obey him as the Lord his sanctifier.

Thus indeed, does the whole Trinity of Persons, in the unity of the
eternal Godhead, Explication and proof.
consent in the blessed work of our redemption and salvation. And the very
phrase of speech (to be baptized into the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost) does note the giving of such a holy assurance as you
speak of: yea such an assurance, as challenges that singular duty, which
has also been spoken of: as may be observed by that one instance, in stead of
all, which is written concerning baptizing into the name of our Savior Christ:
in that he is the second Person in the glorious Trinity. For the Apostle Paul,
minding to beat down all emulation, and depending upon men, and to direct
christians to look unto our Savior Christ, who has accepted them to be his,
and to whom they have addicted themselves: he reasons from this Sacrament of
Baptism to that end. For whereas many among the Corinthians were divided in
their minds: in that one said, I am Paul's, and another I am Apollos, and I
am of Cephas, and I am Christ's: he opposes them thus, Is Christ divided? was
Paul crucified for ye? either were ye Baptized into the name of Paul, etc. As
though he should have said, ye ought, all and every one of ye, to be his
only, into whose name ye have been baptized: that is, ye ought to depend upon
him, to give him the whole glory, etc. 1. Cor. 1.12.13. and Gal. 3.27.28. For
all ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: there is neither Jew
nor Grecian, etc. For ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And likewise, to stir
up the care of godliness and holiness of life, he says, Romans 6.3.4. Know ye
not, that all we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been
baptized into his death? We are buried then with him by baptism in his death,
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, to the glory of the Father, so
we also should walk in newness of life. That which is said concerning the
second Person, in that he is God, yea both God and man in the Person of the
mediator betwixt God and man: is proportionably to be understood concerning the
rest. That is, seeing we are baptized into the name of the Father, we must show
our selves obedient children, yea so, as we must rather then disobey him, make
account of none else to be our Father, as our Savior has taught us. Matthew.
23. Neither must we, by any means, grieve the holy Ghost, by giving place to
wicked lusts and affections, etc. because we are baptized into his name, as
was by you well acknowledged in the answer.

the name of Father: but in the name of the Father, etc. What may we say for
answer to this?

The di^ference of these two speeches is only in words: and not in the
understanding and sense, as I have been taught.

Explication and proof.
So it is indeed. For they are used in the holy Scriptures indifferently:
sometimes in the name (en to onomati) as Act. 2.38. and chap. 10.48. though
most often indeed into the name (eis to onoma) as in these words in the
Evangelist Matthew. and Acts 8.16. and chap. 19.3, 4, 5. and in diverse other
places already alleged: and sometimes (epi to onomati.) So that though we
say, in the name: tha^ is, by the power and authority, as this word name, does
often signify, 1. Cor. 1.10. and as it is interpreted Act. 4.7. By what power,
or in what name have ye done this? yet this power and authority, must be
understood of baptizing into the name; that is, to the faith and profession of
the same name: and to all holy obedience, to him that bears the same name, as
has already bin declared. And hereunto, every one that is baptized, stands
bound: unless he will be a covenant breaker in the highest degree, not only
with men; that is, with the Church of God, in whose sight he has given his
faith: but also, even with the Majesty of God himself, whose covenant it is.
Quemadmodum gratiam suam Deus hoc sigillo nobis confirmat, ita quicunque se ad
Baptismum offerunt, vicissim, quasi data syngrapha, obstringunt suam fidem.
Calu. Matthew. 28.19. Harmon. That is; like as God does by this seal, assure us
of his grace and favor: so do all that offer themselves to be baptized, bind
themselves as it were by a bill of their hand, to be faithful unto him. And
another, To be baptized into the name of any (says he) is to be consecrated
to be a worshipper of him, to profess him to be his Lord, and to addict
himself wholly to his service. It is Piscators observation upon these words of
Saint Matthew, chap. 28.19.

That which has been said, concerning the administration of the sacrament of
Baptism, that it is one principal part of the Apostolic commission: is in
like manner to be affirmed, concerning the other sacrament of the Lords Supper:
the commandment whereof, our Savior had given his Disciples before, at the
first institution of it. And so, (as was alleged not long since) the Apostle
Paul says concerning it, 1. Cor. 11.23. That he had received of the Lord, that
which he did in that behalf, deliver unto them. But the more full declaration
of the doctrine of the holy sacraments of our Lord Jesus Christ, does belong to
another part of Catechism, in a Treatise set apart for that purpose: to the
which we are to refer our selves. Only that which remains to be observed
in this place; is this, that our Savior (as we see) lincketh the
administration of the word, and sacraments together, in one ministry, and
commends and commands both of them to one and the same Ministers of his.
Neither are they faithful Preachers, which teach any thing which our Savior
has not commanded. Of whom also, he requires very straightly, that they be
faithful and obedient to him in them both: as the same commission plainly
shows.

Hitherto of the second branch, of the speech of our Savior Christ, as it is
recorded by St. Matthew: wherein, as was answered before, and now has been
further declared, he has given his Apostles, their charge and commission,
shortly to be put in execution by them.

The third branch follows in the same Evangelist, which contains that
gracious promise, which our Savior made to his Apostles, touching his divine
presence and assistance, while they should faithfully discharge their duties.
But because this was the conclusion of the whole speech of our Savior; and
does concern all other faithful Ministers of the Gospel, to the end of the
world: and for that the Evangelist Mark reports some other words, which our
Savior uttered at this time: we will therefore, here take the^ in, before we
come to speak of those words, which may well be our co^clusio^ of the whole. And
yet so, as that which follows in St. Mark, may well show further, the manner
of our Saviors presence in the ministry of his Apostles, by the effects which
should follow the same: as was answered before. Let us therefore consider of
those effects. The which, seeing as it was answered in the beginning of this
eight appearance, they were either general, concerning all; or more special,
concerning some. Let us in the first place consider of those that are more
general.



He that shall believe, and be baptized (says our Savior) shall be saved: but
he that will not believe, shall be damned.

Explication.
The effects (as we may see) are as general as may be. For they show us, what
shall be the estate and condition of all, to whom the Gospel, is at any time
preached; co^prehending all under two branches: to wit, that they either
believing the Gospel preached unto them, shall be saved: or not believing,
shall be damned. There is no third estate or codition (as our Savior expressly
determines) so that all shall come to a very short and round reckoning. And
that most certainly, and as verily, as our Savior (who is truth it self) is
most true in every word that ever he spoke: yea so true, that though heaven
and earth perish: yet no word that ever he spoke, shall fail; but shall have
their full and perfect effect. Then the which effects; salvation, or damnation:
what may be more grave and weighty? And this we cannot but acknowledge, if we
will consider earnestly with our selves (but a little while) what the nature
is, both of that salvation, and also of that damnation, which our Savior
speaks of: insomuch as both of them being eternal, and that as well of soul
as of body. The one, that is, salvation: notes a most happy, blessed, and
glorious estate, replenished with all heavenly joy and comfort. The other, that
is damnation: notes a clean contrary estate, in the most extreme woe, and
reproachful misery, that may be: infinitely exceeding all disgrace and
torment, that may possibly befall a man in this world; as our Savior in the
Gospel does describe the same.

Wherefore, insomuch as life and death; yea either everlasting life, or
eternal death, both of the body and soul; is thus set before us in the
Gospel: even before us here present, as well as before any other, to whom the
Gospel has in any place, bin at any time, sent by the holy providence of God.
Let us therefore, I beseech and admonish ye, in the Lord, that ye be most
careful, to make good use of these most grave and weighty words of our
Savior, which are (as we see) a part of one of the very last speeches, which
he spoke to his Apostles. For a^^uredly, by the authority of the word of
Christ, I may, and do stand bound, to affirm and pronounce unto you, both
concerning my self and every of you that if we will truly believe the Gospel,
which is the Gospel of salvation, preached unto us; we shall certainly be
saved: yea even as certainly, as God is both t^^e and faithful; and also able
and willing to do it. But if any of us, or all of us, should not believe, and
so continue and die in our unbelief: it is of like certainty, that we shall
undoubtedly be damned: even because the Gospel being sent unto us, we have not
believed it, that we might repent and be saved. Not that the Gospel does in the
own nature, work any other effect then salvation, (as has bin declared not
long since) but by reason of the unbelief, and contrary disposition of those,
that do hear it: as it is evident, John 3.17. God sent not his Son into the
world, that he should condemn the world: but that the world through him might
be saved. He that believes in him, shall not be condemned: but he that
believes not is condemned already, because he believes not in the name of
the only begotten Son of God.

Now therefore, touching these words of our Savior: they may notably serve to
these three or four excellent ends. First, to encourage all faithful
Ministers of the Gospel, even to the end of the world; that their labor in the
preaching of it, shall not be in vain; but shall still have mighty effects,
according to the ends whereunto God has appointed it. Yea like effects
touching conversion of souls, to those which were spoken of by our Savior, to
the encouragement of his Apostles, for the time of their ministry, in the
first publishing of it: though to the encouragement of these indeed, for the
founding, as it were, and planting of Churches: and to the rest, for the
watering of their plants, and for the raising up of the building, from that
foundation which they have laid.

Secondly, these words of our Savior, are of excellent use, sweetly to allure,
and draw the minds of all the elect children of God, to a most willing and
careful harkening, and attending to the preaching of the Gospel: as unto that,
which God has appointed to be the instrument of his divine power, to their
most blessed and endless salvation, in that they believe the same. To the
which end also, justly may the most fearful threatenings of eternal
condemnation, to all unbelievers; be as a spur to the children of God, to chase
away all dullness, and drowsinesse, or negligence in hearing the word, and
Gospel of our Savior Christ, whenever they shall find any such evil,
creeping upon them. Yea and it may justly serve, to awaken those that lie in
their sins, to bethink themselves better then hitherto they have done, when
they hear of the fearful estate of all unbelievers: so that they cannot but
say in themselves; Is it so indeed as the Preachers say; that if I shall not
believe the Gospel, I shall for ever be damned, and perish from the presence of
God, and be thrown down to hell, to be tormented with the devil, and all
reprobates? etc. Surely, by the grace of God, I will no longer neglect the
doctrine of salvation, as I have done: but I will be a diligent and reverent
hearer of it. Seeing faith comes by hearing, I will by the grace of God, use
all good means, that I may strengthen this excellent gift of faith, whereby
ouercomming my self, and this world, and the devil, by the sword of the
Spirit, and with this shield of faith, and giving all glory to God: I may be
saved.

Finally, these words of our Savior, concerning the condemnation of all
unbelievers; being denounced by the Preachers of the Gospel of Christ: they
cannot but some thing restrain and alay the rage even of the wicked
themselves; when as their consciences shall be secretly terrified, by the
hearing thereof. L^ke as it is said of Felix, that as Paul preached of the
judgment to come, he trembled: saying to Paul, Go thy way for this time, and
when I have conu^nient time, I will call for thee again, Act. 24 26.

But besides these notable uses; we have some things else to consider, from
these words of our Savior: in that he ioineth baptism with the belief of him
that shall be saved. What is to be said to this? I^ baptism of like necessity
to salvation,

That is not the meaning of our Savior, as partly may appear, in that he
says not, on the contrary: he that is not b^ptised, is damned: but only
this; he that will not believe is damned.

It is tr^e. For as unbelief, is of it self alone, damnable; though a man
should be ba^tised: Explication
so by faith alone, without baptism, a man may be saved: to wit, if by sudden
death, or otherwise, for want of convenient means, and a fit opport^nitie, he
could not be made partaker of the outward washing, after that he has been
inwardly baptized with the holy Ghost. For as the Apostle Peter teaches; it is
not the outward washing that saves, unless a good conscience do make request
to God, etc. 1. Ep. 3.21. And the Apostle Paul affirms, That we are saved by
the grace of God, through faith. Ephe. 2.8. Thus then we may see, by the
doctrine of those, whom our Savior made the faithful Interpreters of his
mind: that he never meant to make baptism, a matter of ab^olute necessity to
salvation.

What was his meaning then, in linking faith and baptism, by so near a bond
together?

Hereby our Savior determines who they were, that were meet to be baptized,
at the first publishing of the Gospel, to all heathenish and unbelieving
people: namely, such only, as should by the preaching of the Gospel,
profess themselves to believe in Christ to be their Savior.

Hereby also, our Savior gives plainly to understand, that baptism, is not
without great danger, to be despised or neglected of any, that may by any
lawful means, be partakers of it.

Explication and proof.
Doubtless, the danger of despising Christian baptism, is no less then
damnation, if it should not be repented of: yea, the neglect of it, is no small
sin in the sight of God, neither subject to light punishment; as may appear
by that sharp sickness, which God cast upon Moses, for neglecting to circumcise
his child. Exodus 4.24. For baptism is to us Christians, the same in
proportion, which circumcision was to the people of Israel. And furthermore,
as it is a comfortable help, for the strengthening of the faith of those, that
having truly desired it, do enjoy it: so no doubt, the want of it, through the
negligence of any believer, cannot but minister a very great temptation, to the
weakening and disturbing of the peace of his faith, so long as he should want
it: even so often as he should think of these words of our Savior, (He that
shall believe and be baptized) so nearly joining baptism with faith, as he
does; though not as the cause of salvation, yet as a testimony and pledge of
it, to every true believer. And thus (as Master Calvin well concludes this
point) Baptism is necessary, though not simply, yet for obedience sake. Non
simpliciter necessarium dicimus, sed tantum obedientiae nostrae respectu. And
again, Non tanquam dimidia salutis causa, sed vt testimonium. Not as the half
cause of salvation: but as a testimony or pledge of it. But from the former
part of your answer, there seems a great doubt to arise. For seeing our
Savior (determining who shall be baptized) says, they are such, as are first
to be taught; and then also are to believe, and so to be baptized: how comes
it to pass, that we our ^elues, have been baptized, while we were Infants;
and that we do baptize our children likewise, while they are yet very newborn babes, and so cannot be such as have been taught, or be capable of any
instruction; and therefore much less do actually believe.

Question. What warrant can we have for this?

Though it was necessary, that, at the first publishing of the Gospel, to
such people as were altogether heathenish; that is, profane and unbelieving:
they should be brought to knowledge, and so to the faith of the mystery of
godliness; because otherwise the Sacrament thereof, must needs have been
profaned, and of no use and profit unto them. Yet so soon as any believed,
the Lord did not only receive themselves into his holy covenant of grace and
mercy, through Jesus Christ: But also their children. And thereupon, have they,
even from the Apostles times, to this day; been admitted to be partakers of
the sign and seal of the covenant.

Explication and proof.
This in deed has been the perpetual use of the Church of Christ; even from
the primitive embracing of the Gospel, amongst the Gentiles. And the same also
has been done, upon very good ground: insomuch as the parents being
sanctified to God; their children also, are accepted of God, as holy unto him:
as the Apostle Paul teaches. 1. Cor. 7.17. Neither may it be thought, that
the covenant of God, entered with the Gentiles, in the days of the Gospel: is
less favorable and gracious, then was his covenant with the Israelites, in
the time of the law, and before. And therefore, seeing, when the Lord took
Abraham, into his covenant, he did take in his children, and whole posterity
also with him: and for a comfortable testimony, and proof thereof, commanded
that the sign of his covenant, should be imprinted in their flesh, as we
read Genes. 17.7.8.9. etc. We likewise persuade our selves, from the same
ground, that God admitting at the first, believing parents into his most
gracious covenant; does therewithal also, admit their children into the same:
and that they may, and ought now in the time of the Gospel, be as lawfully
baptized, as ever the children of the Jews were to be circumcised in the time
of the law.

But therewithal, this must be as firmly acknowledged; that all Christian
parents, stand as strictly bound, so soon as God gives aptnes of
understanding; to teach them the mystery of their Christian baptism: to wit,
into whose name they have been baptized, and to what end; that they may know
the gre^tnes of Gods mercy toward them in this behalf, even more and more
from time to time: and the straight bond of their duty and obedience, to God
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: insomuch as the Father of his free
grace and mercy, has adopted them, in his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, to be
his children: in whom also, he has reconciled them to himself; washing away
their sins through his blood, and sanctifying them unto himself, by his
spirit: even by the holy Ghost. These things (I say) do all Christian parents
first; who bring their children to baptism: and also, all Minist^rs of the
Gospel, who do baptize them, and all other who are any way specially
interessed in the holy action; stand as strictly bound to teach, and to bring
them up (or procure as much as lies in them, that they may be brought up) in
the holy nurture and information of the Lord; as they are bound under pain of
damnation, to know, believe, and practice, the same good duties themselves.
Lest their children (through their default) for want of knowledge; or having
knowledge, do for want of conscience, fall away from the covenant of their
baptism, to prophanenes and ungodliness: and so bring upon themselves, a double
condemnation. The one, because they are sinful by nature: the other, because
they refuse that mercy which is offered unto them, by the free grace and
favor of God. And the rather do we stand thus strictly bound, to teach our
children, the holy mystery of baptism into the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost: that is, into the name of one only true GOD,
three distinct persons: because we cannot otherwise, rightly know God; nor
how to believe in him; nor what the fruit and efficacy of our baptism is;
nor any thing at all, what true Christianity does mean.

But what if our children do die, before they come to years of discretion: or
(it may be) before they come to be baptized at all?

Question. What is to be said in this case?

Answer. God of his infinite mercy knows, as well how to take them into his
heavenly Kingdom: as to admit them into his gracious covenant here upon earth;
even as seems best to his godly wisdom.

Explication
It is very true. And therein are we to rest, and to quiet and comfort our
selves; as they that have learned to sow in hope. Yea further, we are to
leave secret things to the Lord, and to account things revealed, a sufficient
contentment to us, and our children in all things, whatsoever may concern our
selves or them.

And thus much shall for the present time suffice, concerning the more
general, and common effects of the ministry of the Gospel: and also
touching this point of the baptism of children, as an appurtenance thereunto.
This only added, that no infant of any Infidel, Jew, or Turk, may lawfully
be baptized at this day; no more then in the Apostles time: until the pa^ents
(one of them at the least) have embraced the faith, and do make a holy
profession of it; and accordingly desire baptism, both for themselves and
theirs; with promise to bring them up, and to instruct them in the same faith.

Now let us come to the more particular effects of the Apostolical ministry;
as they are set down, and recorded by the Evangelist Mark: as they follow in
the same 16. Chapter, verse 17.18. There are five of them.



The first was, of casting of devils out of the possessed.

The second, the gift of speaking diverse languages.

The third, the healing of venomous stingings by serpents: or rather a
preservative power to prevent their stingings.

The fourth, a preservative power against every venomous potion.

The fifth, healing of natural sicknesses, by imposition of hands.

Explication
These tokens, or rather signs (Semeia) (says our Savior Christ) shall
follow those that believe: to wit, not so much for signs or tokens, that they
do truly believe the doctrine preached by the Apostles: as for miraculous
signs and confirmations, that the doctrine it self, which they believed by
the preaching of the Apostles; is the very true doctrine of GOD. And that the
Apostles were sent immediately from our Lord Jesus Christ, to be his sanctified
Ministers and instruments, to publish his doctrine, to the salvation of all
true believers.

And therefore it is also, that our Savior says further; that all these
miraculous works, should be effected and wrought in his name: that is, through
that faith which such true believers should have in his name: that is, in him
his own self; in whom they should believe, as being both able, and also
willing to work such gracious and powerful works, at their word, and by the
invocation of his name, for the confirmation of the doctrine of his Gospel.
Which, that it is the meaning of our Savior; it may be evident, from that
which we read, Acts, 3.16. His name (that is, the name of Jesus Christ) whom
God (says the Apostle Peter) has raised from the dead; has made this man
sound, whom ye see and know, through faith in his name: and the faith which is
by him, has given to him this disposition of his whole body, in the presence
of you all. And again, chapter, 4.7. etc. When Peter and the rest were
examined, by what power or by what name they had wrought the miracle: Peter
answered, by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye have crucified, whom
God raised again from the dead etc.

Thus, they ascribe all, to the name and power of Christ, through faith: and
nothing to their own proper power, or godliness. For so they say expressly, in
the 12. verse of the 3. chapter before alleged. And for invocation, or calling
upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the effecting of these miraculous
signs: and for the dispensation of these gifts to others: read in the same
book of the Acts of the Apostles, chapter. 8.14.15.16.17 verse. and chapter.
9.17.18. and chapter. 16.18. Read also James. chapter, 5.14.15.

But that this part of the speech of our Savior, may be the better understood
of us: we are to consider, that he making this promise of the gift of working
miracles, to many of those that should believe, by the preaching of his
Apostles, and at their prayer, and by the imposition of their hands in his name
(as the effect it self, in the fulfilling of the same promise, has declared,
and may be discerned from the places, even now alleged out of the Acts of the
Apostles) we are, I say, to consider, that our Savior minded, first of all
(and so also performed) to bestow these his gifts upon the Apostles
themselves, according to his former promise, John, 14.12.13.14. And also
according as he had, in their tem^orall, and cursorie ministry for a time,
endued them with the like power before: as we read Matthew, chapter, 10.1.
Mark, 6.12.13. They cast out many devils: and they anointed many that were
sick with oil, and healed them. Like also, as he had given like power to the
other seventy, who acknowledged, that the devils were subdued unto them,
through his name: as we read, Luke, chapter, 9.12. And chapter. 10.1. and
verse, 17.18.19.20.

Now therefore that the Apostles had this power renewed unto them afterward,
according to the present speech of our Savior: we have it testified, by
diverse instances. First, for the casting out of the devils, Acts, 16.18 as was
alleged before. Likewise chapter, 5.16. Peter healed those that were vexed
with unclean spirits. And chapter, 8.7. Philip, though not an Apostle, but an
Evangelist; He casts unclean spirits out of those that were possessed. And
chap. 19.11.12. God wrought no small miracles by the hand of Paul. So that
from his body, were brought unto the sick, kerchiefes, or handkerchiefes, and
the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them.

The which, when other attempted to do, without any calling, or appointment of
our Savior thereunto; they found, to their own peril and hurt, that the
evil spirits would not obey them: no, though they command them in the name of
Christ, as it follows in the same chapter: as we may read, verse, 13 14.15
16. This gift of casting out devils, being bestowed upon Paul the last of the
Apostles, was not wanting to the former, as we may well hold it out of all
doubt: and so was it acknowledged of Paul himself. 2. Cor. 12.11.12.

Secondly, for the gift of speaking with new tongues: that is, with diverse
languages: that it also, was bestowed upon the Apostles: we read it testified
Act. chap. 2. Read also 1. Cor. 14.18. where we see Paul had likewise the same
gift. This gift of speaking strange languages, is noted by this phrase of
speaking with new tongues; in such sense, as they are said to have new
hearts, who are renewed in their minds, and affections, by the Spirit of God.

Thirdly, for power and preservation against the stinging of Serpents, we
have an instance for the confirmation of it in Paul, Acts, 28.3.4.5.6. The
like preservative power, the rest (no doubt) had, as their necessities might at
any time require: though it may be, that our SAVIOVR (under this taking away
of Serpents, and the other preservative against poysonings by any venomous
drink, as need should require) would there-with-all, metaphoricallie
express, that most provident care, which he had over those, that will
faithfully employ themselves, in the service of his Gospel: according unto
that which he said to the seventy Luke, 10.19. Behold I give unto you power
to tread on Serpents, and Scorpions and on all the power of the enemy, and
nothing shall hurt you. According also to that, Psalm: 91.13. Thou shall walk on
the lion, and on the aspe, the young lion, and the dragon, shall thou tread
under feet. Nevertheless, we are not to make question, but the provident care of
our Savior, extends to give power against these very dangers mentioned, even
in their proper and natural kinds: even so often as necessity (by reason of
the wicked endeavors of the instruments of Satan, that old Serpent) required:
when they sought, (as we may well think they did sometimes) to poison the
servants of God, whom they did deadly hate. And thus, the Lord would honor the
ministry of the Gospel, in the hand of his servants; no less then he did in
the ministry of Moses, in giving him a powerful remedy, against the stinging
of serpents, for the healing of his people in the desert.

Finally, for the gift of healing sicknesses, bestowed on the Apostles: we have
seen some instances and proofs before, Act. 3.6.7.8. and ch: 5.15.16. and
also, ch: 19.11.12. And we may see it further confirmed ch: 9.32.33.34. where
Peter heals Aeneas, who was sick of the palsy, and had kept his bed 8.
years. Yea more then this; he raised Dorcas from death to life, as it follows
in the same ch: And ch: 8.7. Phillip the Evangelist, besides that he cast out
Devils out of those that were possessed: he did also heal many that were taken
with Palsies, and other kinds of lamenes, And ch: 14, 3. Paul and Barnabas
wrought great signs and wonders at Iconium. And v. 8.9.10. Paul healed a
creeple at Lystra. And ch: 28.7.8.9. the same Apostle praying, and laying his
hands on the father of Publius, who lay sick of a fever, and of the bloody
flixe, he healed him: and many other, in the same Island, of sundry diseases.

The same graces, which were chiefly, and more immediately bestowed on the
Apostles: they were by their ministry, and at their prayer, and by imposition
of their ^andes: bestowed likewise, on many other, as it pleased God to
dispose, and dispense the same: according to the promise of our Savior, extant
in our text of the Evangelist Mark: And as may furthermore be evident, from
that we read, Act: 8. verse 14.15.17 18. For at the prayer of Peter and John;
and by the laying on of their hands: many of Samaria, received the
extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost. And ch: 10.44.46. at the preaching of
Peter; the holy G^ost fell on all them that heard the word, so that they spoke
with tongues, and magnified God. Read also ch: 11.15.16. As I began to speak
(says Peter) the holy Ghost fell on them even as upon us at the beginning. Then
I remembered the word of the Lord, how he said, John baptized with water but ye
shall be baptized with the holy Ghost. And ch: 19 6. Paul laid his hands on
diverse at Ephesus, to the number of about twelve, and the holy Ghost came on
them, and they spoke languages, and prophesied. We read also, that this gift of
speaking languages, together with sundry other: abounded in the church of
Corinth: 1. Ep. chapter 12. and 13. and 14.

But from that which the holy Ghost writes, we may perceive, that (as was said
in the beginning of this treaty) that these gifts were not common to all, but
given to a few in comparison of the rest: and therefore that it was a more
particular, or special effect of the apostolical ministry, then the gift of
faith to salvation is. For so says the Apostle. To one is given one gift, and
to another a diverse gift, etc. ch: 12.8. etc. ver. 30. Are all doers of
miracles? have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? etc. And
as they were given to few in comparison of the rest; so also, the gifts of
working miracles, were given to continue for a short season in comparison of
the time since their ceasing: that is, no longer then the Lord saw it meet,
for the confirmation of the truth of his Gospel. Yea so short was the season,
that it well near ceased when the Apostles deceased; and they that had
received those gifts by the imposition of their hands. And thereupon does the
Apostle to the Hebrews, even at that time when he wrote, reason for the
authority of the Gospel, from the signs already wrought; and not so much,
from any present signs; or any which were after that to be wrought. For so he
writes, chap: 2. verse 3.4. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
salvation, which at the first began to be preached by the Lord, and afterward
was confirmed unto us, by them that heard him, God bearing witness thereunto
both with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of the holy
Ghost according to his own will.

Nay, since those times; God has given us warning, rather to take heed, lest
we should be drawn away from the truth, by false signs and wonders of
Antichrist, and of false Prophets: then to look for any further confirmation,
then we had already, from our Savior Christ himself, and his holy Apostles,
Mat: 24.4, 5, 11, 23, 24, 25, 16. John, 5, 43. 2. These. 2, 1, 2, 3, 9, 10, 11.

Thus much therefore concerning the more particular effects, of the
Apostolical ministry; according to the promise of our Savior Christ, in
this part of his speech, recorded by our Evangelist Saint Mark.

Now let us return again to Saint Matthew: and from him, consider of those
words of our Savior, which we may well account the last branch, and
conclusion of this his whole speech: containing a general promise of his
presence, with all his faithful ministers: whether Apostles, and other
extraordinary ones for that time; or any in a more ordinary course and
calling, according to his appointment by them, even to the end of the world.
For so it is of it self plain, that our Savior is to be understood: insomuch
as the Apostles, and the rest of the holy ministers of the Gospel, who were in
those days; continued but a few years, in comparison of the durance of the
world since their time. And therefore the promise must of necessity, be
extended to all his faithful ministers, in all ages; whosoever were since
their times to succeed them: even so long as the world should last.

But here are two things to be diligently inquired into of us. First, who those
ministers of the Gospel are, which our Savior would have us to account
successors to his holy Apostles, so long as the world endures, Secondly, what
manner of presence that is, which our Savior ha^h promised, both to the one,
and also to the other. First therefore.



All such as after trial of their fitness to minister, have at any time, a
lawful calling; and do faithfully, and diligently preach the Gospel of
Christ: teaching the people of Christ, (^uer whom they have charge) to observe
the Apostles doctrine: even all things whatsoever our Savior Christ commanded
them, and noth^ng el^e besides: they are the true successors of the Apostles.

Explication and proof.
All such indeed, must needs be accounted faithful ministers of our Savior
Christ; and true successors of his holy Apostles. For by such notes; and
chiefly by their doctrine: our Savior would have them tried and discerned; as
we may perceive by that we read, for the description and reproof of the
cont^ary false Apostles and teachers, Mark. 7 15. etc. and Gal 1, 8, 9, 10, And
Colos. ^, 6, 7, 8, 9, and verses 18, 19. And 1, Tim 4, 1, 2, 3. And 2. Peter
chap: 2, 1. And the Apost^e John, 1. Ep: 4, 1, 2.3.

Yea further, the Apostle Paul, writing by the spirit of Christ, will have them
tried by the simple and sinceare manner of preaching without the enticing
speech of man's wisdom, and without affectation of glory, etc. 2. Cor. 11, 2,
3, 4 and verse 12, 14, 15. Read also, 1, Ep: chap. 2, 1, ^, 3.4. etc. For such
as affect such vainglorious and curious courses; not contenting themselves,
with the simplicity of the Gospel: they are in the high way to the corrupting
of doctrine, and to wax false Apostles in short time; as the same holy Apostle
gives plainly to understand.

Thus then, the trial of the true ministers of our Savior Christ and of the
lawful successors of the holy Apostles; even so long as the world lasts; it
is by the truth and sincerity of their doctrine, especially. Yea so; as if
this be found in them, they are to be accounted good and faithful ministers of
Christ: though it may be, that in co^fused or disordered times, there may
easily be some defect in their outward ordination and calling. Now, touching
the second point.

Qu. What manner of presence is that, which our Savior has promised to his
faithful ministers, both Apostles and others; such as have been described:
even to the end of the world?

It is the divine presence of his holy spirit, to give such mighty effects
unto their ministry as have already bin declared: even to the salvation of
all believers; and to the condemnation of all infidells and rebels to the end
of the world: as our Savior himself, has already determined.

Explication and proof.
That it is the divine presence of his holy spirit, which our Savior promises
to the faithful ministers of his Gospel, to the worlds end: and no bodily
presence: it is most certain from his own words, which he has spoken
before, saying; The poor ye shall always have with ye: but ye shall not
have me always. To wit, so as ye have the poor, that is, visibly and bodily,
among ye. Mat: 26, 11. And therefore, they are altogether deceived, who, by a
wrong interpretation of these, or the like words; do dote of a bodily presence
of our Savior, either in, or without the Sacrament of his Supper, etc. Of the
which more afterward. Furthermore, that is most true which is answered; that
our Savior is not idly present, when he does as it were walk, in the midst
of the candlesticks: that is, in the midst of his church; as the spirit of
our Savior himself speaks, Revel: 2.1. but he is present either with his
gracious assistance, to comfort and encourage his ministers, so far forth as
they endeavor and perform a faithful service; or else, to reprove and
chastise such as walk not faithfully before him: as these Epistles show, which
he directed to the seven churches in Asia; as we read in the 2, and 3. chap: of
that book of the Revelation.

This most gracious promise, of our Saviors presence, and assistance, ought to
be a singular encouragement, to all that be faithful in their ministry before
him: to put them in good hope of good success; yea even in the midst of all
contrary fears, and temptations: and notwithstanding all contrary resistances,
by the devil and his instruments. For if the Lord be with us, and on our side;
who can be against us? Rom: 8.31. and Ps. 24.1.2. etc. The Lord being with
Joseph, al things prospered in his hand, Gen: 39.3. likewise the 2. of Sam:
5.10. David prospered and grew, because the Lord God of Hosts was with him.
This was the encouragement, which God gave to Iaakob, Gen: 28.15. and which he
gave to Joshua, as we read ch 1.5. As I was with Moses so will I be with thee, I
will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. Be strong and of a good courage, etc.
From whence also, the holy Apostle giue^h encourageme^t, generally to every
one, that walks in the ways of God: even because the Lord has said, I will
not leave thee, nor forsake thee. So that (as the Apostle assures us) we may
boldly say. The Lord is my helper, neither will I fear what man can do unto
me. Heb: 13.5.6. This was the encouragement which the Angel gave to Gedion, The
Lord is with thee (says he) thou valiant man. To whom, when Gedion answered,
Ah my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this come upon us? and
where be all his miracles, which our fathers told us of, and said; Did not the
Lord bring us out of Egypt? But now the Lord has forsaken us, and delivered us
into the hand of the Midianits, etc. The Lord said unto him, I will be with
thee, and thou shall simite the Midianites, as one man, Judges, chapter 6, 12, 16.
And thus the Angel comforted, and encouraged the Virgin Mary, saying, the Lord
is with thee. Luk, 1.2.8 Thus David comforted and encouraged himself, Ps. 16,
8, The Lord is at my right hand, therefore I shall not slide. And Ps. 23, 1. The
Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want, etc. I will fear no evil, for thou art
with me: thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me. And Psalm: 118 6.7. The Lord
is with me: therefore I will not fear what man can do unto me. The Lord is
with me among them that help me: therefore I shall see my desire upon my
enemies. This comfort, the Apostle Paul professes, that he found in the time
of his trial. 2. Tim: 4, 16, 17.

At my first answering (says he) no man assisted me, but all forsook me: The
proof of his resurrection by his ninth appearance.
I pray God it may not be laid to their charge. Notwithstanding, the Lord
assisted me, and strengthened me, etc. And the Lord will deliver me from every
evil work, and he will preserve me to his heavenly kingdom. Read also, Act:
18.9.10. The Lord said to Paul by a vision by night, Fear not but speak and
hold not thy peace. For I am with thee, and no man shall lay hands on thee to
hurt thee. Thus every good and faithful servant of God is to comfort and
encourage himself, from this most assured promise of our Savior Christ; I am
with you to the end of the world. No Sermon, no prayer, no reproof, no
instruction, no exhortation, no part of ministry shall be in vain; but shall
have a mighty effect from the Lord in the end: both to the salvation of the
elect, and also to the condemnation of all infidells and rebels: whosoever
resist the blessed Gospel of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ.

This therefore, should most seriously admonish all that fear God, both
ministers of the word, and others: that insomuch as our Savior Christ though
he be bodily absent, yet is spiritually present, in all assemblies of his
people: that we all take heed, how we preach, and how we hear, how we pray,
how we regard out covenant made to God in baptism, how we come to his holy
table, how we fear his rebukes, how we rejoice and comfort our selves in his
promises: and finally, what reverend regard we have of the whole Ministry of
the Gospel, and of the Ministers thereof, for his sake: yea what reverend
regard we have of the presence of his divine majesty therein. For assuredly,
he is a continual beholder of us, and will execute true judgment and justice
among us; even upon every o^e, according to his works: as at the l^st day,
when this world shall once end, he will make it most clear and m^ni^est;
according to that of the Apostle, 1. Cor: chap: 4.5. And therefore it is, that
in respect of the certain truth of all things, that this Evangelist Matthew
^a^h rec^rded, and our Savior has promised and spoken: he also concludes
the Gospel with this word, Amen: like as we saw before, the Evangelist John
has concluded that Gospel which he did write.

And thus we conclude the eight appearance of our Savior Christ, after his
resurrection.

LEt us now proceed to these that remain. Whereof, two, that is the 9. and the
10. are recorded by the Apostle Paul (as it is very likely) and also by the
Evangelist Luke, as he makes it more manifest by his more full report. But
first, let us hear the report of the Apostle Paul.



In the 6. and 7. verses of the 15. chap: of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, thus he writes.

6. After that he was seen of more then five hundred brethren at once: whereof
many remain unto this present, and some also are fallen a sleep.

7. After that, he was seen of James: then of all the Apostles.

Explication.
The reason why we reckon these three appearances, for the ninth, tenth and
eleventh, which was the last of all that are mentioned in the holy Scriptures:
it is for that the holy Apostle Paul, reckons the last of these three, next
before that appearance, wherein our Savior shows himself to him last of any
of the Apostles; though not upon earth, but from heaven; as we shall see
afterward. And touching the other: we place them in the ninth and tenth places,
because all the rest, having some ground for their order, we know not so well,
where else we might better place them.

But before we come to consider of them in particular, it shall be good to
observe the reason, why the Apostle Paul makes rehearsal, both of these, and
also of some other of the former, whereof we have already considered, from the
testimony of the holy Evangelists. Namely, for that he being, to prove the
Article of the resurrection of our bodies, does first of all, prove that our
Savior is risen, because his resurrection is the ground and foundation of
ours. Now this he proves, The proofe-of his resurrection by his tenth
appearance.
by the appearances of our Savior Christ after his resurrection, like as we in
an imitation of him, and treading in the foote-steppes o^ the E angelists, have
to the same purpose, used what diligence we could, to lay the same open before
us. Thus then, the reason being observed, why the Apostle Paul alleged the
manifold appearances of our Savior Christ: let us come to the present
particulars. And first, touching the ninth appearance, seeing it is confirmed
unto us, by so great a cloud of witnesses: that is, of more then five hundred,
who at one and the same time being together, saw our Savior after he was
risen; and knew that it was verily he: Yea they being such as were brethren,
that is Disciples of Christ, even such as were desirous to know the truth
thereof, and were not such as saw a thing, which they regarded not, whether
they saw it or no: and the rather also, because at the time wherein the
Apostle wrote his Ep: to the Cor: (though some of those brethren were asleep;
that is, departed this life) yet many of them were yet living, and were ready
to testify the same: it is therefore such an appearance, as is very notable,
to confi^me us to believe this Article of our faith, that our Savior is
undoubtedly risen again from the dead. It might have sufficed, that we have
heard it confi^med, by two witnesses, by seven, by ten, and by eleven, at
sundry times: they being all meet, and most credible witnesses, even such as
God himself appointed thereunto. But now, that we have moreover and besides,
such a troop, as the Apostle tells us of: he may well be accounted, not
only an odd man, but even a very mad man, that would not give credit unto it.
We would say so of him that would not believe half a score honest men, that
should report unto us, that they have seen the Kings Majesty at a sermon, or
in his progress: much more, it not only ten, but ten times ten credible
persons, should from their own ^ye-witnesse confirm the same. And why then
should we not both say, and think the like; yea much rather judge him to be a
most unreasonable man, whosoever, upon so plentiful proofs, as the Lord has
vouchsafed us: will not firmly believe, that our Savior has manifestly
showed himself, to be risen ^g^ine; after that he had lain verily dead in the
grave?

Thus much therefore, may briefly suffice, concerning this testimony of so
great validity.

NOw, concerning the tenth appearance of our Savior to James, though alone: as
he had before appeared to Peter. This we are to understand, that as Peter did
not conceal it, and keep it close to himself; but told the rest of the
Apostles and brethren of it: so did the Apostle James. And therefore this
appearance also though it was but to one yet; has many witnesses, resting upon
the worthy fidelity, and credit of the Apostle James; besides that the Apostle
Paul (as we may justly conceive) would never have alleged this testimony, if
he had not certainly known, that it was very true. But if any should demand
further, why our Savior did thus show himself to James alone? we could not
answer, but only upon probable conjecture; that it is very like, that insomuch
as our Savior minded, and knew before, that he should be the first of all
the Apostles, that should suffer the death of martyrdom for his truth (as we
read he did, some twelve years after the ascension of our Savior Christ: Act:
1^.1, 2.) therefore it pleased him to show James this special favor,
moreover and besides the other. For seeing he vouchsafed to comfort Peter
against his death, though it followed about 20. years after that James was
slain; howsoever in Herod's purpose, he should have been forthwith the next,
as it follow h in the same 12. chap: of the Act: it is, at the least, very
likely (as was said) that even for this cause (whatsoever other there might
be) our Savior appeared thus to the Apostle James alone, to the special
animating and encouraging of him ther^vnto.

ANd thus, for want of any further record of this tenth appearance of our
Savior: we use the more speed, in coming to the eleventh, The proof of his
resurrection by his eleventh appearance.
which is the last of those wherein he showed himself upon the earth; for any
record that we find in the word.

Quest. Where therefore is this last appearance recorded unto us?

Ans. It seems to be that which the Apostle Paul tells us of, immediately
after the former; in that he says our Savior was seen of all the Apostles
together.

But the Evangelist Luke does most certainly report it unto us: more briefly
indeed, in the 50. verse of the last chap: of the Gospel which he wrote: but
more at large, in the first chap: of the Act: of the Apostles, verse 4.5.6.7.8.

It is true. Let us therefore hear his words.



Chapter 24.50. In the Gospel they are these.

Afterward, he ^ed them out into Bethania, and lifted up his hands, and
blessed them.



Ch: 1.4. When he had gathered them together (says the holy Evangelist) he
commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of
the Father, (which says he) ye have heard of me.

5. For John indeed Baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the
holy Ghost within these few days.

6. When they therefore were come together they asked of him, saying, Lord will thou at this time rest^re the Kingdom to Israel?

7. And he said unto them, it is not for you to know the times, or the
seasons, which the Father has put in his own power.

8. But ye shall receive power of the holy Ghost, when he shall com^ on you:
and ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in Judea and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.

Explication
Here indeed we have the full narration of this last appearance, wherein many
things are worthily to be considered of us. But which are they?



First, we are to consi^er the time when.

Secondly, the place where.

Thirdly, the per^^ns to whom our Savior appeared.

Fourthly, the speeches which he used to his Disciples.

Finally, that holy farewell, (if we may so call it) or rather his divine
blessing, which he gave to his Apostles, at his departure from them into
heaven.

Explication.
These points indeed, are worthy to be very diligently, and with all holy
reverence, to be considered, and weighed of us: and that also in the same
order, as you have rehearsed them.

First therefore, concerning the time of this last appearance of our Savior;
When was it?

It was at the end of forty days after his resurrection: and immediately
before his ascension up into heaven.

Explication.
It was so indeed, as the Evangelist Luke testifies in the first chap: of the
Acts, verse, ^. immediately before the words alleged by you: wherein, he says
expressly, that before this time our Savior had presented himself alive after
that he had suffered, by many infallible tokens, he being seen of them, by
the space of forty days, and speaking of the things (which appertain or
were to be spoken) of the kingdom of God.

In which words, even the continuance of our Savior, so long a space of time
upon the earth; besides his often appearances in the same: it ought to avail
much, to the establishing of our hear^s in the faith of his resurrection. For
as our Savior showed himself, four or five times the first day that he
arose; so he might in the next day, have showed himself six times more, if so
it had pleased him: and then have presently departed.

But he would not do so, for that tender regard which he had of our
infirmity; but stayed, by the space of forty days, that therein taking his
most fit opportunities to manifest himself: he might leave no cause of doubt
or scruple about this so weighty, and necessary an Article of our Belief.
And whereas the Evangelist affirms further, that in the space of so many
days, he spoke and gave commandment to the Apostles (whom he had chosen) in
matters concerning the kingdom of God: it may justly be an undoubted ground,
and warrant unto us (considering the faithfulness of the holy Apostles) that all
the doctrine that they taught, and the external order for the government of
the Christian churches which they practiced: and namely, the change of the
Jews Sabbath, to the day of the resurrection of our Savior; was according to
his divine direction, and commandment.

Thus much concerning the time.

The place of the appearance of our Savior, is next.



Where our Savior began to show himself at this time, it is not mentioned:
but that from the place where he did at this time first appear; he led them
into Bethania, and from thence to the mount of Olives: the Evangelist Luke does
plainly declare.

Explication and proof.
It is true. For in the holy Gospel he tells us, that he led them out into
Bethania. And in the 12, verse of the first cha: of the Acts of the holy
Apostles, he says further, that after the ascension of our Savior, they
returned to Jerusalem from the mount is which called the mount of Olives: it
being (as he notes) but a Sabbath days journey from Jerusalem.

The Bethania, which the Evangelist names, was, the town of Lazarus, and of
Marie and Martha, whom our Savior loved: as we read, John, 11:1.5. and of
Simon the Leper, who entertained our Savior in that supper, wherein Marie
powered the costly ointment upon him, cha: 12, 1, 2, 3. and Mat: 26.6 7. To the
which town our Savior resorted diverse times, for that love no doubt, which he
did bear to these his loving and dutiful Disciples: though not always to
feast or eat with them. Mark. 11, 1, 11, 12.

The mount of Olives was the place, whether our Savior did often resort
likewise: But for private meditation, and prayer, Luk, 21, ^7 and chap: 22, 36
And it was the place wherein he suffered one part of his most doleful
affli^tion, as appears in the same chap. Nevertheless, after that our Savior
had finished all things, and was now to ascend up into heaven: that mount which
had been the place of his most low abasement and humiliation: it was the place
from whence he ascended to his most high exaltation.

Whence, elegantly says a learned godly minister of our Lord Jesus Christ,
alluding to the name of Bethania, W. Per.
which according to the Hebrewe writing Beth-gnaijah, or the Sirian
Beth-gnaniah signifies the place of poverty or affliction: that if we bear
our afflictions, as we ought to do, either in our beds of sicknesses, or in
the prisons of persecutions, or at the stakes, or gibbets of execution, for the
testimony of the truth of Christ: such places, though they be as Bethanies
unto us for a time, yet God will make them, to be at the last, places of
passage unto us into heaven, as this Bethania, and the Mount of Olives, were to
our Savior.

But leaving this, let us come to the third point: that is, to the persons,
unto whom our Savior appeared this last time.



An^we^.
They were the whole number of the eleven, his chosen Apostles.

Explication
This is evident, both in the end of the Gospel, and also in the beginning of
the Acts written by S. Luke and 1, Cor. 15, 7. And it was to special purpose,
no doubt, seeing our Savior, at this time, intended to make the same persons,
the special witnesses of his ascension, whom he had already chosen, to be the
principal witnesses of his resurrection. And also because he had yet some
things to speak unto them, before he would leave them.

To these speeches therefore, let us now come.

Quest. Which were they?

Ans. They were first a commandment.

Secondly, a promise.

Thirdly, a reproof, with a renewing of the former commandment and promise.

Fourthly, a blessing.

Explication.
These so many speeches of our Savior, and his leading of them from one place
to another: as first to Bethania, which was about 15. furlongs distant from
Jerusalem, as we read, John, chap: 11.18. and then up to the mount of Olives
(if so we may understand that the ascension of our Savior was from the top of
the mountain) this mountain being but 7. furlongs from Jerusalem as the
Sirian text is: all shows that our Savior continued with his Apostles, a
good space of time. But let us come to the particular speeches.

And first, concerning the commandment.



It was the same, which our Savior had given them before: namely, that after
his ascension, they should keep together at Jerusalem, until he should power
on them the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost.

Explication.
This commandment, being (as you answer) no other, but that which our Savior
had given his Apostles before; according as we have seen in the fifth
appearance: it is here repeated again, because of the weighty and great
importance of the commandment it self. And also to help against the
forgetfulness of the Apostles; insomuch as they (as well as we, and all other)
were naturally easily forgetful, of the greatest, and most weighty matters of
the kingdom of God.

Thus much briefly, touching the commandment now: because we have considered
of it more fully before.

We come to the promise.



The same likewise, which our Savior had made unto them before; as he
himself puts them in remembrance: to wit, that he would surely furnish them
with all excellent gifts of the holy Ghost, meet for the performance of their
Apostleship.

Explication
As the repetition of the commandment, was to help against the forgetfulness
of the Apostles: so this repetition of the promise, was to confirm and
strengthen their faith, in the assured expectation of the fulfilling of it, in
the time and season thereof. And for their further comfort, he tells them,
that it should be shortly accomplished, even within a few days: that is, (as
the event declared) within ten days after this his promise, renewed unto
them. For the ascension of our Savior Christ following upon the same day,
immediately after that our Savior had ended all his speeches to his Apostles;
which was upon holy Thursday, as we call it: the extraordinary gifts of the
holy Ghost were bestowed upon the Apostles, the Lords day, seven nights after.
Yea, and for their further encouragement, to yield their obedience in waiting
for the performance of this promise; our Savior does set forth the excellency
of the blessing, which he minded to bestow upon them, by an unequal
comparison of the outward Baptism of John with water, and those inward gifts
of the spirit, which they should receive: the which he calls metaphorically,
a baptizing with the holy ghost. Not that our Savior minded to debase the
baptism, or ministry of John the Baptist, the which surely was accompanied
with great grace, and so acknowledged, and commended by our Savior himself
(for it was accompanied with faith, and repentance, in those whom he Baptized):
neither yet does he use this comparison, as though his Apostles, had received
no measure of any gifts of the holy Ghost already, (for the contrary has
been heretofore declared) but only by way of amplification; to illustrate the
incomparable excellency of those gifts, which should be given to them:
according to the most gracious gracious promise of the Father, for the
conversion of all the Nations of the world. And this shall, for the present,
suffice concerning the promise of our Savior. The reproof of the same our
Savior, is in the third place, to be considered of us.

But before we come to it, it is necessary, that we do observe the occasion
of it.



The occasion of our Saviors reproof, was that ouerbolde, and unseasonable,
and ignorant question, which the Apostles, (not yet fulite enlightened)
demanded of him: in that they asked him, saying. Lord, will thou at this time
restore the Kingdom to Israel?

Explication.
That this question of the Apostles, was the occasion, that our Savior
reproved them, the text is plain. And that it was both an ouerbould and
unseasonable, and also an ignorant question; the reproof of our Savior is a
sufficient proof in every respect. But that we be not ouerbolde, and
injurious in censuring the Apostles, above that is meet: besides that you
mentioned in your answer, that the Apostles were not so perfitlie enlightened
at this time, as they were afterward: let us consider further, that though
through ignorance, they did not yet rightly conceive of the spiritual nature
of the kingdom of our Savior Christ, and how it was not of this world, in such
manner as he had expreslie taught, and every way carried himself, in such
sort as they might, as we would think, easily have perceived it.

Yet we may not imagine them to be so gross, as to think that our Savior
should in this world, set up any earthly Kingdom, wherein they should live
deliciouslie, or exercize any unjust or cruel tyranny, etc.

But we are rather to conceive, that they thought that it should have been a
Kingdom more wisely and justly ordered, and governed; and abounding with
greater peace and riches, and glory, then ever did the kingdom of Israel, in
king Salomons days: yea so far exceeding king Salomons kingdom, as the
kingdom of Solomon did any the basest kingdom in all the world.

And besides, we are to conceive thus much; that, insomuch as our Savior was
now risen from the dead: and that therein they began to apprehend more
firmely^, the assurance of his godly and divine power and authority; according
to the doctrine which he himself had lately delivered unto them: it might
probably seem unto them, that now was a fit time and season, for that
purpose, howsoever he had before flatly denied to be made a king, to rule over
the people, as we read in the 6. chapt: of Saint John.

Finally, we may not suppose, that they did without reverence ask this
question: for the contrary appears, by the manner of speech which they use,
in calling him Lord, etc. in saying: Lord will thou at this time, etc. therein,
no doubt, yielding him the honor of souereigntie, which they acknowledged in
their hearts to be due unto him, above all that he would assume and take to
himself.

And yet all these things notwithstanding; that is to say, all these
probabilities in regard of the matter, and all these qualifications in their
affections: yet because they presumed without warrant of the word; yea rather
at unawares, presumed to ask a question of such a matter, as he had plainly
disclaimed, and taught them the contrary: he does very earnestly, and no less
justly rebuke them. Whence, we for our parts (being ready to see a mote in
the Disciples eyes, not yet altogether so cleared, as they were afterward)
may learn to discern the beam that is in our own, if so be that we be not
already grown stone blind. For do we not usually (even after longer
teaching, and after a more clear Revelation of all Truth, then the Apostles
at this time, which we now speak of, had) dote still after worldly
pleasure, and Richeste, and Honor, etc: with a desire to attain unto them,
yea though it should be by corrupt courses, of injustice and rapine, of
flattery and deceitful dealing, etc?

The Apostles infirmity therefore (such as it was, before our Savior had
thoroughly confirmed and established them) is well worthy to be marked of us, to
the more clear discovery, and to the more sharp reproof, of a corruption in
us, a hundredth fold worse then theirs was. And to this very end, let us now
come to that reproof which our Savior gave unto them.



Our Savior tells them roundly, that they presumed above that was meet for
them; in desiring to know the times and seasons of that, which God the Father
had reserved, as a proper roialtie and prerogative to his own divine Majesty,
and not to be communicated to any creature.

Explication.
This is in deed his meaning, in that he says, It is not for you to know the
times and seasons, which the Father has put in his own power. Verily, if the
Disciples of our Savior had well remembered, and advisedly considered, what our
Savior had said unto them (concerning the last day) that the Angels which are
in heaven, no nor the Son himself (to wit, in that he was man) did know the
day and hour, thereof, save the Father only: Matthew. 24.36. and Mark. 13.32.
surely they would not for shame or fear, have presumed to ask the question,
which for want of such due consideration, they were ouer-bold to demand. Let us
therefore, learn from hence, another excellent lesson; to wit, that as it had
been the duty of these disciples: so it is our duty, and the duty of all
Christians, even of every one of us in our several callings, to settle our
minds, to walk humbly, and with a single eye, in those duties, which God has
in his wisdom, and of his singular mercy prepared for us to walk in: and to
leave the secrets of Gods counsel, and administration of his Kingdom (at the
least, touching the particular circumstances thereof) to the Lord himself:
who, without us, will order and dispose of all things, in a more excellent
manner and order, then is meet for us to know, before the manifestation
thereof, by the effect or even it self. The secret things belong to the Lord
our God, as Moses says, (and it is a saying worthy so great a Prophet) but the
things revealed, to us, and to our children for ever, that we may do all the
words of this law. Deuteronomy. chap. 29. verse, 29. To the which purpose also, in
like excellent wisdom, says the most wise King Solomon, in his Ecclesiastes,
sundry times: that the Lord does of purpose, order all things, in so uncertain
a course to man; that he should not be able certainly to find our, what
should fall out afterward: to the end he might learn hereby, to humble
himself, under the hand of God, to whom of most due right, all flesh ought to
stoop. Eccles. 2.19. And chap. 3.14.22. And chap. 7.2. and verse, 15.16. And
chap. 8.6.7. And chap. 9.1. etc. So then, let us do our duties, every one of
us in our callings faithfully, and commit both our selves, and all success, to
the most wise, and righteous disposition of the Lord. For he is most faithful
and gracious: and he will assuredly (above that is meet for us to know before
hand) bring all to a most godly issue, both to his own great honor and glory,
and also to our greatest comfort in the end. Shall the husbandman neglect to
sow his corn, because he knows not whether the harvest following shall be
prosperous and fruitful or no? Shall the Shepherd neglect to tend his flock
in Winter, because he knows not whether they will the of the rot in the
Spring? Shall the Minister of the word, cease his preaching, because he
knows not whether his preaching will be accepted of the people, or no? Shall
the Justice of peace, or Judge of a Country, neglect to execute justice,
because he knows not whether he shall ever be able to rid Malefactors out
of the Country or no? Shall the parent or Master of a family, neglect to
instruct, correct, and pray for his family, because he knows not whether
some of them will ever come to good, or no? God forbid. Let us for the present
do our duty, and as was said, so let us say, yea so let us practice still:
even with patience, humbly to commit the success of all, unto the Lord, for
all time to come. For as our blessed Savior tells us, (to whom we ought in
all things to yield a most listening and obedient ear) It is not for us to
know the times and seasons, which the Father has put in his own power: to
wit, according to the prerogative royal, of his own most sovereign
authority.

But (as was said) our Savior does not only reprove that which was faulty
in his Disciples: but for their direction also, he does again put them in
remembrance, both of the commandment which he had given, and also of the
promise which he had made and renewed unto them before. As though he should
say, this ought to suffice you, that you have the promise of a special dignity
and power, to be given unto you: though ye do not encroach upon the
incommunicable power, or authority of God. It is your part, to think first of
the labor, and then of the ease: first of the fight, then of the victory:
first of humiliation, then of the Crown of glory: as you have seen me to
have gone before you.

What Master among us, would take it well at his servants hands: if, when we
should send him to require some debt that were due unto us; or upon any other
lawful message, and service: if he should refuse to go, unless he knew
before, what success he should have, etc? Our Savior therefore, gives his
Disciples to understand, that it was their parts (laying aside all curious
inquisition about such things, as belonged not unto them) to bend their
minds, in hope of the fulfilling of the promise of the Father; to be his
witnesses, and to preach his Gospel in all places, whether he should disperse
and send them, from Jerusalem into all parts of the world, both far and
near. For so our Savior says, Ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in
Jerusalem, and in Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the
earth. And this they must do, whatsoever entertainment they find, whether
good or bad, in all places, whether so ever he should send them. Thus our
Savior, most wisely draws the minds of his Disciples, from their vain
speculations, to mind those things, which GOD would have them mind.

And thus also, we may see to our own notable instruction, even from this
most wise and gracious instruction of our Savior, (if we have any grace to
see) that howsoever our minds, would gladly be wandering, and gadding after
our own vain imaginations: yet it is necessary for us, that we should be
earnestly rebuked, and called home from such conceits, to the word of God, and
to the care of the duties, which he requires at our hands. Yea, we may see, it
is most profitable, that the same word of God (I mean the same instructions of
the word) should be often inculcated unto us: to the end, all other strange
conceits, (though never so pleasing) might be utterly chased away.

The last speech of our Savior (as was answered) was his words uttered in
blessing of his Apostles. For when it is said, that he lifted up his hands,
and blessed them; we must not think, that it was a dumb blessing in gesture,
or in sign and ceremony only: but with word of mouth also. And this (as was
also answered before) was that holy farewell, which our Savior gave to his
Apostles, when he left them, and ascended up into heaven.

For the better understanding of which his farewell, we may not unprofitably
call to mind, that the word of blessing, is taken sundry ways in the holy
Scriptures: according unto the sundry kinds of persons, who are said, either
to bless, or to be blessed. For not only is God said to bless men; but men
also are said to bless God: and one man to bless, and to be blessed of
another. Superiors are said to bless inferiors, and inferiors their
Superiors; and more usually one familiar friend and neighbor another: but not
in the same sense, or manner, as we will now briefly consider.

When one familiar friend and neighbor is said to bless an other, in an
usual. and as we may say, a salutatorie, or a greeting manner: acaccording to
that, Gen: 24, 31. Come in thou blessed of the Lord: And Ruth: 2.4. Boaz says
to his Reapers, The Lord be with you, and they said to him, the Lord bless
thee. Read also, Psalm: 129.8. In such use of this word, To bless, is no more
then a mutual testimony of love, by wishing well one to an other.

When inferiors are said to bless superiors, whether it be, that children
are said to bless their natural parents, or subjects their civil Prince and
Magistrate, or people their spiritual Pastors and Teachers: the word
(blessing) is to be understood, as noting a more dutiful affection, in
wishing and praying all good unto them, with an honorable and thankful
regard of those special blessings which God has, and does vouchsafe unto us
by them, as by his blessed instruments appointed thereunto. Thus, the people
blessed King Solomon, as a figure of Christ their King, 1. King, 8.66.
according also to that, Psam: 20, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and Psalm: 21, 6. Thou have
set him as blessing for ever. And Psalm: 72, 17. where likewise, there is a
prophetical reference to our Savior Christ, All Nations shall bless him: and
be blessed in him. And thus, congregations may, and ought to bless their
Pastors and Teachers; and children, their parents: that is to say, they both
may, and also ought to pray for them, that God would bless and prosper them:
according to that Colos. 4.3. Praying also for us, etc. And 2. These. 3, 1, 2.
and Heb: 13.18. And in this respect, does David, as one succored against
temptations by Abigaill, though a woman, (as a prophetisse of God sent unto
him) bless her, and God for her, and her counsel most heartily. 1. Sam: 25.
32.33. But when Superiors do bless their inferious, whether Princes or
natural Parents; when as they do it in faith, or by prophetical instinct,
they do not only pray for blessing; but also pronounce, and assure blessing
from God, to such, both children and subjects, as shall walk in the ways of
God, and believe the promises which he has made, according to that, Ephesians
chapter 6. verse 2. And thus, Isaak blessed his son Iaakob. Genesis, chapter
27. verses 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. and verses 33, 34, 35. And thus Iaakob blessed
the two sons of Joseph, Manasset, and Ephraim. chap. 48. verses 8, 9, etc.
20, 21, 22. And all his own sons, the principal Fathers of the twelve
Tribes, chapter 49.1, etc. verse 28. And Moses, Deuteronomy, chapter 33.1, etc.
And King Solomon his subjects: 1. Kings 8.14. And King Hezekiah. 31.8.

The same is to be said, concerning Ministers of the word, in the ordinary
course of their ministry. According to that, Numbers chapter 6. verses 22,
23, etc. Thus shall ye bless the children of Israel, and say unto them, The
Lord bless thee, etc. And Deuteronomy 10. v. 8. The Lord separated them to
bless in his name. And 2. Chronicles, chapter 30. verse 27. The Priests and
the Levites arose, and blessed the people, etc. And Psalm 118.26. Blessed be
he that comes in the name of the Lord: we have blessed you out of the house
of the Lord. Read also Psalm. 128. Neither is there any doubt, but the blessing
of the ministers of the Gospel, is as effectual, as ever was the blessing of
the ministers of the Law: according to that promise of our Savior, Matthew.
16.19. and chap. 18.18. and John 20.23. Read also Cor. 1. chap. 16.23, 24. and
Epistle 2. chap. 13. verse 13. yea so, that this grace was not committed to the
Apostles. that it should die with them: but that they should be the Ministers
of Christ, to derive it to the Church of God, in the successiue hand of all
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, to the end of the world.

And therefore all ought in special manner, to regard the blessings of the
Ministers of the word, in their ordinary ministry, above any other
isntrumental or ministerial blessing of God. And in this respect, it is said,
Heb. 7. verse 7. without all contradiction, the lesser is blessed of the
greater After this manner therefore, does man bless man, and one man is
blessed of another; though in a diverse sort, as we have now seen.

Now further, whenas man is said to bless God, whether he that blesses be
inferior, or Superior among men; it is not to be thought, that he either
prays or pronounces blessing upon God: but only, that he does most humbly
profess and acknowledge, all glory, praise, and thanksgiving, as most due unto
him: as King David does, 1. Chro. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. And so he exhorts the
people to do. verse 20. And so does King Solomon, 2. Chro. 6.4. Read also
Psalm. 41.13. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, world without end. Amen, Amen.
And Psalm 72.18, 19. And Psalm. 100.4 Praise him, and bless his name. Some
translate it thus, praise him, and speak good of his name. For to bless, is
indeed, to speak good of the name of God, and to extol and lift it up above
every name, etc. And Psalm. 145. verse 21. Read also James, chap. 3. verse 9.

Finally, when God is said to bless man, whether privately and particularly,
or publicly and more commonly: we are to understand it, to signify that he
does specially favor and advance such a person: as Judges 5.24. and Luke 1.
verse 28. Blessed art thou among women. And Prou. 10.7. The memorial of the
just shall be blessed. Or such a people, as Psalm. 32.1.2. and 89 15. and
144.15. Blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord. In which respect,
Comment: Cen cap. 2. verse ^. Secundum verbum exegeti cum est prioris.
M^ster Calvin worthily observes, that to bless, and to sanctify, or to set
apart from common use, is used for the same thing: and that the latter is an
interpretation of the former. Diem ergo septimum Deus sanctificat, dum eximium
reddit, vt singulari iure excellat inter alios. God (says he) sanctifies the
seventh day, in that he makes it notable, and of singular dignity among the
rest. And this (says he) is that which he means by the former word of
blessing it. Now therefore, as blessing notes the special favor of God, so
all the benefits of God, both spiritual, and belonging to this life, as fruits
of his favor; they are all comprehended under the blessing of God. Genesis 1.28.
God blessed mankind, and said unto them, bring ye forth fruit, and multiply,
and fill the earth, and subdue it, etc. And Prou. 10.22. The blessing of the
Lord, makes rich. And Psalm. 29.11. The Lord will bless his people with peace.
and Psalm. 37.22. Such as be blessed of God, shall inherit the land. And Psalm.
128. Read also Deuteronomy. 28. But they are the chief blessings, which are belonging
to the soul. Of the which, read Act. 3.25.26. Ye are the children of the
Prophets, and of the covenant, which God has made unto our fathers, saying to
Abraham, Even in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.
First unto you has God raised his Son Jesus Christ, and him he has sent to
bless you in turning every one of ye, from your iniquities. And Ephesians. 1.3.
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, in Christ. And thus it is
said every where, that they are blessed, that do fear the Lord: which trust
in him: which wait upon him: which are poor in spirit: which mourn: which are
meek: which hunger and thirst after righteousness, etc. All such are blessed:
that is, they are in an excellent estate, and have received blessed gifts and
graces, from the special favor of God.

These things thus considered, it is now the more easier to understand, in
what sense our Savior is said to bless his Disciples: namely, in the most
special manner above all other, whether Kings, or Prophets, or Priests,
could bless; in that he was a chief Minister, yea a mediator betwixt God
and man. So that he did not only wish blessing, or pronounce blessing, by an
authority or calling committed to him of God; but even in pronouncing, he gave
also his blessing to his Apostles: that is, The meaning of the words of the
article.
all fitness for their ministerial service first, and afterward, all meet
gifts and prosperous success: that so they might be instruments of his
blessing, not only for their own times; but even to the end of the world. In
this blessing of the Apostles, our Savior lifts up his hands; to give to
understand, that all blessing comes from heaven: according to that of the
Apostle James, chap. 1.17. And thus much shall suffice, concerning this last
appearance of our Savior here upon earth, for the full and sufficient proof,
and confirmation of his holy resurrection. Yea, that which hitherto has been
said, shall suffice for the present, concerning all the appearances of our
Savior; so far forth, as they are recorded in the holy Scriptures, and
testified unto us by sufficient witnesses: even from the time, that he rose
from the dead, by the space of whole sortie days, until the time wherein he
ascended up into heaven.

We have indeed two appearances more, recorded in the holy Scriptures, the one
to Stephen the first Martyr, next after our Savior himself. Act. 7.55. And
the other to Paul, at his miraculous conversion. Act. 9.3. etc. and chap. 22.6.
and chap. 26.13, etc. and 1. Cor. 15.8. But these were not in that space of
time, wherein he was here upon earth, as all the former were: but from heaven,
after he was ascended up into heaven: and so belong rather, to his sitting on
the right hand of God his Father, then to this present Article of his
resurrection, as we are here after further to consider. Nevertheless, they are
very excellent, and glorious proofs, not only that our Savior is in our
nature risen from the dead, and ascended up once into heaven; but also, that
he is, still resident abiding and living there in heaven: even in the same his
humane nature, which did once rise again.

ANd now, having good trust, that upon these so manifold sure testimonies, and
confirmations of this Article of our faith; none of us do stand in doubt of
the truth of it: let us in the next place, (according to the order of our
inquiry) come to the meaning of the words of this Article, wherein we
profess that we do believe, that our Lord Jesus Christ rose again the third
day from the dead.



The words of this Article teach me to believe, that our Lord Jesus Christ, the
only begotten Son of God our heavenly Father, did by his own divine power,
working together with the Father, quicken and raise up the same his holy body,
which was before crucified, dead, buried, and remained in the grave, as one
truly descended down among the dead: yea, that he being verily in the state
and condition of the dead, (save only that his flesh saw no corruption, the
soul being nevertheless perfitly separated and removed from the body as
far as heaven is distant from the earth; neither yet perfitly glorified, but
only resting in the paradise of God, among the souls of the faithful already
departed this life, and abiding in like estate and condition with them, all the
time that his body lay dead in the grave) the words of this Article (I say)
do teach me to believe, that the third day after his sufferings, he did
quicken and raise up the same his body, that was dead, and buried; from the
former condition of the dead, and from the power and dominion of the grave,
(his soul returning again to his body) thenceforth never to die, or to be
sundred any more: but to live for ever, in perfect happiness and fullness of
glory, with his divine nature; as the Articles following, will further
declare.

They do teach us indeed, thus much For seeing the humane nature of our
Savior Christ, Explication.
being free from sin in it self, and having on our parts, made a full
satisfaction to God for our sins: and moreover insomuch as, the same humane
nature was united to the divine nature, in one Person; it was impossible, that
death should prevail against him. And therefore, at the time appointed: that
is, on the third day after he was crucified, dead, and buried, he brake the
bonds of death; and has openly declared, that he has made a full conquest
both of sin and death, and of him that had the power of death: that is, the
devil.

But insomuch as this your answer is somewhat long, The meaning of the Article.
and consists of many parts, it shall be good for us, in regard of the
weightinesse of the matter, accordingly to consider of the several proofs
thereof.

First therefore, as touching this, that our Savior Christ did by his own
divine power, together with the Father, raise up his body from the dead: we
have the testimony of our Savior himself, who said before his death, that he
would do so. John 10.17 18. Therefore (says he) does my Father love me
because I lay down my life, that I might take it again: this commandment
have I received of my Father. And 1 Pet. 3.1^. Christ was put to death,
concerning the flesh, but he was quickened by the spirit: that is to say, by
his divine power. And further, concerning the joint working of the Father: thus
we read Act. 2.24. God (says the Apostle Peter) has raised up (Jesus) and
loosened the sorrows of death, because it was impossible that he should be
holden of it. And verse 32. This Jesus has God raised up whereof we all are
witnesses. And again more fully, chap. 3. verses 13, 14, 1^. The God of
Abraham, Isaak and Inakob, the God of our Fathers has glorified his Son
Jesus etc. and has raised up the Lord of life from the dead whereof we are
witnesses. And verse ^6. First unto you has God raised up his Son Jesus. And
chap. 4. verse 10. Be it known to ye all, etc: that God has raised again
Jesus Christ from the dead. Likewise, chap. 5. verse 30. The God of our Fathers
has raised up Jesus, whom ye slew, and hanged on a tree. Him has God listed
up by his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, etc And we are witnesses of
these things which we say, yea and the holy Ghost, whom God has given to those
that obey him. And chap. 10. verse 40. Him God raised up the third day, and
caused that be was showed openly. And chap 13 in the Sermon that Paul preached
at Antioch of Pisidia, from the 30. verse, etc. And Heb. chap. 13. verse 20.
God is called the God of peace, who brought again from the dead the Lord
Jesus, the great Sheepeheard of the sheep.

Thus Therefore, we see it plentifully confirmed, that the body of our
Savior Christ which was crucisied, dead, buried, and which lay in the grave to
the third day, (is one free among the dead, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm.
8.5) was raised up again by his own divine power, together with the Father.
And that this was done (the body nevertheless remaining free from corruption)
it is expressly testified by the Apostles, Peter and the rest, Act. 2.27.31. and
chapter 13. verses 36, 37. according to the prophecy of David in the 16.
Psalm.

Moreover, that his soul, which before he had already commended into the
hands of his Father, with the which also, the soul of the repenting thief,
was the same day in Paradise, as we have seen Luke 23.45, 46. that, I say,
this his soul returned again: it is necessary that, according to the truth,
we do believe it to be so; because otherwise, (insomuch as the soul of man is
the chief part of man) Christ risen could not be the same, whole and true
Christ, who was crucified, dead, and buried before. Neither shall it be amisle
for us, in this behalf, to conceive, that the ministry of the holy Angels,
who descended from heaven, to bear witness of the resurrection of our
Savior, was employed to the bringing of the soul to the body: according as
the Ange^ls are said to have carried the soul of Lazarus, from the body of
Lazarus, into the bosom of Abraham. But howsoever the conueiance of the soul
of our Savior, was from heaven, to the body: this we may be sure of, that
it was by the divine hand and power of God, reunited to the body; from the
which it had been separated by so far a distance before.

That the same his soul was not yet fully glorified, though for the time of
his separation from the body, it rested in the Paradise of God, with the
souls of the righteous, departed this life: it is very evident, because the
full glorification of the whole humane nature, depended upon the ascension of
our Savior to the right hand of the divine Majesty of God, The Promise.
as we may perceive, John 7.39. and chap. 17.5. and 20.17.

And that there is no death or separation for ever, now after the reuniting of
the soul to the body: the Apostle Paul does plainly testify, Act. 13.34. in
that he says, Explication and proof.
God raised up (Jesus) from the dead, no more to return to the grave. To the
which very purpose also, he alleges the testimony of the Prophet Isaias,
chap. 55.3. I will give ye the holy things of David, which are faithful. For
the Apostle gives us to understand, (as the truth is) that if our Savior
should not live for ever, he could not perform the mercies promised to the
Church of God, in him, and by him alone, for ever.

Likewise, Rom 6.9.10. If (says the same Apostle Saint Paul) we be dead with
Christ, we believe that we shall live also with him. Knowing that Christ being
raised from the dead, dies no more: death has no more dominion over him. For
in that he died, he died once to sin; that is, to take away the power and
strength of sin, in those that believe in him: but in that he lives, he
lives to God, that is immortallie in his eternal glory. And Revel. 1.17.18.
Fear not (says our Savior himself to the Apostle John) I am the first, and
the last. And I am alive, but was dead: and behold, I am alive for evermore,
Amen: and I have the keys of hell and of death. Finally, he is in this respect
called, and is in very deed, The Lord of life and glory, Act. 3.15. and 1.
Cor. ^.8. Heb. 7.24, 25. This man, because he endures ever, he has an
everlasting Priesthood: wherefore he is able also perfectly, to save them that
come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. And
chap. 9.28

THus then, we having the meaning of this Article of our Saviors resurrection
from the dead: let us according to our order, come to the promise, and then to
the use of it, being apprehended by faith: first touching that comfort which it
yields to us, from our Savior Christ: and then for duty, which it requires
at our hands toward him, as a fruit of our thankfulness for the same.



We have the prophetical promise of it in the 16. Psalm: as it is evident by
the allegation of the Apostle Peter, in the 2. chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles, verses 25, etc. And of the Apostle Paul in the 13. chapter, verses
32, 33, 34. etc yea we have the prophetical promise of the whole glorification
of our Savior, to our advancement, in the 2. Psalm. For ask of me (says the
Lord) and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of
the earth for thy possession.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. And this, no doubt, is for the singular benefit, and
preferment of every believing Gentile, as well as of the believing Jews: as we
may see the same gracious promise of the Lord yet further confirmed by the
Prophet Isaias, chap. 53.10, 11, 12. He shall see his seed, and shall prolong
his days, and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hands, etc. The
Prophet shows, what should follow after the death of our Savior, according
as it is come to pass in a great part: and shall be still more and more for
ever; according to the former prophecies of the holy Scriptures; and according
to the testimony of our Savior Christ himself. Luke 24. verses 26, 27. and
verses 46, 47, 48, 49.

But these things belong to the comfort of faith, in respect of the
resurrection of our Savior Let us therefore proceed unto it.

Question. Answer. Explication.
What is the use of this Article, for the comfort of our faith?

It is very great, and that also sundry ways.

It is very true. For the comfort of the resurrection of our Savior, is (as
it were) the harvest of his death: in such sense as our Savior himself
compares his death unto the seed time thereof, John. 12 23.24. saying, The
hour is come, that the Son of man must be glorified. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, Except the wheat corn fall into the ground and die, it abides
alone: but if it die, it brings forth much fruit, etc.

Now we know, that the time of harvest, The Comforts.
is a time of greater joy then is the seed time. And again, the Sun rising,
is more glorious then the Sun going down. So is the resurrection of our
Savior Christ, in comparison of his death. For though the death has
purchased, yet the resurrection puts into possession. Though all are lapped
up in the death, yet they are not clearly unfolded, but by the resurrection,
etc. And for this cause it was, that usually, when our Savior spoke of his
suffering and death, (which in themselves were uncomfortable) he was wont to
add the doctrine and promise of his resurrection, as a certain larde or
sweetning unto it: as Matthew, chapter 16.21. and chapter 17.21, 23. and chap.
20.18, 19, 20. and chap. 26.31, 32. And Mark 14.28. Likewise Luke 18.31, 32,
33. and cha. 24.6, 7, 8. where the holy Angels do put his Disciples in
remembrance thereof, at the time of his resurrection.

But because, (as was said) the comfort of the resurrection is manifold: let
us not content our selves, with a general conceit, or observation; but let us
come to the particulars. And whereas we cannot look by and by to draw in, so
full a draught of comfort, as is offered unto us therein; let us not be less
wise by the wisdom of spiritual grace; then the little infant is by natural
instinct: who, though the milk of the mothers breast come not at the first,
yet cease not drawing till the milk streameth forth. For assuredly, the
breasts of the word of God; the old and new Testament: the one promising, the
other performing; they are even pent with the sincere milk of the Spirit of
God, abundantly sufficient to satisfy all those, that, as new borne babes,
will lie drawing at the same: and will not be like those, who are so besotted
with carelessness in seeking after the comfort of the holy Scriptures, as if
there were sufficiency of knowledge in ignorance, and comfort enough in a
senseless conceit of heavenly things. But let not us be such, but let us be
careful to seek and inquire after all the comforts, which this excellent
Article as the sunshine of Gods holy Spirit, shining upon our dead hearts, may
by the warm and healthful beams thereof minister unto us.

Which therefore are those manifold and great comforts, which the faith of the
resurrection of our Savior Christ do minister unto us,

First, our Savior Christ is by his resurrection from the dead, mightily
declared to be the Son of God, and the very true Messiah and promised
Savior of his Church: to this very end, that our faith and hope, might be
in GOD, who raised him from the dead, and thereby gave him glory in the midst
of his people.

3 Secondly, it is a public and real confirmation, that he has perfectly
fulfilled all righteousness, and holiness, in the sight of God: and that we,
by the imputation of his righteousness, and holiness, are perfectly justified
from all our sins, through the satisfaction, and price of his death.

3 Thirdly, hence was the treasure-house of the manifold gifts, and graces of
the holy Ghost, as it were unlocked and set open: that they might be more
plenteouslie powered down from heaven, upon his Apostles first; and so by
their ministry, upon all Nations of the world, both Jews and Gentiles,
whosoever among them should believe in his name. For even hereby also, the
door was set wide open, for the preaching of the Gospel, to every people and
Nation under heaven.

4 Fourthly, by the power of the resurrection of our Savior, we are quickened
to newness and holiness of life.

5 Moreover, by the virtue of the same, we are strengthened, and confirmed to
all holy constancy, in the faith and service of the Gospel: under the blessed
hope of immortality, and heavenly glory.

6 Furthermore, we have by it, a settled comfort against the uncertainty of our
frail and transiterie life; yea against all the troubles of it, and against
death it self, and all the terrors and dismayings thereof: seeing our Savior,
has perfectly vanquished and overcome them for us.

7 And yet more then these; the resurrection of our Savior, is a real
confirmation, that our bodies, though they must die in corruption, weakness,
and dishonor, as natural bodies, for a final conviction and farewell of
sin: yet they shall, by the saving power of the resurrection of our Savior
Christ be raised up again; and made spiritual bodies, incorrupt, and
glorious, never to return to corruption again.

8 The resurrection of our Savior, is also an evidence, that be is ordained of
God, to be the judge of the world.

9 Finally, it is a most pregnant confirmation, and application, of all the
fruits, and benefits, which he has purchased for us, by his death, and by all
other his manifold sufferings going before the same.

Explication and proof.
The resurrection of our Savior is indeed, as the sealing up of all these
fruits and benefits unto us: and therefore it may well be exceedingly
comfortable unto us, and his whole Church. For as our Savior died not in the
state of a private man, but in the behalf of the Church: so also did he not
rise again, so much for himself, as for the benefit of it. But let us see
some proofs of holy Scriptures for these things.

For the proof of the first part of this answer, we may read Romans 1.3, 4. And
1. Pet. 1.21. where the resurrection of our Savior, is alleged for a proof,
that he, who is our Savior, is the Son of God. And that it is furthermore a
proof, that he is the promised Messiah: it is evident, in that it is an
accomplishment of the former prophesies, which were given forth thereof: as we
saw before, and may justly here call to mind again, Psalm. 16. Isai. 53.8,
etc. and chap. 55.3. Our Savior himself also, before his death, foretold the
same, as a sign and confirmation thereof. Matthew. 12.39.40. John 2.18.19. Read
also chap. 20.9. And in the Law, the escape goat, and the live sparrow let
loose, may well be accounted figures of the resurrection: and so the
resurrection an accomplishing of the same, as the slain goat and killed
sparrow, were figures of his death. Leuit. 14.4, 5, 6, 7. And chap. 16.5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10. as was observed once before.

For the proof of the second part, read Romans chap. 4. verses 22, 23, 24 25,
26: where note, that the Apostle affirming that our Savior being delivered to
death for our sins, is risen again for our instification: he makes the
imputation of his righteousness, and our justification, one and the same
thing. So that to be justified in the sight of God, is to have the
righteousness of our Savior Christ imputed to us, who has perfectly
fulfilled it, on our behalf, even as he was perfectly sanctified of God
himself to that end: according as it is nearely lincked with it. Romans chap. 1.
verses 3, 4. alleged before. Declared mightily to be the Son of God,
touching the spirit of sanctification, by the resurrection from the dead. And
as we read 1. Tim. 3.16. God manifested in the flesh, justified in the the
spirit. Yea all the places alleged before, to show that our Savior was raised
up from the dead, and exalted by the hand of God himself: they are so many
proofs, that by his holy verdict, his justice is fully satisfied, and that our
Savior has procured our perfect Quietus est, from all our sins. For if any
one of our sins had not been fully satisfied for, by him who was made sin
for us: or if any thing had been wanting, touching our Savior his own
holiness and righteousness: God would never have raised him up, nor
acknowledged us to be made the righteousness of God in him.

But now our Savior being declared to be perfect, just, and holy, by the
spirit of righteousness and sanctification, bearing witness thereunto by his
resurrectio on our behalf, (as before:) we are hereby assured, that we have
our full discharge whenas otherwise, we should have been still in our sins.
1. Cor. 15. verses 17, 18. Read also Act. 13.37, 38, 39. And Romans 10.4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9. And 1. Pet. 21. A good conscience looks to the resurrection of our
Savior, for the settling of the peace of it. And Philip. 3 8, 9, 10. This is
that virtue of our Savior, which the Apostle Paul so highly valueth and
aduanceth, that in comparison of it, he counts all things dung and mere
loss. Yea, this is that life, which he lived in Christ; or rather which Christ
lived in him, according as it is said, The just shall live by faith: to wit, in
the apprehension of Christ's righteousness, thus manifested by his
resurrection, to be their own, through the most gracious imputation of God.
Gal. 2.19, 20, 21. Romans 1.17.

For the proof of the third part of the answer, read John 7.38, 39. and chap.
20. verse 21. the ordination of the Apostleship and ministry of the Gospel.
Read also Luke 24.47.48, 49 Acts 2.17, 18, 32, 33. And 2. Tim. 1.9, 10, 11.
These things indeed, were not performed till after the ascension:
nevertheless, the resurrection made way, and was as the first step unto it.

For the proof of the fourth part, read Rom 6.4, 5. 2. Cor. 5.14, 15. Ephesians.
1.19, etc. and chap. 2.1. Acts 3.26. and chap. 5.31. Colos. 2.12, 13. and chap
3.1, etc. This rising up to newness of life, is called the first resurrection.
Revel. 20.5. And it is the way to attain unto the second. For let us note
well, that albeit God does favorably behold us in Christ only, for our
perfect justification before him: yet this is no dispensation to us, that we
should continue in sin; but it calls for sanctification at our hands,
without the which, no man shall see the Lord: as we read Heb. 12.14. And it is
also necessary for us, to the end that from the fruits of our sanctification,
we may have the comfortable persuasion of our justification. Romans 6.1, etc. And
that we are elect and chosen to salvation. 2. Pe. 1, 10. Yet so, as we must in
no part rely upon our own holiness, or works, which will always be failing
and imperfect: but on our Savior alone, by whom we are justified.

For proof of the first part, read 1. Pet. 1.3, 4, 5, etc. Blessed be God,
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant mercy,
has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead, to an inheritance immortal, etc. And chapter 3.21. And Ephesians. 2.4, 5,
6. Acts 4.10, 11, 12, 13.

For proof of the sixth, read 2. Cor. 1.8, 9, 10. and chap. 4.8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13. 14, 15 16, etc. And 1. Cor. 15.57. according to the prophecy of
Isaiah, 53.12. And Hosea 13. verse 14.

For the proof of the seventh part, read John, 11.25. I am the resurrection,
and the life, he that believes in me, (says our Savior) though he were dead,
yet shall he live. Read also Romans 8.11. and 1. Cor. 6.14. and chap. 15. verse
12, 13. and verses 19, 20.21, 22. and verses 32, 33. and 35. and 45, 49.
Likewise Philip. 3.^0 21. and 1. These. 4.13, 14. A lively representation, and
foregoing demonstration whereof; was the opening of the graves, at the death of
our Savior, and the resurrection of the bodies of many Saints, who came out of
their graves, and went into the holy City, immediately after the resurrection
of our Sa iour, and appeared to many. Matthew. 27.52, 53. For seeing, 2. Kings
13, 21. God gave testimony to his faithful Prophet Elisha, after his death, by
reuining a dead man that was put into his grave, that he was a Prophet sent of
him: much more would he confirm unto us, by the resurrection of many, after
the death and burial of our Savior Christ that he is the true Messiah, the
very Prince of all Prophets that were before him. But not only so: he would
thereby show also that our Savior did not rise for himself alone, but for us:
and that therefore, by his resurrection, he has broken and dissolved the power
of the grave, that (will it, nill it) it must perforce one day, yield up all
the dead that are holden under the dominion of it, as touching their bodies;
though their souls be presently in a heavenly and happy estate. And in this
respect, Col. 1.1^. our Savior is called the first borne of the dead: the
Apostle thereby giving to understand, that all other of the faithful, shall in
their order be in like manner borne a gain, and delivered as it were out of
the bowels, The Duties.
or womb of the grave. To the which purpose also, 1. Cor. 15.20. he is said
to be the first fruits of them that sleep: to show that in due time, all that
belong to him, as a holy lump or croppe, shall in their bodies be awaked out
of the sleep of death: that as it is contained in the same chapter: Like as by
man came death, so by man might come the resurrection of the dead. And that, as
in Adam all die, so in Christ all should be made alive. Neither is it to be
neglected, but diligently to be marked, as serving greatly to our comfort; that
all the faithful, which died before our Savior Christ, died in this hope,
where unto we are called by the Gospel. Heb. chap. 11. verse 35. Read also
Daniel 12.2, 3, 13. Job. 19.23, etc. Isai. 26.19. And Ezekiel 37. a notable
allusion to the ground and Article of the resurrection familiarly embraced of
them: according as we may perceive by the answer of Martha to our Savior, John
11.24. I know (says she, speaking of her brother which was dead) that be
shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day. Read also Psalm 49.16.
God (says the holy Psalmist) will deliver my soul from the power of the
grave, for he will receive me. Selab. For here (as Master Calvin worthily
observes) we have a notable testimony of the faith wherein the holy Fathers
lived and died under the Law. Praeclarum (inquit) habemus testimonium fides, in
qua vixerunt and mortui sunt sancti patres sub Lege.

Now for the proof of the eight part of the answer, Read Acts chapter 17.
verse 31. God has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man, whom he has appointed: whereof he has given
assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. And Romans 14.9.
Christ therefore died, and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord,
both of the dead, and of the quick.

Finally, from the proof of the last part; read Romans 5.10, 11, etc. For if
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son:
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life, etc. And chap. 8.33,
34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which
is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, etc. Do we not see that
the resurrection is the first step of the gradution, or amplification of the
comfort, for which he reasons? And the Apostles in their sermons, did
instantly insist in this point of the resurrection; as being that which is more
familiar for use, though not the highest degree of his exaltation and lifting
up: as we have a president in the Acts of the Apostles, and in some other
places of the holy Scriptures: as Romans 109. And chap. 14.9. Abraham, (as we
read Heb. 11.19. rejoiced when he received his son Isaak after a sort from
the dead: infinitely much more, may we rejoice, in that God has not given us
our Savior Christ raised up after a sort, but has verily and indeed raised
him up from the dead, and so given us assurance that he is a perfect Savior
unto us.

Thus comfortable, every way, is the resurrection of our Savior to the faith
of every true christian: even as a most joyous and plentiful harvest, after a
hard seed time of his death, as was observed before.

NOw let us proceed.



Insomuch at the fruits and benefits of the resurrection of our Savior, are
so many and great, as we have heard: and that all the fruits and benefits of
his death, and sufferings, are hereby more authentically and comfortably sealed
up unto us: we ought therefore by all good reason, in special manner, to
glorify and praise God our heavenly Father, with most high and hearty
thanks, and with all duty most boundenly in this behalf.

It is very true. In this respect, may we well reason, as it is in the
beginning of the 48. Psalm: Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised.
Justly may we say as David does, What shall we render unto the Lord for this so
great a benefit? And with Paul, What thanks way we render, answerable to this
so great a mercy, for our comfortable encouragement, to continue and abide
faithful unto the Lord. 1 Thessalonians. 3.8.9. Read also Romans 7.24.25. And 1. Cor.
15.57.



Seeing the comfort of the resurrection of our Savior, is so manifold and
great, it is our duty, first of all; to esteem most highly and pretiously of
the grace and virtue of it.

Secondly, to labor earnestly, that we may be partakers of the same grace, or
virtue, and power.

Thirdly, from the same power, to endeavor to walk in all holy obedience to
God, in every Christian duty.

Explication.
That we are thus, both most highly and pretiously to esteem of the virtue and
power of the resurrection of our Savior: and likewise, most earnestly to seek
to apprehend it by faith: the example of the Apostle Paul, Phil: 3. may be a
sufficient proof, and inducement unto us; both so to think, and also to be
earnest imitators and followers of him. And in deed, unless we do, with
him, carry the same judgment, how can we draw with him, in the like yoke of
affection?

Now, touching a particular endeavor, to walk in every good duty of obedience
to God, as a fruit of this power of the resurrection of our Savior Christ
apprehended by faith: it is good for us to consider, that the holy Apostles do
every where, hold forth the same as a reason of singular force, to stir up
the hearts of all Christians to mind repentance from all dead works, and to
provoke to the contrary duties of godliness. And namely for one instance. 1. Corinthians. 15. the last verse of the chapter, where, so soon as the Apostle had
professed thanks to God, for this unspeakable comfort, which the resurrection
of our Savior affords; he annexeth this exhortation forthwith, Therefore my
beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, immovable, and abundant always in the
work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your labor is not in vain in
the Lord. And Acts, 2.38. after that the Apostle Peter, has laid open, and
confirmed the article of the resurrection: he does immediately exhort, and
encourage unto repentance. And chap. 3.15.19. And the Apostle Paul again,
chap. 13.30. etc. 40.41. And Romans 6 9.10.11.12. etc. And 2. Cor. 5, 15. And
Coloss. 3.1. etc. 5. For sanctification (as was noted before) is very nearly
linked unto justification. Heereunto therefore, we ought, as the Scriptures do
speak, to rise early in the morning, with all cheerefulnes of heart and
spirit: even as our Savior Christ did, preventing as it were, the morning
watch, that he might manifest, and make known, that good hand which he had,
in his so speedy a victory, over the dominion of the grave, and of death, and
hell. And this also ought to give us singular encouragement, not only to fight
manfully against sin and all the confederates thereof, the flesh, the world,
and the devil: but also with good hope of prosperous success, to seek after
mighty increases in godliness. Neither let it be a small comfort and
encouragement unto us, to bethink our selves, that according to the ordinance
of our Savior himself, we do together with the exercises of our Christian
religion, every Lords day celebrate (as it is meet) the memorial of the
blessed resurrection of our Savior; and of the restoration of the world by
him, partly already begun, and to be fully perfitted in time to come. And in
trust of this mercy of our God also, let us not cease to pray continually, in
this barren and dead time of godliness, wherein we live, for a new spring and
resurrection in men's minds, to the zeal of the Gospel, as a fruit of this
resurrection of our Savior Christ. Finally, let all our life long (in the
premeditation of our resurrection at the last day, by the virtue of his
resurrection, to everlasting life, and of that perpetual feast of the Lamb,
which we are invited unto) be nothing else, The danger of not believing this
article.
but a careful addressing and preparing of our selves, both souls and bodies,
against that great day, that then we may be partakers of a joyful
resurrection, and so live for ever with him. Amen.

These things in deed, are to be further enforced upon our consciences, from
the Articles following, which do set forth the further exaltation of our
Savior: but because (as was said in the comforts) the resurrection is the
first, and most familiar inducement heereunto, therefore the exhortation unto
these duties, might not be pretermitted here.

ANd now that we may fully finish the doctrine of this article.

What danger is there in not believing the very natural and bodily
resurrection of our Savior Christ, and not in yielding that fruit of
obedience,

If any do not believe this Article of the resurrection of our Lord Jesus
Christ's true and natural body: his death shall profit them nothing, but they
shall die in their sins.

And further also, as touching those that be not through the virtue of our
Saviors resurrection, partakers of the first resurrection of their souls,
from the death of sin: they shall never be partakers of the resurrection of
their bodies to everlasting life, by him, at his second coming.

Explication.
For the proof of this, read first of all. 1. Cor. 15.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.
Where the holy Apostle makes the resurrection of our Savior Christ, the
ground and foundation of ours: yea so the ground; that they are as one would
say coincident, and of the nature of relatiues, in a certain sort. For
insomuch as our Savior Christ, who is the head of his Church, is bodily raised
up; it cannot be, but the members of this mystical body, must be made
conformable; that is, they must be likewise raised up, and united unto him: or
else he should be as a head without a body. And likewise, insomuch as our
Savior Christ is raised up to be a King, and a Prince over his Church for
ever: his subjects also, must be raised up, or else he could not have subjects
of the same nature and kind with himself to rule add govern. A King who is a
man, must be a King of men, and not of beasts: yea of men, and not of spirits
or ghosts, etc. It is so in this world: it shall be so in the world to come, as
touching the Kingdom of our Savior Christ. For as he shall retain the whole
nature of man for ever and ever: so he shall rule over men, consisting of
souls and bodies, even as over his natural brethren. Answerable after a sort
to that which the people said to David, 2. Sam. 15.1. Behold, we are thy
bones, and thy flesh. And as our Savior himself shows plainly concerning
himself in his message sent by Marie Magdalen. John, 20.17. though he be in
another state and condition then we are in now: and is so to continue even
world without any end. And therefore the holy Apostle, after that he has noted
diverse gross and heretical absurdities, accompanying the denial of the
resurrection of Christ, 1. Cor. 15. he adds verse, 17.18. If Christ be not
raised, your faith is in vain, ye are yet in your sins. And so they who are
a sleep in Christ, are perished. The Apostle speaks in way of supposition:
but in truth it is not so; seeing it is most certain (as he declares) that
our Savior is risen again. And therefore there is not only an assured ground
of the resurrection of the body hereafter: but also of the present felicity
of the Saints departed; even from the very time of their bodily death.

Nevertheless, to them which do not believe, that our Savior is risen, it is
all one as if he were not risen at all: save that they must one day; yea do
already begin to feel the punishment of their infidelity concerning this
article as one the chief among the rest.

Woeful therefore is the state of the unbelieving Jews to this day; whosoever
of them embrace the wicked fable of their unbelieving and blasphemous
ancestors: Belief in God the Son, who ascended up into heaven.
of whom we read Matthew. The ground of the article.
28.12.13.14.15. who as much as lay in them smothered the light of his
resurrection, and led many into this damnable heresy, of denying the same.

Miserable also, was the condition of Hymeneus and Philetus, of whom we read.
2. Timothy, 2.17.18. who like enough, from this evil ground of doubting of the
resurrection of our Savior: or at the least not considering the right use and
end of his resurrection; denied the resurrection to come, saying that it is
past already.

Likewise, miserable were the Corinthian heretics, who denied that our Savior
rose again: they embracing (as it is very like) that wicked and blasphemous
fable of the Jews. Only Cerinthus acknowledges this, Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 2.
cap. 28.
more then those Jews: that our Savior shall rise again at the last day: and
so adds one gross error to another.

Moreover, the fable of the Gnostici, is to be condemned of us: in that they
would have us believe, that our Savior was not only by the space of forty
days after his resurrection here on earth, but even whole 18. months, that
is a year and half: which must needs falsify the holy story, touching the
time of the ascension of our Savior, and also of the sending of the holy
Ghost upon the Apostles, and of the beginning of their preaching: and therefore
is in no wise to be endured of us, but earnestly rejected as a most erroneous
computation.

But what shall we say of the family of H.N. and their most false Prophet H N.
himself, and all their devilish leaders and guides, most heretical above all
other? who in the light of the Gospel, and after the most lightsome discovery
of all former heresies: do yet renew the same again: and that also in the most
fantastical and absurd course that may be: perverting all things according to
their feeble and braine-sicke allegories; both conception, birth, life,
sufferings, and resurrection of our Savior Christ, as if there were no
historical truth at all to be greatly regarded in any of these excellent
articles of our Christian faith. But blessed be the Lord our GOD, and our Lord
Jesus Christ, to be blessed for ever; who by his faithful servant, and true
Minister of his Gospel, M. Knewstub has so unmasked, and confuted this
notorious and monstrous heretic H. N. that none can be deceived by his
delusions henceforth, but they that are willing to be seduced. For whose
blessed labors, as we have great cause to bless and praise God in Christ
Jesus: so let us entreat the same our God, and most gracious and heavenly
Father, that by his, and all other good means and helps, both of writing and
preaching, the which he of his infinite mercy has vouchsafed us: every one
of us, that are the Scholars of our Savior Christ, may learn to be sound in
the faith, and so continue to the end, to the glory of the same our good God,
and of our Savior Jesus Christ, and to our own everlasting salvation, through
the grace of the holy Ghost, guiding and confirming us all, in the whole truth
of the Gospel. Amen.

Thus much concerning the first degree of the exaltation of our Savior Christ.

Belief in God the Son, who ascended up into Heaven.


Which is that? How follows it in the articles of our belief?

Answer. Question.
He ascended up into heaven.

What ground of holy Scripture have you for the ground and warrant of this
article?

The Evangelist Mark records it briefly in these words. chap. 10 ver. 19. So
after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received into heaven.

The Evangelist Luke is somewhat more large, chapter, 24.51.52.53. after this
manner.

51. And it came to pass (says he) that as he blessed them, he departed from
them (that is, Luke. 24.
he removed himself some distance from them) and was carried up into heaven.

52. And they (that is his Apostles) worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem
with great joy.

53. And they were continually in the Temple, praising and landing God, Amen.

But in the first chap. of the Acts the Apostles, verses, 9.10, 11. he is yet
more large then thus, saying:

Acts. 1.
9. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up: for
a cloud took him up out of their sight.

10. And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went, behold, two men
stood by them in white apparel:

11. Who also said, Ye men of Galile, why stand ye looking up into heaven? This
Jesus which is taken up from ye into heaven, shall so come, as ye have seen
him go into heaven.

In these places, we have in deed the historical record of this article of
our faith, Explication.
as it was fulfilled by our Savior in the time and season thereof: not only
according to the former and more ancient prophesies, Psalm. 68.18. compared with
Ephesians. 4.7.8. And Psalm. 110.1. compared with Matthew. 22.41. etc. (insomuch as the
sitting of our Savior at the right hand of God there prophesied of, includes
the ascension: And Dan. 7.13.14. where the ascension and sitting at the right
hand of God are jointly foretold:) But not only thus was this fulfilled, but
also by the more late predictions of our Savior himself, at sundry times
before his death: as John. 3, 12.13. more darkly to Nicodemus. And to the Jews
more commonly. chap. 6.62. And chap. 7.33.34. And chap. 8.21. And to his
Disciples more privately and apart, in most sweet and comfortable manner,
though for the present, they did not so conceive of his speech. chap:
14.2.3.4.5. And verse, 28.29. And chap, 16.4.5, 16.17, etc. But most plainly,
to Marie Magdalen after his resurrection, chap: 20.17.18. Jesus (as the
Evangelist writes) says unto her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to
my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father,
and your Father, and to my God, and your God. And Marie Magdalen (as Saint John
writes further) Came and showed the Disciples that she had seen the Lord,
and that he had spoken these things unto her.

Thus I say, not only is this article recorded unto us, as it was fulfilled in
due time: but also, as it was long before, fore-tolde by the Prophets, and more
nearly upon the performance thereof, by our Savior himself. The which, as
the effect it self declared, were not coniecturall and gessing
prognostications, but most certain and divine predictions, revealed by God
himself, the only governor and disposer of every thing, in the proper time
and season thereof, as we have heard before.

But leaving the prophesies; and coming to the historical report of the
performance thereof, as the holy Evangelists Mark and Luke even now alleged,
do report the same.



In the historical report of this article, the holy Evangelists do lay it
forth in this order.

First, they note the time of the ascension of our Savior.

Secondly, the place from whence he ascended.

Thirdly, the manner how.

Fourthly, the effects which it wrought in the hearts of his disciples.

Fifthly, the testimony of two Angels, concerning the ascension: with their
holy instruction, and admonition, to the Disciples, continuing in the earnest
beholding of the same.

These indeed, are the points recorded in this part of the holy story: and
they may well be considered of, in this order, wherein you have rehearsed them.

First therefore, concerning the time of the ascension of our Savior.

Quest. When was that?

Ans. It was at the end of forty days, after he rose again from the dead.

Explication and proof.
It is true. So does the Evangelist Luke affirm and testify in the first chap:
Acts, verse 3. In the which space of time also, as he there shows, our
Savior spoke to his Apostles, of those things, which appertain to the
kingdom of God. And this contains matter of singular comfort unto us, in
that our Savior would not leave his Disciples at uncertain, but gave them
commandments, what they should do after his departure. And again,
considering the faithfulness of the Apostles in obeying our Savior Christ in
all things, we may well assure our selves, that whatsoever they have taught,
and preached in the Church of God, was by the appointment of our Savior, as
well in the change of the Sabbath from the seventh day, (the day after the
finishing of all Gods works of creation) to the first day of the week, the
day of the Lords resurrection, (a most memorable declaration that he is the
redeemer of the world, in whom alone consists the restoring of the
desolations of his people, as was touched before) as also, in all the duties of
Gods worship, to be practiced on that day, Preaching, prayer Baptizing,
supper of the Lord, offices and government of the Church, and whatsoever else
beside. Thus much does the consideration of the time serve to inform us of.

Neither is the proportion of the time, to be neglected in that, as he was
forty days in the wilderness, for the confirmation of his calling, at the
entrance of his Ministry; so after the finishing of all things, it pleased
him to remain on the earth forty days, to make known and confirm, that
all things were indeed finished by him, whatsoever was indeed to be done,
before his ascension into heaven. The day of the ascension of our SAVIOVR, was
that which we usually call holy Thursday.

But let us come to the place whence our SAVIOVR Ascended.

Question. Answer. Explication
Which was that?

It was from the Mount of Olives, near to Bethania.

This also is evident by the testimony of the Evangelist Luke, chap: 24.
50.51. and Acts 1.12.



Insomuch, as the place which was before in one part of it, a place of his
lowest humiliation, and descension, was afterward made in the same, or in some
other part of it, a place of his triumphant ascension: we may well comfort our
selves, that though we must pass through many afflictions, yet no place of
affliction, nor any measure of affliction, shall hinder us from entering into
the kingdom of heaven.

Explication
This was observed before, by reason that the place of the last appearance of
our Savior to his Apostles, was the place of this his Ascension. But it is not
amiss, that you have here called it to mind again. And indeed, whence is
it, that God does usually take his children from the earth up into heaven: but
their souls first out of their sick bodies, or out of their uncomfortable
prisons, or from the places of their execution for his holy truth and Gospells
sake? And afterward their bodies out of the dust where they have been rotted
before. But of this place of our Saviors ascension, we may see more in that
which is said before concerning the place of his last appearance here on earth
after his resurrection.

Leaving the place thereof, let us come to the manner of his ascension.

Ques. How was that?

Ans After that our Savior had blessed his Apostles, he withdrewe himself
from them.

Explication.
So indeed are these words of the Evangelist Luke, chap: 24. verse 51. to be
understood, in that he says of our Savior, that he departed from them: dieste
ap auton, disiunctus est ab eis: that is, he was disioyned or separated some
distance from them.



To the end the Disciples (whom our Savior minded to make witnesses of his
ascension) might the better discern his taking up from them into heaven.

Explication.
This is manifest in it self. For if he had been taken up from them, on a
sudden, while he had been in the midst of them, they could not for fear,
and through other infirmities so sensibly have discerned the same, nor have
given so perfect a testimony of it. And therefore it is declared in the holy
story, that first our Savior was removed some small distance from them: and
then, that he was carried upward from them into heaven: as it follows in the
forenamed 51. verse.



A cloud took him up out of the Disciples sight* while they beheld him on the
earth, and looked up steadfastly toward heaven, so long as they might discern
him ascending.

Explication
It is the report of the Evangelist: Acts, 1. verse, 9.10. as was rehearsed
before. And this motion of the cloud coming down perpendicularly, as one may
say, and ascending up directly again, contrary to the natural course, which
is circular: it shows the miraculous and divine hand of God herein: like as
did the strange motion of the star, at the birth of our Savior; it going as
it were in a direct line, and not compass wise, from the East to the city of
Jerusalem, and then from thence to Bethlehem, where he was borne.



Though our Savior could by his divine power, have caused his body to have
ascended, without any means. For he being in stead of a ladder to the Angels
of heaven to ascend and descend, he could have been a ladder to himself. Genesis
28.12.13. and John. 1.51.
Yet it seems, that for the declaration of the truth of his humane nature
still so to remain in heaven, after his ascension, and for ever, as he was at
his resurrection here upon the earth: he would have it lifted up and carried up
by a cloud.

Explication.
So it seems indeed. For notwithstanding the body of our Savior, being
glorified, and freed from all natural grossenes, was more apt to move with
greater agilitie and quicknes by many degrees then before: yet we may not
think, that it had lost all waightines of substance, and therefore had yet
naturally need of some help to lift it up: like as it is said of our bodies,
that though at the resurrection they shall be glorified bodies yet they shall
stand in need of the clouds of God to carry them into heaven. 1. These. 4.17.
And even for this cause also, would our Savior in the translating of his body
from earth to heaven, give us a president how our bodies shall be conucied
thither at the end of the world. Thus then we see good reason why our Savior
would have his body taken up and carried into heaven by a clowd Neither is it
to be neglected, which learned interpreters observe, that the Lord by putting a
clowd betwixt our Savior and them, would teach them sobriety, least they
should seek to know more of the secrets of God then were meet: but should
content themselves, and rest satisfied with those things which he thought good
to reveal unto them. Like as the Lord, at the giving of the law, did, as it
seems to the same end appear in a dark cloud, Exodus: 19.9. And afterward in
the Tabernacle, chap: 46.34. etc. Number: 9.15. and chap: 16.42. and likewise in
the Temple. 1. King 8.10.11.12. Read also, Psalm: 18.9.10.11. and Hab: The
meaning of the Article.
3: verse, 4.

Hereunto tend the speech of the two men, that stood in white apparel: Act.
1.10.11. that is to say the two Angels: such as the Evangelist John says, to
be Angels in white garments, chap: 20, 12. whom Mark and Luke do
nevertheless call by the names of men, clothed in white shining vestures,
Mark, 16, 5. and Luke, 24.4. For these Angels, of whom we speak in this our
text of the Acts, call the Disciples from looking any longer up to heaven,
after that our Savior was received out of their sight, and informs them of
his second coming to judgment, and that he should remain in the heavens
until that time, retaining still the same nature of man, wherewith he visibly
ascended up from them.

And thus the Angels, besides the Apostles, who were eyewitnesses, do
testify unto us this article of the ascension of our Savior into heaven, yea
the Angels do further testify, of his cont nuance there, in the same nature;
as was said even now: until his coming again. A point right worthy and
comfortable, to be no^ed of us.

And further, touching the speech of the Angels, in that they speaking to the
Apostles do call them men of Galile; they do it not in any way of reproof,
but that by hearing their country mentioned by such as were strangers and
unknown of them, they might be so much the rather stirred up to attend their
speech. Nleither are we so to understand these Angels, as though they did
simply reprove the Disciples for looking up to heaven: but even as our Savior
in former times showing his Disciples the glory of his miracles did
therewithal make mention of his death: and speaking of his death, did upon
that occasion likewise, often foretell them of his resurrection: and being
risen again, interrupteth Mary Magdalen, and tells her of his ascension, and
by her, his Disciples: so here, the holy Angels call their minds, from that
which was of little use, further then they had already seen, to that which
was now more necessarily to be known and thought upon of them, to the end
they might prepare themselves, and teach others also so to do, that they might
be found such as they ought to be in all faithfulness of good service at his
glorious appearance: according to that of the Apostle Paul. 2. Cor: 5.10. 11.
we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, etc. knowing
therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, etc.

Thus much therefore concerning the manner of the ascension of our Savior, and
of the faithful witnesses of it: yea even of the whole history and ground of
it.

ANd now in the next place, we are, according to our course, to consider of
the meaning of the words of the Article.



This Article teaches me steadfastly to believe, that albeit our Lord Jesus
Christ, in respect of his divine nature was all ways both in heaven and earth,
filling all places at once, with his divine presence: so that, to speak
properly, and without figurative speech, he cannot be said (his Godhead
simply considered in it self) to have at any time, either ascended, or
descended: yet that in his humane nature, both body and soul, being here upon
the earth, and not in heaven, yea that even with the same body, which was
conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Marie, was crucified, dead
and buried, and the third day rose again from the dead: he did at the end of
forty days after his resurrection, ascend up from the earth here below,
into the highest heavens, there to remain till the end of the world, and is
not now, neither will be, till that time, bodily present any other where.

Explication
All is very true that you say. For first, that the Godhead, to speak
properly, and without trope, or figure of speech, cannot be said to ascend or
descend, it is evident, insomuch as it is not possibly subject to change of
place but it is present every where filling at once all places. Ier: chap: 23.
verse, 23.2^. And Psalm: 139, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. So that, where God is said to
descend or ascend, and to go from one place to another: as Gen: 11.5, 7, and
chap: 18.21. Exodus: 3, 2, etc. 8. and cha: 19, 18. Psalm: 89. Habak, chap: 3,
verse 3, etc. this is to be understood of some special declaration of his
divine and glorious presence by the ministry of his holy Angels, with some
strange adioynts and effects of the same his presence. And this may jointly or
distinctly be ascribed to all three persons of the Deity: as Mat: chap. 3, 16.
John, 14, 23, 26, cha: 15, 26, and 16, 7, 8, Acts 2.1, 2, 3, 4. And yet more
specially concerning the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, in the person of a
mediator, both God and man: when he is some time in the holy Scriptures, said
to have descended from heaven before, as well as to be now ascended up into
heaven. John, 3, 13, Ephesians. 4, 9.10. For this is spoken, by that trope or figure
of speech, which Divines call the Communion of Proprieties: that is, when by
reason of the two natures united in one person; that is communicated to one
nature, which is proper to the other; or that to both, which is properly
agreeing only to one of them. Thus therefore, to speak properly, the Godhead
either in the holy Trinity, or in the person of our Savior Christ the
mediator, can neither ascend nor descend.

But the humanity of our Savior Christ, and namely his body, which is most
properly and sensibly apt to change the place, did according to the most
propriety of speech that may be, ascend up from the earth into heaven. Yea so,
that as when it was here belowon the earth, it was not in heaven, nor in
anymore places but one on the earth, at one and the same time, according to the
speech of the Angel, Luke 23.26, He is not here, but is risen; so now, being in
heaven, it is not one the earth, according as our Savior himself had told his
Disciples before, Mat: 26, 11. ye have the poor always with ye, but me ye
shall not have always. And according to the saying of the Angels in the first
of the Acts. And of the Apostle Peter, cha: 3, 21. whom the heavens must
contain until the time that all things be restored, etc.

The heaven which our Savior is ascended into, is not the aierie region, which
is sometime called by the name of heaven; namely, when the Scriptures speak of
the fowls of heaven, or of the clouds of heaven: neither is it any upper
region, or that which is usually called the firmament, even to the highest that
we see, in which respect the stars are called the stars of heaven: but it
is that which is above all that spreading which we see, even that which the
Apostle Paul calls the third heaven, 2. Cor: 12.2. That is to say, It is
neither the neither part of the aier, nor any upper part of that which we see:
but it is a third above them, invisible unto us: and as he says Ephesians: 4, 10.
far above all these visible heavens. The which also are called oftentime in
the old Testament. The heavens of heavens, Deuteronomy: 10.14. 1. King, 8.27, Psalm:
148.4. that is, the most high heavens, Psalm: 68, 33. The which heavens are
called also the holy palace of the Lord, where his throne is: and his
sanctuary, etc. Psalm: 14.4. and Micah, 1, 2. his holy Temple. Read also, Psalm:
113.4. The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory above the heavens.

To this place of glory, is our Lord Jesus Christ ascended: even to the right
hand of the throne of God. Heb: 12.2. insomuch as such an high Priest it became
us to have, as should be made higher then the heavens, as we read in the same
Epistle, chap: 7, 26, Read also, chap: 4, 14, and chap: 6, 19, 20, And thus we
may perceive, the true meaning of this Article, and what proofs we have to
warrant and confirm the same unto us.

It is the more diligently to be marked of us, because by the right
understanding and belief of it, we shall, by the grace of God, be easily
freed from very gross errors and heresies, contrary to the true Christian
faith, wherewith the world has been misled in the Antichristian Church of
Rome, by the space of some three or four hundredth years, in the opinion of
transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, The Comforts.
and otherwise in the report of some bodily appearance of our Savior upon
earth since his ascension: yea and by some other, not able all at once to cast
away, that ^euen of transubstantiation out of their hearts, have of latter
years, fancied a consubstantiation in the same Sacrament: But all in vain, as
this Article rightly understood and believed (as was faide) will easily show.

For so much as, this is most certain, that our Savior Christ did ascend up
into heaven, really, substantia^ly, visibly, locally, bodily, and in his humane
nature totally; and that with a determinate mind and purpose, there to
continue till the end of the world: for it is affirmed expressly, that he
went away hence, John: 14, 2. that he left this world, chap: 16, 28. that he
was carried upward into heaven. Luke, 24.51. And that the heavens must contain
him. Acts: 3. it is of as great certainty, that since the time of his
ascension, he neither has bin, is, or will be bodily present with his Church,
in, or out of the Sacrament: but only by his divine spirit, though in more
gracious and special manner, both by his word and by his Sacrament, then ever
he was in former times, or by any other means besides, before this his
ascension up into heaven: not by descending bodily down to the faithful, but
by sending his holy spirit into them, and by causing their hearts by faith to
ascend more lively and spiritually up unto him.

And as for this Popish transubstantiation, and the other like error of
consubstantiation, so near of kind unto it: as the Church has well wanted
that absurd conclusion by the space of more then twelve hundredth of years
after the ascension of our Savior, until the Laterance council held under
Pope Innocentius the third: anno Domini 121 5: and this other till three or
fourscore years since: so may we justly cast them away at this day, and look
up to our Savior Christ and apprehend him, and long after him, only
spiritually, and by faith, unto the time of his promised coming again at the
end of the world, as all true believers not misled in this point, have always
done.

Hitherto of the meaning of this Article.

THe promise is next to be inquired into.



The generally promise, that God has made to give our Savior, to the benefit
and salvation of his Church, may well be an assured confirmation unto us, that
as he was conceived, borne, dyed and rose again for us; so, that he has on
our behalf, and for our further benefit, ascended up into heaven. But beside
the general promise of God, we have the particular promise and warrant of our
Savior himself.

We have so indeed, as will be manifest by the opening of the benefits, and
comforts thereof: which come now in the next place to be considered of us.

LEt us therefore, forth with come unto them.



First and foremost, it is a benefit of singular comfort, that our Savior
Christ immediately before his ascension, so soon as he had made his will fully
known to his Apostles, touching the matters and ordinances of his kingdom, to
the behoof of his whole Church: he did to the same end bless the same his
Apostles and leave his blessing behind him, to the effecting of his good will
and pleasure, for the calling, sanctification and salvation of his whole
Church, to the end of the world.

Explication
This questionles must needs be esteemed a singular comfort. And the rather, if
(as was noted partly before, and may well be called to mind here again) that
the blessing of our Savior Christ is infinitely to be preferred, before the
pronouncing of blessing, by any other, either holy Priest of the Law or most
faithful minister of the blessed Gospel. For as the one did bless, so does
the other; that is, only by way of entreaty from God, as his Ministers though
in special manner above the private man's blessing, whether Parent or any
other: seeing God has made a special promise of blessing in this behalf, as
we have seen before: But our Savior Christ blessed, not only as a minister
of the word, or rather as a Mediator of the everlasting covenant of God,
entreating it^ from him: but even as a self commander, having equal power
with God, to confer all grace and blessing whatsoever. He does not therefore
bless, as Aaron blessed Israel, but rather as Melchisedek blessed Abraham, in
whose loins was Aaron, yea rather, as God to be blessed for ever, did bless
Melchisedek himself.

And thus it is evident, that we are to account it a special benefit, not
only to the Apostles, but even to our selves being as it were in their loins,
touching the spiritual propagation of the Church by them: insomuch as being in
the action of blessing^ he went into heaven, giving thereby no doubt to
understand, that he minded even from thence, to bless out of the heavenly
Sion, even from that sanctuary and Tabernacle which the Lord God himself
pight, and not man. Heb: 8.2, and ch: 9, 11.12. Let us therefore have his
blessing in most high and singular estimation. Iaakob (as we know) so greatly
esteemed to be blessed of his Father before he should dye) that by all means
he labored to obtain it. Yea profane Esau, after he had lost the blessing of
his father, labored importunately to recover it. What thanks therefore,
infinitely much more, ought we to render to our Lord Jesus Christ, the
everlasting Father of blessing to his Church. In whom, and by whom, all the
nations of the earth are blessed, Isai: 9.6. Yea, for that he has so prevented
us with his blessing, that we need not seek it by unlawful means, as
Rebecka and Iaakob did the blessing of his Father Isaak. Neither need we
fear any contrary curse according to that: Number. ch: 23. verse 23. There is
no sorcerie against Iaakob. For who can curse when God has blessed, etc. Read
also, Gen: 12.3.



As it it a^^ higher degree of the exaltation of our Savior Christ in our
humane nature, then was his resurrection from the dead: so it it a further
confirmation, and assurance unto us, that we are perfectly justified in the
sight of God by him.

Explication
The reason is very clear. For insomuch as it is truly said, that if our
Savior had not fully satisfied the justice of God for our sins (insomuch as
he had made himself sin for us, by taking upon him the guiltines and
offenses of us and all the elect) he could never have risen again from the
dead, as a conqueror of death, which is the just stipend or wages of sin for
ever, Rom: 6, in the end of the chapter: much less (may we say, could he have
been admitted to ascend up into heaven. But now that we know, he is not
only risen from the dead, but is also ascended up to the living God, appearing
there on our behalf, as we shall have further occasion to observe in the next
Article: we may justly reason from hence, by way of amplification, that it is
now much more manifest, by the ascension of our Savior into heaven, that we
are surely discharged indeed, both of the guiltiness, and also of the
punishment of all our sins, and perfectly instified in the sight of God,
through faith in his name. Read, John: 16. verse, 10. and Rom: 8.34. For the
ascension is included as one degree of exaltation, and so of the amplification
of the comfort, to be understood betwixt the resurrection of our Savior, and
his sitting at the right hand of the Father. Of the which more afterward. In
the mean season, let us gather together the rest of the comfortable fruits of
the ascension.



A third comfort, may justly be this, that it is likewise a further assurance
unto us, that our Savior has so vanquished and subdued all our Spiritual
adversaries, that they shall never recover themselves, to be able to prevail
against us, or any of the children of God.

This also we may see confirmed, Ioh, 16 verse 11. where our Savior himself
tells his Disciples, that after his ascension, the holy Ghost should reprove
the world of judgment, because the Prince of this world is judged. We may see
it also, plainly testified, Ephesians: 4 8. according to the prophecy of the 68.
Psalm: verse 17.18. when he ascended up on high, ^e ^e^ Captiuor^ ^^stitua^^^^
scimundum, carnen, ^^^catum, mortem, Satanam cap, titam fecit^ id est, sub^ g^t
Tren^: and Iu^:
captivity captive; that is, he has most gloriously surprised and taken our
enemies and subdued them. He had even upon the cross rifled and spoiled the
devil, and took away the hand writing which was against us. Collos: 2.14.15.
but his ascension shows it more clearly a great deal. Neither is it to be
neglected, for the furtherance of our comfort in this behalf: that whereas the
devil and his arm is described, as having the advantage, in fighting against
us, not only in heavenly things, but also from the air, we being as poor
earthwormes, creeping upon the earth, Ephesians: 2.2. and ch: 6.12. Our Savior, who
is our captain, and under whose ensign we fight, is far higher then they,
and has infinitely much more power and advantage against them, for the leading
and safe conducting of us, then they have against us for our hurt. So this may
well be a third comfort indeed, according to that: Psalm: 68.34.35. Ascribe
the power to God; for his majesty is upon Israel, and his strength in the
clouds, etc.



Our Savior Christ being ascended up into heaven, has from thence, and since
that time, and even to this day, more plentifully enriched his Church, with
heavenly gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, for the further benefiting of
every particular member of it, then ever he had done before.

Explication
It is true. For so Ephesians. chap: 4. verse 8.11. etc. the Apostle Paul adds to
the leading of captivity captive, this further fruit and excellent benefit
of the ascension of our Savior, that thenceforth, of his most royal bounty,
he has given most plentiful gifts unto his Church: both gifts of callings
and offices, and also gifts of manifold graces for the execution of the same,
to the replenishing of his whole Church from time to time. For unto every one
of us (says the Apostle) is given grace according to the measure of the gift
of Christ. Wherefore he says (that is the Psalmist whom the Apostle alleges
says) when he ascended up on high he led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men, etc. that he might fill all things. And the Apostle, to make the
matter plain, he adds yet further. He therefore gave some to be Apostles,
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, For
the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for
the edification of the body of Christ, Till we all meet together, in the
unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, and
unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, etc. Yea the holy
Scriptures of the new Testament, a most faithful record of the Gospel
Preached by the Apostles, and delivered unto us in holy writings, it is verily
a fruit of the Ascension of our Savior: and that also a very great one, to
us, and to all the ages succeeding the Apostles times, even to the end of the
world. For otherwise, how should the ages following, specially those something
more removed, have enjoyed so pure and plentiful a fruit of their Preaching,
had it not been for this holy record of their Doctrine in writing. Surely, the
defection from the truth, foretold so speedily by them, and even beginning in
their days, hasted on so fast, according to the common proverb, An ill weed
grows a pace: that the truth without recovery, by any ordinary means,
would surely have been utterly perverted by the bastard traditions and
doctrines of men in a short time.

Thus then, though our Savior Christ be naturally absent in body, ever since
his ascension into heaven: yet he is, and always has bin spiritually, present
with his true Church, and chosen people, by his divine presence, walking as it
were in the midst of the seven golden Candlestickes, taking care for them all.
Revel: 1, 13. and chap: 2, 1. etc. According to his most holy and gracious
promise, Mat: 28.20. Lo, I am with ye always, until the end of the world.
Amen

But because the accomplishment of all this, neither was, neither could be at
once, and immediately upon the ascension of our Savior: therefore the
accomplishment of this fruit must be referred to the Article of the perpetual
sitting of our Savior at the right hand of God: though the beginning, and as
it were the first fruits of the consideration of these fruits, do belong
also, to the Ascension: seeing hereby, all that follows, took that glorious
effect which insued upon it.



Yes. We have a fifth, yea and also a sixth fruit, beside all the former, in
that like as by the resurrection of our Savior, our minds are first raised up
to newness of life, and our bodies also have thereby a pledge as it were, that
they shall rise again at the last day: so by the virtue of his ascension,
apprehended by a true and lively faith, our minds are yet further lifted up,
and confirmed in the study and practice of all heavenly and spiritual duties,
in certain hope that our souls shall be taken up into heaven, immediately
after this life.

And not only so, but by the ascension of our Savior, we are further assured,
that at his coming again to judgment, at the end of the world; our bodies
(their souls joined to them again) shall be taken up by the clouds, like as
he himself was taken up, that so we may for ever live and reign with him, and
all the thousand thousands of his Saints, and holy Angels in the heavens.

Touching the fifth fruit, that is, the further lifting and drawing up of our
minds, Explication and proof.
to the love and care of heavenly studies and duties of godliness, by the faith
of the ascension of our Savior; let us consider what he himself faith,
speaking of his lifting up, upon the cross by his death, John 12, 32. saying,
If I were lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me. Now therefore
seeing his lifting up upon the Cross, which was indeed with extreme reproach,
was mighty to begin so great a work: how shall not his lifting up to the
heavenly glory, (duly of us looked up unto) be much more mighty, to perfect
that which is already so well begun? For so it is written, Acts 5, 30.31. The
God of our Fathers has raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree.
Him has God lifted up with his right hand to be a Prince, and a Savior, to
give repentance to Israel, and remission of sins.

And now last of all, in the sixth place, that not only our souls shall be
received into the heavenly places, God has prepared a kingdom for his people,
from the beginning of the world: to wit, in his eternal counsel Mat: 25, 34.
Our Savior Christ is gone up into heaven to prepare places in his kingdom, as
one that actually executes the counsel of his Father, etc.
so soon as they depart this life, but also our bodies at the last day, as a
fruit of the ascension of our Savior Christ; we have his own promise, John,
12, 26. If any man serve me, let him follow me: for where I am, there shall
also my servants be: and if any man serve me, him will my Father honor. And
chap: 14, 2.3. In my Fathers house are many dwelling places: if it were not so,
I would have told ye: I go to prepare a place for ye, And though I go to
prepare a place for ye, I will come again and receive ye to my self, that
where I am, there may ye be also. And chap: 17. verses 22.24. And 1. These. 4,
13, etc, touching our bodies, thus writes the faithful Apostle of our Lord
Jesus Christ yet more expressly, The Lord himself shall descend from heaven,
etc. Then shall we which live be caught up with them also in the clouds, to
meet the Lord in the air: and so shall be ever with the Lord. Wherefore
(says he) comfort your selves one another with these words.

Thus then we see, that the ascension of our Savior Christ into heaven, is an
Article of our faith, many ways very beneficial, and comfortable unto us:
yea so was it to the Apostles, even from the instant time thereof. For they, as
it is written, Forthwith returned from the mount of Olives, The Duties.
whence our Savior ascended to Jerusalem, with great joy: rejoicing, no doubt,
in assurance that our Savior was not only verily and in truth risen again:
but also, that he was truly ascended up into heaven, and that from thence they
should receive the gifts of the holy Ghost, which our Savior had promised to
send down upon them. Luke. Acts, 1.12. and in the Gospel, 24.52. And much
more joyful was it unto them, after the receiving of the gifts of the holy
Ghost, as it follows in the next verse. For of that time chiefly the
Evangelist seems to speak, in that he affirms, That they were continually
in the Temple, praising and lauding God. The certain truth whereof, and of the
whole Gospel, he assures and concludes with the word Amen: like as we have
seen before, Matthew and John to have done. The like joy ought we to have, yea
increasing more and more therein, with all holy thankfulness, and the
declaration thereof, by all good fruits of duty which may argue the same. The
which graces, God of his infinite mercy, grant unto us, even for Jesus Christ's
sake, Amen.

ANd now having thus finished the comforts, and found that the ascension of our
Savior, is a matter of joy, yea of singular joy, as his conception and birth
was to the virgin Marie, and to Elizabeth, and to the Sheepheards: and as his
resurrection was to Marie Magdalen, and to the Disciples: let us come to
inquire out the duties, belonging to that comfort and joy, which faith
apprehends therein.



To speak more generally, It is our duty, as a fruit of our faith in our
Savior, ascended up into heaven, to endeavor so much the more cheerfully, to
go forward with mighty increases, both in the mortification of the remnants
of all sin abiding still in us, and in the minding and doing of all holy and
heavenly duties of a godly life, in all the days that we have to live here
upon the earth.

Explication
It must needs be so, in all proportion of good reason. For the proof whereof,
we may take the example of the Apostle Paul, and other faithful Christians:
of whom he writes, Philippians, 3.20.21. saying, Our conversation is in
heaven, from whence we look for our Savior, etc. We may likewise take for
proof of it, the prayer of the said Apostle, Colos. 1.9.10.11. And his
exhortation. chap. 3.1. etc. And the precept of our Savior. Matthew. ^.19.20.
21. Lay not up treasures for your selves upon earth, etc. But lay ye up
treasures for your selves in heaven, etc. For where your treasure is, there
will your heart be also. To the which purpose, it may profitable for us, to
consider, in what phrase of speech, the holy Scriptures do speak of the
service of GOD, and of all his holy waves: namely, in that is said, The way of
life is on high to the prudent; to avoid from Holy beneath. Prou. 15.24. and
in that the servants of God are said, To have lifted up their hearts to seek
God, and to have lifted up their prayers to God, etc: As 2, King. 1^.4. and 2.
Chronicles, 32.20. And Psalm, 25.1.15. Read also Psalm. 123. Verily, our
Savior Christ, truly believed in, as being ascended up into heaven, cannot but
be a most effectual loadstone to draw up the minds of those that be his,
unto him, how heavy and lumpish so ever they be in themselves. Whosoever
therefore, do not lift up their minds unto heauen-ward, but still like swine
are groueling, and rooting in the earth: they show plainly, that they little
know, what the faith of this Article does mean.

And thus much, something more generally, of the duties of faith, belonging to
the comfort of the ascension of our Savior.



They may be gathered from the particular comforts, above rehearsed.

Show how.

First, in that our Savior ascending up into heaven, left his blessing behind
him: every one of us, ought to walk in the duties of our several callings,
specially the Ministers of the word, in sure trust of good success, we giving
(as we are bound) all divine worship, honor, and praise, to the Lord our
Savior after the example of his holy Apostles, when they saw him to ascend.

Secondly, insomuch as our justification in the sight of God, is so clearly
confirmed by the ascension of our Savior: we ought to rest more quietly and
peaceably in it, without any looking this way or that way, to any thing else:
as the Apostle Paul teaches. Romans 10 6.7.8 9.10.11.

Thirdly, seeing the ascension of our Savior makes it most manifest unto us,
that he has vanquished all our enemies: we ought, so much the more
cheerfully to serve God, in holiness and righteousness, without fear of them,
or giving place to any doubt or fear, arising in our own consciences, that
might any way hinder the same our service unto him.

Fourthly, seeing he has by the same his ascension, enlarged the bounty of
his gifts and graces, that they might flow forth, as a more full stream, to
the end of the world: we are to account it so much the more unworthy a thing,
that any professing the name of Christ should be ignorant, and unbelieving, or
to dam up the passage of knowledge and faith against our selves; or having
gifts, to be proud of them, or not to employ them wholly, to the glory of God,
and edification of his Church and people.

Fifthly, insomuch as our Savior has ascended, to show us that our minds
should be set upon heavenly things, and therefore has promised to send the
holy Ghost to be our comforter: it were a shame for us, to lie still groueling
in the sinful lusts, and pleasures of this world, as if all our comfort lay
in them, and not rather, to show our selves to be as pilgrims and strangers
in it, and to rest and stay our selves upon God alone, for all our consolation:
according to the holy entreaty of the Apostle Peter. 1. Epist. chapter. 2.
11.12.

Finally, seeing our Savior is ascended to prepare places for us in heaven: it
is our bounden duty to prepare our selves, and all that belong unto us,
Pastors their flocks, Parents their children, etc. that we may in Christ
Jesus, be found meet to be received unto them: and even to long after the
same, according to the example of S. Paul, and other ancient Christians of that
time, 2. Cor. 5.12. etc. but not till we have finished our course, fought the
spiritual battles of God, and kept the faith, as we are else where advised
by the spirit of God, and by the ministry of the same his holy Apostle.

Explication.
These are the good duties in deed, which the comfort of faith in the ascension
of our Savior into heaven, calls for at our hands; and which we stand hound
to yield in regard thereof. And if we do not prepare our selves, and provide
the marriage garment: how I pray you, may we look to be admitted for guests in
his heavenly Kingdom? we should show our selves unworthy the communion of
Saints here, much more there. If we acquaint our selves with rude behavior,
how should we be fit to stand before Princes, much less before the God of
heaven, if we give our selves over to sin and wickedness. All contrary
neglects, or practices, are utterly unbeseeming all true, faithful, and
believing Christians, and do hinder from ascending into the Kingdom of
heaven. Read Psalm. 15. and Psalm. 24. Much might be said as you see. But thus
much for the present shall suffice touching the duties.



Such as will not lift up their souls to believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, and
accordingly to obey him, in that he is ascended up into heaven, shall find no
benefit of his saving health here upon earth, or immediately after death, when
their souls shall be separated from their body: much less shall both their
bodies and souls, be taken up into heaven, there to live and reign eternally
with him, at the time of the resurrection of the dead.

It is very true. Our minds must be lifted up first, The danger of not
believing this article.
or else our bodies shall not be lifted up afterward: like as we saw before,
that we must be partakers of the first resurrection, before we can have any
part in the second. For proof whereof, read John 8.21. where our Savior
tells the unbelieving Jews of his going away, that is, of his leaving the
earth, and ascending up into heaven: that if they would not believe in him as
one specially sent of God, and returning to him again, they should die in
their sins, and they should have no eternal abiding in the house of God:
that is in heaven, as true believers shall have, verses, 35.36. Read also chap.
16.9. where he says, that the holy Ghost shall convince the world of sin,
even from this, that men believe not in our Savior, seeing he is gone to his
Father, to wit, into heaven. Thus then we see, that the danger is very great in
not believing this article.

And that we may provoke our selves to be careful to labor to be found in the
faith hereof; it shall be good for us, to consider of the fearful examples of
those, which both heretofore, as also to this day, have grossly erred from it.

O^ old time, the heretics called Apellites, said that the ascension of
Christ into heaven, was but the dissoluing of his body into the four elements.
The Manichaei, Seleuciani, and Hermenians, not going so far, as to say, that
it is dissolved, yet they are said to have affirmed thus much, that the body of
our Savior is fixed about the stars, and chiefly about the globe of the
sun, and is ascended no higher. And in deed, if it should not be gone into
the invisible heavens, where might it be more likely to abide, then in the
Region of those excellent creatures, and near about the sun? Thus leaving
the truth, they would seem to be as wise in error, and as soberly minded in
their madd conceits, as any color or pretext, might cause them to seem to be.

The Carpocratians, they would not deny the ascension of our Savior into
heaven: but they held that the ascension was of the soul only, and not of the
body. But the Christolites, they restrain the ascension to the Deity: saying,
that it only ascended, and not the humane nature at all. Thus have many erred
in former times. And in our own days, the Papists, who, though they grant an
ascension of the whole humane nature: yet they believe not soundly, that the
same is contained in heaven, until the end of the world, as the scriptures do
plainly teach us. For if they did, then would they not tell us, of any bodily
appearances of his, here upon earth, either to Peter going out of Rome to
shun martyrdom (as we have the tale delivered under the name of Linus the
next Bishop of Rome after Peter, as they say. Neither would they, so many
hundred years after our Saviors ascension, have brought the transubstantiated
presence of his body into their Mass, so often, and in so many places so ever,
as they have mind to make it, as they hold and teach that they do.

They also, that do contend for an vbiquitarie or every where presence of the
body of our Savior, would never be so earnest that way; nor to say, that the
ascension of our Savior was nothing else, but a disparition, or vanishing out
of sight, and no removing out of one place into another: neither would they
strive for a bodily presence, really, in, or with the bread of the Sacrament,
etc. if they did truly believe this article. These dangers therefore, are
carefully to be avoided of us. And to the end, our souls may be preserved from
them, it is necessary, that we do rightly understand, and firmly hold the
truth of this article: not according to any fancy of man, but according to the
true interpretation of the holy Scriptures alone.

Belief in God the Son, who sits at the right hand of God the Father
almighty.
Belief in God the Son, who sits at the right hand of God the Father
almighty. The ground of the article.

Hitherto of the second degree of our Savior Christ his exaltation. The next,
and highest degree, is to be inquired of.



He sits at the right hand of God the Father almighty.

So in deed it follows in the articles of our belief. But what ground of
holy Scripture have you for it?

In the 19 verse of the 16. chap. of the Evangelist Mark, immediately after the
former article of the ascension, this of our Saviors sitting at the right hand
of God, follows in the very next words.



So (says S. Mark) after the Lord had spoken to them, he was received into
heaven, and sat at the right hand of God.

Explication.
This is a plain ground and testimony of it in deed. And it is no other thing,
but the accomplishment and fulfilling of that, which was long before prophesied
on, and foretold in the 110. Psalm. like as we have seen before, how in the
book of the Psalm. both the sufferings, and also the death, and resurrection,
and ascension of our Savior have been foretold unto us: like also as our
Savior himself, while he was yet living on earth, spoke of his betraying, and
of all his sufferings even unto the death, and of his resurrection from the
dead, and of his ascension up into heaven, before any of these things came to
pass; to the end his disciples might the rather be moved to believe, when they
should see them, according to his word, to take their effect. So did he even to
the same end and purpose, foretell this his sitting at the right hand of God
the Father; before it was fulfilled; (...) we read it recorded Math. 22.4^ etc.
Where he applied the ancient prophet of the 110. Psalm. is long before spoken
of himself, and thereby, did put the Pharisees to silence giving them to
understand, that the promised Messiah, was another manner of one, then they
imagined him to be: that is to say, of greater dignity, then any mere mortal
man. For who else, but such a one, might be David's Lord, who was the sovereign
King of Israel? This was that, which did at this time confound the^. And
another prediction of his sitting at the right hand of God, we read it uttered
before the high Pri^st, Math. 26.64. Hereafter (says our Savior) shall ye see
the son of man sitting at the right hand of the power of God.

Thus then, we may evidently see, that we have this article of our faith,
sufficiently warranted, and confirmed unto us, in the holy scriptures?

NOw, after the ground and proof of the article: it follows in the next
place, that we do inquire into the true meaning of it. To the which end, as
you heard in the Sermon upon this article, diverse things are diligently to be
considered of us: the which it is necessary for us, here to call again to
mind.



First, the time is to be considered, when this sitting of our Savior here
spoken of, did begin, and how long it is to continue.

Secondly, the place where he sits.

Thirdly, the Person at whose right hand he sits.

Fourthly, what is meant by the right hand of God.

Fifthly, what the sitting of our Savior means.

That all these things are necessarily to be considered of us, to the right
understanding of this article: it will appear in the examination of the
particulars.

Let us therefore come unto them. The meaning of the Article
And first; at what time did this sitting of our Savior begin? And how long is
it to continue?

An. It began immediately upon his ascension up into heaven: and it continues
for ever, w rld without end.

Expli. It is very true. For so first, touching the beginning, is the truth of
it historically and orderly reported in the holy Scriptures: namely, Mark
chap. 16. verse 19. as was before rehearsed. And again, Acts chap. 2. verses
33, 34. the sitting at the right hand, follows immediately after the
exaltation of our Savior by his ascension to heaven. And though the ascension
is not always mentioned betwixt the resurrection and sitting at the right hand
of God, (as Romans 8.34. and Ephesians. 1.20.) yet it must necessarily be
understood, according to those former testimonies of Mark and Peter. And so
likewise, although the sitting is rehearsed in some other places, immediately
after his death: as Heb. 1.3. and chap. 10.12. and chap. 12.2. yet must both
the resurrection, and also the ascension be understood, as going in order of
time, betwixt them. For so it is plain, from the testimony and prediction of
our Savior, adjured by the high Priest. Matthew. 26.63. Hereafter (says he)
shall ye see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of the power of God.
This (hereafter) which our Savior speaks of, was indeed to be accomplished
a great while after: and is still remaining to be performed so long a time
hereafter, as the world is yet to continue. Nevertheless, that the sufferings,
death, resurrection, and ascension of our Savior, were before his sitting at
the right hand of God: and that the sitting was after them, the words of our
Savior are very plain. So then, howsoever the sitting of our Savior at the
right hand of God, is to continue for ever, as was further answered: (which
thing the Apostle plainly affirms, Heb. 10.12. as we shall have further
occasion to consider afterward) yet it began not, till that very time when he
was ascended, and entered into the high heavens, even to the throne of the
Majesty of God.

This consideration of the time, is the rather to be diligently observed of us,
to the arming of our minds against that confused fancy of some, who in favor
of their errors in some other points, would have us believe that our Savior
had always his seat at the right hand of God: and also, that the right hand
of God here spoken of, is every where, etc. But that this Article of our faith,
is not so to be understood, we have seen already, in that which was said
touching the time. And as for the place: we are now to consider secondarily,
that it was not,

I have learned from the holy Scriptures, that the place, where our Savior
sits at the right hand of God, is only in the heavens.

Explication and proof.
So it must needs be. For seeing by his ascension, he has left the earth, I
mean as touching his humane nature, (for of it do these articles of our faith
properly speak) and is gone into the heavens, which must contain him, till he
shall come again to judgment: we cannot understand his sitting at the right
hand of God in his humane nature, to be any other where then in heaven. So that
this we are to embrace and hold for a certain truth, that the place of our
Saviors sitting at Gods right hand, is that place only, whither he is
ascended. For proof whereof, read Ephesians. 1.20. God has set him at his right hand
in the heavenly places. And Heb. 1.3. In the highest places. And chapter 8.1. in
the heavens. And 9.24. Christ is not entered into the holy places, that are made
with hands, which are similitudes of the true sanctuary: but he is entered into
very heaven to appear now in the sight of God for us. Thus much concerning the
place. The which is the more diligently to be observed of us, for the reason
before mentioned, concerning the time. The third thing to be considered,
Question. Answer. Explication.
is the Person, at whose right hand our Savior sits. Who is that?

Even the same which is mentioned in the first article: that is, God the father
almighty.

It is very true. For so are all those places of holy Scripture to be
understood, where mention has bin made of our Saviors sitting at the right
hand of God Neither is it necessary, that the word (Father) should be always
expressed: seeing it is a very usual thing, to understand the Father, by the
name of God, when mention is made of God with a respect to the Son, as it is
here in this Article. Nevertheless, sometimes the name of the Father, and also
of his almighty power, is expressed: namely, Ephesians. 1.17, etc. The God of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, etc. by the exceeding greatness of
his mighty power, has raised up our Lord Jesus Christ, and set him at his
right hand. And 1. Cor. 15.24. the same Apostle speaking of our Saviors
delivering up of his kingdom, says, That he should deliver it up to God the
Father, of whom he received it. And furthermore, that this Father is almighty,
it has been proved and declared before: so that, it is less necessary at
this time, to stand upon it. This also is very comfortable, as we shall have
occasion to observe afterward.

Let us therefore come now to consider of the fourth point, necessary to the
understanding of this Article: to wit, what is meant here, by the right hand of
God this almighty Father.

To whom will ye liken me? or what similitude will ye set up unto me? etc.
What is to be said to this?

The right hand of God is usually mentioned in the holy Scriptures, to note the
mighty power of God. But in this Article, it is to be understood, according to
that use which was among the great Kings and Princes of the earth, to set those
at their right hand, whom they specially favored, and minded to advance to the
chief degrees of power and authority under them: or to be as it were in their
stead, and in office to represent their person.



They do by a familiar comparison, represent to our weak capacity, the most
sovereign and divine authority of God.

Explication and proof.
They do so indeed. For notwithstanding, as you answered before, the right
hand of God does most usually note the power and strength of God: according to
that, Psalm. 89.13 Thou have a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy
right hand, etc. Likewise Psalm. 20.6. Now I know that the Lord will help his
anointed, and hear him from heaven his sanctuary, by the mighty help of his
right hand. And even concerning the matter in hand, according to that Act.
5.31. God has lifted up Jesus by his right hand, (that is by his mighty
power) to be a Prince and a Savior. Nevertheless, in the present Article, it
seems of it self very clear, that the right hand of God, should rather
signify, the sovereignty of that authority, which by greatest right, is most
due unto him. So that we may not unaptly say thus, to express the meaning of
this Article: that God has lifted up our Savior, by the right hand of his
almighty power and strength, that he might set him at the right hand of his
most sovereign majesty and glory. In which sense, mention is made of the
right hand of God. Psalm. 17.7. And that it was the manner of Kings and great
persons, to set those, whom they favored, at their right hand: and that this
was accounted a special honor, and preferment, given to such; we may
perceive, by that which we read, Genesis 48.18. where Joseph is desirous that
the eldest of his sons might stand at the right hand of Iaakob his Father, to
receive his blessing: which Iaakob no doubt, was in dignity and honor, a
Prince of the holy people of God, though outwardly, in a more mean estate. We
may perceive it also by the practice of king Solomon. 1. Kings. 2.19. who set
his mother, coming to make a certain suit unto him, at his right hand. And by
that which is said, Psalm. 45.9. of the wife of the King, The Queen stood at
the right hand of the King, The Comforts.
in a vesture of gold of ophir. And Mat. 20.20, 21. by that request which the
mother of James and John made to our Savior Christ, that one of them might sit
at the right hand. And finally, by that, which our Savior himself says, that
at the day of judgment, he will place the sheep, that is, his faithful
people, at his right hand, Matthew. 25.33.

But that this speech of our Saviors sitting at the right hand of God: is in
no wise to be literally understood, after the heretical conceit of those,
that are called Anthropomorphites, because they held God to be like man in his
outward shape and proportion of bodily members: beside that which was already
observed, concerning the spiritual nature of God: it may further appear, by
comparing of diverse places together, where this one and the same thing, is
expressed in diverse words, as by an interpretation of them. For Mat. 26.64. the
right hand of God, is called the right hand of his power. And Heb. 8.1. the
right hand of his throne of majesty. And again, chap. 12.1. the right hand of
the throne of God. Where we see, the right hand of God, attributed to his
power, and to his throne: to show that by his right hand, is meant his
sovereign power and authority only: and no outward form and description of
his nature.

These things thus considered, it shall be easy for us to understand in the
first place, what is meant, by the sitting of our Savior at the right hand of
God, the almighty Father.

The sitting of our Savior at the right hand of God, signifies unto us, these
two things.

First, that he has received of his Father, even in his humane nature, so
great honor and glory: as neither may lawfully, nor can possibly be given to
any person, who is no more then a creature, whether man, or Angel.

Secondly, it signifies, that according to the incomparable excellency, and
glory given to his person: he has likewise received of God our heavenly
Father, the most high sovereignty of office, and power over all creatures, and
that eternally, even for ever and ever: as well in kingly regencie over men,
and all creatures, as in the intercession of the high priesthood with God, for
men: to wit^ for all his elect children.

Explication and proof.
That these things are so. First, touching the peerless honor and glory of
our Savior, signified by the sitting at the right hand of God: read Heb.
1.13. unto which of the Angels, said (God) at any time, sit thou at my right
hand, etc. Wherefore, seeing this dignity, cannot beseem an Angel: we may
well conclude, that it is not meet to be attributed to any creature beside.
And likewise verse 5. of the same chapter, Unto which of the Angels (said God)
at any time, Thou art my son, etc. So that, where it is said by the Apostle
Peter, 2. Epistle 1.17. that our Savior received honor and glory, when there
came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased: yea even while he was yet upon the earth. And the
Apostles saw his majesty, verse 16. of the same chap. For he was gloriously
transfigured before the^. Mat. 17 2. much rather then may it be said, in
respect of his sitting at the right hand of God, that he has received most
high honor and glory from God.

But because the highest dignity and honor of person, was not sufficient for
our Savior, (so infinite was the love of God toward him, and his own worthiness
in himself) therefore did he join a like sovereignty of office, with his
excellency of person, that his power might maintain and uphold his honor.
For potentia est custos and vindex honoris: according to that, which we may
further read, Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 20, 21, 22, 23. God set Christ at his right hand,
in the heavenly places, far above all principality, and power, and might,
and dominion, and every name that is named: not in this world only, but also
in that which is to come. And he has made all things subject under his feet,
and has appointed him over all things to be the head to the Church, which is
his body, even the fullness of him that fills all in all things. And Philip.
2.9. God has exalted him, and given him a name above every name. And 1. Pet.
3.22. and Heb. 2.9. We see Jesus crowned with glory and honor. Indeed, as the
Apostle says in the same place, our Savior was made a little inferior to the
Angels, through the suffering of death: yea in that the Son of God was made
man, it was a wonderful humiliation which he stooped unto. But now, on the
contrary, the advancement is so great, that we may say, that man is after a
sort, made the most high God. This most high and divine sovereignty of our
Savior in office, joined with the most high dignity and honor of his Person;
consists partly, in that power which he has from God over men, and partly
in that favor which he has with God for men, as was answered. But because
these things are afterward to be considered more fully, in the benefits and
comforts belonging to the faith of this Article; therefore we will content our
selves only to have made mention of them now.

In the mean season, let us first observe this in a word: that whereas the
holy Scriptures teach us, that our Savior sits at the right hand of the
Father, in the heavens: we are not to conceive, as though he were restrained
from all motion of his body. Though indeed, it is all one with him now,
whether he do continually sit, or should be in continual motion, and bodily
action, or should be continually standing, as Stephen saw him. And the right
hand of God, is principally, every where in the most glorious heavens, where
the throne of his Majesty is. Neither is our Savior said to sit at the right
hand of God, so much (by these words) to note the situation (as one would say)
of his body: as that excellent estate and degree, wherein he is, according to
that which was declared before.



This Article teaches me, and every true christian, undoubtedly to believe,
that the only begotten Son of God, our glorious Lord Jesus Christ, who after
his death rose again bodily from the dead: is now, in the same our humane
nature, not only ascended bodily into heaven but also, that he has there
received of the Father (as a fruit and declaration of his infinite love toward
him, and as a fruit of his own infinite merit and worthiness in his sight)
all perfection, of divine power, glory, and majesty, to the perfecting of all
things, belonging to his most high and eternal office of kingdom over all;
and o priesthood and prophetship, for the perfect salvation, and glorification
of his Church even in that he is the Son of man.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. For herein is fully confirmed to our Savior Christ, that
which he himself had affirmed before his death. John 5.20, 27. The Father
loves the Son, and shows him all things, whatsoever he himself does; and
he will show him greater works then these, that ye should marvel, etc. And
he has given him power also to execute judgment, in that he is the son of
man. And that also is herein fulfilled, which he said a little before his
ascension, Matthew. 28.18. All power is given me in heaven and in earth. And that
which he prayed, John, 17.1. Glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may
glorify thee, as thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life, to all them whom thou have given unto him. And verse 5. Glorify
me thou Father, with thine own self, with the glory which I ha^ with thee
before the world was. In the which glory of the Father, he shall come at the
last day. Matthew. 16.27. And chap. 25.31. And Luke 21.27. with power and great
glory.

THus, from the meaning of the Article, we come to the promise.



The prophecy in the 110. Psalm verse 1. contains a promise in it, saying,
The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies
thy foot stool.

Explication and proof.
It is true. For the conquest of our Savior, promised to him, was also to the
benefit of the Church, as the same Psalm does plainly declare.

But because the promise will further appear, from all the effects thereof, in
the most comfortable fruits and benefits, The Comforts.
which the sitting of our Savior at the right hand of God, has brought unto
the Church: therefore we will abruptly break off from the promise, and haste
unto them.

Qu. Which are those most comfortable fruits and benefits?

An. To speak (as the truth is) generally, by this most high exaltation of our
Savior Christ in our humane nature, all the fruits, how many, and how great
soever, we receive by him: even from his very incarnation, and first coming
into the world, to his ascension up into heaven: to wit, redemption,
justification, sanctification, salvation, and whatsoever else beside: they are
all most perfectly warranted and sealed up unto us, and to every true christian
believer, yea even to the poorest and basest of those, which do truly believe
in his name.

It is very true: according as that one place of the Apostle Saint Paul, Romans
8.29, 30, etc. Explication and proof.
even to the end of the chapter, may abundantly prove and declare. For albeit,
as we must acknowledge, he deduceth and deriveth our salvation from the very
first and supreme cause of i^; that is to say, from the most sacred and
eternal election, and high counsel of God: yet he proceeds to make the most
low humiliation of our Savior Christ, the original means of our attaining
unto it. Neither does the holy Apostle rest or stay his speech, until he do
come by an excellent gradation, even to the height of this exaltation, at the
right hand of the majesty of God. That even as when God has made all his
works of creation at the first, he looked upon them, and saw that all was very
good: so by the ascension of our Savior to his right hand, the work of our
redemption and salvation, (according to the new creation of all things in
Christ, after the most holy consultation and decree of the whole Trinity)
might be represented most glorious and perfectly good before him. For to this
purpose it is, that the holy Apostle thus writes in that holy scripture, Those
(says he, speaking of God) whom he knew before, he also predestined to be
made like to the image of his Son, that he might be the first borne among
many brethren.

Moreover, whom he predestined them also he called, and whom he called, them
also he justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

What (says the Apostle hereupon) shall we say to those things? If God be on
our side, who can be against us? who spared not his own Son, but gave him
for us all (to death) how shall he not with him freely give us all things else?
(charisetai)

Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea or rather who
is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also
for us.

Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? that is, from that love, which
we are sure, CHRIST bears toward us? Shall tribulation or anguish, etc.

No, says the Apostle. For I am persuaded, that neither death nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord? to wit, from that love
wherewith God is affected most tenderly, and constantly, toward us for Christ
Jesus sake.

The Apostle, we see, speaking of that high consolation which we have in our
Lord Jesus Christ, being at the right hand of God making request for us:
fears not, lest he should use any too high excess of speech. For the matter
exceeds every hyperbole, insomuch as it is higher then the very heavens, and
all creatures either in heaven or in earth.

So that indeed, to speak generally, as was answered: the height of our
Savior Christ's most high exaltation, is as it were the top, and vpshot, or
perfection of the comfort of our faith, yea even the very full triumph and
glory of it, as his most low humiliation and sufferings, are as the ground and
foundation thereof. And so the same Apostle reasons also, Ephesians. 2.1, etc.
For immediately after that he had in like lofty manner, described the most
high advancement of our Savior, even from his resurrection to his sitting at
the right hand of God: he infers upon it, that whereas we are by nature,
dead in trespasses and sins, and children of disobedience, etc. and by nature
children of wrath, as well as others: yet, (as he there affirms) God who is
rich in mermy, through his great love, wherewith he loved us, even when we were
dead by sins, has quickened us together in Christ, (for by grace are ye
saved, says the Apostle.) And he (that is, God) has raised us up together,
and made us sit together in the heavenly places, in Christ Jesus, that he might
show in the ages to come, the exceeding riches of his grace, through his
kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. For by grace are ye saved through faith,
and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God, not of works, etc.

Sessio Christi ad dextra^ patris, est perfectio vel excellentia officij
mediatoris^ officij scil: prophetici, Sacerdotalis, ac regij, quod iam
Christus, vt pote caput ecclesiae glory ficatum in humana natura, gloriose in
coe^is exercet. Cui etiam, haec gloria debetur tum ratione officij, tum ratione
personae Dei. Vrsinus.
Thus then, we may perceive what, and how great, the use of our Saviors sitting
at the right hand of God is, for our comfort generally. But it is meet, that
we should look more nearly into the particulars.

The which, that we may do, we cannot (as I think) take a better course, then
according to the diverse parts of our Savior Christ's most holy and high office
(wherein he is, according to the most excellent worthiness of his Person, most
gloriously advanced) to consider what be the fruits and benefits thereof. For
although we have already considered of the anointing of our Savior to this
threefold, or tripartite office, when we speak of the title Christ: yet this
lets not, why we should not now treat of the perfect accomplishment of the
same: though therein we call again to mind, some of those things which have
been set down before. And further also, notwithstanding the office of our
Savior Christ, is most usually determined in his kingdom and priesthood: yet
because the holy Scriptures do give us to understand, that he was a princely
Prophet, like to Moses and David, as well as a kingly high Priest, like to
Melchisedech: we may not amiss: (for the more plainness of doctrine) make
his prophetship a distinct member of his office.

First therefore, what are the fruits of the advancement of our Savior, as a
most high and princely Prophet, interpreter, or Preacher of the word of God.

First, he has most perfectly sealed up, and authorized all former doctrine
and prophecy, taught both by himself, and also by all other the holy
Prophets, that were since the beginning of the world: as the true testimony,
and declaration of the will of God, touching the salvation of his people.

Secondly, he has more plentifully cleared, published, and confirmed the
doctrine and Gospel of salvation, them ever he had done before.

Thirdly, he has given more gracious and plentiful effects to the ministry
and preaching of his Gospel, then ever he gave to the ministry of the former
Prophets, or unto his own, while he preached in his bodily presence, here upon
earth.

Explication and proof.
These are the fruits and benefits indeed, which we may not unfitly, refer to
the sitting of our Savior at the right hand of God, in respect of his princely
prophecy, as we will by the grace of God endeavor to make plain.

And first, that our Savior Christ has by his sitting at the right hand of
God, sealed up and ratified al former holy doctrine and prophecy, taught both
by himself, and his holy Prophets, to be the very true testimony of the will of
God, touching the salvation of his Church. And secondly, that he has thereby,
and from thence, more plentifully cleared, published and confirmed the same his
holy doctrine: it may be evident, in that from the time of his sitting at the
right hand of god, and not before, he powered down the gifts of the holy ghost
most ple^tifully upon his holy Apostles, for the benefit of his whole Church,
both by their preaching for their life time, and by their writings, eue^ to
this day, and to the end of the world. Insomuch as, both by the one, and also
by the other, their whole ministry was employed to the clearing of the
testimonies of the Prophets, by the full performance of them, in and by our Lord
Jesus Christ: to the redemption, justification, and salvation of the whole
Catholic Church of God, consisting both of Jew and Gentile: according to that
notable testimony of the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14, etc. The which
notwithstanding we did allege it, as we had occasion given us, from the 7, 8,
9, and 10. verses going immediately before, concerning the ascension of our
Savior up into heaven: yet because the performance, and distribution of the
gifts of our Savior, was not, by reason of the ascension, simply considered in
it self, but in respect of the end wherefore he ascended: that is, to take
his full glory and power at the right hand of God: therefore we have just
cause, to call it to remembrance here again, yea here to give it the due place
of our more full consideration. For that it might the rather appear, that
these fruits and benefits, are to be ascribed to the sitting of our Savior at
the right hand of God, to the perfect ratifying of all holy prophecy and
doctrine, (according to his own teaching. Mat. 5.17, 18.7 Think not that I am
come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets. I am not come to destroy them, but to
fulfill them. For truly I say unto you till heaven and earth perish, one ^ote
or one title of the law shall not escape, till all be fulfilled, etc.) he would
not send the holy Ghost down upon his Apostles immediately upon his ascension,
(though he ascended to that end and purpose) but deferred it ten days after.
For our Savior, ascending to heaven, as we know, on thursday, which fell out
to be the fourtith day after his resurrection, he did not send the holy Ghost
till the Lords day sen-night after: which being called by us Whitsonday, it is
in the 2. chapter of the Acts, (where this holy history is recorded unto us)
termed by the name of Pentecost, which in the Greek tongue signifies the
fiftith day^ (pentecoste) sub andi (he m^ra) though by use (to note this time,
which was a feast of the Jews, otherwise called of them the feast of the
weeks) the same word (pentecoste) is made a substanti^e. But what then? were
the holy Apostles without the holy Ghost, or void of the gifts and graces of
our Savior Christ,

No we may not say so.

Answer. Explication and proof.
You say true. For it is evident, that they were already indewed with a great
measure of grace, as is plainly, and expressly testified in the first chapter
of the Acts of the Apostles, verses 13, 14, 15, etc. to the end of the chapter.
And that two ways. First more generally, in that it is recorded, that in this
mean time, they (continuing together according to the commandment of our
Savior while he was yet with them) gave themselves with one accord to prayer
and supplication. verse 14. Secondly, and that more particularly, in the wise
and gracious ordering of the election of Matthias, to be in the room of a
twelfth Apostle, in stead of Judas, who had left his place, and lost his
fellowship which he had externally enjoyed with the rest of the Apostles: as it
follows verse 15. and to the end. Thus it may evidently appear, that the
Apostles were not utterly void of the holy Ghost, from the time of the
ascension of our Savior Christ, till the tenth day.



It is to be understood, only concerning that most full measure of the gifts of
the holy Ghost, which our Savior did in dew them withal at that time:
according to his promise made unto them before his ascension, as the holy story
does sufficiently declare.

Explication and proof.
So it does indeed. For after the holy Ghost was descended upon the Apostles,
and that they had the gift of speaking languages, and uttered the wonderful
mysteries of God, to the astonishing of many sorts of strangers, in their
several languages, as the Spirit gave them utterance: the Apostle Peter says
thus, Acts 2.33, 34, 35, 36. Since that Christ has been exalted by the right
hand of God, and has received of his Father, the promise of the holy Ghost:
he has shed forth this, which ye now see and hear. For David (as the same
Apostle adds further) is not ascended into heaven, but he says, The Lord
said to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot
stooie.

Thus then we so, that we may well say, that our Savior Christ has by his
sitting at the right hand of God, as a princely Prophet, sealed and confirmed,
and most plentifully cleared, and published the holy doctrine of our salvation.
Yea that he has confirmed and authorized it, more firmly then it is said of
the laws of the Medes and Persians, which never change. For though men's laws
are sundry times repealed and altered, yet it is not, neither shall ever be so,
with the doctrine of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. For it shall remain
still in full strength, when all humane laws, policies, and decrees of man's
wit, shall for ever be disauthorised and dissolved Herein therefore, well may
we use the words of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 8.16. that the Testimony and the
Law, that is, all the holy doctrine of God, is most perfectly bound up, and
sealed among the Disciples of our Savior Christ: that is to say, it is
ratified and reserved to their use, though withdrawn, and hidden as a secret
from all unbelievers.

Like also as we read the same kind of speech to a more particular purpose,
Dan. 8.26. The vision is true: therefore seal it up. And chap. 12.4. Shut up
the words and seal the book. But more generally, chap. 9.24. it is prophesied
that our Savior should by his death, seal up all vision and prophecy here
upon earth. The which also he has since his ascension, sealed up most
perfitly in heaven, to hide it above the reach of all infidells, but to cause
all things to shine forth more clearly, to the plentiful increase of the
comfort of all true believers. According to that of the Apostle Paul, 2. Cor.
chap. 4. verse 3. If our Gospel be then hidden, it is hidden to them that are
lost. In whom the God of this world has blinded their minds, to wit, the
minds of infidells, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is
the image of God, should not shine unto them.

But now, that we may come to the third fruit, and benefit of our Saviors
sitting at the right hand of God, in that he is advanced in his princely
prophecy: to wit, to those most gracious and plentiful effects, which from
that time, he gave to the Ministers and Preachers of his Gospel, and their
ministry, above that he ever gave to the ministry of his former Prophets,
or to his own most sacred preaching, while he was bodily upon the earth: the
holy history entitled, the Acts of the Apostles, does plentifully confirm
that he did so, even from the beginning of the 2. chapter, to the end of the
28. chap. which is the last of that notable book. According also, as it is
most briefly testified by Saint Mark, chap. 16.20. where he shows, that
after our Savior was received into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God,
the Apostles went forth and preached every where. And that the Lord wrought
with them, and confirmed the word with signs that followed.

And this was that which our Savior himself had promised before his death,
John 14.12. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes in me, the works
that I do, he shall do also, and greater then these, shall he do: for I go
to my Father. These greater works, were the preaching of the Gospel to the
Gentiles, and their conversion to the faith of Christ, and to the obedience of
the Gospel: which were not fulfilled till our Savior was set down at the
right hand of God, and that he had endewed his Apostles with great power of his
grace, from the same right hand of the power of God: as the whole history of
the Acts of the Apostles, does plentifully declare.

We conclude therefore, that, look what comfort we find by the ministry of
the Gospel, yea and from the word and Gospel of the new Testament it self;
written to our uses by the holy Apostles; we are to ascribe it most
immediately, and as touching the perfect sealing of it up unto us; to the
sitting of our Savior at the right hand of God. So that, seeing the people
rejoiced greatly at the works of our Savior, while he was upon the earth for
a time, because God had raised up a great Prophet among them, though they did
not then know him to be the Son of God. Luke 7.16. Much more may we justly
rejoice, who know and believe, that the same great Prophet, the Prince of all
Prophets, the most princely Prophet, is royally advanced at the right hand of
God, to such excellent ends, as have been hitherto declared.

And thus much shall suffice to note out the comforts of this article of our
says, in regard of the prophetical office of our Savior Christ.

Let us come to the like comfortable fruits and benefits of his advancement
to the right hand of God, in respect of his kingly priesthood.

Question. Which are they?

Ans. We are hereby assured, that all the comfortable fruits and benefits of
the most holy sacrifice of our Savior Christ, in his death and sufferings for
our sins, as well touching the evils removed, as the benefits conferred and
bestowed thereby, are most perf^^ty confirmed to us, and all true believers:
Yea, that the covenant it self, of the whole bounty of Gods most free grace,
even to our eternal salvation and glory is for ever most authentically sealed
up, and confirmed to the whole Church of Christ.

It is very true. For in this respect, he is in titled to be a Priest, not
according to the law of the carnal commandment, Explication
but according to the power of endless life. For he, (that is, God by his
holy Prophet) testifies thus. Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedech^ Heb. 7.16.17. The which excellency and perfection of our
Saviors priesthood, is in the same place confirmed from hence, that he is
advanced to the right hand of God, as this article of our Christian belief
teaches us: according also as it follows in the some Epistle to the
Hebrews, chapter, 8.1. in these words, Now of the things which we have spoken
(says the Apostle) this is the sum, that we have such an high Priest, that
sits at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens, And is
a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, which the Lord pight
and no^ man. And thereupon also he says, further, verse, 6. that the same our
high Priest, has obtained a more excellent, office, insomuch as he is the
Mediator of a better Testament, which is established upon better promises, etc.

Now, what the fruits and benefits be, which are most perfitly assured unto
us, and to the whole Church of our Savior Christ: by this his sitting at the
right hand of God, in regard of his advancement in his royal Priesthood: we
are to call them to mind, from that which has been observed before,
concerning the sufferings and death of our Savior, in the proper place thereof.

But whence is it, that all those fruits, should take their full effect, from
the sitting of our Savior, in his priestly advancement, at the right hand of
God? Was it not sufficient, that our Savior, in the time of his humiliation,
suffered to death, even to the death upon the Cross, to be a sacrifice for our
sins? seeing it is expressly said in the 10. chapter of the same Epistle to
the Hebrews, verse, 14. that with one offering he has consecrated for ever
them that are sanctified? Seeing also (as the holy Apostle says further in the
same place) the holy Ghost bears us record: in that after he said before,
This is the Testament which I will make unto them after those days, says the
Lord, I will put my laws in their heart, and in their minds I will write
them. And their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.

Was not therefore, I say, the sacrifice of the death of our Savior, in it
self fully sufficient, once for all, without any further respect, to this his
sitting at the right hand of God?

The sufferings and death of our Savior, were fully sufficient to the act of
meriting all things for us, at the hand of God, once for all.

They were so in deed: for so it follows still in the same text, verse, 18.
in these words, Now where remission of these things is, there is no more
offering for sin.



Our Savior is risen again from the dead, ascended up into heaven, and
thenceforth sits for ever at the right hand of God: to dispense and apply
the fruits and benefits of the same his merit, to every true believer in him.
And to this purpose we are further taught and assured that our Savior being
at the right hand of God, does make continual intercession for us.

This also is confirmed in the same Epistle to the Heb. chap. 7.23.24.25. where
the Apostle makes the comparison betwixt our Savior, and the Priests of the
law, after this manner: that among them many were made Priests, because they
were not suffered to endure, by the reason of death. But this man (says the
Apostle, pointing to our Savior) because he endures ever, he has an
everlasting priesthood. Wherefore he is able also, perfitly to save them, that
come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. The
same is confirmed. Romans 8.34. Christ is at the right hand of God, and makes
request also for us.

This therefore may justly be a singular comfort unto us, yea the perfection of
all our comfort, infinitely above that comfort, which the Jews took by Esters
intercession for them to Ashnerus, though Hamans most cruel and bloody
massacre was prevented thereby: yea, greater then they might, at any time,
have taken in the intercession of Moses and Aaron, or any of the holy Prophets
of God for them. They say, it is a great benefit for a man, to have a friend in
the Court. And so it is, specially if the Kings Son, the heir apparent of
the Kingdom, should be a man's faithful friend and favorer. But what were
this, in comparison of this benefit which we now speak of, that we have the
Son of God, the heir of heaven and earth, the mediator of the great covenant
to eternal salvation, our intercessour, mediator, and advocate, at the right
hand of God, in the most high Court or Senate of heaven? According to that most
comfortable saying of the Apostle, Ioh. 1. Ep. chapter 2.1. If any man sin, (to
wit of those that shall be sorry for their sins.) We have an advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the just. And he is the reconciliation for our
sins. etc.

But how, I pray you, do ye understand this, that our Savior Christ is our
intercessour at the right hand of God?



Answer. Explication. and proof.
No, I have been taught to understand this mystery, far otherwise then so.

Good reason that you should be so taught. For that kind of intercession,
which our Savior used in the days of his humiliation for a time, and as it
may be said once for all (like as it is said of the offering up of his
sacrifice) it cannot agree to that glorious estate, wherein he is now most
highly advanced for ever. Neither could that kind of intercession, proper to
his humiliation, be used now and for ever, without prejudice against the
perfection of those his prayers, and supplications, which were made by him,
with most strong cries and tears, etc. in the days of his flesh. Which, once
to think, were contrary to that part of our faith. We are therefore
necessarily to distinguish, betwixt that intercession of our Savior, which was
before his death, and at his death; and this that is now in heaven, and shall
continue for ever at the right hand of God, as we have seen before. For that
was perfect for merit, once for all: and this for application, for ever, and
ever.

Nevertheless, you have not yet showed, what this intercession means, which
our Savior continues at the right hand of God.



I have learned, that the intercession of our Savior Christ, at the right hand
of God in heaven, is nothing else, but the continuance of his most gracious and
effectual will and desire, in comp ssion over his Church in the sight of God
and according to the will of the Father (by his blood formerly, and for ever
reconciled unto us, and all his elect) that we, and the whole Church, might
for ever be partakers of all the fruits and benefits of his whole humiliation
for us, even from his incarnation, to his death, and continuance in the grave.

You have herein learned, as the truth it self teaches. For we have no
inkling; of any other kind of intercession of our Savior, now in heaven. We
never read of any kneeling there. And God, we know, is perfitly reconciled.
Stephen saw the heavens open, and our Savior standing at the right hand of
God, as one ready to assist his servant, and to address his judgment against
the adversaries of his truth. Otherwise, we read of no other disposing of his
body but sitting, and that also in such sense, as has been before
interpreted. Only this is that, which is given us to understand, to our
comfort, (and it is in deed a comfort of comfort,) that our Savior Christ
being in heaven, has the same render compassion and care over us, that he had
while he was upon the earth: though not now with such kind of humane passions
of sorrow, and weeping, etc. as he had then. Neither does the word,
(entug^chanes) necessarily import such a kind of instance as is by kneeling,
or prostrating of the body, as we may perceive by the use of it. Acts.
chapter, 25. verse, 24. The Jews have called upon me, says Festus there. So
that it may generally signify a soliciting without regard of this or that
outward manner. And Romans 11.2. He is in deed as perfectly desirous now, that
we should enjoy the whole fruit of his humiliation, and death, as he was
willing to humble himself, even to the death of the Cross for us: but that
he does it after another manner now, then he did upon the earth, it may be
evident from the testimony of the Apostle. Heb. 9.24. etc. For Christ (says
he) is not entered into the holy places, that are made with hands, which are
similitudes of the true Sanctuary: but he is entered into the very heavens to
appear now in the sight of God for us, Not that he should offer himself
often, as the high Priest entered into the holy place every year, with other
blood, (For then must he have often suffered since the foundation of the
world) but now in the end of the world, he has appeared once to put away
sin by the sacrifice of himself, etc. But (as it follows) unto them (says
the Apostle) that look for him, he shall appear the second time without
sin, unto salvation.

Thus then, while that by faith we do look up unto our Savior, sitting in
the glory of his most high and royal priesthood, at the right hand of God the
Father almighty: we may safely conceive strong consolation and comfort to our
consciences, in the assurance of the forgiveness of our sins, and in the hope
of everlasting life: even, in that hope which (as the sa^e Apostle says) We
have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and enters into that
which is within the veil (that is, into heaven) whether the forerunner is for
us entered in, even Jesus, who is made an high Priest for ever, after the order
of Melchisedech. Heb. 6.18.19.20. And hence it is, that we receiving from the
right hand of God, this special grace and favor, that the spirit of our
Savior Christ, even the Spirit of adoption, who teaches us to cry Abba
Father, and helps our infirmities in this behalf; yea, and makes requests
for us with sighs which cannot be expressed: we have exceeding comfort, that
our prayers which we make, shall be regarded of God, seeing the spirit
teaches us to make them, according to the will of GOD, and in the name of our
Savior, who sits at his right hand. Romans, 8.15.16.26.27. and verse, 34.

In which respect also, this may be no small comfort unto us, which is
mentioned in the articles of our belief, and is confirmed in the holy
Scriptures: that our Savior makes intercession for us to God, who being his
natural Father, vouchsafes also through him, to be our Father by the grace of
adoption: and for the same cause, is willing to hear both him for us, and us
for his sake: yea, and not only willing, but being almighty, is as able as he
is willing, to grant us all things through him.

Finally, this may justly be exceeding comfortable unto us, that look what was
represented by the glorious garments of the high Priest of the law: his Ephod,
with the Onix stones, in the which were graven the names of the twelve tribes
of Israel: the breast plate of judgment, wherein were likewise set twelve
stones, answerable to the names of the children of Israel, graven as signs:
the Vrim and Thummim also, the hidden brightness and perfection which were in
the same breast plate; and he plate, or crown, and miter on his forehead,
wherein was engraven; Holiness to the Lord: the truth of all is now most
perfectly and brightly performed a heaven by our Savior Christ. For he
presents us holy and righteous in himself before God continually: he supports
his Church, and every weak member, as it were on his shoulders: he carries
the remembrance of all in his heart: in him are all the hidden treasures of
wisdom: he alone so sweetens us, and our prayers, and all that we do in
his name, that though all be weak and vnpersit, yet both we, and they, are
for his sake, most graciously accepted of God. Revel. 8.3.4.5. Our Savior
therefore at the right hand of GOD in the heavens, in unto us, that our only
high Priest, who is anointed with the oil of gladness above all his fellows:
infinitely more delightful, and pleasant, then ever was Aaron, or any of his
companions; though the sweet smell of his perfume is greatly commended, both
in Exodus, 30.22. etc. and Psalm. 133.

Thus far of the fruits and benefits of the exaltation of our Savior
Christ, to the right hand of God, in respect of his royal and kingly
priesthood.

Now in the last place, what are the fruits and benefits of his sitting at
the right hand of God, High-Priestry royalty, and spiritual Kingdom.

They are partly such, as do more directly concern his Church: that is to
say, the whole company of his obedient and faithful subjects: and that either
from age to age in this life, or at the end of the world for ever and ever.

And partly they are such, as for the same his Churches sake, and to the
benefit thereof, do concern his dealing against all those enemies which it
has, whom this our King and Savior, takes to be enemies likewise unto
himself.

It is true: they may well be considered under these diverse heads.



More directly, for the benefit of the Church, and every true member thereof;
our Savior, in respect of his kingly advancement at the right hand of God, he
does from the same.

First, here upon earth, most holily, spiritually, and as we may say;
religiously, rule and govern it.

Secondly, he does most vigilantly maintain and preserve it.

Thirdly, he does most wisely and discreetly chastise and nurture it.

Fourtly, he does most sweetly, comfort, cherish, and refresh it from time to
time.

Finally he does by all means make his Church and every member thereof, truly
humble and wise, unto their eternal salvation: and he will verily for ever
save and glorify them at the last, in the Kingdom of heaven.

Explication. and proof.
These in deed are the most gracious fruits and benefits: which proceed from
the advancement of our Savior, to sit down at the right hand of God, in his
most royal and priestly kingdom.

For proof whereof, read first Psa. 45.6.7.8.9. and verses, 13.14.15.16.17.
compared with Heb. 1.8.9. And Psalm. 72. under the type and figure of King
Solomon. And Psalm. 2.2. Blessed are all that trust in him. Read Isaiah,
32.1.2.3. etc. Behold a King shall reign in justice, and the Princes shall rule
in judgment: And that man (to wit Christ our king shall be as an hiding place
from the wind, and as a refuge. etc.

Yea generally, let us observe, that whatsoever the holy Prophets do
prophecy of the special Kingdom of Christ, in respect of the Church: the
perfection of the administration thereof depends vpoh this his sitting at the
right hand of God: and they are also so many proofs, that his kingdom should
be most graciously governed, especially from the time of his sitting at the
right hand of God, as the effect it self confirms, according to that Isaiah:
ch: 9.6.7. and ch: 11.1.2.3. etc, to the end of the chapter. For all I say,
takes the full accomplishment from hence.

And to this end, we may fitly ascribe, that which is spoken in respect of his
eternal Deity before his incarnation, to his most sovereign and royal state
now, in that he is man united personally to the same Deity: so that it may be
veried of him now, which was said then by the spirit of prophecy, Prou: ch:
8.14. etc. I have counsel and wisdom: I am understanding, and I have
strength, By me kings reign, and princes decree justice. By me princes rule,
and the nobles, and all judges of the earth. I love them that love me: and they
that seek me early shall find me: Riches and honor are with me, even durable
riches and righteousness. My fruit is better then gold, even then fine gold, and
my revenues are better then fine silver. I cause to walk in the way of
righteousness, and in the midst of the paths of judgment. That I may cause
them that love me to inherit substance, and I will fill their treasures.

And further, whereas the church of our Sa: Ch: enjoys godly and Christian
kings and princes, for the protection and defense of it, according to the
promise of God, Isai: 49 23. Kings shall be thy foster-fathers, and Queens shall
be thy nources, etc. this, out of all question, is the gift of our Savior
Christ, from the right hand of God, even of his royal bounty, and from his
most high and sovereign authority, in that all power in heaven and earth is
given unto him.

Thus much, in the first place, more generally, for the most holy rule and
government of our Savior, for the benefit of his church more directly.

Now secondly, for his vigilancie in preserving and maintaining of it. Read,
Revel: 1, 10.11, 12, 13, etc. for our Savior is described to walk in the
midst of his churches* and to have eyes like a flame of fire, etc, and a
two-edged sword going out of his mouth, etc.

And therewithal it may be seen in the third place, by the two chapters
following, what wise discipline our Savior uses: according to that, chap: 3,
19. As many as I love I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore and amend.

And again in the same place, that which was fourthly observed, concerning the
sweet consolation and comfort which he gives to all those that will receive
it, as it follows in the very next verse, which is the 20. Behold (says our
Savior by his holy spirit from heaven) I stand at the door and knock. If any
man hear my voice and open the door. I will come in unto him: and will suppe
with him, and he with me. And this does our Savior, even from the right hand
of God: as he promised that he would, John: ch: 14, 18. I will not leave you
comfortles, (or as orphanet, and fatherles children, in which respect he is
called an everlasting father to his church, as to his children. Isai. 9.6.) but
(says our Savior the king of heaven,) I will come unto you. And verse. 27.
Peace I leave with you, etc.

Finally, that he does all this to humble his Church, and every member thereof,
to make all that be his, wise unto salvation: and that he minds from heaven,
even from the right hand of God to save them: it is evident, in the former
place of the Revel: ch: 3. as it follows in the 21, and 22. verses, To him
that overcomes (says our Savior) I will grant to fit with me in my throne,
even as I overcame, and fit with my father in his throne. Let him that has an
ear, hear what the spirit says to the Churches.

Read also, Rom: 8.28. We know that all things work together for the best,
etc. And 1 Cor: 11.32. When we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, that we
should: not be condemned with the world.

It is evident also, by the express predictions and warrant of our Savior
before his death, as we read, Matthew: 25.31. etc. For when the Son of man
comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, etc.

Then shall the king (that is, he himself who is the king of his church shall
say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the
kingdom prepared for ye, from the foundation of the world. But of this more
afterward, in the handling of the next Article.

In the mean while, that we may now go forward in our present argument.



As touching the enemies of the Church, whom also our Savior accounts to be
enemies to himself.

First he does most mightily bridle, and restrain their fury and rage.

Secondly, he does most wisely defeat them, in their most crafty and subtle
devises.

Thirdly, he does most justly infatuate and confound them.

Finally, he will in his wrath, most fearfully cast them down the height of
their pride, to most we full destruction, for ever and ever.

Explication and proof.
That he will do so (that we may speak of the last part of the answer first) we
may perceive it plainly, by his own description of his last judgment, Mat:
25.41. For then shall be (that is the king, as before verse, 34.) say to them
on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the devil and his Angels. Yea, we may perceive it by a reason of
no small amplificatio^. For insomuch (as there it appears) that according to
the saying of the Apostle James, there shall be judgment mercitesse to them
that show no mercy; how much more heavy, may we think shall the judgment
of them be, who give themselves to all malicious practices of cruelty, against
the poor Saints and holy Church of God? Read also to this end, Matthew: 21.33.
etc. the parable of the householder, who planted a vineyard, etc. and then let
it out to husbandmen, and so went into a strange country, etc. The which
husbandmen, when time of fruit came, denied him fruit, abused his messengers,
and at the last slew his own Son whom he sent unto them. Now of these
wicked husbandmen, what judgment the Lord of the vineyard should give, our
Savior leaves it as a matter easy for every man to judge. And they who heard
the parable, could not but say (though at unawares they read their own doom
against themselves) He will cruelty destroy these wicked men: and will let out
the vineyard to other husbandmen, who shall deliver him the fruits in their
seasons. And chap: 22.1. etc, 6, 7. we read the like application of the parable
of the marriage of the kings Son. For as touching those that despised the
marriage feast, and mifused the messengers and slew them: the king hearing of
it, was wroth, and sent forth his warriers, and destroyed those murderers, and
burnt up their city. And again, our Savior use h another parable to the same
purpose, chap: 25, 14, etc. and Luke 19.12. etc. under the similitude of a
certain noble man, who going into a far country, to receive for himself a
kingdom, and so to come again. Who called his ten servants and delivered
them his goods, etc to occupy till he should come again. But (as the parable
says) they hated him, and sent an embassage after him, saying, we will not
have this man to reign over us, etc. The conclusion of the parable is this,
that the king having received his kingdom; and returning again contrary to the
desire of these rebels, he gives commandment that those his enemies which
would not that he should reign over them, should be brought and slain before
him. And for us to speak the truth, how should it be in any equity, that any
of those who either heretofore, have most vily profaned and blasphemed the most
holy prophecy, or kingdom of our Savior Christ, as the Jews and Gentiles
did, while he was upon the earth: or shall at any time do the like, in
despising his holy word and Sacraments, etc. but they must of necessity one
day known, and feel from the sword, and balance of Gods divine justice, how
grievous a crime, and what the price of it is?

All this is agreeable to the holy Prophesies which were given forth,
concerning this sovereignty of our Savior, and this mighty administration of
his kingdom from the right hand of God long before: as Psalm: 110.1. etc. The
Lord (says the Princely Prophet King David) said to my Lord, Sit thou at my
right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footestoole. The Lord shall send
the rod of thy power out of Sion, etc. The whole Psalm is nothing else but a
prophetical description of the mighty fruits and effects of the royal
Priesthood, and Priestly royalty of the kingdom of our Savior Christ in the
subduing and overthrowing of his enemies, from the glorious right hand of God.
And so also says the holy Apostle Paul. 1. Cor: 15.25. from the authority of
the same Psalm, he must reign till he has put al his enemies under his feet.

In which words of the Apostle, two things are well worthy to be observed of
us. First, that he interprets the sitting of our Savior at the right hand of
God by this word to reign, because thereby, (as has been showed already)
his most high and kingly authority is signified.

Secondly, that he refers it unto our Savior Christ: which the holy
Psalmist attributes unto God, insomuch as the Lord does that by our Savior
Christ (to whom he has given all power and authority for the government of
his Church) which the Prophet says that God would do himself. And so he does
indeed, though not imediately, but as it were by the hand of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

This most high souereigntie of our Savior, was likewise prophesied of, by the
Prophet Daniel as we read cha: 2, verses 44.45, The God of heaven (says
Daniel) shall set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed, and this
kingdom shall not be given to another people, but it shall break and destroy
all these kingdom. (he speaks of the proud and rebellious monarchies of the
world) and it shall stand forever.

And to his purpose, is our Savior Christ compared there, to a stone cut out
of the mountains without hands, that should break in pieces the iron, The
letter inte^ds the 4. Monarchies, vz of the Babilonia^s, the Medes and Persians
of the Grecians, and Syria and Egypt.
the clay, the silver and the gold: that is to say, which should break all
other kingdoms, how strong or how rich soever they should be, which will not
submit themselves unto him.

For as it is in the 35. verse of the same chapter, all the rebellious
kingdoms of the world were to become, like the chafe of the summer flowers,
which the wind carries away, so that no place is found for them. But as
touching the stone which smote the image, that should become (as the Prophet
says) a great mountain, and fill the whole earth.

And again, ch: 7. v. 13.14. As I beheld in visions by night, behold one like
the Son of man came in the clouds of heaven, and he approached unto the
aucient of days, and they brought him before him. And he gave him dominion,
and honor, and a kingdom, that all people, languages, and nations should
serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall never be taken
away: and his kingdom shall never be destroyed.

And in the same chap: verses, 26.27. The same holy Prophet, foretelling the
afflictions which should befall the Church, through the cruelty of tyrannous
persecutors, says, that the judgment should sit, to take away the dominion of
the persecutor, to consume and destroy it to the end. And as the Prophet adds
further. The kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the
whole heaven, shall be given to the holy people af the most high, whose
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all power shall serve and obey him.
The Prophet Daniel, I confess, does in these words, first of all speak to
comfort the Jews, and to describe unto the^ what their estate should be until
the coming of our Sa: Ch: into the world, and that though many tirants should
arise to trouble them, yet should they be suppressed by the hand of God.
Nevertheless his prophecy extends it self further, yea even beyond all
extent of time, as his words do plainly show. And even that also which did
most properly concern the Church of the Jews, it contains a proportionable
resemblance of the state of the Chistian Churches, such as it was afterward in
the like times of their persecutions, under the like unmerciful tyrants. And
in this respect, many things are spoken in the Revelation of the new Testament,
in way of reference, or by allusion at the least, to this prophecy of Daniel,
and to some other of the holy Prophets. Thus Revel: 1.6. our Savior is called
in these days of the Gospel, the Prince of the Kings of the earth And chap:
19. verses 11.12. etc. I saw heaven open (says Saint John) and behold a white
horse, and he that sat upon him, was called faithful and true, and he
judges and fights righteously. And his eyes were as a flame of fire, and on
his head were many crowns: and he had a name written which no man knew but
himself. And he was clothed in a garment dipped in blood; and his name is
called the word of God. And the warriors which were in heaven (says Saint
John) followed him upon white horses, clothed with five linen, white and pure.
And forth of his mouth went out a sharp sword, that with it he should smite
the heathen: for he shall rule them with a rod of iron: for he it is that
treads the wine press of the fiercues and wrath of almighty God. And he
has upon his garment, and upon his thigh a name written The King of Kings, and
the Lord of Lords. And chap: 17, 14. The Lamb shall overcome the Kings of the
earth: for he is Lord of Lord and King of Kings, etc. Thus then we see how our
Savior shall finally prevail against all the enemies of his Church, the which
he does account to be his enemies, as was said. And also how all the neglect of
his Saints, is esteemed of him to be the neglect of himself: according to
that, Mat: 25. verse 42. etc. I was an hungered and ye gave me no meat, etc.
Verily I say unto you, insomuch as ye did it not to one the least of these, ye
did it not to me. And that he does likewise take all the injuries done against
them, to be done against himself: we see it plainly, from that his own
speech to Saul, saying thus unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And
again, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. And therewithal shows Saul his
dangerous enterprise, telling him that it was hard for him to kick against
pricks. Act: 9.4.5.

How as he shall finally prevail against all his enemies, so we are further to
consider, and to assure our selves to our comfort, that he will in the mean
white, evermore so wisely order, and moderate; yea so mightily over rule all
causes and persons, as may best serve, to fulfill the whole counsel and decree
of God, to the glory of his own name, and for the everlasting comfort and
salvation of all his elect people.

To this purpose (as was answered in the beginning of the answer) the Lord does
mightily bridle and restrain the rage and fury of his adversaries, according
to that in the 2. Psalm: why do the heathen rage, and the people murmur in
vain? etc. And no doubt but as God did of old time defend the holy patriarchs,
and gave them their standing, and remouings, all the time that they dwelt in
Tents, restraining the heathen from oppressing them, or doing them any harm:
and afterward brought their posterity into the land of Canaan, as we read, Ps.
105.12. 13.14. So does he now, and always has, and will by the hand of his
Son our Savior, hold in the rage of all the enemies of his Church, even to
the end of the world, so as the very gates of hell shall not be able to
prevail against it. That Savior of ours, who so restrained the devils in the
days of his humiliation here on earth, that they could not quetch without his
leave: he does not now leave them to themselves, but much rather restrains
them, insomuch as he is to that end most highly exalted and glorified at the
right hand of the Majesty of God in heaven.

Neither is there any doubt, but God does by our Savior take the wise in their
crafts, according to that, 1. Cor: 3.19.20. And Prou: 8.12. I am wisdom,
says the Son of God himself) I inhabit prudence. etc. The word (Gnarmah)
sigfieth, that holy and wary circumspection wherein the Lord over reaches all
the crafts of the wicked: yea so, that when they persist in their resisting of
him, he utterly infatuateth and confounds them, that it may easily appear to
us, while they go on in their blind wilfulnes, that there is no wisdom nor
counsel against the Lord: according to that Prou: 21.30. and Isai: 8, verse,
9, 10. etc. And as we have had experience in this our age, even to this day, in
that the Lord has not only restrained those former cruelties which were like
the raging waves of the sea billowing and beating against us, 1588. as an
intended effect of the Antichristian confederacy against the Gospel in the
popish counsel of Trent. Verily, and out of all question, it is from no other
where, but from the right hand of God in the highest heavens, nor by no other
means then by the glorious mediation of our Lord Jesus Christ there, that any
of the Churches of Christ have at any time received, or at this day do enjoy
such godly Princes as it has, for the protection and defense of them against
the adversaries thereof. And chiefly above all other, may we and ought we
justly say and acknowledge to the most glorious praise of God, concerning our
selves and the Church of Christ in our land, that it could not possibly have
enjoyed the Gospel, nor our gracious Queen Elizabeth, so many years
together, nor now our gracious King James so worthy a successor (whom God
preserve long to go forward with his blessed work begun by her): had it not
been for the most gracious and tender care of our Savior from the right hand
of God our heavenly Father, both toward them and us. To him therefore, with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, be the whole glory and praise of it, for ever and
ever, Amen.

Thus much concerning the comforts of this Article, that our Lord Jesus Christ
sits at the right hand of God the Father almighty. All which comforts
descending unto us from his advancement, they are so much the more comfortable
because he being once seated, continues an high Priest and king for ever.

For good things are so much the better, by how much they are of longer
continuance: and best of all, when they never decay.

But here a doubt comes to be answered. For how then is it said by the
Apostle Paul, 1. Corint: 15.24.25. that our Savior Christ shall at the end
(of the world) deliver up the hingdome to God even the Father, when he has
put down all rule and all authority and power? For (as he there affirms)
our Savior must reign till he has put all his enemies under hie feet. And
verse 28. he says yet further; when all things shall be subdued unto him,
then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that did subdue all
things under him, that God may be all in all.



Our Savior shall no more cease to be King, though he is at the end of the
world to deliver the kingdom up to the Father: then the Father has ceased to
be a King, since he committed all kingdom and power to our Savior, by his
lifting of him up, and seating of him at his right hand.

Explication and proof.
It is true. For it is expressly testified in the word of truth, as we have
seen before, that there is no end of the kingdom of Christ. Revel: 1.5.6. And
it is with like faithfulness assured unto us: yea it is of it self most
certain, that God the Father never intermitteth, or cease the regencie and
government of his kingdom, 1. Tim: 1, 17. and chap: 6.15.16. and 1. Pet:
5.10.11. and in the Ep: of Jude verse. 25.



The meaning of the holy Apostle is this, that as the Father rules and
reigns by the Son, till the end: so at the end, the Son having fulfilled
all things most perfitly, which were by the appointment of the Father, to be
performed of him, for the gathering t^^ether and defending of his Church, and
to the suppressing of all usurped power: he shall make it manifest in the
sight of God, and before all his Saints, that no point or parcel thereof is
unperformed: and so shall thenceforth rule and reign, in and with the Father,
only in another manner of empire, and government, then before.

Ephli. This is something which you say. For it is certain, that our Savior
being most faithful and true, yea the truth it self. Revel: 3.7. and again
verse 14. and John, ch: 14.6. will most fully and perfitly perform all that
has been committed to his trust. And it is of like certainty, even from the
words of the Apostle, who says that all rule, and all authority, and power
shall be put down (that is to say) the devil, who has now great power, and is
as it were a God in the world, ruling in the children of disobedience, and by
them molesting the church of God, shall then have no such power, neither he nor
his instruments the wicked Tyrants and cruel persecutors that be in the world:
likewise Sin which is of no little strength, to entice and draw even the
children of God aside in many things; and death it self which now overthrows
all, shall then be for ever ouerthrown: Yea as we may add yet further, all
authority both civil and ecclesiastical, though of necessary use now, shall
then cease, as being of no further use in the kingdom of heaven, insomuch as
the causes of this course of government shall then be removed, to wit, all
ignorance of judgment, and all peruersenes and stubbornenes of affection, etc.
It is therefore, I say, as certain as the former, that our Savior shall rule
in another manner, not in the midst of his enemies, nor by such ministerial
services of men and Angels, as for the present, and ever since his ascension,
he has done: but most sweetly, and peaceably, as among his friends and
dutiful subjects, and more immediately by his holy spirit, all the rebels and
disturbers of the most sacred peace of his kingdom, being for ever utterly
cast out into their own place, and as it were a prison of eternal woe and
torment, according to that grand commission which our Savior had received of
the Father in that behalf. And thus it may be evident, that the Apostle
speaks not generally, that our Savior shall lay down all regencie and
kingdom, but only that part of it which was temporary, and to continue no
longer then the time of this present evil world, while yet the occasions of
that kind of government are to remain. Vrsinus.
It is a true saying of a learned man, Sic filius tradet regnum Patri, vt sibi
tamen ipsi subijciat omnia. Non igitur sibiipsi sed alijs regnum abrogando,
tradet regnum Patri, Piscator.
etc. And an other, Cum regnum tradiderit Deo. Id est cum desinet ita regnare
vt nunc regnat, dominando scilicet in medio inimicorum: quam potestatem a Patre
accepit, etc. Alioquin Pater nunc regnat per Filium, and Filius in aeternu^
regnabit cum Patre: sed alio modo, hostibus sc: omnibus subiectis.

But yet for all this, the doubt is not fully cleared. For the holy Apostle
says further, that when all things shall be subdued unto God, then shall the
Son also himself be subdued unto him, etc. that God may be all in all.



This subjection of the Son, is in no wise to be so taken, as if the holy
Apostle meant to note any abrogation or diminishing of his Kingly dignity,
considered simply in it self: much less any inferioritie of his divine
person, more, or otherwise after the end of the world, then since his ascension
to the right hand of God.

There is indeed no reason why we should take the meaning of the Apostle to
be so. Explication and proof.
For our Savior being once advanced in his humane nature, as a fruit of his
most worthy obedience to his Father: continuing still every way as perfitly
worthy, even to the end of the world, and being also so to continue for ever,
as well as at any time before: Why should we once imagine, that there should
ever follow any abasing of his glory, or diminishing of his power and
authority? And as for the Deity of his Person, seeing he was therein equal
to his Father, even in the days of his humiliation, as he himself has
affirmed, saying, I and my Father are one, John, 10.30. How should we conceive
that now after his exaltation, there should follow any the least Eclipse?



Ans. Our Savior Christ (as we are here to consider) is both God and man in
one Person of a Mediator And likewise, in that he is a Mediator betwixt God
and man, he is (as we know sometime compared with God the Father, and sometime
he is spoken of in respect of his Church.

Now therefore as he is a Mediator, Christus inferior est Patre, quoad
humanitatem and natura and officio: quoad Diuinitatem vero non natura sed
officio tantum, Vrsinus. Christus, quatenus Deus est, cum Patre nos subiectos
habet: quatenus est Sacerdos, nobiscum Patri subiectus est. August: lib trin:
1. cap: 8.
and in that respect compared with God the Father he is in regard of this his
mediation to him, his inferior, and so will for ever show himself to be in
subjection to him, as he is at this day, and so has been ever since his
ascension in heaven.

But on respect of his Church for whom he is a mediator, he is and shall
always remain a King or Prince, and a most sovereign Lord and Savior unto
it.

Expli. It must needs he so. For else how should it be truly said in the holy
Scriptures, that he remains a king for ever, and that of his kingdom there
shall be no end?

Wherefore yet further, that we may by the grace of God, help ourselves to the
understanding of this high mystery; it is to be observed, that our Savior
Christ is to be considered of us, either more distinctly and a part by
himself, as he is the head of his Church, or else as he has his Church as his
spiritual members mystically united unto him. And in this latter
consideration, is the subjection of our Savior chiefly to be understood. For
thus it shall be most clear and manifest, that Christ in his members shall be
subject to the divine man she of God.

Nevertheless, this also must we understand withal, that the subjection of our
Savior Christ and his church, which now we speak of, shall not be any
debasement, either to Christ or to it: but such a subjection, as shall be
crowned with perfect glory, and chiefly touching our Savior, who must by all
right, have a prehemmence above all, without measure.

To the which good purpose, well observes Master Beza, Annot Maier, that
there is in this word Subjection, a figurative antanaciasis to be respected, in
that it is used in this matter, concerning the Son of God together with his
Church, in a contrary sense to the same word, as it is to be taken immediately
before: where it is used to note the Subjection of the enemies of God, and his
Church, by his subduing and suppressing of them. For their subjection shall be
enforced against their wills, and to their most miserable and woeful thraldom
for ever, through the most righteous judgment of God.

But the subjection of our Savior as the head, and so consequently of his
Church as the members of his mystical body: it shall be most voluntary and
willing, and all one with their perfect glorification, under the most gracious
and immediate government of God, world without end. For it shall be a
subjection to God, in perfect freedom from all adversaries, and in the enioyng
of a most bl ssed and eternal peace, etc. So that this word of Subjection, is
used rather in way of emplification, then otherwise. And that to the singular
comfort of all the children of God, as if the holy Apostle should have spoken
thus. Marvel not at this that I say all the enemies of God shall be subdued
unto him: for even the Son of God himself, in that he is man yea in that being
both God and man, and bearing the office of the Mediator he shall in regard of
the same his office, willingly submit himself under God as to his head, 1.
Cor: 11, 3. though he shall nevertheless for that, but rather more gloriously
rule and reign over us as our head to our infinite benefit, Ephesians: 1.22. and ch:
4. 15. Colos. 1.18. and ch: 2, 19.

And thus may we perceive, that the clear manifestation of the subjection of
our Savior (such as it shall be) contains a most sure ground of perfect
comfort to us, insomuch as we shall at that time, and thenceforth, for ever,
continually behold and enjoy the most blessed presence of our Mediator, by
whom we being once reconciled and united to God our heavenly Father: shall by
him, and under him, be held in so sweet a bond of subjection to ou^ God,
that we shall never have any mind, to lift up ourselves against God, or at any
time to withdraw our dutiful obedience and service, as in Adam out first
Father, all of us did, and are still of our selves always apt so to do.

But yet one thing more remains, concerning this great point of our faith.

Quest. What does Saint Paul mean, when he says, that our Savior shall be
subject, to the end God may be all in all? Is it his meaning, that then our
Savior Christ shall cease to be any longer Christ, and that he shall lay
aside his humane nature? etc.

Far be it from us, once to admit any such thought. The meaning of the holy
Apostle is, that by the subjection of our Savior which he speaks of, the
divine Majesty of the Godhead, both Father, Son and holy Ghost, shall be so
clearly manifested, that the bright glory thereof, shall not only infinitely
excel the glory of all other creatures, but even the humanity of the Son of
God himself. So that though our Savior Christ shall retain his eternal
glory, even in that he is the head, and mediator of the Church: yet the
perfection of all glory, yea even touching our redemption, justification,
sanctification and glorification shall be ascribed to the Deity, both Father,
Son, and holy Ghost: by whom we were with one most holy consent, eternally
elected and chosen: and through whose grace toward us, and the whole Church,
the Father did send the Son in due time to take the nature of man by the holy
Ghost, and so to obtain this high grace to be the Redeemer and Savior of men.

Explication.
This is indeed the holy meaning of the blessed Apostle, so far as we in our
weakness could attain, to the glimse at the least, of so high a mystery. The
which doubtless neither we, nor any other, shall be able fully to understand,
until the time come, that we shall know as we are known, as the some
Apostle speaks; and that we see it fulfilled before our eyes, in the blessed
season appointed of God.

Hitherto of the comforts of faith, arising unto us from the sitting of our
glorious Lord Jesus Christ at the right hand of God the Father almighty.

NOw let us come to the use of the same comforts, touching those fruits of
obedience and thanks, which we stand bound to yield unto God our Savior for
the same.



To speak more generally, As all the fruits and benefits of our redemption,
are by this last and highest degree of our Saviors exaltation, most
comfortably sealed up and assured unto us, and to the whole Church for ever: so
are we in every respect, both of his princely prophecy, and also of his
royal Priesthood and k ngdome, exceedingly to rejoice and comfort our selves
in him, as in an al sufficient Prince and Mediator of our eternal redemption
and salvation. And accordingly with the greatest cheerfulness of soul and
spirit that may be, to yield him all the duties of the greatest love,
reverence, and obedience that we can possibly attain unto.

Explication and proof.
It is indeed most reasonable and meet, that it should be so: as every one
must needs acknowledge in his heart, though we should say no more. For seeing
he is a most high and holy Prophet, we are to rejoice in him more then ever
the people of Israel did or might lawfully rejoice in Moses, though he was the
blessed instrument of God to deliver them out of that heavy bondage of Egypt
wherein they had been a long time sore oppressed. And more then any other of
the same people might afterward rejoice in any other of the holy Prophets,
though God made them to be as Fathers unto them, and as the horses and
chariotes of Israel: according to that which one of the Kings acknowledge
concerning the Prophet Elisha. 2. King, 13. verse 14.

Seeing he is a royal high Priest, it is our duty to take more joy in him
spiritually, then all the sweet perfume, and all the glorious garments of
Aaron, or any other of the high Priests of the law, could yield outwardly to
those that beheld, and sinelled to the same. Exodus 28. Psalm: 133.

Seeing he is the King of Kings, The Duties.
and so crowned of God in the Lighest heavens: we ought to rejoice in him with
joy infinitely exceeding the joy, which the people took at the anointing and
coronation of King Solomon here upon earth, though at the blowing of the
trumpet, all of them said, God save King Solomon, and piped with pipes, and
rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rang with the sound of them. 1.
Kings, chap. 1. verses. 39.4^. And hereunto, we are in special manner
exhorted, by the Spirit of God, in the Song of Songs, in that sweet allegory
borrowed from the same anointing and crowning of King Solomon, in that he was a
type of our Savior Christ. chapter, 3.11. For: Come forth ye daughters of Sion
(says the Church) and behold King Solomon (that is our Solomon the great King
of the whole Church, both in heaven and in earth) with the Crown wherewith his
mother crowned him, in the day of his marriage, and in the day of the gladness of
his heart.

But this beholding, must be with the eye of faith: for otherwise we cannot
pierce so high, as to see the glory of the coronation of this our Solomon, whom
we now speak of.

Thus I say more generally, we are to rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious, in respect both of his princely Prophetship, and also of his kingly
high Priesthood and Kingdom, though with our natural eyes, as the Apostle
Peter says, we do not see him: And this is the next, and most immediate duty
which does kindly follow upon the former doctrine. For insomuch as there is so
great a ground, or Sea full of comfort: what may more aptly follow upon it,
then that we do cheer up, and comfort our hearts therewithal, after the
example of the Apostle Paul. Romans 8.34. etc. as we have seen before.

Ver^ly, if we do not make this the ground and perfection of our joy, that our
Savior is in heaven, at the right hand of God, all our rejoicing shall be in
vain, whether it be in wit, or learning, or in strength, or beauty, or in
riches, or revenues, or honor, or in any thing else whatsoever it may be.

But for our more plentiful instruction, from so special a ground, and from
so worthy and excellent an occasion: let us, I pray you, consider more
particularly of our duties belonging hereunto, in respect of either branch of
the advancement of our Savior, severally, and apart.



We do stand bound to esteem the doctrine, which he taught first himself,
and which since his a cension to the right hand God, his holy Apostles have
both preached by the Spirit, and also left recorded in writing, to be a most
perfect doctrine. And likewise, that the miracles which he wrought, first
himself while he was upon the earth and then also by the same his Apostles, in
his name, and by his power from the right hand of God* to be perfectly
sufficient, for the confirmation of the same his doctrine, touching the
kingdom of God.

Secondly, we are to have like reverend estimation, of the sincere and
faithful preaching of the same doctrine the doctrine of his blessed Gospel,
and heavenly kingdom.

Thirdly we are to reject all strange doctrine, and to withdraw our selves,
from every false Prophet and Antichrist, which preaches the same.

Explication and proof.
That we are thus to esteem, First of the doctrine of our Savior Christ, and
of his miracles: and secondly of the sincere preaching of the same his holy
doctrine, by his faithful Ministers, as a duty belonging to this advancement
of our Savior at the right hand of God: we have one notable testimony and
proof: Heb. 2.1. etc. Where, after the declaration of the most high
excellency of our Savior, even from hence that he alone is found worthy so
sit at the right hand of God, he infers this most grave conclusion,
following: Wherefore (says he) ^e naught diligently to give heed to the things
which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip: For if the word
spoken by Angels (that is to say, the in of all saw of God) was steadfast, and
every transgression and disobedience received a just recempence of reward, How
shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to
be preached by the Lord and afterward was confirmed to us by them that heard
him. God bearing witness thereto, both with signs and wonders, and with
diverse miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost according to his own will: For
he has not put the world to come, whereof we speak, to the subjection of the
Angels.

Likewise chap, 3.1. etc. Therefore holy brethren partners of the heavenly
vocation, consider the Apostle and high Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus:
Who was faithful to him that has appointed him, even as Moses was in all his
house: For this man is counted worthy of more glory then Moses, etc. And
verse, 5 etc. Now Moses verily (as the Apostle adds further) was faithful in
all his house (that is, in the house of God) as a servant, for a witness of the
things which should be spoken after But Christ (is) as the Son over his own
house, whose house we are, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of
the hope unto the end; Wherefore as the holy Ghost says, To day if ye will
hears his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, etc.

And again, chap. 12.24.25. Ye are come to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling which speaks better things, then
that of Abell. See that ye despise not him that speaks: for if they escaped
not who refused him that spoke one earth to wit in the name of the Lord
(Chrematizenta) that is Moses, much more shall we not escape, if we turn away
from him, who speaks from heaven, that is, if we turn away from our Savior
Christ.

And yet further, that we are from this consideration, to reverence the
ministry of the word, to rejoice in the promises pub ished thereby, to fear
the menaces and threats thereof, to admit the reproof, contained therein, etc.
it may be plain from the words which our Savior himself spoke while he was
upon the earth, in that he said, that he would ratify in heaven, that which
his faithful Ministers should, in their holy ministry and service, speak in
his number here on earth. Math. 16.19.

Here therefore it is also evident, that on the contrary, all such as shall
got about to publish any other doctrine, then that which our Savior has
delivered to his Church, are together with their doctrine, to be rejected of
all such as do only believe in our Savior Christ, sitting at the right hand
of G^d the F there, according to the admonition of our Savior himself: Math.
7.15. etc. and cha. 24. verses, 23.24.25. and according to the admonition of
the Apostle Paul. Gas. 1 8 ^. etc.

Thus much ^riefly, concerning the duties nore properly belonging to the
advancement of our Savior, in that he is a princely Prophet.



It is our duty, in the comfort of it, that like as we have learned before, to
rest wholly upon that his sacrifice, which he has offered up for our sins,
while he was here upon the earth, for the every merit of our redemption and
salvation: so in this respect to rest altogether upon his intercession now, and
continually in heaven, for the effectual application of the same his merit, to
the performance and accomplishment of the same our salvation.

It is also our duty, both in our prayers, and also in our thanksgiving and in
every other duty which we perform unto God: and likewise in our dedicating and
^ffering up of our own leaves both souls and bodies, a living sacrifice, holy
and acceptable to God: that we do all in the name of our Savior, not only
looking back to his mediation perfi ly performed here^^ earth, but also
looking forward, even up into heaven by the eye of our faith, to his continual
intercession for us, at the right hand of God. to the continual applying of
the fruit and merit of his death, as was said.

Explication.
It is true. For although we must begin to look back to the humiliation of our
Savior, and from thence learn unfeignedly to humble and cast down our selves:
yet we must not stay, till, with reverence, and for the further perfiting of
the peace of our conscience, we do comfortably look up unto him, and behold
him advanced to the right hand of God, on our behalf. For so the holy Apostle
teaches us. Heb. 4.14.15.16. in these words, Seeing then (says he) that we
have a great high Priest, which is entered into heaven, even Jesus the Son of
God, let us hold fast our profession. For we have not an high Priest, which
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things
tempted in like sort, yet without sin. Let us therefore go boldly unto the
throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace to helps time of
need. And cha. 10. verse. 10. etc. Seeing therefore brethren (says he) that by
the blood of Jesus, we may be bold to enter into the holy place, By the new and
living way, which he has prepared for us through the veil, that is his flesh.
And seeing, we have an high Priest which is over the house of God. Let us draw
near with a true heart, in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an
evil conscience, and wished in our bodies with pure water, Let us keep the
profession of our hope without wavering, for he is faithful that has
promised, etc.

Thus from the humiliation of our Savior, and from that experience which he
had of our infirmities, while he was upon the earth: we are with reverence to
approach near unto him by faith, even to the heavenly throne of Gods grace. If
we should rush immediately to the right hand of God, without faith in the merit
of his death, and without humiliation in casting down of our selves, we might
justly look for the repulse; yea, for a mighty fall, as a just punishment of
such our inordinate presumption and pride. The only lawful and allowed
mediator for us unto God, is our Savior Christ.

And if we would needs have a Mediator for us unto our Savior himself, being
now in heaven: what other can we have, or any way look for, then the death of
our Savior, in that he has thereby already made request for us unto God, in
the days of his humiliation here upon earth, and namely in the time of his
most bitter sufferings upon the Cross? That is to say, we neither can have,
neither may we look for any other Mediator to Christ, then Christ humbled, to
Christ exalted. If we will with the Papists look after any other Mediators, or
any other mediation to God for us, we shall with them vainly and foolishly
deceive our own selves.

And herein, I beseech ye, let every one of us labor so strengthen our faith:
because doubtless the want of faith in this point, has brought most gross
idolatry into the Church of God. For who having learned to behold our Savior,
an everlasting and perpetual mediator for him at the right hand of God, by the
eyes of his faith: would be so base minded, as to set up a dead and dumb
Idol, or once vouchsafe to cast an eye toward it, being set up, and fastened
to the wall before him, by any other.

Moreover, as touching our own praie^s, or any other duty and service, that
we can any way perform: we must take religious heed, that we do not trust
to any godliness or devotion, that we imagine and persuade our selves to be
therein: but rather, evermore to humble our selves in the sight of the
imperfections thereof. And look what grace and godliness there is in any, and
namely the grace of prayer, it is our duty to acknowledge, that it is not of
our selves, but of the holy Ghost. Neither are we to think, that any prayers
which we make, are heard, nor any other duty accepted, for any worthiness of
us: but because the holy Ghost raises up sighs and groans in us, and makes
request for us unto God, together with our Savior Christ. Romans 8.26.27. And
Revel. 8.3.4. And even this, that we have the grace to offer up our prayers
unto God, it is a fruit of our Saviors heavenly intercession for us. And the
same grace also of our care to make our prayers to God, in the name of our
Savior here from earth: it may be a good proof unto us, that our Savior is
an intercessour in heaven for us. But our manifold failings both in prayer, and
in all other duties, ought justly to cause us, unfeignedly to acknowledge our
selves, even when we are at the best, to be but unprofitable servants. Luke
17. verse, 10.

Thus having seen the duties belonging to the advancement of our Savior in
his royal Priesthood: let us come to his advancement in his royal kingdom.

First, inward reverence of soul and spirit, in the most dutiful
acknowledgement of his most royal sovereignty over his whole Church, and
every member thereof.

Secondly, all religious worship and service, both inward and outward according
to his word and commandment.

Thirdly, obedience and submission to those that rule over the rest in his
name, both civil Magistrates and Church governors.

Yea all christian obedience to his laws and commandments, in the common
actions, and conversation of our whole lives.

Finally, all divine honor, praise, and glory, for the whole work of our
redemption and salvation.

That we do stand bound, in respect of the royal, or princely advancement,
and sovereign Lordship of our Savior at the right hand of God, to yield him
all reverence in the acknowledgement of the same his high sovereignty: we have
a sufficient warrant, from that great and solemn proclamation, made from the
God of heaven, by the Apostle Peter in that first public Sermon of his, which
he made Acts 2. by the which, three thousand souls were converted, and
brought to the faith, and obedience of this great and glorious Lord our
Savior. David (says the Apostle, verses 34, 35, 36, etc.) is not ascended
into heaven: but he says, The Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand,
until I make thine enemies thy foote-stoole. Therefore, let all the house of
Israel know for a surety that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this
Jesus, I say whom ye have crucified. Now when they heard it, they were pricked
in their hearts, etc. And again, chap. 5. verse 31. God has lifted up Jesus
with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to
Israel, and forgiveness of sins. According also to that prophetical
instruction, by a sweet allegorica l description of the spiritual marriage of
our Savior with his Church, Harken O daughter (says the Psalmist) and
consider, and incline thine ear, forget also thine own people and thy fathers
house: so shall the King have pleasure in thy beauty, for he is thy Lord, and
reverence thou him. The word which the Prophet uses, notes such a reverence,
as is declared by outward bowing, or falling down before him. (vehashtahaeui-lo)

Hence therefore, we have a fit occasion given us, to proceed from the inward
reverence, to the proof of the second point, that all religious worship, both
inward and outward, is due to our Savior sitting at the right hand of God.
Which, that it is so, it may be evident unto us, from that which we read
Philip. 2.9, 10, 11. where, after that the Apostle has made a notable
description of his exceeding great humiliation, he infers this upon it,
saying, Wherefore also God has highly exalted him, and given him a name above
every name, That at the name of Jesus, every knee should bow both of things in
heaven and of things on earth, and of things under the earth. And that every
tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the glory of God the
Father. Read also 1. Tim. ^.21. I charge thee (says the Apostle to Timothy
an Evangelist) before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels,
that thou observe these things without preferring one to another, and do
nothing partially. He speaks of such things, as do nearely concern the
divine worship and service of God and our Savior Christ, and the reverend
ordering and performing the duties thereof. And again, 2. Epist. 4.1. I charge
thee therefore before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Read also
Heb. 12.28, 29. Wherefore (says the Apostle) seeing we receive a kingdom he
speaks of the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, now established from heaven)
which cannot be shaken, let us have grace whereby we may so serve God, that we
may please him with reverence and fear. For even our God is a consuming fire.
And so it is said of our Savior Christ, that he shall come at the last day
with flaming fire, rendering vengeance to them that do not know God and which
do not obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. To this purpose
therefore, the prophetical exhortation of the 2. Psalm. ought to take place
among us, yea among the Princes, of the earth, as we read verse 10, etc.
where, after that the Prophet has showed how fearfully our Savior shall
proceed against his enemies, yea even here in this world: he earnestly
admonishes and exhorts those that be corrigible, even so many as
appertain to the Lord, that they would be wise in time, and so prevent the
peril: Be wise now therefore O ye Kings (says he) be ye learned O ye
Judges of the earth. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling. Kiss
the Son, (that is, in all honorable sort, declare your selves to be his
willing and professed subjects) lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way,
(to wit, before you bring your own devises to pass, which surely he will
frustrate above that you can be aware) when his wrath shall suddenly burn (or
as they translate, and as the words will well signify, burn never so little,
to show the fearfulness of his wrath) And then he concludes the Psalm,
with this excellent sentence, Blessed are all that trust in him. The last place
which I will allege to this purpose, is Psalm. 110. verse 3. where the same
holy Prophet, even the princely Prophet David, deriueth this, (as an effect
from the sitting of our Savior in his kingly glory, and souerainge power at
the right hand of God) that his people should be such, as will, through the
mighty power of his word, and by grace of his holy Spirit, in the days of his
Gospel, stock in companies, and that also with great cheerfulness, to yield
all spiritual worship and service to our God, in the name of Jesus Christ
our Lord. The Lord (says King David) shall send the rod of thy power (that
is, the scepter of his word and Gospel) out of Zion, saying, Be thou ruler in
the midst of thine enemies: Thy people shall come to offer willingly, in the
time of the assembling of thine army, to wit, to defend thy Gospel by the
sword, against the violent adversaries thereof, according to that, Psalm 47.
verse 9. or rather, when they shall come by troops unto the places of thy
spiritual worship, to learn to fight thy spiritual battles, against their
spiritual enemies, the world, the flesh, and the Devil: by an allusion to
the holy custom of the Jews, resorting by companies to the Temple of the
Lord, at the solemn feasts of the Law, according to that, Psalm 42. verse
4. and Psalm 84 verse 7.) For so the words seem to follow aptly thus, in the
seemly places of thy holiness: yea even from the womb, that is, so soon as
they shall be spiritually reg^nerated unto thee (as it were betimes in the
morning, or at the peep of the day, that is, most diligently) shall the dew of
thy youth (that is, thy new borne babes, very copiously, according to the
falling of the dew upon the earth, like to that phrase of speech, 2. Sam.
17.12. used in that sense, though then by Ahitophel, to a wicked purpose) shall
present themselves unto thee. The reason whereof follows, answer rabble to
that which went before, The Lord has sworn, and will not repent. Thou art a
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech.

And thus we see, that from this Article, concerning our Saviors royal
advancement, to be the only spiritual King and Prince of his Church, that
is, of all the Saints of God, that all holy and religious worship is due unto
him.

Now thirdly, that all submission and obedience, is for his sake, and according
to this word, to be yielded to all civil Magistrates, and t all
ecclesiastical Church governor: as it is evident, Romans 13.1, etc. Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers, etc. And Matthew. 18.15. and verses 18 19.
Verily (says our Savior) I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven, etc. Where, out of all question, he had respect of
that heavenly sovereignty, which he has now at the right hand of God.

And fourthly, touching general obedience, in the common actions, and
conversation of our lives: read Colos. 3.1, etc. If then ye be risen with
Christ (says the Apostle) seek those things which are above, where Christ
sits at the right hand of God. Set your affections on things which are
above, and not on things which are on the earth. For ye are dead, and your life
is hidden with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life shall appear then
shall ye also appear with him in glory. Mortify therefore your members which
are on the earth, fornication uncleanness, etc. And 1. These. 4.1, 2. And
furthermore (says the Apostle) we beseech ye brethren, and exhort ye in the
Lord Jesus, that ye increase more and more, as ye have received of us, how ye
ought to walk and to please God. For ye know what commandments we gave you
by the Lord Jesus. For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, and
that ye should abstain from fornication, etc.

If we shall do thus, yea constantly to the end, and not be turned away by any
afflictions: then behold how gracious the promise is, It is a true saying
(says the Apostle, 2. Tim. chap. 2.11.12.) For if we be dead with him, (that
is, with out Savior) we shall also live with him. If we suffer, we shall
reign with him. And Revel. 2.26, 27 our Savior testifies thus by his holy
Apostle, from heaven, He that overcomes and keeps my works unto the end,
to him will I give power over Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of
iron: and as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken. Even as I received
of my Father, so will I give him the morning star: (that is, singular
brightness and glory, comparable to the morning star) answerable to that
prophecy of Daniel, chap. 12.^. They that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, shall
shine as the stars for ever and ever. And again, Revel. 3.21. To him that
overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I overcame, and
sit with my Father in his throne. Let him that has an ear, hear what the
Spirit (that is, the spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, by his holy Apostle from
heaven) sait unto the Churches These promises therefore, and such duties, to
the constant performance whereof they are made, are diligently and religiously
to be attended and believed of every true christian.

Finally, touching the last branch of the answer: to wit, that all divine
honor and glory is to be given to our Savior, for the whole work of our
redemption, and eternal salvation: We have the practice of the Church of God
in the hea^ens, yea and of the holy Angels also, exemplified before us, Revel.
chap. 5. v^rses 6, 7, 8, etc. they do most solemnly give high glory to our
Savior Christ in that behalf, falling down and saying. Thou art worthy,
etc. And verse 12. The Angels say with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that
was killed, to receive power and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
honor, and glory, and praise. Yea, the vision declaring what is the duty of
all, as well in earth as in heaven, represents unto John, that all the
creatures which are in heaven, and on the earth and in the sea and all that are
in them, do say, Praise, honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that
sits upon the throne, (that is, to God the Father) and unto the Lamb for
evermore. That is, to the Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to this
Article of our faith, sits for ever at his right hand. And this is that
whereunto we, and all the Church of God, in the days of the Gosp^l, are
prophetically exhorted, and earnestly stirred up by a fiuefold repetition of
the same words, Psalm. 47.5, 6, 7. God is ascended with triumph, even the Lord
with the sound of the trumpet. Sing praises to God sing praises sing praises
unto our King sing praises. For God is the King of all the earth (that is, of
the whole Church, both Jews and Gentiles) sing praises eu^ry one that has
understanding. Or rather thus, sing praises, with a Psalm of instruction: that
is to say, fit to instruct us in this mystery of the exaltation of our Lord
and Savior.

And hereunto, the excellency of the person of our Savior is very forcible,
and also the highness of that place, from whence all the mercies of God are
confirmed, and the daily fruits thereof renewed unto us. For we use to esteem
gifts and tokens of love, at very high price, when they come from Persons of
high place. Most of all therefore, and m st highly, ought we to esteem those
most excellent gifts and blessings, which do continually descend unto us, from
the most royal hand of our Savior Christ, even from the right hand of God, in
the highest heavens. To him therefore, be all honor, and glory, and praise,
for ever and ever, Amen.

And thus albeit this yielding of glory and praise to our Savior, is a part,
yea a chief part of his divine worship, and might well have been spoken of in
the second branch: yet it need not be thought to be much amiss, that it
should in this wise be made a special conclusion of the whole answer, touching
the duties of faith belonging to the manifold comfort of faith touching this
Article.

NOw for the shutting up of all, The danger of not believing this Article.
according to our order of handling every other Article of our faith: What is
the danger of not believing in our Savior Christ, and of not obeying him, as
one thus most highly advanced, to the right hand of the most sacred Majesty of
God?

Ans. It cannot be, that the faith of any such, should be perfitly established.
Nay rather, all that shall remain in this their unbelief, and disobedience
against our glorious Lord and Savior: shall not only be excluded from every
benefit of Christ, but also stand most deeply subject to extreme wrath and
judgment, as a just punishment for so great and intolerable a contempt.

Explication and proof.
It must needs be so indeed. For seeing, as it was said, even in respect of
the appearance of our Savior in the time of his humiliation, that he which did
not then believe in him, was condemned already, because he believed not in
the name of the only begotten Son of God. John. 3.18. Much rather may it be
affirmed now, after that our Savior is ascended thus into heaven, and fully
established in his glory. And we may here again call to mind the words of
our Savior, John 8.23, 24. and verses 34, 35, 36. The sum whereof is this,
that if we believe not in him, as one that came from heaven, as one being sent
from God, and is gone again to God into heaven, we shall die in our sins.
Hereunto likewise serves that which our Savior spoke, chap. 16.9. that the
holy Ghost, after his ascension to the right hand of God in the heavens, should
rebuke the world of sin, (to wit, in it self, even to the own condemnation)
as touching those that would not believe in him, thus leaving the world, after
his manifesting of himself, and going away again to him that had sent him. In
which place of Scripture also, our Savior said further, that the holy Ghost
should after the same his ascension, convince the world of righteousness, that
is, should show by real proof and demonstration, even by reason of his
ascension, that our Savior is righteous: for so are the words of our Savior
himself, Because I go to my Father, and ye shall see me no more Our Savior
means till the end of the world. And last of all, our Savior added in the
same place of the Evangelist John, that the holy Ghost should come to convince
the world of judgment: that is to say, that wrath and vengeance is due to all
that will not believe in him, seeing he has made it most clear and evident,
that the Prince of this world, that is, the Devil, is judged: to wit, for the
benefit and safety of all that shall truly believe in our Savior Christ.

Thus therefore, they that will not, to their benefit believe in our Savior,
nor give glory unto him exalted to the right hand of God: they shall well know
one day, what (as the Prophet Isaiah speaks) the high hand of the Majesty of
God means, to their severe punishment. chap. 26.10, 11.

A King here upon earth, (as we all know) will not endure that any of his
subjects, shall dishonor such a one, as he has thought good to set up in any
special high place and dignity, specially if it be in the next place to
himself, in the honor of his kingdom: and shall we think, that God will
endure, that our Lord Jesus Christ, whom he has most worthily and resolutely
set at his right hand, shall be dishonored of any creature, (no not of the
Kings, and Princes of this world) and the contemner of him whosoever he be, to
escape unpunished? It is against all, both reason and duty, yea even againsst
common sense, that any should think so. Nay rather, let us well assure our
selves, as the truth will plainly inform us, that seeing our Savior did
justly reprove his Disciples, for that they were of little faith in believing
in him, while he remained yet in this weak and base estate of his humane
nature here upon earth: much more worthy shall we be of reproof, if now
after his most high advancement, even in his humanity, we should be found not
only weak in faith, but even altogether void of faith, and of every good duty
and fruit thereof. Wherefore, casting away all unbelief, and every discomfort
and disobedience thereof: let us settle our hearts, most co^fortably to
believe, and with all humbleness of mind, to submit our selves under the
mighty hand of this our most glorious King and Savior. Belief in God the
Son, who shall come from heaven to judge both the quick and the dead.
Always remembering, The ground of the Article.
that the only way to exaltation, is by this humility and obedience of faith,
which we speak of: according to our Saviors own doctrine, Luke, chap. 14.11.
and chap. 18.14. And as Peter, the Apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ teaches us
also, 1. Epist. chap. 5. verses 5, 6. Verily, if we should seek for our
Savior Christ at the right hand of God, and not trace him out by the
footesteppes of his most low humiliation here upon earth, and so from his
death, to make his resurrection, and ascension, as it were for a ladder to go
up by, step after step, we should never find him there for our comfort.

Finally, let neither any old sort of heretics, such as the Seleucians are
said to have been, who utterly denied this Article, cause us any way to doubt
of it, or to call it into the least question: nor any new Vbiquitarians,
whether Transubstantiatours, or Consubstantiatours, draw us aside either from
the true sense, or from the right use and comfort of this so holy and heavenly
an Article, of our christian belief.

Belief in God the Son, who shall come from heaven to judge both the quick
and the dead.
ANd thus, having seen what our Savior Christ has done and suffered for us
heretofore, and likewise what he has obtained for us, and what he does still
for us at the right hand of God, and so will continue to do for us, even to
the end of the world: let us now come to consider what he will do hereafter at
the end of the world, for the full perfiting of all things, to the full
redemption and salvation of the whole Church.



It follows thus, from thence shall he come to judge both the quick and the
dead.

Answer. Explication.
In this Article, we have to observe these two things.

First, the place from whence our Savior shall come: that is, from heaven,
even from the right hand of God, whether be is ascended.

And secondly, we are to observe the end of his coming: which is, as the
article it self expresses, to judge both the quick and the dead

There are diverse other things beside these, to be observed also, in the
through consideration of this article, as we shall perceive from the ground and
warrant of it in the holy Scriptures.



We have it in so many words well near, as it is set down in our Creed, Act.
10. verse 42. where the Apostle Peter is recorded have said thus.

God has commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify, that it is
he that is ordained of God, a judge of the quick and the dead.

This indeed is one very good, and almost in express words, a full ground of
this Article. Explication.
Wherein also, let this be specially observed of us, that the holy Apostle
affirms, that God has commanded, that it should be earnestly and diligently
taught unto his people: and therefore consequently, that every one of his
people that has understanding, may easily perceive, that this is his duty,
diligently to hear and regard this doctrine of this article, as well as of the
rest. Let us therefore, stir up our selves, to use all good and holy
diligence, in our preparing of our selves, both to the preaching, and also to
the hearing of the same. And to the end, we may consider of this holy article,
as fully, as we have by the grace of God, gone through the former: let us hold
the same course, both concerning the ground, and also all other points. And
namely, concerning the ground, let us not only look unto such holy Scriptures,
The danger of not believing this Article.
as do more briefly mention the substance of this article: but also those,
which do most historically and largely, lay it forth unto us, with all the
holy circumstances thereof. For this we are to understand, (as a further reason
to stir up and sharpen our diligence) that in regard of the weightines of this
article, it is very often repeated in the holy Scriptures: not only in the new
Testament, but also in the old, though not so fully and plainly as it is here
in the new.

Touching the old Testament, that one testimony of the Apostle Jude, mentioned
in the new Testament: where he writes thus, ver. 14, 15. Enoch also the
seventh from Adam prophesied of such (that is so say, of such as were like to
Caine, Balaam, and Core) saying, Behold the Lord comes with thousands of his
Saints, to give judgment upon all men and to rebuke all the ungodly among them,
etc. This one testimony, I say, may be as a holy commentary unto us, that the
Church of God, even from the beginning, were made acquainted with this article
of our faith, concerning the last and general judgment of God: and that all
the threatenings and declarations of Gods judgments against sin, point forward
still unto this last and final judgment: and specially that universal
judgment upon the whole world, in the days of Noah, for the generality of it:
and that other, of the burning of Sodom and Gomorrha, and the other Cities
about them, in respect of that kind of visitation, which shall be upon the
whole world at that day, when (as our Savior himself says) it shall be with
the world, like as it was in those days: we may well observe to this end, that
when mention is made of the eternal confusion of the wicked, and of the
everlasting felicity of the godly: there is a respect unto this last judgment.
As for example, Ps. 9.6, 7, 8, O enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual
end. But the Lord shall sit for ever: he has prepared his throne for
judgment. For he shall judge the world in righteousness, and shall judge the
people with equity. And ver. 17. The wicked shall turn into hell, and all
Nations that forget God. And Ps. 17.15, But I shall behold thy face in
righteousness: when I awake, (to wit, at the resurrection) I shall be satisfied
with thine image. And Ps. 49.14. The righteous shall have dominion over the^ in
the morning (that is, in the most comfortable day of the resurrection of the
just) whenas hell shall consume the beauty of the wicked fro his house, that is,
from the grave. Trem: and Iun. And ver. 15. But God will deliver my soul from
the power of the grave, for he will receive me, to wit, into his heavenly
kingdom Selah. Read also, Psalm. 125.1, etc. to the end. And Prou. 10.30. The
righteous shall never be removed. And Ec. 8.12, 13. Though a sinner do evil a
hundred times, etc. yet it shall not go well with the wicked. And Isai. 33.14.
God is compared to burning fire, yea to everlasting burnings, according to that
we read, Deuteronomy. 4.24. But yet more plainly, do the Scriptures following
point us to the last judgment, and to the end of the world, and thenceforth
the state of the godly and wicked for ever. Psa. 1^2.25, 26, 2^. O my God
(says the Prophet) thou have aforetime laid the foundations of the Earth, and
the heavens are the works of thine hands. They shall perish, but thou shall
endure: even they shall wax old as does a garment: as a vesture thou shall
change them, and they shall be changed. ^ut thou art the same and thy years
shall not fail. The children of thy seruents shall continue, and their seed
shall stand fast in thy sight. And Psalm. 145 1. O my God and King, I will
extol thee, and bless thy name for ever and ever. And verse 21. My mouth
shall speak the praise of the Lord, and all flesh shall bless his name for
ever and ever. And contrariwise, touching the wicked, Eccles. 11 9. Rejoice O
young man in thy youth (says King Solomon, showing the vanity of all
youthful pl^^sure, not ordered in the fear of God) but know for all these
things God will bring thee to judgment. And chap. 12.14. God will bring every
work unto judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil. And
jointly, both of the wicked and godly, Isai. 66.14, 15, 16. The hand of the
Lord shall be known among his servants, and his indignation against his
enemies. For behold, the Lord will come with fire, and his chariots like a
whirlewinde, that he may recompen^e his anger with wrath, and his indignation
with the flame of fire. For the Lord will judge with fire, and with his sword
all flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be many. And verse 24. The worm
of the transgressors shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and
they shall be an abhorring to all flesh: says the Lord by his holy Prophet.
Likewise Daniel, chap. 12. verse 2. Many of them that sleep in the earth (an
uncertain or indefinite number put for that which is infinite or innumerable)
shall awake (says the Angel of the Lord to Daniel) some to everlasting life,
and some to shame, and perpetual contempt. Finally, Malachie, the last of the
Prophets, Behold (says the Lord by him) the day comes, that shall burn as
an oven, and all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble, and
the day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts, and shall
leave them neither root nor branch. But unto you that fear my name, shall the
Son of righteousness arise, and health shall be under his wings. Thus, the
last judgment is not obscurely pointed at, though as it were a far off, in
the old Testament.

But in the new Testament, it is most clear and plain: and it is also more
plentifully repeated. First by our Savior, Matthew chap. 8. verses 11, 12. I
say unto you, that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down
with Abraham and Isaak, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. And the children
of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness, there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. Compared with Luke, chapter 13. verses 24, etc. 29, 30.
And again, Matthew 10. verses 14, 15. Whosoever will not receive you, nor
hear your words, when ye depart out of that house, or that City, shake off
the dust of your feet. Truly I say unto you, it shall be easier for them of
the land of Sodom and Gomorrha, in the day of judgment, then for that City.
And chapter 12.32. and verses 41, 42. And chapter 13.36, etc. 43. Likewise
verses 47, 48, 4^, 50. And chapter 16. verses 27. The Son of man, shall come
in the glory of his Father, with his Angels, and then shall he give to every
one according to his deeds. Moreover, chapter 19. verses 27, 28, 29. and
chapter 22.13, 14. And chapter 24, a great part of the chapter. And chapter 25.
the whole. And chapter 26. verse 64. Read also John 5. verses 28, 29. And
chap. 14.1, 2. And chapter 16. 16, etc. 23. Thus our Savior Christ is
plentiful in the repetition of this Article. And so are his holy Apostles,
Acts 3.19, 20, 21. and chap. 10.42. rehearsed before. And chap. 17.31. And Romans
2.5, 6, etc. 16. and chap. 14.9, 10, 11, 12. And 1. Cor. 1.7, 8. and chap. 4.
verse 5. and chap. 15.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. and verses 51, 52, etc. And 2. Cor.
5.10. Philip. 3.20, 21. 1. These. 1.10, And chap. 5.1, 2, 3. And 2 These. 1.5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10. and cha. 2.1, 2, etc. And 2. Tim. 1.18. And chap. 4 1. Heb. 9 27,
28. And chap. 10.25, 26, 27, etc. James 2.13. and chap. 4.12. And 1. Pet. 4.5.
And chap. 5.4. And 2. Pet. chap. 3. verses 3, 4, 5, etc. Revel. chap, 20.11,
12, 13, etc and chap. 21. and chap. 22. Finally, Acts 1, 10, 11. Two Angels do
immediately upon the ascension of our Savior, testify to his Disciples, that
he should come again from heaven as they had seen him go up into heaven.

Thus in many places, and in more then have been now rehearsed, the new
Testament is plentiful, in the confirmation and opening of the truth of this
article of our faith, concerning the coming of our Savior from heaven to
judge the quick and the dead.

But that we may consider of this article, in as commodious a manner as we
may:

First of all, (as I have heard you teach) we may from the ground of the holy
Scriptures, commodiously consider of the time of our Saviors coming to
judgment.

Secondly, of the signs that shall go before his coming.

Thirdly of the place from whence, and whether he shall come to give judgment.

Fourthly of the manner of his coming,

Fifthly, of the persons whom he shall judge.

Sixthly, of the order of his proceeding to judgment.

Seventhly, of the sentence and judgment it self, what it shall be, and
according to what rule or law, it shall be given.

Finally, of the present execution of the sentence, or judgment, so soon as
it shall be awarded and given.

Ex. In this order indeed (as I suppose) we may well consider of the ground
and warrant of this Article, from those manifold proofs and testimonies, which
it has in the holy Scriptures. Which things well observed, we may
thenceforth, easily gather both the meaning of the article, and also the
promise, together with the comforts and duties, belonging to the faith of it:
and last of all, what the danger is of not believing this article. Let us
therefore hold our selves to this order.

FIrst of all therefore, that we may begin with the time.

Question. Answer. Explication and proof.
When shall our Savior come to execute this last judgment?

He will come again, to this end and purpose, at the end of the world: and not
before.

So indeed, do diverse places of the holy Scripture expressly affirm. And
namely, Matthew. 13.39, 40. The harvest is, that is, it represents the end of
the world, and the reapers to be the Angels. As then the tares are gathered
and burned in the fire, (to wit, at the harvest) so shall it be in the end of
the world: that is, concerning the wicked, as it follows in the
interpretation of the parable. And again, verse 49. So shall it be in the end
of the world. The Angels shall go forth, and sever the bad from among the
just. And 1. Cor. 15.24. Then shall be the end, when he has delivered up the
kingdom to God, etc. And that he will not come till the end of the world, it
is evident from the testimony of the Angels. Act. 1.10, 11. And of the Apostle
Peter, chap. 3.21. of the same history.

But the places of holy Scripture, which we will chiefly stay upon to this
purpose: as also for the signs going before his coming, and the rest of the
points, to be observed concerning this article, are the 24. and 25. chap. of S.
Matt. with whom accord the Evangelists Mark chapter 13. and Luke 17.23, etc And
chap. 21.

Here therefore let us stay, and as it were pitch and fasten the stakes of our
tent, till we may finish this so necessary and notable a doctrine: insomuch as
our Savior in these places, as a most wise and careful shepherd, (as he is
compapared, Ier. 31.10, 11, 12. and Ezekiel. chap. 34.1, etc verses 22, 23, 24.
and as he does compare himself diverse times in the holy Gospel) leads us
into a very sweet and battlesome pasture, in special manner prepared, for us,
to the same very end and purpose.



In the 24. of Matthew, verse 3. the Disciples of our Savior, desiring him to
tell them what sign there should be of his coming, end of the end of the
world: he answers so, as he does not so much satisfy them, according to
their demand, as he does teach them, what use both they, and we also, are to
make of so huge and fearful a judgment of God.

Explication and proof.
It is true. And it is well worthy to be observed, that as the Disciples, do
join both the destruction of Jerusalem, which our Savior had immediately
foretold, and the end of the world together (because in their conceit, the
world was like to end with the desolation of the Temple, it being so goodly and
firm a building) so does our Savior link and intermixe the answer to the
one, with his answer to the other, as we may perceive verse, 4. and so forth to
the 14. Yet so, as afterward he does somewhat more distinctly, answer unto
them. Namely, to the former question concerning the destruction of Jerusalem,
from the 15. verse, to the 29. And to the latter question, concerning the end
of the world, from that 29. verse, to the end of the chap. and likewise in the
25. chap. And yet again, he does not answer so distinctly, but that there are
some speeches interchangeably intermixed, which concern the other, rather then
that which is most what spoken of, to the end he might make the use of either
of them mutually more effectual, as we shall perceive by the course of the
text.

Let us therefore come to the words of our Savior. And first more generally,
concerning the argument of either question, from the beginning of the chapter,
to the 15. verse. Qu. Which are they?

An. 1 Jesus (says the Evangelist Matthew) went out, and departed from the
Temple, and his Disciples came to him, to show him the building of the Temple.

2 And Jesus said unto them, see ye not all these things? Verily I say unto
you, there shall not be here left a stone upon a stone, Our Sauio^rs last
farewell to the Temple of Jerusalem. F ue common calamities to be expected in
the world. 1. Seducement by false Christ's 2. Wars. 3. Famine. 4. Plague or
pes^^lence. 5. Earthquakes Saint Luke adds a sixth, Eue^ great ^ignes from
heaven. chap. 21.11. Five grievous trialls or tentations more proper to the
Church of Christ. 1. Rigorous proceeding of Princes and Rulers against
christians, by whipping, imprisoning, and killing of them 2. A general hatred
of all not converted to the Gospel, against them. 3. Persecution and betraying
by false brethren and near kinsmen. 4. False Prophets. 5. Weak and loose
proses^^urs, such as God calls luke warm. Our thoughts ought obediently to
attend upon the ministry, and not turn a^de to any of our own carnal
conceits.
that shall not be cast down.

3 And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, his Disciples came to him apart
saying, Tell us when these things shall be, and what sign shall be of thy coming,
and of the end of the world.

4 And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you.

5 For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.

6 And ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars: see that ye be not
troubled: for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet.

7 For Nation shall rise against Nation, and realm against realm; and there
shall be pestilence, and famine, and earthquakes in diverse places.

8 All these are but the beginning of trouble: to wit, in comparison of those
that should be in the time of the siege of Jerusalem, and at the end of the
world.

9 Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and they shall kill you, and
ye shall be hated of all Nations for my names sake.

10 And the^ shall many be offended, and they shall betray one another, and hate
one another.

11 And many false Prophets shall arise, and deceive many.

12 And because iniquity shall be increased, the love of many shall be cold.

13 But he that indureth to the end, he shall be saved.

14 And this Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached, through the whole world,
for a witness to all Nations, and then shall the end come.

Ex. Here we see, that the disciples of our Savior, propound unto him a double
question. And we have also in these words, the answer of our Savior, something
more generally to both, as I take it, as was said before.

Bu before we come to the words of the present text, it shall be good for us,
to consider of the occasion which the disciples took to ask these questions.
That is evident, from the latter end of the former chapter, where our Savior,
after he had vehemently reproved the sins of the Scribes and Pharisees, and
with the^ those that were willingly misled by them: he foretells, and
threatens, the desolation of Jerusalem, Behold (says our Savior) your
habitation shall be left unto you desolate. According also to that which he had
said before. Luke 19.41, etc.

Hereupon the disciples, instead that they should (from the most grave sermon
of our Savior Christ, even grieuing at the contempt done by the rulers against
their Lord and Master, our Lord and Savior) have held their hearts in the
meditation of the hainousnes of sin in the sight of god, from the consideration
of his heavy judgments denounced against it: yea so that for the sins of the
people, he would not spare his own city, nor the holy place of his worship:
they, as soon as they came out of the temple, do very childishly cast their
eyes upon the goodly building of it, partly pitying to think of the ruin
threatened, and partly imagining (as was said) that the world should as soon be
at an end, as Jerusalem should be destroyed. And according to their own fond
conceit, in which they pleased themselves and their senses, as if they had
never seen the temple before, one among the rest (as Mark writes, chapter 13.1.)
and also the other consenting with him, would have induced our Savior to turn
back to behold the building, as they did. But our Savior does earnestly rebuke
them; as the Evangelist Luke makes this point most plain, chap. 21.6. saying,
Are these the things that ye look upon? For so he might very justly do,
specially at this time, when they so crossed his doctrine, though simply in it
self, it was not a thing merely unlawful to behold the beauty of so goodly
a building as the Temple was. And therewithal, our Sau^our does in the like
earnestness, justify and confirm that which he had before affirmed, saying
unto them, See ye not all these things? Verily I say unto, you, there shall
not be here left a stone upon a stone that shall not be cast down And that
also very justly, because the wicked rulers and people of Jerusalem, had
profaned the worship and Temple of God, making it of a house of prayer, a den
of thieves: and because they refused to submit themselves to the Lord of the
Temple, etc. It is no other thing then that which God has threatened, Ier.
18.9, 10. And thus we see what was the occasion, whereby the Disciples were
moved, to ask our Savior, the double question before mentioned: partly because
our Savior had threatened the destruction of Jerusalem: and partly, because
after they were reproved and confirmed against their negligent doubting, and
gave heedfull credit to the word of our Savior, (wherein they are to be
commended) they did therewithal now forthwith imagine of their own heads, that
the end of the world, which our Savior had spoken of diverse times before,
should be at the same time: as though the Temple and ceremonies thereof, were
appointed to continue as long as the world should last. For this cause, four
of them, to wit, Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, (as S. Mark
reports) came to our Savior, then sitting upon the mount of Olives: and
asked him secretly, saying, Tell us, when these things shall be, and what shall
be the sign when all these things shall be fulfilled. But Matthew makes the
matter more full and plain, reporting their demand or entreaty (as was
rehearsed) thus, Tell us when these things shall be, and what signs shall be of thy
coming, and of the end of the world. And Luke records it interrogatiuely:
Master, when shall these things be? Thus much for the questions.

Now let us come to the answer of our Savior, wherein this first of all, may
well be observed of us, that our Savior does not satisfy their curious
desire, which was only to know the time, as one would say historically, as if
all troubles were now over, and that they should forthwith without any fight
obtain the victory, (like as all of us would gladly go to heaven with as much
ease and pleasure as might be) but our Savior, (as I was about to say) does
not in his answer so much respect the intent of his disciples: as to teach them
those things, where of it was necessary, that they should be admonished, in
respect of the diverse tentations and dangers, which belonged to the same.

Our Savior therefore, instead of making them a direct answer gives his
Disciples warning, and in them us, and his whole Church: to take diligent heed
against these great and perilous dangers, before that time shall come.

First, that we be not perverted in our minds, by any false Christ, or false
Prophet.

Secondly, that we be not discouraged in our hearts, by any outward fears and
troubles, common in the world, or by any persecutions, more proper to the
Church of God.

Thirdly, that we be not offended, or caused to stumble, either at the falling
away of false brethren, or at the declining and fainting of the weak. But that
contrariwise, we remain faithful and constant, in a zealous profession and
obedience of the truth, even to the end.

And hereunto, our Savior gave both his Disciples, and us, and the whole
Church, these three singular encouragements.

First, that he will be most graciously present and assistant by his most holy
and comfortable Spirit, in the most grievous afflictions of all such as will
continue faithful unto him.

Secondly, that they shall be assuredly eternally saved in the end.

Thirdly, that nothing shall be able to withstand the course of the preaching
of the Gospel, till it shall be published in all the world, according to the
holy will and appointment of God, for a testimony against all unbelievers, but
to the comfort and rejoicing, yea even to the honor and glory of the faithful
preachers and professors of the same.

This is the brief of the first part of the answer of our Savior. Let us
consider somewhat more fully of them, to the further opening and applying of
them to our manifold use and comfort. In the rest we will be more short.

First of all, our Savior (as was said) does admonish us, to beware of the
instruments of the devil: whosoever shall at any time, go about to pervert
us, and to withdraw our hearts from the truth of the Gospel. The which, as it
stands in two points: to wit, the truth of the Person of Christ, who he is,
and the truth of his doctrine, what it is: so there want not two sorts of
instruments, which cease not to labor to pervert the minds of the unstable,
either way. And therefore it is, that our Savior gives so earnest warning,
both against false Christ's, and also against false Prophets and Teachers,
whether servants to the false Christ's, or arch heretics and Masters of any
sect, contrary to the direction and doctrine of our Savior.

Take heed therefore (says he) that no man deceive you. For many shall come in
my name, etc. that is to say, not only with pretense of authority from me,
but even in effect arrogating to themselves my name, as if they were the true
Christ indeed.

These (as our Savior, the only true Christ says) shall deceive many. So that
by two very forcible reasons, he does warn to take heed of all such. First,
because there should be many of them. And secondly, because many for want of
taking heed, shall be deceived by them.

But who have been such false Christ's.

And who have at any time been deceived by them?

There have been many such among the Jews: and many also of the Jews, have
bin deceived by such, not only before our Savior gave this warning, but also
sithence: some whereof are mentioned by S. Luke, in the book of the Acts of
the Apostles. chapter 5.36.37. one Theudas, and Judas of Galile, and cha. 21.38. a
certain Egiptian. Of which sort more are recorded by Josephus, who writes the
Jews story, as we may read in his books both of their Antiquities, and also
of their wars. But though there were no record, yet ought we undoubtedly to
believe, that the word of our Savior, has been fulfilled: according to that
he said, Ioh. 5.43. I come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not: if
another shall come in his own name, him will ye receive.

And even to this day, so many as under the name of Christ, do seek to draw
the minds of any from the true Christ to themselves, who may justly be in that
respect called Antichrists (such of who^ the Apostle John says, that there
were many eue^ in his time) all these may justly come under the name of false
Christ's. Yea, whosoever does seek to draw away from Christ, either under the
name of Christ professedly, or by promising those things to such as will
cleave unto the^, which none can perform but our Savior Christ alone, they
are according to the mind of our Savior, false Christ's. Such false Christ's,
and that in the highest degree, are those in the East, that draw all under
subjection to Mahomet, and his Alkoran: and here, in the West, all the Popes of
Rome in their Antichristian succession, who hold all to their Portuise and
Masse-booke, etc. adding, detracting, and changing as they list, the laws and
ordinances, and doctrine of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Yea, every
arch-heretike that draws from Christ, by promising safety and salvation, by
the embracing of him and his doctrine, though contrary, or swaruing from the
truth of the doctrine of Christ; they may all be reckoned false Christ's. Such
as were in former times, Praxeus. Valentinus, Ebion, Cerinthus, Nouatus, Arius,
Donatus, etc. and of latter times, H. N. and his successors, great false
Christ's, though more secret and lurking then many of the rest. And thus we
may perceive how the word of our Savior is fulfilled, that there should be
many false Christ's. And that infinite multitudes have been deceived by them,
and are yet to this day: none can be ignorant, that will not willingly shut
their eyes.

Now, beside these false Christ's, there are another sort of deceivers, with
like circumspection to be avoided of us: as the same our Savior, the only
true Christ of God, does advertise us: that is to say, false Prophets.

These we may account to be all such, as are servants to false Christ's, by
their servile flattery, for lucres sake, to set up, and advance their power,
and excellency, as if all outward peace, or spiritual relief, and safety,
were to be found in submission and subjection unto them: and as if no other but
such, were worthy to have liberty, to buy or sell, or live upon the earth.
False Prophets therefore, are such as preach Mahomet, or the Pope, or H. N. or
the heresy of any other, to draw any, to be of the sect of their Master
heretic. And consequently, all their deceivable doctrines, must be with like
care watched against, and rejected, as our Savior gives warning, ver. 11. To
the which end and purpose, our Savior uses the same reasons, which he had
rendered before: to wit, the multitude of such deceiving Prophets, which come
out of the bottomless pit, by companies like locusts. Reave. 9. as we may take
the wicked Jesuits and Seminary Priests, in these our days, for example in
one kind: and because as we have experience, multitudes are through their
neglect of this our Saviors admonition, deceived and perverted by them.

O therefore, I beseech ye, let us be yet more and more careful, to seek to
know our Lord Jesus, the only true Christ, the only begotten son of God,
more perfectly then yet we have done: not only from the holy prophesies, given
forth of him, from the beginning, and so from time to time: but also in the
accomplishment of all things, in his conception in due time, in his birth, in
his life, in his doctrine, in his miracles, in his sufferings: and in his whole
most high exaltation, even from the grave, to the right hand of God, in the
highest heavens: the which things, have been from the holy Scriptures, in some
measure for our parts, faithfully opened and declared unto you.

And I beseech ye (to the further quickening of your diligence) let us
consider, that the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his blessed
Gospel, is a most high and deep mystery, and of another nature, then is all
humane literature and learning. So that we are ready to imagine too soon, that
we know all well enough, etc, whereas we ought to think, that we know nothing, so
thoroughly and perfectly as we ought to know it, or to believe in it and obey it.

Hitherto of the first part of the warning of our Savior Christ, that we take
heed, that we be not deceived, either by false Christ's, or by false Prophets.

It follows, that we do likewise consider, of the second part, which is
against those discouragements, which might arise from outward troubles, such as
our Savior foretells, should be either generally in the world, even so long
as the world shall last: or more particularly with like continuance, or often
renewings against the Church of God, to the special trial and trouble of his
servants, either in goods, liberty, or life it self. And that either by the
hatred of their own kindred, against the law of nature: or by the false and
back sliding brethren, contrary to the law of God, and all bond of true
christianity. For against all these, does our Savior give us a gracious
admonition, take heed, that we be at no time inordinatly disquieted by the^.
Ye shall hear of wars (says our Savior) or rather we may read it thus, ye
shall hear wars: to wit, the stroke of the drum, or sound of the Trumpet,
etc. either more near at hand, or further off, as we heard the noise of the
great Gunnes against Ostend the other Summer. And touching rumors of wars,
we have heard them in our age, as others have done in their times, from diverse
places. Yea, so as there is still great likelihood, that they shall continue as
they have done heretofore, no man knowing how long, nor to what extremity they
may grow. Nevertheless, be ye not troubled (says our Savior) so as ye should
for this give over the profession of my name, nor any thing remit, or lay aside
the work of the lord, so far forth as ye may by any lawful means, further and
promote the same.

The wars, and rumors of wars, such as the Jews had experience of (as
Josephus reports) were under these Roman governors, Cumanus, Felix,
Albinus, Florus, in the cities of Caesarea, Scythopolis, Aschelon, Ptolomais,
Alexandria, and Damascus, before that Jerusalem was besieged and overcome by
Vespasian, and Titus the Roman Emperors themselves. And touching the wars
and rumors of wars among us Christians, they are so rife in our knowledge,
and hearing to this day, that we need say nothing of them, save only to
wonder at Gods mercy, that they have not been more grievous to us for our
parts, and to have commiscration of our brethren, who have been more sharply
afflicted then our selves.

But our Savior proceeds to encourage his Disciples and all christians, to
be of good cheer, though beside wars and rumors of wars, they must look that
there shall be likewise often renewings of pestilence, and famine, and
earthquakes: that is, though God for the sins of the world, do send all
four of his great judgments, according to his threatening given forth against
Israel, by his Prophet Ezekiel. Earthquakes being here put in stead of wild
beasts there mentioned, which may well be accounted for the roaring of the Lion
in the Forest, as the Prophet Amos speaks, both of the^, and the rest of God
his judgments. For all these, our Sa: would have him Disciples look to meet
with in the world: and yet not to be discouraged, or confounded. And how truly
the words of our Savior have bin, and are fro time to time performed, both we,
and all the world have sufficiently tasted. God grant that we may learn by
the^, to repent of our sins: but touching well doing, that we may not be
discouraged, but rather quickened to all godliness thereby, according to this
blessed admonition of our Savior.

Now touching afflictions and troubles against the Church more immediately, we
read ver. 9, 10. The^ (says our Savior) they shall deliver you to be
afflicted: to wit, in course of pretended justice before the Magistrate: as it
is by the other Eua^gelists, Mark and Luke, expressed in these words, They shall
bring you before Kings and Rulers for my names sake. Where also these diverse
kinds of afflictions are mentioned, scourging, imprisoning, and killing of
some. Yet our Savior would not have his disciples danted, nor any christian,
for all this. And to this purpose, he does add in the same Evangelists, most
gracious promises, to the animating of the^ and us. For whereas, in such
extremities, we are usually ready to discourage our selves, while every poor
christian is apt to think thus with himself; This was the estate of poor
christians in the 10. persec^tions under the heathen Emperors, and since that,
under the c^uell Pope,: and in late days among our selves in the reign of
Queen Mary: as the Acts and Monuments of the Church do perfitly show* me
promerimnate. apologethenat.
Alas what shall I do? I shall be carried before great learned men: before
great men of power and authority, having both the prison, and the whip, and the
sword at their commandment: before men of stern and sower countenances: before
men of taunting and reuiling spirits: before men of ireful and cruel
affections, etc. what shall I say? how shall I behave my self, so that I may not
dishonor the glorious and holy profession of the name of christ, nor give the
wicked any just occasion to make a scorn of my self and the blessed gospel,
etc? Behold our Savior gives us his gracious promise to this effect. Let us
cheerfully dispose our selves to answer as wisely, reverently and meekly, as we
can: and the Lord himself will be so assistant by his holy spirit, to guide
both our hearts and our tongs, that he will glorify himself by us, in
conuicting the adversaries of the truth, by that testimony which he shall give
unto it: either to move the^ to repentance, and to win the^ to the gospel: or
else to leave them without all excuse, when they shall see us ready (if they will
so far press us) to seal our profession of the truth with our blood. And
therefore, says our Savior to this effect, as we read in Mark and Luke, See
ye give place to no distrustful, or distracting thoughts or doubts, (for so
does the word which he uses signify) neither be ye careful to make any
eloquent and exquisite apologies or defenses: but go ye even simply and plainly
to work, and I will be with you, giving you such a spirit and such wisdom, as
your adversaries shall not be able to resist. We must not then be careless,
neither distrustfully careful. We may well encourage our selves by the word of
our Savior, as Moses did by looking up to the invisible God: against all the
fierce countenances and speeches of me^, and against all their carnal wit. And
to conclude, while we shall consider, what reproaches and cruelties our Sa:
endured himself: and so has not only left behind him the doctrine, but also an
example of incomparable sufferings: Heb. 12.2, 3.
why should we refuse to take such part as our Lo: and M. did?

Now thirdly, for encouragement against evil examples, the words of our
Savior are plain, ver. 10. and 12. of Mat. And Mark. chapter 13.12. The brother
shall deliver the brother to death, and the father the son, and the children
shall rise against their parents, and shall cause the^ to die. And Luke 21.16.
Yea, ye shall be betrayed of your parents and of your brethren, and kinsme^, and
friends, and some of you shall they put to death. These te^tatios indeed are
very great, as we may easily conceive, if we earnestly consider of the^, but a
little while. For when neither bond of nature nor religion ca^ hold the^ in
conscience of duty, Belief in God the Sone, who sits at the right hand of
God the Father almighty.
but they will fall from that grace, and sweet fellowship, which they seemed
to be entered into, and become persecutors of their own kinsemen, and of good
Christian brethren: these must needs be accounted very heavy and uncomfortable
spectacles, to the discouragement of our feeble minds, if we do not hearten
our selves against them. Neither is it a small stumbling block to see any
(though not fallen to be persecutors) yet to be declining from the truth, and
to be lukewarm, yea even ca-cold, both touching the zeal of Gods glory,
wherewith they seemed so be inflamed before, and also touching the love of the
brethren, whom they made show to have loved, in that they were beneficial unto
them: so that now they may be scared to be no better then a pray to the devil,
to be easily carried away, to this or that falsehood of religion.

But dear brethren, how many soever we see, to do thus: far be it from us,
to be moved by either sort of such examples, to wax weary of well doing. No,
no, rather so much the more, let the glory of God, be more dear and precious
unto us: and every faithful brother, and sister in our Lord Jesus Christ, let
them be more heartily loved, tendered and cherished among us. The which, if we
shall do: then, as there is no doubt, but the Lord our God will for his part make
precious reckoning of us: so will he also for the love he bears us in his Son,
in such sort either restrain and moderate the rage of the wicked, or
strengthen us in patience, that we shall always find our most safe and blessed
protection, under the faithful and constant profession, and practice, of his
only true and holy religion and worship. They shall not kill all, but some of
you, says our Savior.

Wherefore, let us not in any wise, give place to any fearful thoughts,
howsoever they shall assalt us, so as we should say to our selves, by the
suggestion of the devil to our own discomfort. O what shall we do? how shall
we now escape? The wicked are mightily increased. The zealous godly are few. If
we deal not very warily, and frame our selves to be like to them, and to seek
favor with the^, there shall be no abiding for us. Nay rather, let us assure
our selves, that the less the slock of the Lord is, the more vigilant will he
be to defend it, or if he suffer any to fall into the hands of the wicked: the
more rigorous they shall be in oppressing and tormenting, the more gracious and
merciful will he be, in upholding, strengthening, and comforting, as the true
church of God has had experience, from time to time. Let us not therefore be
discouraged, through any fear. Not a hair of your head shall perish (says our
Savior) Luk: 21.18. That is, it shall not perish without the providence of
God, and further then he shall think good to permit. And therefore much less
shall our lives, and whole bodies perish, otherwise then he shall dispose of
them. Wherefore (I say again) as our Sa: exhorts, let us be of good comfort,
and arm our selves with invincible patience, that so we may most safely
retain and hold the possession of our souls. For this is the only sure
possession of them, to be prepared to all affliction for the Lords cause.

But that which may yet more effectually encourage and confirm us, to be of
good comfort, and constant in the Lord against all discouragement, it is the
most gracious promise o four Sa: that if we continue to the end, to wit, of
this short life that we are here to live, yea even of that short time of
affliction which shall betide us, we shall be saved. That is, we shall not only
be freed from all trouble, but also set in a most happy estate, eternally in
heaven, with all the Saints, which have from the beginning, passed through many
afflictions, into the same kingdom. Neither is it a small encouragement, that
God will so prosper his own work, in the hand of his servants, that no
resistances of the wicked shall be able to hinder it so, but it shall take that
good effect, whereunto he has appointed it. For as our Savior says, This
Gospel of the kingdom, shall be preached through the whole world. For a
witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come.

Our Savior had said before, after mention made of wars, that the end is not
yet; that is, the destructon of Jerusalem, and the Temple: and therefore much
less the end of the world. But here he says, that after the Preaching of the
Gospel to all nations, then should the end come: to wit: not only of
Jerusalem first in the time thereof, Belief in God the Son, who shall come
from heaven to judge both the qu^cke and the dead.
which was not till the Apostles were dispersed into all quarters, as one may
say, and had Preached the Gospel far and near: but also the end of the
word shall be then, when God has fulfilled the course of the Gospel, and
caused it to be preached in all places, wheresoever he has any people, till
he has gathered into his Church, the whole number of his elect, by the voice
of his Gospel.

Thus much of the first part of the answer of our Savior, more generally,
both concerning the time of the destruction of Jerusalem, and also of the end
of the world: not definitely determining the space of time, either of the one
or of the other: but only thus far, that there should first be great and
many troubles, before the destruction of Jerusalem should come: and then
again, after that, many like great troubles before the world should end. Like
as the Apostle prophesied afterward concerning the day of the Lord, and the
last judgment, that there should come a departure first, and that Antichrist
should be revealed. And John, in the Revelation: that the Churches of Christ
should be grievously afflicted before that time.

And herein, we have been the more large, for the more full and plain
opening, and for the better applying of these most grave and weighty things to
our manifold use and comfort. God grant that we may joyfully entertain this
most holy doctrine of our Savior, concerning affliction, that so we may the
more joyfully endure the afflictions themselves (if need shall so require) as
it becomes all those, that do truly profess his name, and would be
acknowledged of him, to be in the number of his true Disciples and inheritors
of his heavenly kingdom.

We will be henceforth as brief as we can in the rest: and namely in that
which follows, more properly belonging to the destruction of Jerusalem, from
the 15. verse of our text unto the 23. verse. Chiefly observing such things, as
may best fit our present purpose, touching the time of the last judgment. And
to this end, let us hear the words of our Savior.



The Evangelist Matthewe continues the speech of our Savior, in these words.

15. When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by
Daniel the Prophet, standing in the holy place (let him that reads consider
it.)

16. Then let them which be in Judea, fly into the mountains.

17. Let him which is on the house top, not come down to fetch any thing out
of his house.

18. And he that is in the field, let him not return back to fetch his
clothes.

19. And woe shall be to them which be with child, and to them which give
suck in those days,

20. But pray that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath day.

21. For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not from the beginning of
the world till this time, nor shall be.

22. And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved:
but for the elects sake those days shall be shortened.

Explication First, our Savior fore-sheweth the danger. 2. He gives counsel.
3. He gives a reason of the same his c^unsell. 4. He comfort the faithful
against the extremity of the evil.
In these word, which are a portion of the second part of the answer of our
Savior, after he has confirmed his prophetical menace against Jerusalem and
the Temple thereof, from that former prophecy which he had revealed to Daniel
by his holy Angel, chap: 9.27. And therewithal, having admonished all
believing Jews, upon the beginning of the evil, advisedly to regard the truth
of that prophecy saying. Let him that reads, consider it, to wit, as being
then to take the full effect. Our Savior does there upon furthermore,
earnestly advise and charge all such as should have any opportunity to escape,
with all expedition to fly from the danger the which should (as he gives them
to understand) grow otherwise inevitable, and not possibly to be avoided of
them.

And this earnest advise, and counsel, our Savior gives first to those, that
had their dwelling places further distant from Jerusalem, which might so much
the sooner epsy the danger approaching. And secondly, he gives the same
advise to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, whosoever of them in the time of the
danger growing near, should be about any business in the fields, or on the
tops of their houses, or turrets, from whence they might peradventure epsy
their enemy a far off marching toward them, as we read of the watchman
that stood in the tower in Izrael, 2. King, 9.17.18.20.

And touching, those that either could not co^modiously flee (such as should be
then great with child, or that had children hanging on the breasts) or that
would not regard his admonition to flee, though they might more easily do it:
he shows that the calamity of all such, should be exceeding great. From the
consideration and certain knowledge whereof, our Sa: (moved with great
co^miseration toward those that were his) gives them this holy counsel, that
they should pray to God, that though it must needs be, that Jerusalem should be
woefully besiedged, and at the last destroyed, because of the sins of the wicked
Jews: yet that the beginning of it might not be in the winter: or though in
the summer, yet not on the Sabbath, specially at such solemn times, as they
should resort to Jerusalem with a mind to celebrate any of the principal
feasts of the Lord, for many days together: such as were the Passover; the
feast of weeks, and the feast of Tabernacles, Exodus: 23. Deuteronomy: 16. For these
seasons would be a hinderance to the expedition of their escape: and then
should they be more generally surprised, and enclosed, by the destroying army.

The reason of this his careful and manifold admonition, our Savior renders
in the 22. v. for that the tribulation should be greater to those that should
be enclosed in the siege, then ever fell upon that city from the beginning of
the world: though before it was subdued by the king of Babel, and the people
carried captives into Babylon. For they returned again. Yea because it should
be more doleful then the siege of Samaria, though the city was brought into
very great distress. 2. king: 6.25. For they of Samaria had a gracious
deliverance, as appears in the next chap: Which Jerusalem (as our Sa: gives
his Disciples to understand) should by no means obtain. Only he gives this
comfort, that albeit the days of the siege should continue long, by reason of
the stout resistance of the people; and thereby also an exceeding great
slaughter should fall upon them, according to their own execration upon
themselves and children, concerning the blood of Christ, whom they persecuted
to the death as was declared upon the words of our Sa: to the women that wept
for him, when he went to be crucified: yet lest all should perish, to wit, with
the sword of the enemy: therefore says our Sa: for the elects sake, to whom
belonged eternal salvation, he would shorten the days of the siege, by putting
an end to the wilfulnes of the people in standing out against it, and so at the
last, grant a temporal deliverance to some among the rest: according to the
usual course of Gods mercy, in sparing the wicked, lest his own should be
altogether cut off, from this life, with them; as Gen, 18.23.24. and chapter 19.22.
and 2. Pet. 2.9 Ier: 5.1. And so, though eleven hundredth thousand were slain,
yet the lives of nintie thousand were spared, such as were taken prisoners,
beside many other, as Josephus the Jew writes. The which exceeding great
number of the slain, as also of the remnant preserved alive, may cause us to
conceive, that for want of prayer against this evil, it fell upon the city,
in the time that the people of the land were gathered together in it.

Now concerning the words of Daniel the prophet alleged by our Savior,
speaking of the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place: Read for
the proof of this interpretation, the words of our Sa: alleged by S. Luke,
ch: 23. v. 20, etc.and chapter 19 43. they were words describing the Roman Army,
which were to come into the holy land; and to compass the holy city, yea to
come into it, and to the holy Temple, to leave it desolate according to the
decree of God for the sins of the people, chiefly for putting our Savior to
death. So that though they were his just instruments, to take vengeance of a
wicked people, yet they were in themselves, no better then an abominable rout
of Idolaters, whom God in that respect abhorred, howsoever he used these now,
and so has often used such kind of abominable people, for the rod of his
anger, to visit the sins and rebellions of his own disobedient and
licentious people. For so before this time, he used the wicked King of Ashur,
to be a scourge to Israel, and after that, the King of Babel, to take vengeance
of Judah, and to lead the people away to be in captivity to him.

Thus, briefly passing over these words, as was promised, the use whereof (in
regard of the time of our Saviors coming to judgment at the end of the
world) may well be this: that the fulfilling of this prophecy against
Jerusalem, being famously come to pass, according to the word of our Savior,
may and ought justly to confirm cur faith, in the assured expectation both of
the ending of the world, (in such manner as he does likewise foreshewe in the
latter part of his answer) and also that he himself, will accordingly come to
judgment, at the same instant, when the world shall be at an end.

Yea and in the mean while, let us from that destruction, learn how vain a
thing it is for any to trust in the holiness, or strength of any place of
defense, when as they themselves be unholy, and thereby have betrayed and
weakened all their strength.

And let us likewise learn by their example, to take heed how we provoke God
to wrath against us, by the contempt of that grace of Christ and his Gospel,
which he offers unto us.

Now let us proceed. How follows it in the text of the Evangelist Saint
Matthew, from the 23. verse of this his 24. chap:



Then says our Savior) if any shall say unto ye, Lo here is Christ, or
there, believe it not.

A second c^unsell or admonition of our Savior, and the reason of it,
amplified also by a renewed exhortation, and the reason thereof.
For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and they shall show
great signs and wonders so that if it were possible, they should deceive the
very elect.

Behold I have told ye before.

Wherefore if they shall say unto ye, Behold he is in the desert, go not
forth: Behold, he is in secret places, believe it not.

For as the lightening comes out of the East, and shines into the West, so
shall also the coming of the Son of man be.

For wheresoever a dead carcass is, thither will the Eagles resort.

Explication.
The former part of the answer of our Savior, does so properly belong to the
destruction of Jerusalem, that it cannot be transferred and applied to the day
of the last judgment. For beside that Jerusalem is expressly mentioned: that
which is said for the description of the calamity thereof, can in no wise
agree to that judgment which our Savior shall execute at the end of the
world. For whether should any fly at that instant, from the presence of the
Lord? And how should that be less woeful to the barren, then to the wicked
that are childbearing, and such as give suck? And as for godly women, it
shall be to all of them, as well childbearing, as other, a day of singular
comfort and rejoicing.

Moreover, that day shall be so sudden, that there shall be no time of flight,
no not for those that are swiftest of foot, no though they had the wings of
the Eagle or Hawke.

The words now rehearsed, do indeed belong to the former particular prophecy
of the destruction of Jerusalem, and were fulfilled in part, at that time:
according to that which was observed before, concerning the arising of false
Christ's, and false Prophets, as may also be further seen in the history of
Josephus, which was then pointed unto. But though Josephus had said little or
much, or nothing at all: the word of our Savior himself, is, and may justly
be a sufficient ground and warrant unto us, that all was fulfilled which he
foretold: whether in this place, or ch: 24, 38. and Luke ch: 19.43.44, and ch:
21. verse 20.24.

Thus, I say, we are indeed, to refer these words, to the description of
the calamity of Jerusalem, at the destruction thereof, and to show that all
succors for relief and deliverance should be expected in vain, so that
whosoever should, or did take upon him, any courage to be their deliverer, as
it were under a pretense of being a Christ, or deliverer unto them: should
enterprise all in vain. Nevertheless, we may therewithal, well understand
these words, as being a transition from the description of the calamity of
Jerusalem at the time of the siege thereof, to the description of the state of
the world, yea even of the visible Church, such as it should be after the
destruction of Jerusalem: specially in the times which should more and more
nearely approach to the last end of the world, by that more quick siege and
battery which the Lord himself will lay against it, and wherewith he will
surprise it infinitely above that which Vespasian and Titus effected against
Jerusalem. For so do the words of our Savior, give to understand.

First in that he says of the false Christ's, and false Prophets, that they
should show great signs and wonders, so that if it were possible, they should
deceive the very elect. For this was much more fulfilled, after the destruction
of Jerusalem to this day, then it was before: insomuch as though many great
things were attempted then, for the deliverance of the people, It is a
wondeeful thing to see how the Pope has prevailed to set up himself above the
Kings and Princes of the earth: what religious buildings have bin built for the
advancement of Popery? what revenues? that a (...) ^^t^de of ord^^^? that
C^u^^^^? what wr^t^^g^^ ^^ca h^^ (...) and ^age volu^^^^ printed, and (...)
against the truth, under pretense of the defense of it, etc. All these a^e
dangerous and m^gh^ie tentations to such as take not diligent heed against
them.
and many encouragements given, as if the Romans should not prevail against
them, etc. Yet nothing took so great effect, as the false Christ's and false
Prophets of Turkey and Rome have done, who have by their deceites wonderfully
prevailed with multitudes to draw them away, either from the truth of the true
Christ's Person, or of his doctrine: Yea even from the truth of both: and that
also by lying signs and wonders, as the Apostle interprets these words of
our Savior. 2. These. 2 9 10.11.

And secondly, it may be perceived by those words of our Savior, concerning
the manner of his coming, to wit, in that it should be spiritually, as it were
upon the wings of the Gospel, preached to all nations, as well af^^r the
destruction of Jerusalem, even to the end of the world, as before, from the
time shortly ensuing the ascension of our Savior up into heaven: in tha^ ^he
compares his coming to the lightening which coming out of the East, shines
into the West: as it is applied Luk, 17.20.21.22.23.24. Like as also his
coming shall be bodily to the sight and view of all people, in the clouds of
the air, descending from the highest heaven, when he shall come to judge the
world, as it is in the text of Matthewe.

The use of which doctrine of our Savior, as it was double, unto the believing
Jews, before the destruction of Jerusalem, partly for direction, and partly
for consolation and comfort: Read also Luk 17.23.24. etc. to the end of the
ch: where he plainly extends the words of our Savior to the end of the world.
so it may well be, and it is unto all true be^^euing Christians, to the end of
the world, and even in regard of the end it self. For instruction thus:
first, for that, insomuch as our Savior has sufficiently confirmed himself
to be true Messiah, and his doctrine to be the only true doctrine of
salvation, by those miracles which he wrought, first by himself among the
Jews, and afterward by his holy Apostles, both among Jews and Gentiles: that
therefore we are not to be drawn away from him, or from his doctrine, under
pretense of any other miraculous workings whatsoever. Secondly, this doctrine
of our Savior, serves for our instruction against all secret and heretical
inticements of false Prophets and Heretics, whose manner is usual among many
of them, to draw Disciples away from the public profession of the Gospel,
even in the times of the liberty thereof, to secret corners, as if they were a
company, more holy then the rest, and had a more perfect doctrine. Whereof we
may take the Family of Love, for one chief example among the rest. But says
our Savior, though they say, behold, Christ is in secret places, believe it
not. Our Savior will have his Doctrine publicly Preached and professed, under
good Christian Princes: and he will have it publicly professed upon all just
occasions under Idolaters and Tyrannous Princes, though they will not suffer
the Gospel so long, as they can hinder it to be publicly Preached. He cannot
like, that it should be smothered in corners. It shall, as he says, break
forth like lightening: that is, it shall be published openly and in the public
view of the world: and accordingly, he will have it to be publicly embraced
and professed.

Thirdly, the Doctrine of our Savior, in this part of his answer to his
Disciples, serves to teach us now, as well as it did to teach the believing
Jews before the destruction of Jerusalem, that as they were not to tie
themselves to Jerusalem, and to stay their flight from it, as if then Christ
might no where else be found: so neither are we, to tie our faith to any
place, as many do their faith to the Church of Rome, but to resort thither,
and to stay there, where Christ is truly Preached, as well in one place, as in
another: wheresoever, and whether soever the Lord shall call us. And to this
purpose, he uses the prouerbiall speech, Wheresoever the dead carkesse is,
thither will the Eagles resort; Albeit, Luke, 17.37. it seems that our
Savior used the same prouerbiall speech, at some other time in way of a
promise, that our Savior would gather all his elect at the last day into his
heavenly kingdom, where he himself should be.

Thus, the Doctrine of our Savior serves for our instruction. And for
comfort, it is likewise very notable, in that he assures us, that none of the
elect of God shall be deceived by any false Christ's, or false Prophets, though
their coming be never so deceitful, and strong to delude the wicked. Not that
they have any such wisdom of themselves, that they can thereby discern their
spiritual craft, or any such strength, that they should in their own might
withstand their delusions: but because God, who has elected them, will also
endue them both with wisdom, and also with power from above, so as his grace
shall be sufficient to preserve them. According to that of the Apostle Saint
Paul, 2. These. 2. verses 13.14.15.16.17. We ought to give thanks to God for
you brethren, etc.

These things thus briefly considered, according to promise, let us henceforth
have to that which follows: which is, as was said, the third part of the
answer of our Savior, and does particularly concern the time of his last
judgment, which shall be (as he further declares) at the end of the world.
Yet so, as we shall again perceive, as was said in the beginning, that some
part of the speech, does more specially concern the calamity and destruction
of Jerusalem, then the end of the world: as we shall easily perceive, when we
come unto them.

This last part of the answer of our Savior, concerning the end of the
world, which is the time of the last judgment: it comprehends therewithal,
both the signs of his coming, and also the place from whence and whether he
will come. Likewise the manner of his coming, and the persons whom he will
judge: with diverse other points which were propounded in the beginning of our
inquiry into this place.

But let us proceed by degrees. And first concerning the time when, secondly
the signs of his coming; and thirdly, the place from whence and whether he
shall come: fourthly, the manner of his coming, and therewithal the persons
whom he will judge when he shall come. For these four points are somewhat more
nearely lincked together.

What are the words of our Savior:



It follows thus, from the 29 verse unto the 32.

29. And immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the Sun be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall
from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken.

30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then
shall all the kindreds of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man
come in the clouds of heaven, with power, and great glory.

31. And he shall send his Angels, with the great sound of a trumpet, and they
shall gather together his elect, from the four winds, and from the one end of
the heaven to the other.

These words (as we may evidently perceive) do properly belong to the second
coming of our Savior, to execute his last judgment: and therefore, they are
likewise, more properly belonging to that Article of our faith, which we do
now enquire of. Nevertheless, the former speech was not to be neglected of us,
seeing our Savior himself, thought good to speak of the destruction of
Jerusalem, as of a good inducement, or preparatiue, to the more reverend and
profitable consideration of this.

And indeed, what judgment of God, might so fitly be a representation, or as a
warning piece, to stir us up, to the due expectation of it? The city of
Jerusalem, and the Temple thereof, were by Gods special ordinance, and
appointment, singularly holy unto him, and of great account, even for his own
name, and mercies sake: and so were the people also for many ages of ancient
time, a peculiar people unto him, and chiefly beloved of him. And yet all that
could not hinder the due course of Gods vengeance, after that the
bountifulness of his mercy, and long suffering, was most notoriously abused
by them. It was in vain for the Disciples, to stand upon the goodlines and
strength of the building, or any such thing, to dissuade, or pity the
destruction thereof. So likewise, whatsoever may be said, concerning the
beauty of the heavens, though they be honored by the name of his throne: the
fruitefulnesse of the earth, which is called his foote-stoole, the stately
buildinges that are built upon it, by the ministry of man, the pleasant
orchyardes and gardens, the rich furniture of houses, the beautiful plate and
Jewels which are the delights of men, all shall be in vain, and of no force
with God, to stay that universal judgment, which he has, for the sins of
the world (when once they shall be full ripe) determined to bring upon it,
moreover and beside his particular judgments, wherewith he will every day
visit the earth in the mean while. Wherefore also let nothing be able to
hinder our hearts from a dutiful attention toward the doctrine, which our
Savior vouchsafes to deliver unto us, in this behalf.

And first; concerning the time, of this last and greatest judgment of all
other: and therewithal, concerning the signs of it: our Savior does first,
more generally refer us to the tribulations before described concerning
Jerusalem: or rather to the tribulations described before that, in the first
part of the answer of our Savior, which (as was said) treats of the common
troubles, both of the world, and also of the Church, which should not only go
before the destruction of Jerusalem, but also follow after, even to the near
approaching of the last judgment of our Savior. And then more particularly
(according as he had told his Disciples, that beside those before expressed
signs, they should have no other special sign of the calamity to come upon
Jerusalem, but the compassing of the city by the Roman Army) so he does
proportionably tell his Disciples, or rather us by speaking to them (seeing
upon us are come the days of the more near approaching of the end of the
world) that there shall be noe other sign, more particular then those which
he has already mentioned: until he shall by his very coming declare
really and indeed that the end it self is come. So that then, beside the
general signs, going before the end of the world, answerable to those which
went before the destruction of Jerusalem) we have here in the words of our
present text, a description of those signs, which shall more immediately go
before the coming of our Savior, and then of the coming of our Savior
himself, at the very end of the world, from whence and whether he will come:
together with the manner of his coming, and the persons whom he will judge,
who also are described by the effects which his coming shall have in their
hearts, though to a contrary end and purpose; in diverse of them, as we
shall observe. Let us therefore weigh these things in order.

And first, concerning the time of the last judgment, our Savior Christ
says, that it shall be immediately after the tribulations before expressed.
The which words, we must either understand of the common troubles generally
set down in the first part of the answer of our Savior, (they being as well
forerunners of the end of the world, as of the destruction of Jerusalem) or
else we must understand this word immediately to be spoken, not so much in
respect of our computation of time, as in regard of the estimation of God, with
whom a thousand years is but as one day, as the Apostle Peter teaches 2. Ep:
3.8. But seeing our Savior speaks familiarly, to inform his church, rather
then to disclose the unsearchable mind of God: therefore we may justly
understand it in the first sense.

Nevertheless, this being yielded: there arises a further question,
concerning the darkening of the Sun, whether our Savior, does in these
words, speak properly, and in the natural sense, or tropologically and in a
borrowed phrase or speech. To the which we answer, that it is true indeed,
that the Lord by his holy Prophets, has used these very same speeches
metaphorically, to signify great troubles, and public alterations of states
and kingdoms in the world: as Ezekiel, 32:7, 8. to express that great distress
which he would bring upon Egypt, by the King of Babylon: when I shall put thee
out, I will cover the heaven (says the Lord) and make the Stars thereof
dark: I will cover the Sun with a cloud, and the Moon shall loose her
light. All the lights of heaven I make dark for thee, and bring darkness upon
the land, says the Lord God: I will also trouble the hearts of many people.
And Isai: 13.9.10. the same borrowed speeches, are used to describe the
fearful destruction of Babylon, by the Medes and Persians. Behold the day of
the Lord comes cruel, with wrath, and fierce anger, to lay the land wast: and
he shall destroy the sinners out of it. For the Stars of heaven, and the
Planets thereof, shall not give their light: the Son shall be darkened in his
going forth, the Moon shall not cause her light to shine.

And thus it is said Amos. 5.18. woe unto you (he speaks to the wicked) that
desire the day of the Lord, to wit, of his mercy: what have ye to do with it?
the day of the Lord, that is of his v^sitation upon sinners, is darkness and
not light. As if a man did floe from a lion, and a bear met him, etc. And ver.
20. shall not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light? even darkness and
no light in it? Likewise Joel: ch: 2.2. And in the same ch: v. 3^, 31, the same
speeches, with a further allusion to some former strange works of God, are used
to note the strange effects which should follow upon the first coming of our
Savior into the world, and in the times succeeding, by the Preaching of his
Gospel. I will show wonders in the heavens, and in the earth (says the Lord)
blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The Sun shall be turned into darkness,
and the Moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord do
come. Thus I say, these kind of speeches (as we see) are used to note strange
things and alterations metaphorically, Read eccles. cha: 5.16, and chapter 12.2.
And what could more significatly express the same? Nevertheless, this lets
not, why we may not understand our Savior in these words, not only to
understand strange events, by a figurative phrase of speech: but also the very
accomplishment of the things themselves, in their proper kinds immediately
before his coming to judgment: like as the Sun was darkened indeed, in the
time of the crucifying of our Savior by the space of three hours. And so does
that place in Joel, seem to give to understand. For it is to be extended, not
only to the first coming of our Savior, but also to his second. At which
time we know that our Savior shall come in flaming fire in deed. 2 Thessalonians.
1.8. and 2. Pet. 3 verses, 10 and 12. That the heavens shall pass away with a
noise, and be dissolved by fire, etc. So then, the meaning of our Savior, may
well be, that (beside the great and strange troubles which shall be even to the
end, many times falling out so strangely, as heaven and earth should go
together, as one would say) the strange things here mentioned, should really
and in deed come to pass. And so does S. Luke report this part of the speech
of our Savior, that not only there should be really signs in the Sun, and
in the Moon, and in the Stars, and that the Sea and waters should roar: but
also, that as effects from the same signs, present and sudden before their
eyes, The hearts of men should fail them for fear. For then (says our
Savior) there shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the
Stars, and upon the earth trouble among the nations, with perplexity (not
knowing what to do for want of counsel, en aporia) the sea and the waters
shall roar. And men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for looking after
those things, which shall come on the world: for the powers of heaven shall be
shaken. Luke chap. 21.25.26. And then (as it follows in the next verse) shall
they see the Son of man come in a cloud, with power and great glory. The
which words reported by S. Luke, may well serve to clear those which are
recorded by S. Matthew, where our Savior says that then, to wit, at the end
of the world, The sign of the Son of man shall appear in heaven, so that
all the kindreds of the earth shall mourn: Yea, and that with deep mourning,
beating their breasts, (Copsontas) co^cutientur.
as the Greek word imports. For it can be no small or base sign, that can
work this mighty and rare effect upon the earth. The sign of the Cross, as
some would understand these words, or the representation of those wounds which
were made in his flesh upon the Cross (they being signs of his humiliation
and abasement, and not of his glory) they are not fit to set forth so great a
Majesty, as our Savior will no doubt come withal: as it follows also in
the same text of Matthew thus, and they shall see the Son of man (even him
whom the wicked had before despised) come in the clouds of heaven with power
and great glory. So then the sign of the Son of man, seems to be nothing
else, but the evident declaration of his coming, in such sort, as his divine
Majesty cannot but be discerned of all, to be in the present view, without
any further the least delay. The sign therefore of the coming of our Savior,
may not unfitly be taken for the glorious, and aspectable coming it self,
like as in like phrase of speech, Circumcision is called the sign of
Circumcision, because it was appointed of God to be a sensible declaration of
his special love and favor, toward his people. Or, as our Savior speaks of
the sign of the Prophet Jonas, when he tells the unbelieving Jews, who
despised many signs, that they should have no other sign, but the sign of
the Prophet Jonas: that is to say, the accomplishment of that, which was in him
prefigured, concerning his burial and resurrection, As though he should have
said, the thing it self accomplished, shall be a sufficient and full sign,
to those that will look upon it, and observe it. And thus the coming of our
Savior, at the last day, (Epiphaneia) Illustris apparitio.
is called his evident and bright appearance, signified by the Greek word
Epiphancia, applied thereunto. 2. Thessalonians, 2.8. And 1. Timothy. 6.14.
Likewise 2. Timothy, 4 1. and verse, 8. And Titus, 2.13. In which sense also,
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, is said to be a clear revealing of him
in his glory, at that day: as we read Luke, 17.30. The Son of man shall be
then revealed (apocaluptetai.) And 1. Corinthians, 1.7. waiting for the
revelation, (apocalupsin), of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And 2. Thessalonians, 1.7. When the Lord Jesus shall show himself from
heaven (en te apocalupsei tou Curion Iesou. Likewise 1. Peter, 1.7. And
chapter, 4.13. Likewise under another Greek word (phanerothe) Colossians, 3.
verse, 4. When Christ who is our life shall appear or be made manifest. And 1.
Pet: 5. verse 4. Phanerothentos tou archipoimenos. When the chief shepherd
shall appear. And 1. John 3.2. We know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him: for we shall see him as he is. And thus the sign of the Son of
man, may well be interpreted, by that which follows in our text of the
Evangelist, where our Savior adds these words, as an explication of the
former, All the kindreds of the earth, shall see the Son of man come in the
clouds of heaven, with power and great glory. And he shall send his Angel
with the great sound of a trumpet, etc. Now verily, there can be no more meet
signs of the appeara^ce of the glorious Judge of the world then these, wherein
we are the rather to rest, because we cannot bend our thoughts to find out
any other, but we shall be left at uncertain, and cannot but wander without all
warrant or ground, we know not whither. Let us therefore rest in that which our
Savior himself has revealed, or else let us willingly suspend our judgment,
till the time be come, when the performance it self, shall declare, what other
sign it is, which he means.

ANd thus having spoken of the time of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ to
judgment: and of the signs thereof, both former, and latter, and last of all,
as our Savior himself has foretold and described them: it is therewithal
evident, both from whence, and also whither our Savior shall come to execute
his judgment: to wit, from the highest heaven, into the inferior heaven, next
unto us here on earth, according to that, Act: 1.11. Philip: 3.20. 1. These.
1.10. and cha: 4.16. The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shoute,
(or as the Greek words En celeusmati, signify, with a ready yielding of all
heavenly creatures thereunto, as with one entire endeavor and consent) and with
the voice of the Archangell, and with the Trumpet of God.

And it is also from the same words of our Savior, in the text of the
Evangelist Matthew, manifest, in what manner our Savior shall come to execute
his last judgment: to wit, in a most mighty and glorious manner, the
thousands of his Angels attending upon him: that is, he shall come in most
divine manner, as we shall have occasion to consider again, cha: 25.31. In
which respect, our Savior calls that glory in which the Son of man shall
come, the glory of his Father, chap: 16.27. of the same our Evangelist.

Moreover, it is evident from the same our Text, who they are, whom our Savior
shall come to judge: that is to say, All the kindreds of the earth, not only
the Tribes of Israel, who had the law given them, but also all other kindreds
and people, who have sinned without the law, as the Apostle teaches, Rom: 2.
ver. 12.16. And also all that sin against the Gospel. The persons to be
judged at this general and most fearful Assizes, are described by that
effect, which the most mighty and glorious manner of the appearing of this
great and most high judge shall work in their hearts: namely, that they shall
mourn with a most doleful and deep mourning, as was observed in a word
before: and as may further appear, by that which our Savior spoke concerning
the calamity of Jerusalem, in the destruction thereof, Luke 23.30. compared
with Revel: 6.15.16.17. when the Kings and all sorts of men shall wish in their
hearts, that the mountains and rocks would fall upon them, and hide them from
the presence of him that sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb, Because (as S. John says) The great day of his wrath is come, and who
can stand? And no marvel, seeing his coming shall be most terrible, to all such
as have evil consciences, and are guilty to themselves of contempt and
rebellion against this most high Prince and just judge of all: yea no doubt,
the very godly and believing Christians, shall at that day of this fearful
assummons, be at the first stricken with a very great and reverend fear, so
that as the Apostle Peter admonishes, 2. cp. 3.11.12. it behooves all of us,
to be very careful, that we may be found in holy conversation and godliness,
and that also with all expedition and watchfulnes: seeing the heavens shall
pass away in a fearful manner, and be dissolved with fire, etc. According is
we read, 2. Thessalon: 1.8. The which, whosoever shall do, though they do
fear, yet they shall be so comforted against the suddenness and extremity of
their fear, that they shall recover themselves out of it, and find that to be
a day of most sweet consolation to them for ever, which shall be a day of the
beginning of the most woeful, both terror and torment, of all the wicked and
ungodly. And therefore it is of purpose added by our Savior, in this Text of
S. Matthewe, that by the ministry of the holy Angels, All the elect shall be
gathered together, to be partakers of their everlasting salvation, with our
Savior in heaven: when as all the rest shall be left to eternal destruction in
hell: according to those parables of our Savior, which we read in the same
Evangelist, chapt: 13.41.42.43. and in the same verses 49.50. And as we have
further to consider, chapter 25. verses 34.41.46. Our Savior shall also at
this day, judge and condemn the Devil, and all his wicked Angels, as we are
from that place of the 41. verse of the 25. of Matthew to observe.

But for the comfort of the godly, and to cheer up their hearts, Saint Luke
reports other words of our Savior, which we may not here omit, insomuch
as we read, chapt: 21.28. that our Savior spoke thus also for the consolation
of the godly. When these things begin to come to pass, then look ye up,
and lift up your heads: for your Redemption draws near, yea even our full
Redemption, as well of body, as of soul: according as the Apostle Paul
interprets the words of our Savior. Rom: 8.23.

THese things thus considered, from the former words of our Text: Let us now
go forward, to that which follows in the Evangelist, from the beginning of
the 32. verse, to the end of the 41. For these words also, do concern the
description of the time of the same his last coming, so far as is meet for
us to know, and also of the manner of it, together with some intermixed speech
concerning the destruction of Jerusalem.



Now (says our Savior) learn ye a parable from the fig tree, when her
bough is yet tender, and it brings forth leaves, ye know that summer is
near.

33. So likewise, when ye see all these things, know ye that it is near,
even at the doors: that is to say, the time of the coming of our Savior: or,
he himself: or as it may be supplied from S. Luke, his Kingdom is very near.

3^. Verily I say unto you, this generation shall not pass, till all these
things be done.

35. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.

36. But of that day and hour, knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven,
but my Father only.

37. But as the days of Noah were, so likewise shall the coming of the Son
of man be.

38. For as in the days before the flood, they did eat and drink, marry,
and give in marriage, unto the day that Noah entered into the Arc.

39. And knew nothing, till the flood came and took them all away: In graeco
centextu paralambanetai assumitur, aphietai relinquitur. Enallage temporis,
ducens quasi in rem praesentem. Sic Piscator.
so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.

40. Then two men shall be in the field, the one shall be received, and the other
shall be refused.

41. Two women shall be grinding at the mill: the one shall be received, the
other shall be refused.

Explication and proof.
In this portion of our Text, our Savior adds that which he thought good to
deliver, concerning the time and manner of his coming to judgment at the end
of the world, so far (as was said) it is meet for us to know: with a certain
recapitulation of all that which he had said before, concerning the signs,
both going before the destruction of Jerusalem, and also the end of the world,
and last judgment thereof: And he does it in this order.

First, our Savior does generally affirm the certainty of either part of
this Prophecy, according to the precursorie signs which he had given thereof:
and that from the similitude of the fig tree: and as S. Luke adds further,
from the similitude of all other trees, chap. 21. verses, 29.30.31. For he
spoke to them a parable (says the Evangelist) saying, Behold the fig tree
and all trees, when they now shoot forth, ye seeing them, know of your own
selves, that Summer is then near. So likewise ye, when ye see these things
come to pass; that is to say, when ye, for your parts, see Jerusalem
destroyed, and all the troubles that I have spoken of before: and when the
Church shall afterward see, the like signs performed, even to the darkening of
the Sun; then our Savior assures those who shall live in those days, that
the end is at hand, and that, as it follows in Luke, The Kingdom of God is
near. The which he says for the comfort of the godly, as the similitude of
the nearnes of Summer, succeeding the spring time, gives to understand. For of
that nature, shall the Kingdom of our Savior be to them: and that shall be
the end of his coming, to put an end to all the hardness of their adversity
and Winter, and to give them the comfort of an everlasting Summer. For
otherwise, we may think that our Savior would have taken his similitude from
the autumn or fall of the leaf, which is a foregoing sign of Winter, and of
the hardness thereof approaching, as it was unto Jerusalem, at the destruction
thereof, and so it shall be to the wicked, at the end of the world. Thus, our
Savior does more generally affirm the certainty of either part of his
prophecy, though chiefly pointing forward to the end of the world: as both
the similitude, and also the application of the same gives plainly to
understand.

And after this, our Savior does more particularly, affirm the certainty of
either of them, severally and apart by themselves. First, concerning the
destruction which was then yet to come upon Jerusalem, in these words, Verily I
say unto you, this generation shall not pass, till all these things be done.
That is to say, those that were living when our Savior spoke this, should live
to see all that he had spoken, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, and
the troubles to go before the same, fulfilled. And therein also, they should
see as it were a type of the state of the world, as it should be even to the
end of it, as touching the kinds of troubles: though not in the particulars,
which could not be, neither have we any reason so to think of the meaning of
our Savior. This is therefore the more particular earnest affirmation of that
part of the prophecy.

The like earnest affirmation of the other part, touching the end of the world
yet to come, is contained in the next words. Heaven and earth shall pass away:
but my words shall not pass away. As though our Savior should have said thus.
Not only shall Jerusalem be destroyed, but also the whole frame of heaven and
earth shall be changed, and so after a sort pass away, as touching their
present state and condition, according to that which was observed before, out
of the 2. Ep of Pet. chapter 3. touching the passing away of the heavens, and their
dissoluing by fire, etc. But my words (says our Savior) shall not pass away,
but they shall take their full effect, without any either reuocation or
changing of the manner of the accomplishment thereof.

This done: our Savior preuenteth an objection, that might be made, from the
curious mind of man, as though our Savior, speaking so much of the end of the
world, and of his coming to judgment, with the manner and certainty of it,
had yet failed in concealing the very time of it: yea, in that he had not so
much as noted the age, wherein it should come to pass, as he had done
concerning the destruction of Jerusalem. Our Savior therefore, cutteth off all
further question, about the particular determination of the time, and faith
thus: But of the day and hour (to wit, when the heavens and the earth should
pass, away, and so this world come to an end) knows no man, no not the
Angels of heaven; no nor (as it is in Mark, the Son himself, chapter 13.32.) but
my Father only.

And this ought fully to satisfy every one that has any drop of modesty in
him, and to restrain us all from any further inquiry. For seeing God the
Father has so reserved the knowledge of this secret to himself, in his most
excellent wisdom and counsel, that he has not disclosed it to his holy
Angels, no nor yet to our Savior himself, in that he was man, and had his
knowledge limited, Belief in God the Son, who sits at the right hand of
God the Father almighty.
yea in that he was Mediator, and so might not, neither would speak or do
things otherwise, or in any other season, then as the Father, who had ordained
him to that office, had appointed and commanded him: according to that we
read, Matthew, chapter 20. verse 23. And John, chapter 12. verses 49, 50. How
therefore may any think it meet, that he should be desirous to know it?
Neither indeed were it good, that any of us should know it. For seeing we are
secure, though it be very uncertain unto us, so as, if we were not from that
consideration, continually stirred up to be watchful: we might easily be taken
of that day at unawares, to our eternal destruction: much more secure should
we be, if we did know it to be many years, or some ages yet to come.

Here therefore at once, is a certain ground, for the refutation of all such,
as either from the former Rabbinicall prophecy under the name of Elias, for
the continuance of the world six thousand years: or from a proportion of the
creation of the world in six days, as if every day should stand for a
thousand, as some would countenance the matter from the words of Saint Peter,
2. Epist. chap. 3. verse 8. or from any conjunction of Planets, to fall out
this or that year, pretending great matters, do go about to determine this
most hidden secret, as touching the day, or hour, or age, wherein it shall be.
For it is most certain, from the express testimony of our Savior, that the
knowledge of the time, is and always shall be as uncertain, even till it
shall come indeed, as it is most certain that it shall come. And touching the
objections to the contrary, Master Perkins in his learned exposition upon the
Creed, according to his accustomed good and godly course, answers well.

This uncertain certainty of it, our Savior does, in the next place, set
forth by a similitude or equal comparison of a like example, betwixt the state
of the people which shall be toward the end of the world, and that which was
before, and at the drowning of the world. For As the days of Noah were (says
our Savior) so likewise shall the coming of the Son of man be. For as the
days before the flood, they did eat and drink, etc: so shall also the
coming of the Son of man be. That is to say, all people toward the end of
the world (a few excepted in comparison of the rest) shall be as secure and
careless, as if no such great reckoning and judgment were toward them, as our
Savior speaks of. By reason whereof, all such shall be taken at unawares, to
their condemnation and destruction, as the other were at that time, as the
history in Genesis shows, and as we read, 1. Pet. 3.19, 20. The people at
that time, regarded not to prevent the day of their visitation, though a time
was set them, if they would not repent. Therefore (that is, because of their
great sins, and security in sinning) the Lord said, My Spirit shall not
always strive with man, because he is but flesh, Genesis 6.3.
and his days shall be a hundredth and twenty years: to wit, before his
destruction, if he will not repent. We regard not to repent, though we are
altogether uncertain, how soon we may be called to our general reckoning and
account. So then, as touching the world, it is all one, whether they have a
time of repentance, or no time limited unto them. In St. Luke, there is also,
(though likely uttered by our Savior, at another time) the example of the
days of Lot, added to this of Noah to the very same purpose, and therefore may
we well make mention of it here.

Likewise (says our Savior, Luke chapter 17. verses 28, 29, 30.) as it was in
the days of Lot: they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they
planted, they built.

But in the day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from
heaven, and destroyed them all.

After these (ensamples) shall it be in the day when the Son of man shall be
revealed.

This uncertainty of the time to our knowledge, though most certain and
exactly determined in the counsel of God: Belief in God the Son, who shall
come from heaven to judge both the quick and the dead.
it is in the last place of the description of the t^me amd manner, declared
from the sudden and contrary effects instanced by two combined examples, as
one may say: the first, of two men in the field working together, the one
received, to wit, into the kingdom of heaven, as Luke 17.17. the other
refused: that is, as one adjudged to everlasting torment. The second example is
of two woman grinding at the mill: the one received, the other refused. And in
the Evangelist Luke, the chapter before alleged, verse 34. there is a third
instance expressed. I tell you (says our Savior) in the night there shall be
two in one bed. the one shall be received, and the other shall be left. And
beside this, there is also this use prescribed from the former examples of the
days of Noah and Lot: that every one ought to be so willingly prepared to
meet the Lord, that they should have their minds sequestered from all desire
after earthly things: or else, that all contrary desires and endeavors in
seeking after the enjoying of them, should be in vain, yea perilous and
damnable unto them. At that day therefore (says our Savior) he that is upon
the house, and his stusse in the house, let him not come down to take it out:
and he that is in the field likewise, let him not turn back to that which he
left behind.

Remember Lots wife. Whosoever will seek to save his soul, (to wit, by any
unlawful practices against the Lord, Zoogonesei A metaphore in like sense as
it is said, The blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Gospel. For it is as
the seed of their own salvation.
as in seeking to elude or escape his judgment) they shall loose it: and
whosoever will loose it, (that is to say, willingly in the ways of God) he
shall get it life.

Thus much out of St. Luke in another place, though belonging to the same
doctrine.

But as touching the use, it follows to be more fully considered of us from
the words of our Savior, recorded by Saint Matthew, when we shall proceed to a
new portion of our text. But before we come to that: let us observe two things
more. First, concerning the former three couple of instances, in the which, the
one of every couple were received, the other refused: yea though they were
about lawful business of this life, or at their natural rest: what then
shall we think of those both couples and companies, that shall be found
unlawfully busied, either in bed, or at board, as we use to speak? such as give
themselves to wantonness and uncleanness, or to any other lewd practice, or
that spend their time wholly, or principally, at dicing and carding, or in any
other exercise of vain pleasure and delight, without regard of the honest and
godly duties of some good and profitable calling. The nature also of the
refusing, which our Savior speaks of, would diligently be considered of us.
For it is a most terrible thing to be left so, as a man shall remain for ever
separated from the Lord, world with out end, to remain in extreme anguish of
soul and body, in a conviction of all former contempt, and sin, and
rebellion against the holy word and Gospel of God. Nevertheless, we must not
so take the words of our Savior, concerning the receiving of one, and the
refusing of the other: as though no two, or more in a company, shall not be
received together.

For out of question, though thousands of the elect, faithful, and dutiful
children of God, should be gathered together in one place, at a sermon, or upon
any other just occasion, no one of them should be refused.

And yet for all that, let none, being without faith, and care of godliness in
himself, think that because he is with the godly, in near society in outward
and civil respects, that therefore he shall be saved. Nay rather, the wife
living with a godly husband, and is not godly herself: or the husband living
with a christian wife, and is not himself careful to serve and obey Christ:
and so of parents and children, etc: they shall the rather be condemned,
because they profit not by such excellent examples, which God has set before
them, in a continual view, to put them in mind of their duty. This ought
therefore, not only to cause every one to be careful for himself, but also
as much as lies in him, for his near companion, the husband for the wife, the
wife for the husband, the parents for the child, and every friend for his
friend, that they also may be saved with them.

Thus much concerning the first of the two observations mentioned before.

Now secondly, let us observe, that whereas our Savior in describing the
security of the old world, in the days of Noah, and of Lot, makes men^ion of
their marrying, and giving in marriage: of their eating and drinking: of their
buying and selling: of their building and planting: it is not because these
things, or any of them, are unlawful in themselves. For we know, that marriage
is the ordinance of God, yea an honorable ordinance. And God that has given
us appetite, and made his good provision, with a bountiful hand, for the
feeding of us: it is his good will no doubt, that we should eat our meat, yea
not only for necessity, but also sometimes for dainty. It is lawful also to
buy and sell, yea necessary for a Commonwealth, and benefit to all. It is the
duty of the Husbandman to plant and sow, etc. Why then does our Savior
mention them? The only cause was, for that the people in either of those
times, did wickedly abuse, and pervert those ordinances of God. As for example,
how the people whom the Apostle Peter calls the world of the ungodly, abused
marriage in the days of Noah. Read Genesis 6.2. The sons of God saw that
the daughters of men were fair, and they took them wives of all that liked
them, etc. This confusion of marriages betwixt the professors of the true
worship of God, and idolatours and profane persons and Athiests, without care
of all holy choice: it is a manifest sign of the decay of all true godliness,
wheresoever it is. Yea it is such an undermining of it, as gives it the most
speedy and dangerous overthrow. For they that stick not to communicate with
the wicked in marriages, they will have society with them in any thing. And how
the Sodomites abused the good gifts of God in their inte^perate eating and
drinking, The Evangelist Mat^hew seems of p^rpose to use the word trogontes,
which most pr^perly signifies to feed more like br^^t beasts, th^^
^^^emblemen.
and in the more then brutish effects which followed upon the same: read Genesis
8.4, 5. And Ezekiel. 16.49, 50. Behold this was the iniquity of thy sister
Sodom, pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her, and in
her daughters; neither did she strengthen the hands of the poor and needy.
But they were hauty, and committed abomination before me; therefore I took
them away as pleased me. And 2. Pet. 2.2.6.7.8 God turned the Cities of Sodom
and Gomorrha into ashes condemned them, and overthrew them, and made them an
ensample unto them, that afterward should live ungodly. And delivered just Lot,
vexed with the unclean conversation of the wicked.

For he being righteous, and dwelling among them in seeing and hearing, vexed
his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds.

So then, not eating and drinking, and such like things are simply condemned
here by our Savior, but only the inordinate use, or rather abuse of them,
when as they are sought after, in an unlawful manner, and when the heart is so
addicted to them, that God is forgotten in them, contrary to the admonition of
God, Deuteronomy 8.10. The which abuse, our Savior notes against those, that being
invited to the Gospel of his kingdom, made their excuse, because, Deuteronomy. 6.10,
11, 12, 13. And cap. 8.10, 11, 12.
one had bought a farm, and must go see it: and another five yoke of oxen,
and he must go to prove them: and a third, that he could not come, because he
was to solemnize his marriage. Luke chap. 14. verses 16, etc.

Our lesson therefore hence, must be this, that if we would not be hindered
from the kingdom of God, nor be unprepared when our Lord Jesus shall come to
his last judgment, or that we be taken away by death before he do come:
that according to the admonition of the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. chap. 29. verses
30, 31. They that have wives, be as though they had none, (to wit, so that they
will not be hindered from Christ in that respect) and that they which weep, be
as though they wept not: and they that rejoice, (that is to say, upon worldly
occasions of increase of worldly wealth) as though they rejoice not: and they
that buy, as though they possessed not: and that they which use this world, be
as though they used it not: (because the Apostle says) the fashion of this
world goes away. We must take heed that we be not like the pampered horse,
that will lift up his heel against his Master, as the people of Israel were,
for want of receiving the prophetical admonition which Moses gave them. Deuteronomy.
32.15. What Master will retain such a servant, as being well and liberally
maintained by him, will be ready to despise him? And shall we think that God
will endure that we being all fed by his providence, shall lift up our selves
against him.

THese things observed, concerning the former Scripture: now let us go
forward, to see what further use our Savior makes, from the description of
his last coming to judgment, in respect of the uncertainty thereof to our
knowledge.



It follows in the Evangelist Matthew in the 42. verse of the four and
twentieth chapter, in these words.

Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your Master will come.

Explication.
Our Savior having showed, that the uncertainty of his coming to judgment,
shall be most heavily dangerous to the world, by reason of the security
thereof, because he knew before, that they will not regard his most serious
admonition and warning: answerable to the peril of the people of the old
world, in that they despised the warning which God gave them by Noah: and
likewise, answerable to the peril of the people of Sodom, and the people of
other Cities adjoining, because they despised the reproof of Lot: he does
therefore, use this admonition to his Disciples, and to all that will yield
themselves teachable, that they may avoid so grievous a peril, as he knew to
be coming toward the world, for the carelessness and impenitencie thereof.

This most serious admonition and warning, which our Savior gives to his
Church, is delivered by him, two manner of ways. First, in more simple and
plain speech: and secondly, under diverse very lightsome, and significant
parables and similitudes. The reason is, because our Savior, of his singular
pity which he bears toward us, would leave no means unattempted, whereby
he might induce and confirm us, in that careful and watchful course which is
necessary to be taken in this behalf, of all such as mind the way of
salvation, and would not be deceived in their expectation. Let us therefore (I
pray ye, all and every one) diligently observe in marking, and mark to observe
and obey, the admonition and counsel which our Savior gives unto us,
concerning the same everlasting welfare and salvation at his coming. Yea, and
seeing this care was necessary, for them to whom our Savior spoke, while he
was yet in the world, sixteen hundredth year well near before this time,
wherein we hear our selves to be put in mind, of this most grave warning:
let us not now set light by it, but much rather, let us so much the more
attentively harken unto it.

To the which end, let us well consider and bear in mind, that which no doubt
our Savior did most prudently consider on our behalf, and on the behalf of
his Disciples, from the very time, wherein he first uttered this doctrine: to
wit, that, insomuch as there shall be a general judgment, and that all must
appear before the judgment seat of God, there is little difference between
those which shall be found living, at the coming of our Savior, and those
which shall be dead many hundreds of years before. For as any have died, and
as they do from day to day depart this life, either in faith and repentance,
or otherwise: so shall they be found, and judged then, like as all shall be,
whosoever shall be found alive at his coming. Wherefore, seeing the Disciples
of our Savior, were to watch at that time, when he spoke unto them, because,
the time of his coming was uncertain, though further off: therefore we are to
watch now, seeing the time is not only as uncertain, as it was, but also much
rather, as much as almost sixteen hundred year comes unto, as was said
before.

But let us come to the words of our Savior: and first, to those which are
delivered more simply, and without parable. Watch therefore (says our Savior,
as we read in the Evangelist Matthew) for ye know not what hour your Master
will come.

These words of our Savior, are recorded more fully by the Evangelist Mark:
let us therefore make our supply from him, to our more full and plain
instruction in this his admonition.

Qu. Which therefore are the words of our Savior, as St. Mark reports them?

They are these, as we read chap. 13. verse 33.

Take heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is.

Explication.
Here indeed, we have three words in stead of one: and so the mind of our
Savior more fully opened, as it were by an excellent commentary, upon the
words of the Evangelist Matthew. For whereas in all wise and circumspect
dealing, these three things are necessary to be put in continual practice:
first, that the danger imminent be seen and discerned: secondly, that it be
watched against, and prevented by all means, as much as lies in him that is
in danger: thirdly, that if he find himself too weak, he do implore and
crave the aid of such as he knows to be both willing, and also able to
relieve and aid him.

All these are here mentioned by our Savior. First, take heed, (Blepete) see,
look to it: secondly, watch: thirdly, pray. And we have great need to be
stirred up to all these things. For, howsoever we are usually wary enough to
espy bodily dangers, and such as would annoy us in our outward estate: and
accordingly we are also ready to watch narrowly, and with all diligence, to
make all the friends we can to back us: yet touching our souls, and the
eternal welfare of them, yea touching the eternal salvation both of soul and
body, we are every way strangely negligent. We are so far from watching
against the danger, and from seeking help: that we are willingly ignorant,
that we are in any danger at all. We fare, as if it were a matter of no
difficulty, to attain to the kingdom of heaven. But alas, all that think
so, are utterly deceived. It is a matter of the greatest difficulty in all the
world. No adversaries of our outward welfare, (how crafty and crabbed
instruments of the devil soever they are) be of like subtlety, as is the
devil himself, yea many devils, who are adversaries to the salvation of our
souls. Ephesians. chap. 6. verses 10, 11, 12. And therefore we had need, to be
in special watch and ward against them: as we are admonished 1. Pet. chap. 5.
verses 8, 9. And besides this, the adversaries which the devil uses for his
instruments, to hinder our salvation, by the perverting of our minds, such as
our Savior has given warning of, (to wit, false Christ's, and false Prophets)
they are more dangerous in their craft that way, then any adversaries of the
outward peace of our lives are.

And therefore we have most special cause to be specially prudent and
watchful in this behalf, all the days of our life: we for our parts, and all
other, even to the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. But because we cannot either
by our own foresight, epsy our danger in this respect; or by our own
strength, or any coadintory help of any man, escape the continual danger we
are in, to be pulled away from the due care of our salvation: we are
therefore, above all things, according to the direction of our Savior, to pray
to God, and to seek for help at his most gracious and only all-sufficient
hand, that we may by him be guided and strengthened to walk on safely and
constantly, to the escaping of all the dangers, which we are most dangerously
compassed about withal. In which respect, most comfortable is the promise,
which God has made to all such, as shall faithfully and constantly seek unto
him: as we read Joel, chap. 3.32. Whosoever shall call on the name of the
Lord, shall be saved. Yea this benefit, (as there the Prophet says) shall be
found of those that shall pray to God when his great and terrible day shall
come: even that day, when the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the
Moon into blood, etc. according to that which our Savior said, should come
to pass, before his coming to execute his most fea^^full judgment. Yet so,
as we must take heed, that we do not think, that every one that shall upon
the sudden view and terror of Gods coming to judgment, say, Lord have
mercy upon us: shall be saved. For then sure it is likely, that none at all
should be condemned. But this promise is made to such only, as shall be found
true worshippers and believers in God, who acquaint themselves with the duties
of his service and worship: of the which, prayer is a very principal one, as
may appear by this, that the Lord himself did for the same cause, call his
house, a house of prayer. And as may appear on the contrary, in that he does
note out all heathenish and profane persons, by this mark, that they are such
as do not call upon him. Psalm. 14.4. and Psalm. 79.6. and Ier. chap. 10. verse
25. Hence therefore, we may see, that they are in a blessed estate, whosoever
are careful, to invre their hearts with the performance of this excellent
duty of true christian prayer, both morning and evening, and so often as just
occasion is given: both publicly, and with their families, and in their own
secret chambers and closets, that God who sees in secret, may reward them
openly. Thus much concerning the words of our Savior, as they are recorded
more fully by the Evangelist Mark, then they were by the Evangelist Matthew.
But now, if we might be certified in this great case of danger, what those
things are, which we are to watch against, as being very dangerous unto us:
and likewise, what we are to pray for, at the hands of God: then should this
admonition of our Savior, contain an excellent and full instruction, as we
must needs confess. Behold therefore, the Evangelist Luke shows, that our
Savior continued the speech of his admonition, even thus far also: as we
read in the Gospel written by him, chap. 21. verses 34, 35, 36.



Thus says our Savior in that place of Saint Luke.

34 Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and lest that day come on
ye at unawares.

35 For as a snare, shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the
whole earth.

36 Watch therefore and pray continually, that ye may be accounted worthy to
escape all these things that shall come to pass, and that ye may stand before
the Son of man.

Explication
Here it is plain, that our Savior expressed to his Disciples, both what
dangers we are to take heed against, as enemies to our watchful preparing of
our selves, against his coming to judgment: and also, what we are to entreat
at the hands of God in the same respect. Let us therefore stay here a little
while, to consider of these points.

And first, concerning the dangers which our Savior warns us to take heed
of, they are of two sorts: the one is surfeiting and drunkenness: the other,
the cares of this life. These dangers, as they are in themselves diverse, so it
seems that they may be distinguished, in respect of those diverse sorts of
persons, to whom they do most properly agree. As surfeiting and drunkenness:
that is, excess of diet in eating and drinking of dainty meats and strong
drinks, to the more rich and wealthy sort, who have these things in greater
abundance then the rest: and the cares of this life to the poorer sort, that
is, as our Savior does, ( mimice, as one may say, or in way of imitation)
describe them, Matthew. 6.31. to be such, as are so distracted in their minds,
that they doubt how they shall be fed and clothed, because they cannot see how
to compass it by their own forecast. And indeed to speak generally; these
evils may be distinguished thus, not only in their own nature, but also in
respect of the diverse persons and subjects, wherein they are more properly
found. For how can rich men (as one would think) be careful how they may be
fed, when as every day, their table is furnished with great store, which they
have ever at hand? And how should poor men, which have but for necessity,
(...) eating and drinking? Nevertheless, we are so to distingu^^^ (...) must
therewithal understand, that they are but as two rivers, (...) asunder for a
while, do eft-soone fall into one and the same stran^^ (...) we shall see
many rich men both voluptuous and also covetous, and in either respect
insatiable, and doubtful of their estate. For covetousness is a bottomless
gulf, or whirle-poole: it knows no measure, i^ can never de^^e when it has
enough. And again, we shall see many poor men, that though they be in poor
estate, yet will be very spend-thrists. If they can by any means, get but a
little before hand, they will by and by to the Ta^erne, of beere-house, and
never leave till they have consumed all that they have, upon their ale-bench.
So that we may easily see, that both poor and rich, and all of us, have need
to receive our admonition from these words of our most wise and blessed
Teacher, our Savior. And this will we the rather acknowledge, if we shall
duly consider, who they are to whom our Savior, at the first uttered this
doctrine: namely, to his Disciples, who were men of as good temperancie, and
contentment, as any, to whom this doctrine may now be delivered. Wherefore,
seeing it was meet, that they should be warned to take heed, and beware of
these evils: how should any of us think it to be needelesse for us?
Doubtless, our Savior speaks not so much to beastly drunkards, and
eatnells, who delight to sit long at the wine, and go about to seek mixed
wine. Prou. chap. 23. verse 30. And be mighty to drink wine, and strong to
pour in strong drink. Isai. chap. 5. verse 22. (for these as we know, our
Savior condemns under the name of swine and dogs, to whom his pearls and
holy mysteries do not belong. Matthew, chapter 7. verse ^.) but he speaks
even to those, that are of best moderation above the rest. Why then, may it be
asked, does he use such gross terms? Our Savior speaks according to the
wisdom of God, who, (as we know) in his holy law, under the name of the
gross sin; condemns all other of the same kind, of what degree of offense
soever they be. Now therefore our Savior does not only give us warning, to
take heed of that surfeiting and drunkenness, wh^t makes men worse then
bruit beasts: of whom it is said, whordome and (...) and new wine, that is,
wine upon wine, take away their heart, to wit, so as they regard no warning or
punishment of God. Hos. chap. 4. verse 11. but he admonishes us, to shun
all intemperancie in eating and drinking, whereby either our bodies or minds
should be oppressed, or made heavy and v^^p^ to the service of God. For it is
a very inordinate course, that when God fir^^ given us food, and all things
else, in abundance (to the end he might encourage us, to serve him with a
cheerful and good heart) we should thereby, make our selves more unfit to
serve him. Surely this must needs turn the blessing of God, to a heavy curse
against our selves, if we should take this course: as God threatens, Deuteronomy.
chap. 28. verses 47, 48. Hence therefore, may we take the rule and prescript of
our diet, more exactly, then any Physician could prescribe it. For it does not
so much consist in eating this or that meat, or this or that quantity: as in
this; how in the experience and partaking of Gods bountifulness, we find our
selves made more apt and fit; or else to grow more negligent and slothful to
the duties of the service of God, in our several callings.

So then, we may by this Crisis or Crasis, (call it what we will) best know,
when we eat and drink by the cup of the best moderation that may be: and
keep our bodies in best temper: to wit, when by our meat and drink (whether
by a more full or skant diet) we still find our hearts and minds earnestly
disposed, and our bodies best pliable, strong, and able, to walk in the holy
duties of our several callings: and when we can best bless God, after we
have eaten, and when we can most willingly go to a sermon, and hear it
attentively, without drowsinesse, and be most ready in the inioying of the
blessings of God, to meditate and speak most honorably of his holy and
glorious name: when we can in our abundance, remember to relieve the
necessities of the poor: and finally, when being careful with the holy
Prophet, What we may render to the Lord for all his benefits toward us, we
shall with him, take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord:
and perform all the holy and lawful vows of his service, which at any time,
either of want, or of sickness etc. we have made unto him. But on the
contrary, if we shall find, that our meat and drink do make us drowsy and
vnwilsome, when we shall go about good and holy duties, and only apt to rise
from the table to play and spend our time in vanity, or to go about some lewd
practice or other: then; whether we have eaten much or little, we may be sure,
that we have dieted our selves very ill. Such therefore is the admonition of
our Savior, concerning the first sort of dangers to be avoided: not only of
drunkards, but also of the more moderate persons: as hindrances of our
watchfulnes, necessarily required to the obtaining of eternal salvation, at
the day of the last judgment.

Now likewise, the warning which he gives, touching the cares of this life,
does not only respect such as we call earth-wormes, and misers, who mind
nothing but the earth, and are always seruilely plodding thereabout, and
couetously seeking how they may increase their worldly pelf: or in another
kind, those that through poverty are distracted in their minds, about
necessary provision: but out Savior speaks likewise, to those that are of a
more liberal disposition; warning all to take heed, that they do so limit
their cares, yea even their lawful cares, in busying themselves, or taking
account of others, in surueying of their lands, in perusing their evidences of
writing, etc. that in the mean while, they be not hindered from reading the
holy Scriptures of God, the evidences of our eternal inheritance: or from the
sanctification of his holy Sabbaths, etc.

The richer sort, they are rather to take care, how they may religiously
husband and employ that which they have already, like good Stewards of God,
then couetously to hunt after more; like vassalls of their own lusts:
according to that more full instruction of our Savior, Luke, chapter 16.
verses 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. a most excellent doctrine, though the wicked
Pharisees, who were covetous, mocked at it, as it follows in the same Text.
And the poorer sort, are to quiet their minds in the Lord, using their
diligence, and staying themselves, through faith in his fatherly providence,
according to that other most comfortable and plentiful instruction of the same
our Savior, Matthew, chapter 6 from the 25. verse, to the end of the chapter.

Hitherto of the first part of the speech of our Savior, recorded by Saint
Luke; wherein he shows, what are the common dangers, which are to be watched
against, lest the judgment of God should fall upon us at unawares: insomuch as
be tells us plainly, that it shall come as a snare, upon all that dwell on
the face of the whole earth; whosoever shall suffer their hearts to be
oppressed with voluptuousness, or their minds to be snared with the cares of
this life, that they will not regard to seek after the freedom of the Spirit
of God, that so they may have liberty to seek after his heavenly kingdom.

The second part of the speech of our Savior, shows (as was said, and as
it is plain by the words themselves) what we are to pray for, in regard of
the danger which all of us are in, without watchfulness and prayer, yea
without continual and constant watching in prayer, according to that which was
before observed: and as it is notably set down by the Apostle Paul, Colos.
4.2. Continue in prayer, and watch in the same, with thanksgiving.

The meaning of our Savior, in this part of his admonition, is this: that we
do continually remember in our prayers, instantly to entreat the Lord our God
and heavenly Father, to give us grace, that we be never found like the
careless people of the world, such as were in the days of Noah, and in the
days of Lot, upon whom his fearful judgment fell, while they lay securely
in their sins, and in the contempt of that warning which God gave unto them:
but that we may be like Noah, who believing the warning of God, and moved with
reverence and fear of the judgment threatened, prepared not only the Arc,
but himself first, and so escaped the wrath of God. And that we may be like
Lot in Sodom, mourning to behold the wickedness of the world, that so we may
escape, when the world shall be condemned: yea, that we may escape all those
things, whereof our Savior has given warning. And therefore, that in our
prayers to God, we be always mindful to beseech him, to strengthen us so by
his holy Spirit, that neither common troubles in the world by wars, etc. nor
more proper troubles of the Church: whether persecution by adversaries, or
falling away of brethren, or the arising of false Christ's, and false Prophets,
do neither entice us to embrace any erroneous, and heretical opinion and
religion, nor fear us from the profession and obedience of the truth of the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And that we continuing thus faithful before him, to the end of our lives,
whether we die before, or live till the coming of our Savior to judgment:
may, of his infinite mercy, be for Christ's sake accounted worthy to stand
with comfort, before his judgment seat, when as the wicked shall not be able
to endure, but against their wills, to see him in so great glory, whom they
have most vilely esteemed, and most presumptuously dishonored, as if he had
been no better then a base and contemptible man. For verily, like as when the
traitors and rebels of an earthly Prince are found out, and brought before the
Judge to be examined, they are confounded, and cannot without inward terror,
look the Judge in the face: so, nay infinitely much more terrible shall it be
to all wicked sinners, and rebels against our Savior Christ, at the day of his
appearing, when he shall come in flaming fire to render vengeance: howsoever,
until that day (which they put far from their thoughts) they imbolden
themselves, to commit all kind of iniquity, both in life and religion, without
all fear or remorse.

Thus far, concerning the gracious admonition, and warning of our Savior, in
more simple, and direct speech, without any parable or continued figure.

IT remains, that we do henceforth, consider how he continues the same his
most gracious and necessary admonition, under diverse and sondrie lightsome and
familiar parables, full of excellent instruction. The which he does no doubt,
add to the former part of his speech, to the end it might take the more deep
and firm impression: it being so exceedingly necessary, and profitable for us.

Let not therefore, that which our Savior sees to be little enough to awaken
and stir up our dull and drowsy hearts, seem too much unto us: neither let
that which he labors to make lightsome, and pleasant unto us, be accounted
of us tedious and irksome, to our own further woe and smart. For assuredly,
most extreme woe, shall be to all such, as will not take their warning, from
this so plentiful an admonition, which our Savior does, of his abundant
grace, with so great variety of instruction, enlarge and beautify, that it
might be the more gratefully accepted of us. Let us therefore, with willing
hearts proceed to these parables, which our Savior uses. There are diverse of
them: one taken from the Master of the Family keeping at home: two, from the
Master of the Family going from home, giving his servants their charge, and
committing his goods unto them: and one from a Bridegroom being to solemnize
his marriage, which is usually called the Parable of the ten virgins. Of
these let us consider, in the same order and manner, which the holy Evangelists
have recorded the same.

Question. And first of the parable of the Master of the Family, abiding at
home. How does our Savior contriue that, to stir us up to watchfulnes?

Answer. Thus we read in our text of the Evangelist Matthew, chap. 24.
verses, 43.44.

43. Of this be ye sure (says our Savior) if the Master of the house knew at
what watch the thief would come, he would surely watch, and not suffer his
house to be dug through.

Or we may read it, with some change of tense in our language, thus, If the
Master of the house had known at what watch the thief would have come, he
would have watched, and not have suffered his house to be dug through.

44. Therefore be ye also ready: for in an hour that ye think not, will the
Son of man come.

Explication.
In these words of our Savior, we have both the first parable, and also the use
of it, so plainly expressed, that we need not use many words, for the
interpretation or application of it: save only because of the diverse
translation, or reading, mentioned in the answer. For if we read it, as it is
first set down, according to our English translation, and as M. Beza has
translated the Greek and Tremellius the Syrian text into Latin in our present
text; as if our Savior meant to show, what a man would do, if he should before
hand understand the purpose of a thief: namely, that he would then surely
watch, etc. then the reason of the parable, infers the use thus: that
insomuch as no governor of a Family is so careless, but he would watch and
defend his house in such a case of imminent danger, both to keep his goods to
his own proper possession and use, and also his family in safety, and from
peril of their lives: then much more ought we to watch for our souls,
against the danger of eternal destruction: yea, every one, that has any care
and tuition of other, should be specially careful over them also, with this
care, that as much as lies in him, they might be saved with him for ever. Such
is the meaning of the use, in the first sense.

But if we read it, as if the parable were framed of a thing already past,
to show the evil events which followed, for want of former watchfulnes;
namely, that the secure man's house was dug through, etc. as Master Calvin
translateth the parable, and likewise Master Tremellius as we read in his
translation out of the Syrian, Luke, 12.39. where the same parable is set down
in the same Greek form of speech: and as H. Stephanus translateth in his
marginall notes, Ei eidei, etc. egregoresen an ca^ oue an ciase, etc.
both upon Luke and Matthew. Si sciu^sset, etc. vigilasset and non siuisset
perfodi domum suam: and as the Geneua translation is in Luke: then the use of
the parable should be this; that insomuch as the loss of outward things,
breeds such repentance in men, when it is too late, that they had rather then
any thing, they had wanted that nights sleep: infinitely much rather then,
ought every one of us to watch, and that continually, in regard of the safety
of our souls eternally; seeing we have so fair a warning given us, of that
continual danger which we are all in, without continual watch and ward, both
in respect of our selves, and also in respect of others, committed to our
charge.

And thus does the parable seem to fit most aptly, both to the words going
before, and also to those that follow in our text, concerning the
uncertainty, at what time our Savior will come, though it is revealed unto
us, that it is most certain, that he will come: and therefore that it lies us
in hand, to be continually watchful. Yea, and to this end, our Savior
baulketh not so to suit the parable, as it falls out that he compares
himself in regard of the same uncertainty of his coming, to the secret and
unknown coming of a thief to rob and spoil. But so as it may stir us up to
watchfulnes, he is content to bear this disparagement of the similitude, for
his part. And again. Revelation, chapter, 16. verse, 15. Behold I come as a
thief. Blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments (to wit, lest
they be stolen) and lest he walk naked, and men see his filthiness: that is,
lest a man be found in his sins through his neglect of faith and repentance.
And so does the Apostle Paul to the same end, put the Thessalonians in mind of
it, with a little qualifying of the harshnes of it. 1. Epistle, 5.1.2.3. But of
the times and seasons brethren (says the holy Apostle) ye have no need that I
write unto you. For ye your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord
shall come, even as a thief in the night. For when they shall say, peace, and
safety, then shall come upon them sudden destruction, as the travel upon a
woman with child, and they shall not escape Read also, 2 Pet. 3.10.

Thus much shall suffice concerning the first parable of the Master of the
family, keeping at home.

LEt us now come to the second, which is the first of those, which our Savior
gives forth of the Master of a Family, which upon occasion, goes from home,
and gives his Steward charge to ouer-see, and to keep his family in good
order.



It follows thus from the 45. verse, of the 24 chap: of S. Matthew.

45. Who then is a faithful servant, and wise, (says our Savior) whom his
Master has made ruler over his household, to give them meat in season?

46. Blessed is that servant, whom his Master, when he comes, shall find so
doing.

47. Verily, I say unto you, he will make him ruler over all his goods.

48. But if that evil servant shall say in his heart, my Master does defer
his coming.

49. And begin to smite his fellows, and to eat and drink with the drunken.

50. That servants Master, will come in a day, when he looks not for him, and
in an hour that he is not ware of.

51. And he will cut him off, and give him his portion with hypocrites: there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Explication
For the more clear opening of this Parable, it shall be good for us, to have
our recourse to the Evangelist Luke, who chapter, 12.35. (though not in the
historical order of the time) shows the occasion of these words. For whereas
our Savior had (as we read) propounded this exhortation to watchfulnes, in
these words, Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning. And ye
your selves like unto men that wait for their Master, when he shall return
from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him
immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom the Master when he comes shall
find waking: Verily, I say unto you, he will gird himself about, and make
them to sit down at table, and will come forth and serve them. Now if he come
in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and shall find them so,
blessed are those servants.

Then follows that of the householders watching against the coming of the
thief, as we have seen already, from the report of the Evangelist Matthew.
Which, after the Evangelist Luke has set down, verses, 29.4^. of this 1^.
chapter: then it follows thus, verse, 41. etc. Then Peter said unto him,
Master, tellest thou this parable unto us, or even to all? And the Lord said,
Who is a faithful Steward and wise, whom the Master shall make ruler over his
household, to give them their portion of meat in season? Blessed is that
servant, etc. as we have seen before, how it follows in S. Matthew.

But S. Luke continues the speech of our Savior further then S. Matthew does,
as it follows in the 47 and 48. verses, in these words, And that servant that
knew his Masters will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his
will, shall be beaten with many stripes. But he that knew it not, and committed
things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. For unto
whomsoever much is given shall much be required, and they will ask the more of
him, to whose trust they have committed much.

So then, by comparing Matthew with Luke, we see that whereas our Savior
requires diligent preparation and watchfulness of all christians, and
therewith wisdom also from his word, that they be neither ignorant, nor
slothful, as he signifies by the girding up of their loins, after the manner
of that country, when any were ready to take their journey: and by the lights
burning in their hands, lest they should loose their right way: by occasion of
Peter's question, he applies this admonition, chiefly, to the Ministers of the
word, whom he compares to the Stewardes of the house, in whom is required
special wisdom, to the ordering of their Masters affairs, and special
faithfulness, in the performance of those duties which they stand bound unto,
according to that of our Savior, at another time, Be ye wise as serpents, and
simple as Doves: and as the Apostle Paul writes in the name of our Savior
Christ. 1. Cor. chapter 4.1.2 Let a man so think of us, as of the Ministers of
Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. And as for the rest, it is
required of the disposers, that every man may be found faithful. Whereunto
also, our Savior in this text annexeth a warrant of blessing and reward to all
faithful servants: and of curse and punishment to all wicked, and unfaithful
ones, who shall have their portion with hypocrites and unbelievers. Yea, and
this our Savior shows to be equal, even among men: and therefore we cannot
think that either the justice or mercy of God, the Father of the ^hole family
both in heaven and in earth, is inferior; but rather infinitely exceeding,
both in the one respect, and also in the other: that is, in the grieuousnes of
punishment upon transgressors, and in the bountifulnes of the reward of his
mercy, upon those that be dutiful and obedient.

The use of this parable therefore, is answerable to the former, for to
admonish all sorts, but specially the Ministers of the word, to be diligent and
faithful in their callings, against the coming of the Lord: that then they
may receive, from the merciful hand of God, a most blessed reward: according
to that. 1. Peter. 5.4. When as on the contrary, the most fearful wrath and
vengeance of God, shall fall suddenly upon all the wicked, which shall not
regard the judgment of the Lord: specially upon such, as being in place and
office of guiding and admonishing others, be themselves most out of frame, and
as vnwatchfull as any of the rest: as the Lord complains against the
Shepherds of Israel, Ezekiel. 34. verse, 4. And yet so as our Savior gives to
understand, that not only such careless, blind, and unconscionable guides,
shall be punished: but also such as will suffer themselves to be misled by
them, and do contrary to the admonition of the Lord in that behalf,
willingly following the^r evil example. For if the blind lead, the blind
both fall into the ditch, as our Savior tells us, in another place. Matthew.
15.14.

Thus much briefly, of the second parable, concerning the Master of a Family,
that goes from home, and tarrieth somewhat longer, then he was looked for.

NOw like unto this, is the next parable, as it follows in the Evangelist
Matthew, though set down under the name and example of women, yea of tender
virgins, or damsells. Let us hear the words of our Savior.

Quest. How do they follow, from the beginning of the xxv. Chapter?

Ans. 1. Then (says our Savior) the kingdom of heaven shall be likened unto
ten Virgins which took their Lamps, and went to meet the Bridegroom.

2. And five of them were wise, and five foolish.

3. The foolish took their Lamps but took no oil with them.

4. But the wise took oil in their vessels, with their Lamps.

5. Now while the Bridegroom turried long, all slumbred and slept.

6. And at midnight, there was a cry made, Behold the Bridegroom comes: go
out to meet him.

7. Then also those Virgins arose, and trimmed their Lamps.

8. And the foolish said unto the wise, give us of your oil, for our Lamps
are out.

9. But the wise answered, saying, we fear lest there will not be enough for us
and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves.

10. But while they went to buy the Bride-grome came, and they that were ready,
went in with him to the wedding, and the gate was shut.

11. Afterward came also the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to vt.

12. But he answered and said verily I say unto you, I know ye not.

13. Watch therefore, for ye knew neither the day, nor the hour, when the
Son of man will come.

Explication
Here we have a third parable, like to the former, and of like use. For that was
of servants, whose duty was said to be, to watch and attend their masters
coming from the wedding: this is of Virgins appointed to atend upon the
Bridegroom, to the marriage supper. Wherein, notwithstanding our Savior
frames his parable, according to the custom which was among the people, which
was not only to have their marriage feast at night, but also, that the
Bridegroom should be brought to the Bride, by a train or company of
maidens, the daughters of his near friends: Yet I doubt not, but he does of
purpose chose to give forth this parable, under the name and example of
womankinde, yea even of young and tender maids: to admonish them, as well as
men, that as they are appointed of God, to be heirs of the same grace and
salvation: so they may know, that the same duty of watchfulness, and
constancy in the faith, and in all good fruits thereof, is to be performed of
them, in their places and callings as well as of men. Yea, the younger are
hereby admonished, as well as the elder: young men and maids also old men and
children, as it is in the 148. Psalm.

No youth, or tenderness of those that be of discretion, must exempt us, from
using all good diligence, and painfulness, in seeking after the kingdom of
heaven. We know the curse which the Lord threateneth, whereof even the
dainty and delicate both men and women, that will scarcely set their foot on
the ground, shall be partakers, as well as the rest: for their want of care to
obey the Laws and commandments of God, Deuteronomy: 28. verse 5^. and 56. Let us
therefore, all without exception know, that it is our duty, to watch
diligently, and carefully to prepare our selves, against the day of the Lords
judgment, whenever he shall come. For otherwise, as our Savior tells us.
The Kingdom of heaven shall be likened to ten Virgins: to wit, as touching
this point, of admitting and receiving those only, tha^ be careful to prepare
themselves aright, and of excluding and rejecting all the rest.

The particulars of this parable, are thus to be understood and applied.

The Bridegroom, signifies our Savior Christ, in respect of that spiritual
marriage, which he minds eternally to celebrate and solemnize with his
Church, at the end of the world: the which he has already espoused to
himself, as it is most plentifully and delightfully described in the most holy
and excellent song of songs, by King Solomon. In which respect also, John
Baptist calls our Savior the bridegroom, and professes himself to be
for his part, a friend of the bridegroom. John 3.29.

And our Savior calls his twelve, the children of the marriage chamber, and
himself as the bridegroom, for the time he was present with them, Mat: 9.14.
15.

The ten Virgins, do represent the visible Church of God, here in this
world. Of the which, some regard only the external calling, and the outward
profession of the Gospel, so far as it has praise and allowance of men, and
these are but hypocrites: other do not rest themselves in the outward calling,
and profession, but seek after inward truth, and the power of godliness,
through the sanctification of the spirit of God. And these alone, are the true
members of the visible church: insomuch as they only, appertain to the secret
election, end internal calling of God.

As touching the equal number of five of the one sort, that is the wise; and
five of the other, who are said to be foolish; it is not to be stood upon,
as though that were intended by our Savior: insomuch as we know what he
has said other where; to wit, that many are called, but few chosen. Yet this
is certain, that every true member of the Church, is truly wise, seeking after
inward truth, as was said: and that all other are foolish, how many soever
they are, who look no further then to an outward profession, albeit they hear
daily, that God makes no reckoning of the outward man, though that seem to be
near, when the heart is removed far from him.

The long staying of the bridegroom, notes the distance of time, betwixt his
ascension up into heaven, and his coming to judgment, at the end of the
world: which proves longer then men would have thought. For so it falls out
oftentimes, in matters of great solemnity, that many occasions breed delay,
above that the attendants do know off. And verily, many great works of God,
were to be wrought, betwixt our Saviors leaving of the world, and his
returning to it again: which required, as we have experience, a long tract of
time. And it is of the infinite mercy of God, that there is such a delay: to
the end, that none of his elect might perish, but in his due time, come to the
knowledge and faith of their salvation.

The failing of the oil in the lamps of the foolish, notes the detection and
discovery of their hypocrisy, and that they were not grounded, and truly
rooted in Christ. They had a certain historical knowledge: but not the graces,
and gifts of sanctification, neither sought they after them.

The full supply of oil, which the wise furnished themselves withal (as it
were against a dear year) notes their inward truth and steadfastness of
faith and godliness: they having their lamps, as it were under the two olive
trees of God, for the continual cherishing, and feeding of the light thereof:
as we read, Zech: 4.1.2. Yet not so, but the wise have their infirmities, and
failings, as if they were not better then the rest in inward truth, who seemed
to be as good, as they, in outward show: but their inward truth reuiueth all,
when as the best motions of the rest, do quickly vanish quite away.

The sudden coming of the bridegroom, notes the sudden coming of our
Savior to judgment, when the time of his stay is once expired. Nevertheless,
that judgment which shall be the condemnation of the foolish, it shall be the
salvation of the wise. For this, as was said in the beginning, is signified by
the shutting of the gate against the rest. The which no noubt, shall be as
doleful to those, which shall be deprived of this feast, as it shall be
joyful to those, that shall be made partakers of it, according to that, Revel.
chap: 19.7. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give glory (to the Lord our God)
for the marriage of the Lamb it come. And verse, 9. Blessed are they that are
called to the Lambs supper.

Finally, in this parable, it is most needfully to be marked of us, that when
the opportunity of accompanying this Bridegroom to the marriage feast, is
once past, that there is no recovering of it, for ever after. And not to
prepare and furnish our selves thoroughly, is in a manner all one, as if we
never set foot out of doors. Wherefore as we began, so let us end. Take we
heed, that we be prepared, and that we may be found watching always, because
we know not the day nor the hour, when the Son of man will come.

THe last parable is yet behind, tending to the same end, with the former: as
it is plain, by the manner of the inferring, or knitting of it with the same,
as it follows in the text.

How much a talent was according to our present coin, thoug it be not easy
to oftimate, yet this is certain, that it contained a great sumaie. It may
appear, in that, one tale^t of gold was sufficient in quantity, to make that
goodly branched and bowled Candlestick f r the holy Tabernacle, with the
snuffers and snuff dishes for the same. Exodus, 25. verse, 31. etc. 3^. This
talent was indeed the talent of the sanctuary, but the talent in common use
among the people of God was in quantity half so much: that is about 60.
pound, when the greater was 120. pound in weight. vide Iunij annot: in eum
locum Exodus 25.


For (says our Savior, verse 14 and so forth to the 31.) the kingdom of
heaven, or the Son of man: or with a more short supply of words thus, For
(so it is, to wit: in this case) that as a man going into a strange country
called his servants, and delivered to them his goods.

15. And unto one he gave five talents, and to another two, and to another one,
to every one after his ability, and strait way went from home.

16. Then he that received the five talents, went and occupied with them, and
gained other five talents.

17. Likewise also, he that received two he also gained other two.

18. But he that received the one, went and dug in the earth, and hid his
masters money.

19. But after a long season, the master of those servants came and reckoned
with them.

20. Then came he that had received five talents, and brought forth other five
talents, saying, master, thou deliver cast unto me five talents: behold I have
gained with them other five talents.

21. Then his master said unto him, It is well done good servant and
faithful, thou have bin faithful in little, I will make thee ruler over much:
enter into thy masters joy.

22. Also he that received two talents, came and said, master, thou
deliueredst unto me two talents: behold I have gained other two with them.

23. His master said unto him. It it well done good servant and faithful.
Thou have been faithful in little, I will make thee ruler over much: enter
into thy masters joy.

24. Then he which had received the one talent, came and said, master I knew
that thou wast an hard man, who reapest where thou sowedst not, and gatherest
where thou strawedst not.

25. I was therefore afraid, and went and hid my talent in the earth: behold
thou have thine own.

26. And his master answered and said unto him, Thou evil servant and
slouthful, thou know that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I
strawed not.

27. Thou ought therefore to have put my money to the exchangers: and then at
my coming I should have received mine own with advantage.

28. Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which has ten
talents.

29. For unto every man that has, it shall be given and he shall have
abundance, and from him that has not, even that which he has, shall be taken
away.

30. Cast therefore that unprofitable servant into utter darkness: there shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Explication
Before we come to the interpretation of this parable, if we would see it more
briefly propounded, we may read it, as it is contracted by the Evangelist Mark.
ch: 13.34.35.36.37. with a short supply of words after this manner. For the
Son of man is as a man going into a strange country, and leaves his house,
and gives authority to his servants, and to every man his work, and
commands the porter to watch. Watch therefore, (for ye know not when the
master of the house will come, at even, or at midnight, at the cocke-crowing,
or in the dawning), lest if he come suddenly, he should find you sleeping.
And those things which I say unto you, I say unto all: See that ye watch. This,
as it seems, is a brief contraction, not only of this last parable, set
down at large by Saint Matthewe: but also of the other, recorded both by
Matthew, and Luke. And the general use of them all, is here expressed most
fully at once: which is, to stir up all without exception, to be watchful;
lest we or other should be found unprepared, when God shall call us to an
account.

The Evangelist Luke, sets down the same parable, in as large a discourse
as Matthew does, used of our. Savior to the same end, though with some
difference in certain circumstances. And it may be also at another time,
before this most large speech of his, concerning his second coming: for it was
before his last farewell to the Temple: as we may read. 19. chap: from the
12. verse to the 28. Nevertheless, as touching the end and scope of the
parable, it is plain to be the same, from the 11. verse in these words. While
they heard these things (says the Evangelist Luke) that is to say, while the
Disciples heard those comfortable speeches, which our Sa: spak concerning
Zaccheus, that salvation was that day come to his house, etc (For the Son of
man is come to seek and to save that which was lost) our Savior (as Saint
Luke says) continued and spoke a parable, because he was near to Jerusalem,
and because also they thought that the kingdom of God should shortly appear.
He said therefore, (as it follows in the 12. verse) A certain noble man,
went into a far country, to receive for himself a kingdom, and so to come
again. And he called his ten servants, etc.

But of the difference of the circumstances, we will speak afterward. Let us
first consider of the substance and matter of the parable, as it is contrived
and disposed, in the Evangelist Matthew.

By the going of the man (the noble man as it is in Luke) into a far
country, our Savior represents himself, in respect of his leaving of this
world, and of his ascending up into heaven, and of his abode there, till his
coming again at the end of the world. The which though it should be
uncertain all ways, and sudden whenever it should be: yet he does give to
understand, that it should not be so soon as his Disciples were ready to
conceive, and as our Savior knew how the minds of some would ouercarie them:
as we may perceive accordingly how it came to pass, 2. These: 2.1.2.3. Neither
does our Savior so speak of his leaving of the world, as though he meant not
after his departure, to be any way present in it: but he speaks only of his
bodily absence. For by his spirit, he is, and so always intends to be
present in his Church, according to his promise, I will be with ye to the end
of the world, as he spoke a little before his ascension: and likewise before
that, wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in
the midst of them.

And so does the effect it self declare, and confirm diverse ways: in that
since his ascension, even shortly after, and thenceforth to this day, he has
established offices and callings in his Church, furnished them with gifts, made
them effectual, to the winning of thousands, and ten thousands of souls, to
the faith of his Gospel, etc. Only the full perfiting of all things, is
reserved till his own coming, at the end of the world.

Now, that the meaning of our Savior, is not utterly to relinquish the Church
till that time of his coming, it is evident by that which follows in the
parable. For by the Lord, or master of the family, his calling of his
servants, and his distributing and delivering unto them his goods, to some more
and to some less, in a diverse measure and degree, with a commandment that
they should employ the same to his advantage, till he should come again to
take account of them: he gives plainly to understand, that though he be bodily
absent, yet he rules and governs in his Church continually, by his most holy
and sovereign spirit: giving to every one such an office, and such a measure
of gifts in his Church, as he thinks meet: Romans 12.3, 4.5.6.7. And 1. Cor:
12, 3, 4, 5. Touching the imploiment of which his gifts, he will call every
one to give an account. For that is the occupying, which out Savior shadoweth
out, in the parable.

The gain also, which is intended, by the parable, is the winning of souls
unto God: when, by the preaching of the Gospel, and by all other spiritual
means, both public and private: they are brought to faith and repentance, and
furthered therein by the same, more and more, from day to day.

The praise and reward, which the master gives his good and profitable
servants; represents that eternal reward, which our Savior will give unto
every one that shall be found faithful, in the employing of their gifts: to
the glory of God, and profit of his Church, in their several places and
callings.

The masters joy, (that is, the place of the masters joy, whereinto the good
and faithful servants are received) is the kingdom of heaven, even the most
joyous place of heaven it self: and all the blessed joys of the same.

The inequality or excellency of the reward, infinitely exceeding the service
(for a talent, though it be a good round sum to be valued, yet it is said
to be but a small thing in comparison of the joy that follows) may well
express unto us, that the reward is of bounteous mercy from God, and not of
any merit or worthiness in man. For if God should enter into a a strait
account with us, we should be found but unprofitable servants: and so we are
always to account our selves, Luke, 17.10. For wherein can we be profitable
to God, as Elihu says to Job, chap: 35.7. to beat down all conceit in man's
own righteousness? It is only of mercy, that God vouchsafes to accept of any
service from us: yea, or of our selves, to be his servants.

And therefore also, when it is said, that to every one is committed this and
that measure of gifts; or this or that calling, according to his ability: it
is not meant, of any natural ability, which any has of himself; but of that
power and ability, whereby they are fitted through the grace of God, to
perform such offices and duties, as he has appointed them unto. As Judge:
6.34. The Spirit of God came upon Gideon, (or as the word labshah signifies
clad or clothed him. That is, as Trem: and Iunius well interpret. Instruxit
cum voluntate and faculate ad hauc expeditionem pertinente, tanquam armis
conuenientissimis. i. He furnished him with will and ability such as belonged
to the dispatch of this service, as it were with most convenient weapons. The
same metaphore is used in the new Testament, sundry times to the like purpose,
concerning the spiritual gifts and graces of the Gospel. Luke, 24.49. until ye
be endued with power from on high, (heos hou endnsesthe.) and Rom: cha: 13. v.
14. and Gal: 3.17. Thus much, of the faithful servants, and of their reward.

On the contrary; the hiding of the talent, notes the not employing, of those
spiritual gifts and graces, which God has given to any: nor themselves in
their calling; whether in magistracy for justice, or in the ministry for the
Preaching of the Gospel, to such ends, as God has given and ordained the
same. And therefore, herein is described, the evil property of all idle
loiterours in the Lords vineyard: that is, of all such as having knowledge,
and other gifts, will not use them to the glory of God, nor to the prosit and
edification of the Church, the which the Lord does account to him a great
loss. This no doubt, is a grievous sin in them; and therefore cannot but in
the justice of God, be severely punished, as it is here described: Cast that
unprofitable servant into utter darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. Now if they that be unprofitable in hiding their gifts, are thus
punished: what may harmful hinderers and destroiers (such as pervert all
whatsoever knowledge they have, and every other gift, to the dishonor of God,
and hurt of his Church) what I say, may they justly look for?

Nevertheless, let us well mark, that unprofitableness goes not alone, in idle
and slothful persons: but it is accompanied with other foul sins, as our
Savior notes, in that they carry in their hearts an evil opinion of God, as
if it were in vain to serve him: like as the wicked are described, to have
grown to that extremity. Mal: 3.14. Which is clean contrary both to the
nature of God described, Exodus 34, 6, 7. and also to that faith, which every
one ought to have of him, and in him. Heb: 11.6. For he that comes to God,
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him. But
the evil servant goes further, and according to his wicked misconceiuing of
God; or rather of mere slouthfulnes, and for want of love to God, and his
glory: he goes about to lay the blame upon God; and to blaspheme him, to the
justifying of himself. But what gains he in the end? He is condemned, and
that justly, even from his own mouth. For if I be like to a hard man (says
the Lord) thou ought to have put my money to the exchangers, that I might
have received mine own with advantage. It is therefore a vain thing, for any
to go about, to make their plea against God. But what? Is usury lawful? yea
verily, this kind of usury, is the only lawful usury: to bring glory to
God, and profit to his Church, by the use of those gifts, which he has lent
unto his servants.

It is such an usury, as the borrower is sure to go away with the gain. As
touching all other biting and devouring usury, which eats up those that take
it to loan: there is no allowance of it in this place, no more then there is
of theft in the first of his parables, because our Savior compares himself,
in respect of his uncertain coming to judgment, to the coming of a thief
in the night. But they do well to dispute the matter now; provided they would
speedily moderate, and determine the question well: before the time of the
account here spoken of do come. For assuredly, then the term will be out, and
no further day granted for any disputation about the matter. And happy shall
they be, that shall turn all their care to practice that usury, which our
Savior has commended: as being the only lawful and blessed usury, which
brings sound and durable gain with it; even to as great abundance, may be
desired. For to him that has (says our Savior) shall be given, and he shall
have abundance: when as on the contrary, that shall be taken away, which the
unprofitable servant, refuses to make any use of.

Thus much of this parable, as it is recorded by Saint Matthew. Whereunto, (as
was said) that other in the 19. chap: of S. Luke accords, touching the
substance and scope of it. As for the circumstances often servants, answerable
to the number of the 10. virgins in the former parable: and of the Mina, or
pound a great deal less sum of money given to every one, in stead of the
talents, in diverse proportions delivered to the rest: they do nothing
prejudice, the same substance and drift of either parable. No more does the
diverse proportion of the gain: or diverse measure of the reward. This only
is to be materially observed in Luke, which is not set down in Matthewe: that
the noble man going into a far country, was hated of his Citisens, who after
his departure rebelled against him: though all in vain. For at his return,
the noble man does execution upon all those rebels. Even so shall it be, at
the end of the world. None of those, that refuse to submit themselves to the
regencie and government of our Savior Christ here in this world, shall escape
his revenging hand: according to the conclusion of the parable in these words.
Moreover, those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them,
bring hither, and slay them before me. The Lord Jesus himself, will see the
execution done upon all those that rebel against him, and his Gospel: by the
ministry of his holy Angels, immediately upon his sentence and judgment,
pronounced against them at the last day. Mat: 13.41, 42. and verses 49.50.

The consideration of all these things, must needs be of great force, to
awaken all that shall duly weigh and believe the words of our Savior, to be
faithful and true: to be continually watchful, that at the last judgment,
they may be found good and faithful servants to God.

And I do heartily pray God, that the same good effect may be wrought in our
hearts, who have heard these things, thus plentifully laid forth unto us, and
that also in so great variety of persuasion, as our blessed Savior, has (in
wonderful desire of our salvation) commended the same unto us: that whether we
dye before his coming, or live till his coming; we may be found such as we
ought to be. For (as has been often said) it comes all to one reckoning
in effect, whether we live to that day or no. For as we dye now, so shall we
be found then: either just, or unjust, true believers, or hypocrites.

Wherefore, seeing our death is as uncertain to us, how soon it shall be, to
every one of us for our parts; as the coming of the Lord, shall be to the
whole world: let not any of us stop our ears, or harden our hearts, against
the gracious warning, which is given unto us. And the rather, because, though
the day of our death is not far off, when it is at the furthest: yet we have
experience, by the sudden deaths of many, that it may be nearer then we can
think. For sometime (as we see) the summons, and arrest, and the execution of
death, come all at once upon others. And why may not death use the like
expedition, in the cutting off of our days? It may fall out so, for any thing
that any of us do know. Let us therefore, I pray you, even all and every one
of us; let us (I say) watch, that none of us, may at any time be taken
unprepared to our destruction: but that we may be in a readiness, to meet the
Lord with comfort, to our eternal salvation. Amen.

And thus far, for the ground of the Article of our faith, concerning the
coming of our Savior, to judge both the quick and the dead, out of the holy
Evangelists: both for the time thereof, and concerning the signs, so far as
they may be discerned of us; and also touching the place, from whence, and
whither he shall come; and in what manner he shall show himself; and who they
are whom he shall judge.

Moreover, we have herewithall, seen diverse of those uses, both for comfort,
and also for duty which we are to make from the doctrine and faith of this
Article. Wherein, though we have somewhat broken our order, to the end we might
not break the course of our text, which is more to be regarded then our order:
yet if need be, we shall very well salve it again, because by how much we
have (as it were) increased the burden here; we shall go away the lighter,
and make the more expedition there.

IN the mean while, let us proceed to that which follows, (and that also,
in as good and commodious a course, as we may attain unto) touching the order
of our Saviors proceeding, in the execution of his last judgment: even as he
himself, has likewise foretold, and described the same.

This follows, in our text of the Evangelist Matthew, from the beginning of
the 31. verse, to the end of the chap: Let us hear the words of our Savior.



And when the Son of man comes in his glory (says our Savior) and all the
holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory.

32. And before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall separate them
one from another, as a shepherd seperateth his sheep from the goats.

33. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left.

34. Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father: inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.

35. For I was an hungered, and ye gone me meat, I thirsted, and ye gave me
drink: I was a stranger and ye lodged me.

36. I was naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in
prison, and ye came unto me.

37. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord when saw we thee an
hungered and fed thee? or a thirst, and gave thee drink?

38. And when saw we thee a stranger, and lodged thee? or naked, and clothed
thee?

39. Or, when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

40. And the King shall answer and say unto them, verily I say unto you, in as
much as ye have done it unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done it to
me.

41. Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

42. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I thirsted, and ye gave
me no drink.

43. I was a stranger, and ye lodged me not: I was naked, and ye clothed me
not: sick and in prison, and ye visited me not.

44. Then shall they also answer him, saying; Lord when saw we thee an
hungered, or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did
not minister unto thee?

45. Then shall he answer them, and say, verily I say unto you: in as much as
ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

46. And these shall go into everlasting pain, and the righteous into life
eternal.

Explication
In this last portion, of the large speech of our Savior, concerning his
coming to judgment: he is more plain and full, then in any part of his
speech before, touching the manner of his proceeding, and ordering of the same:
wherein, after that by a certain close referring, or pointing back, to that
which he had said before, for the manner of his appearing, chap: 24. verse 30.
and also concerning the persons, who are to be judged by him: he does now
furthermore show, in what manner he will address himself to give judgment:
and what his sentence shall be: and by what rule or law the same shall be
directed: and finally, he foretells that the execution of the sentence, shall
take place, forthwith upon the pronouncing of it.

So that partly looking back to that which has been touched already; and
partly by reason of that further addition which our Savior makes: we have
many things to consider, concerning the full laying forth of this last and most
grave and reverend judgment.



First, who the Judge is.

Secondly, in what manner he shall show himself, when he comes to judgment.

Thirdly, how he shall address, and dispose of himself, to pronounce the
sentence.

Fourthly, who the persons are whom he shall judge.

Fifthly, what the sentence shall be.

Sixthly, the reason of the judgment, or by what rule, or law, the sentence
shall be given: together with an explaning of that which might seem strange
therein.

And last of all, what the execution shall be.

Explication.
All these things, are necessary to the execution of any solemn judgment. For
there must be a judge. It is meet also, that he show himself in some
reverend manner, that he be not despised or contemptible. There must be a meet
seat, or throne of judgment. There must be persons, and causes to be judged.
There must be a law or rule, for the ordering of the judgment. And after
judgment is given, there must follow execution: or else all that went before,
is made vain and frustrate. These things therefore are to special good
purpose expressed, in this most grave, and reverend judgment which is most
high above all other.

But how comes it to pass, that we hear no mention made of the producing
of any witnesses, of impanelling of Iuries, etc.



This last judgment, shall not be, to make inquiry into men's innocence or
guiltines: but to manifest who are to be acquitted, and who to be condemned.

Explication. and proof.
It is true. And for the same cause it is, that without any mention of
inquisition, our Savior Christ says, that there shall be forthwith, and all
at once, a separation made betwixt the one, and the other sort: as we have
further occasion to consider anon, and as we have already seen heretofore.
Matthew. 13.49. and chap. 24.30.

As for witnesses, or Iuries; there shall be no need of them, to the
furthering of this judgment: because he that judges, knows the secrets of
all hearts, and is perfectly privy to every man's ways. Revel. 2.23. And
beside this, every man's own conscience, that is guilty, shall be in stead of a
thousand witnesses, and as a book of inditements against himself. So we read
Romans 2.15.16. And 1. Cor. chap. 4. ver. 5. And Revel. 20.12. The books were
opened, etc. To the which end also, serves that saying of our Savior, that
whatsoever is bound on earth, it is also bound in heaven, and so remains
before hand (as it were upon the file) till that day,

But let us come now to the particulars above mentioned.



This judgment is committed to our Savior Christ, not only in respect of his
Godhead, but also in that he is the Son of man.

Explication
So in deed we read in our present text: and it has been often mentioned by
our Savior Christ in his doctrine, concerning this his coming to judgment.
Namely, John, 5.22. The Father has committed all judgment to the Son. And
verses, 26.27. As the Father has life in himself, so likewise has he given
to his Son to have life in himself, And he has given him power also, to
execute judgment, in that he is the Son of man. And the Apostle Paul. Act.
17.31. God has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has appointed, whereof he has given
assurance to all men in that he has raised him from the dead. Thus then, it is
manifest, that our Savior Christ is the Judge of the world: even in that he is
the Son of man.



Yea (as I have been taught) there are many very great and weighty reasons of
it.

First and principally, because God has in his own most sacred and holy
counsel, so determined and appointed: as was even now alleged, out of the 17.
Chap. of the Acts of the Apostles.

Secondly, that the former prophesies, given forth, for declaration of the same
most holy counsel and purpose of God, might be fulfilled: according to that
which we read in the Epistle of Jude, concerning the ancient prophecy of
Enoch. Behold, the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints, to give judgment
of all men. And Zech. 12.10. And John, 19.2^. They shall see him whom they have
pierced. According to that also of our Savior himself, Matthew. 26.64. ye
shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven. And Revel. 1.7.

Thirdly, it is just with God, that in so much as he was on his own behalf,
in the time of his humiliation, unjustly rejected, and murdered, as touching
the malice of men, both Jew and Gentile: he should now, in his most high and
worthy advancement show himself a just Judge in the condemning of so many of
them, as did not repent thereof; and all other also that shall at that day be
found in their sins.

Finally, it shall be so, for the comfort of all true Christians: seeing they
shall behold him to be ordained their Judge, who was before, anointed to be
their everlasting redeemer, and Savior.

Explication and proof.
These indeed are very sufficient reasons, to let us see why it should be so.
And they are no other, then such as have good warrant from the holy Scriptures:
like as you have alleged, concerning the former three. Touching the last
reason; that is, the comfort of the faithful: we shall have further occasion,
to consider of it afterward.

Nevertheless, albeit the judgment is committed to our Lord Jesus Christ,
even in that he is the Son of man: we must not think, that the Deity is
excluded, either of the Son of God himself: or of the Father, or of the holy
Ghost: but the judgment shall proceed from the whole Trinity, though the
Son only, is the administratour and pronouncer of it.

Let this suffice for the first point, who the Judge is.

Question. THe manner of his coming is next. How is it described that it shall
be?

Answer. The Son of man (says our Savior) shall come in glory, and all the
holy Angels with him.

Explication. This glory, which our Savior speaks of, is the glory of the
only begotten Son of God: that is to say, a most divine glory, even the
glory of God the Father, as he himself spoke before. Math. 16.27. For (says
he there) the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his
Angels. Here in this place, our Savior calls it his own glory, because it
is due unto him, even in that he is the Son of man, by the gift of the
Father, who elsewhere is called the Father of glory. Ephesians. 1.17. and the God
of glory. Act. 7.2. and the King of glory. Psalm. 24.7.8.9.10. that is most
glorious in himself, and also the fountain of all true honor and glory to
all other. It shall be the perfect declaration of that glory, which the
disciples saw some bright glimses of: as we read, John, 1.14. Math. 17.2. and
2. Pet. 1.17. It shall be that glory, which our Savior prayed for, John. 17.5.
Now glorify me thou Father, with thine own self, with the glory, which I had
with thee, before the world was.

Now according to this glory, even the divine glory of our Savior: shall that
power be, wherewith he shall come: that is to say, it shall be the very
almighty power of God: according as we have seen before affirmed, by our
Savior himself, Math. 24.30. and Luke, chap. 21.27.

The same glory and power of our Savior Christ, is further illustrated, for a
help of our weakness, to conceive the more gloriously of it: from the
attendance of the holy Angels, who shall at that time accompany him, as his
servants, with all their glory and power, to the execution of this his
judgment. And for this cause, they are called his Angels, Math. 16.27, like as
the glory, is in our present text, called his own glory. Now verily, this we
may be sure of, that the glory of our Savior must needs be an exceeding great
glory, which shall exceed all the glory of the thousands, yea the myriades and
ten thousand thousands of the Angels, which shall accompany him: more, no
doubt, then the Sun excels all the stars of heaven in brightness and
glory.

Thus therefore, as the Judge of the Assise, when he comes in his circuit to
execute judgment from the Prince, is for honors sake, accompanied with the
high Sheriff, and the honorable and worshipful of the Country: so, yea by
infinite odds, shall our Savior Christ coming to execute this judgment of
all judgments, that we now speak of; be accompanied with such a glorious
train, as never any Judge was, or shall be accompanied withal, from the
beginning of the world, to the end of the same.

The use of this exceeding glory, shall be this: even to procure the more
reverend estimation from the godly: and also to the end that the very wicked
may be constrained to tremble before the same.

And in this respect also it is, that according to the words of our Savior,
mentioned before. Math. 24.31. the holy Apostle Paul, does likewise make
mention of some other things, as signs and appurtenances to this most
excellent majesty and glory: as we read, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. 1. Cor. 15.52.
saying, The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a showte, and with the
voice of the Archangell, and with the trumpet of God. Yea, and that no doubt in
far more glorious and magnificent manner, then it sounded at the giving of
the law, Exodus 19.19. though the sound of the trumpet at that time, was long,
waxing louder and louder. And though the law was given by the ministry of
Angels, Gal. 3.89: yet it was with less appearance of glory, then there shall
be at the coming of our Savior Christ to judge both by the law, and also
according to his Gospel, as the same Apostle testifies. Romans 2.12.16.

Thus much of the manner of the appearance of our Savior, when he shall come
to judgment, at the end of the world.

Question. NOw in the third place. How shall he address and dispose of
himself, to the pronouncing of this most reverend and glorious judgment?

Answer. Then (says our Savior) the Son of man shall sit upon the throne of
his glory.

Explication. What manner of throne, this throne of glory shall be, it is
better to suspend our judgment, then to imagine any particular likeness of the
Majesty of it in our minds: till in due season we shall be the beholders of
if, with our bodily eyes. Nevertheless, this we may be as sure of before
hand, as if we saw it presently with our eyes: that it shall answer to that
description of the throne of God, whereof we read Dan. 7. ver. 9.10. And Revel.
20.11. Where the Apostle John says, That he saw a great white throne, and one
that sat upon it, from whose face fled away both earth and heaven, and their
place was no more found. Which throne no doubt shall be infinitely more
glorious, then the ynorie throne of K. Solomon, not only white as that was,
but most bright: answerable to the purity and righteousness of that judgment,
which shall be pronounced by the Judge that shall sit down upon it: according
to that we read, Psalm. 45.6. and Heb. 1.8. O God thy throne is for ever and
ever, the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a Scepter of righteousness. Thou love
righteousness and hate iniquity, etc. According also to the like testimonies,
which have their final prospect toward this last judgment. Psalm. 5.4. and
Psalm. 7.11. and 9, 7, 8. and 94, 20. Read also Genesis 18, 25. Romans 2, 5, 6, And
Eccles: 3, 16, 17. and chap. 5.7.

But there is yet another thing set down, concerning our Savior his
addressing of himself, to the pronouncing of this his last sentence. And that
is, that by the Ministry of his holy Angels, he will gather all those, whom
he will judge, before him: and separate the good from the bad. The which,
because it belongs to the fourth branch of our inquiry, let us consider both
that, and this, together, as they are linked together in our text.



Before the Son of man (says our Savior) shall be gathered all nations, and
he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd seperateth the sheep
from the goats.

And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left.

Explication
Here indeed is one part of the preparation to the judgment, linked with a
declaration of the persons, who are to be judged.

Of the which: first, that the Angels shall be the instruments of our Savior,
to gather all before him, and to make the separation of the one sort from the
other, we have seen before, Matthew. 13.49. and chap. 24.31. And this shows,
that by the swift ministry of the holy Angels, that this judgment of our
Savior, shall be with most singular expedition, considering the maine
greatness of the judgment: according to that of the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor.
15.51, 52. Behold, I show you a secret thing, we shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed. In a moment, in the twincking of an eye at the last
trumpet, etc. Nevertheless, though the holy Angels shall do it, yet because
they do it as the servants of our Savior therein: therefore our Savior does
ascribe it to himself. In which respect it is, that as he is often compared to
a shepherd, in feeding and preparing his slocke, that is to say, the elect of
God, against the day of his appearance: so now he does likewise from the same
similitude, describe the separation which he will, at that day, make betwixt
the sheep, that is, all that belong unto him, and the goats, that is, the
wicked and reprobate, as they are compared Ezekiel 34. insomuch as these kinds
of cattle, are very contrary in many things, as there appears. The sheep
are harmless, the goats are harmefull: they are a more sweet kind of
cattle, this more stinking and unclean, etc.

Thus much of the preparation to this most reverend judgment, concerning the
ministry of the holy Angels, touched in these last words of our Text.

NOw secondly, concerning the persons, that are to be judged; the which is the
fourth point of our inquiry (as was said.)

Question. Whom does our text describe, that they shall be?

Answer. All mankind without exception: both high and low, young and old rich
and poor, learned and unlearned, Jew and Grecian, Barbarian and Scythian,
English and French, bond and free, good and had, Prince and people, inferior
Magistrate and all subjects, Judges themselves, and all upon whom they have at
any time given judgment. Ministers of the word, and their several flocks and
charges, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers, Martyrs and
their persecutors: Captain and Soldier, Husband and wife, Parents and
children, Master and servant. All whosoever have received life, moving, and
being, at the hand of God, in all generations, from the first man Adam, to the
last that shall be found living, upon the whole face of the earth, at the end
of the world.

Explication.
This is plain, from the general speeches of the holy Scripture, concerning
this matter. Our present text says in the words of our Savior, that all
Nations shall be gathered before him. And the Apostle Paul, 2. Cor. 5.10. We
must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ. And again, Romans
14.10.11.12. We shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ. For it
is written, I live says the Lord (he binds it with a sacred oath) and every
knee shall bow to me, and all tongues shall confess unto God. So then, every
one of us shall give accounts unto God. And Gal. 6.5. Every man shall bear his
own burden. Read also Revel. 1.7. Every eye shall see him. And chap. 20.12.
I saw (says S. John) the dead both great and small stand before God, etc.
Neither can any man appeal from this Judge to another. Neither is there any
place of Sanctuary, privileged to stay the course of it.

But it will be said of some, How can this be, seeing all the generations of
the world, from the beginning thereof; to that age, wherein our Savior shall
come to execute this judgment, shall be dead and rotten touching their bodies:
yea, and many thousands of them drowned, and burned to ashes?



All that are already dead, and all that shall henceforth die before that day
shall be raised up again with the same bodies, wherein they lived and died.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. For so we read. Act. 24.15. The resurrection of the dead,
shall be both of just and unjust. And John. 5.28. Our Savior himself
affirms, that the hour shall come, in the which all that are in the graves
shall hear his voice, and come forth. Yea, and as it was showed to S. John, by
special revelation, by the same our Savior, Revel. 20.13. The Sea shall give
up the dead that are in it, and death and hell shall deliver up the dead that
are in them. And thus it is to be understood, that our Saiuour shall judge
both the quick and the dead, Act. 10.24. Romans 14.9. 1. Pet. 4.5.

Neither let any, out of his faithless heart, give place to any contradictorie
speculations, as though this were impossible, that all should be raised up: and
that they should stand in any horizon, or space of the heaven or of the earth
determining our sight. For God who has made the world of nothing, and by his
word has and will propagate the whole increase, and offspring of all mankind,
from the beginning to the end: he both can and will, by the same his almighty
power, raise up, gather together, and bring all to give an account before him.
He knows also without us, in his infinite wisdom, how to do it; and what
compass of the earth will contain the whole number: so that we may well leave
all our proportions, either arithmeticall, or geometrical, to measure and
determine this matter, which infinitely exceeds al humane reach. And if the
present compass of the earth would not suffice: God could in a moment stretch
it out, and enlarge it to the full capacity, ten fold more then it is.

But casting aside all such curious and faithless speculations: let us
proceed to those necessary points, which are yet behind. And namely, that we
may make way to the sentence of that judgment, which our Savior will give.

Question. Shall all arise from the dead in the same manner, and to the same
end?

Answer. Nothing less.

Question. How then?

Answer. Only the faithful, such as are, and shall be dead, until the
appearing of our Savior Christ shall rise again with bodies made glorious and
spiritual: and such of them, as shall be found living at the time of his
blessed appearing, shall immediately be changed into the like glory: whose
judgment, given as well of one, as of the other; shall be their acquiting and
justifying for ever and ever.

But as touching the wicked, which have and shall die in their sin and
unbelief before that day, though they shall rise again with their bodies: and
the rest which shall be living, shall appear before the judgment seat of
Christ: yet shall their bodies abide still in their natural dishonor and
finfull corruption: only fitted to endure that judgment which shall be
awarded against them; even their condemnation to perpetual and most extreme
torment and misery.

Explication and proof.
This difference of the resurrection, is made manifest in many places of the
holy Scriptures. As Dan. 12.2, 3. Many of them that sleep in the dust of the
earth (says the holy Prophet) shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some
to shame and perpetual contempt. And they that be wise, shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament: and they that turn many to righteousness, shall
shine as the stars for ever and ever. And John 5.29. After that our Savior
Christ has affirmed, that the hour shall come, in the which all that are in
the graves, shall hear his voice; (as was before alleged) he adds these
words. And they shall come forth that have done good, unto the resurrection of
life: but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation. We
read also, concerning the state and condition of the faithful, apart by
themselves: 1. Cor. 15.51. and 1. These 4 14. and Luke 13.29. And concerning the
condition of the wicked apart, Matthew 24.30. as we saw before. And Revel. 1.7.
And chap. 6.15, 16, 17.

But let us stay principally upon this our present Text, wherein the difference
is most lively expressed: and that also diverse and sundry ways.

First, in the separation of the sheep from the goats: that is to say, of the
faithful and godly from the wicked: and the same also with a most charie and
shepherd like care, answerable to the prophecy of Ezekiel. chap. 34. And Ier.
chap. 31.10.

Secondly, the difference is expressed in the setting of the faithful and
godly on the right hand, for honors sake: and the wicked on the left hand, to
their perpetual reproach.

But most of all, the difference is manfest by the contrary judgment, which
our Savior has already determined and foretold, that he will give upon them.

THis sentence or judgment of our Savior; let us now in the fifth place, come
to consider.



The King (says our Savior) shall say to them, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom, prepared for you, from the foundations of the world.

Explication
There being two diverse, yea contrary parts of the judgment of our Savior;
according to the contrary estate and condition of the persons to be iudgeed: we
have three things to be observed in either part.

First, the sentence it self.

Secondly, the reason of the sentence, or rather the law, whereby our Savior
will give his sentence.

Thirdly, an explication of that doubt which arises from the reason or rule of
the sentence, to the justifying thereof: both to the eternal consolation of
the godly, and also to the eternal conviction of the wicked.

The first part of the sentence we have already before us. It is a most
gracious sentence, of the most sovereign and supreme King and Judge;
concerning those that do belong unto him: let us accordingly, with all holy
reverence, consider of it. For whereas the words of Kings and Princes here upon
earth, are not to be neglected; specially when they sit in place of judgment,
having God before their eyes: much more is this sentence of the King of heaven
himself, even the King of all Kings; to be regarded of us. And the rather,
because it contains such a sentence, as no King but he; may presume to give.
No earthly King, or Monarch, has ever had, or shall ever have so large an
authority, this over all the world is: much less over all the generations of
the earth; and that from the beginning to the end of the world. None ever had,
or shall ever have, so great and high authority, as to give judgment upon
body and soul, and that for ever and ever: but only our Lord Jesus Christ,
the sole Monarch of the whole world.

In this sentence, our Savior being thus the sovereign Lord and King of all:
he does first, most notably open and reveal to his Church before hand, (for
the common instruction of all the faithful) what is the only supreme and
chief efficient cause of their perfect salvation and glory; which he will at
that day bestow upon them. This cause of their salvation and glory; is not
their own worthiness, either for excellence of their nature, or for merit of
their works: but it is, as our Savior gives plainly to understand, the
only free grace and favor of God. In regard whereof, and of the fruits and
effects of it, he calls them first, the blessed of his Father. Secondly, he
puts them in possession of the kingdom of God: not by purchase, but in way
of inheritance; and the same also not by natural descent, but by adoption
only. And thirdly, our Savior tells us, that this inheritance, whereof he
gives the faithful the possession; is such an inheritance, as God had
prepared for them before they were: and therefore could in no wise, be merited
and deserved by them. All which considerations, are so many notable reason; as
well against the proud opinion of man's merit, as for the magnifying of the most
free and deserved mercy of God: save only, as our Savior has deserved mercy
for us at his hands.

And it is well for us, that our salvation is not fitted answerable to our
merit; though it were so, that we could deserve any thing to be paid, as a
wages, or due debt unto us. For even as the gifts of earthly Princes of great
estate, which proceed from them of mere favor and bounty, are greater then
those which they give in a proportion of this or that service done unto them.
(Of the which we may take the great King Ahashuerosh for an example, Est. chap.
6. verse 6. What shall be done (says Ahashuerosh) to the man whom the King
will honor? Haman forthwith conceiving in his mind, that this should be a
special honor; seeing the King minded to declare his royal magnificence and
gratuitie therein: he therefore describes such an exceeding honor as he
himself aspired after, though he had no desert, whereby he might presume that
it should be due unto him. And chap. 7.2. of his princely bounty he shows
himself ready to grant Ester her request, to the half of his kingdom. Where
as if she should have stood upon her worthiness, he would not have yielded
her so much as one of his hundredth and seven and twenty Provinces.) So no
doubt, the reward and advancement which proceeds of the most free and
infinite bounty of the Lord our God, to the setting forth of the most perfect
glory of his grace, it is infinitely above that which any man (though he had a
meritorious faculty and power) were able to deserve at his hands.

We are the rather thus to admonish, and ground our selves from the present
words of our Savior; to the end we may the better understand, that which
follows in the reason, or rule of this part of the judgment: and that we may
not be misled, by the false interpretation of any, that contend for
justification by the merit of works.

Nevertheless, before we go from these words, Come ye blessed of my Father:
we are to stay a while longer, to observe other most sweet and comfortable
instructions from the same.

And first, in that our Savior shows, that he will most lovingly call and
encourage those that be of his sheepfold, to come unto him, and to take
possession of the kingdom prepared for them: he shows, that he will be then
of the same gracious mind which he was of, while he was upon the earth, in
that he encouraged all humbled and distressed souls to come unto him, as we
read Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will
ease you. For as he promises, so will he then perform, to call all such to
the eternal possession of that rest, which he promised to begin in the^
here. And it is to singular purpose, that our Savior certifieth us, that he
will in this gracious manner, inuit and encourage all true believers, to the
possession of this glorious kingdom: because he knows, that they will
retain this constant judgment of themselves, that they are utterly unworthy
of if, save only from the free grace and mercy of God, through the alone
worthiness of their Savior.

This therefore shall be the accomplishment of that encouragement, which he
gave to his Disciples before, as we read, Luke 12, 32. Fear not, little
flock: for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom. Yea even that
kingdom, which is only in truth and in full perfection, worthy the name of a
kingdom: because all other kingdoms here in this world, though they be rich,
and have many pleasures, yet they are full of manifold griefs and vexations,
even to the Kings themselves; and they are also subject to impouerishment, and
to all calamity and desolation. Only this kingdom of our Savior, shall be
replenished with true, durable, and perfect, riches and glory, for evermore.

And further more, that this most glorious and incomparable kingdom of God
shall be given to all true believers, of the free gift of God; in way of
inheritance, through adoption, and not of purchase or by any desert: it is
every where confirmed in the holy Scriptures, according to this testimony and
canonical direction of our Savior. And namely, Acts 26.18. That they may
receive forgiveness of sins (says our Savior to Paul) and inheritance
among them which are sanctified by faith in me. From the which ground and
warrant, says the same Apostle Paul, Romans 8.15, 16, 17. Ye have received the
Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father. The same spirit bears
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. If we be children,
we are also heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, if
so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him. For I
account that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory
which shall be showed unto us. Now if the sufferings of martyrdom, for the
testifying of the truth, be not worthy: what obedience of any other work, may
be accounted worthy? It is therefore by inheritance, and that by adoption, as
the Apostle teaches. For the holy spirit of God, is the proper assurance of it
unto us, and not any worthiness of our selves, or our works. Ephesians. 1.13.14.
and chap. 4.30. and 2. Cor. 1.22. Read also Gal. 3.18. This inheritance is not
of the law but by promise. And Colos. 3.24 it is the reward of inheritance by
the gift of Christ, and not the reward of a hired service. And 1. Pet. 3.9. The
children of God are called to be heirs of blessing. Likewise, Heb. 1.14. And
chapter 9.15. Through the death of Christ, they are called to receive the
promise of the eternal inheritance. This inheritance, to the lively hope
whereof, wear, of the abundant mercy of God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, begotten by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead: it is an
inheritance immortal and undefiled, which fades not away, but is reserved in
heaven for us. 1. Pet. 1.3, 4. The riches of this inheritance is glorious,
above that we can fully conceive. Ephesians. chapter 1. verses 18, 19.

From hence therefore we may conceive, in what sense our Savior calls the
children of God, the blessed of his Father: not in respect of the outward
blessings of this life, either riches, or honor, etc: but in regard of the
inward graces of the holy spirit bestowed upon them; and because or this
heavenly inheritance which is prepared for them: according to that in the same
chapter of the Ephesians, verses 3, 4. Blessed be God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things in Christ. As he has chosen us in him, before the foundation
of the world, that we should be holy, etc. as it follows most notably in
that chapter.

And whereas, it was of the great mercy of God, that it pleased him to create
all outward blessings for mankind at the beginning; before he created them: O
how much more infinite was his mercy, that he knowing that man would soon
forfet all his present blessings, prepared for him, and for many thousands of
his lost posterity, a heavenly kingdom, replenished with all spiritual
happiness, and blessing, laid up in store for them! Verily, we cannot
worthily bless God; neither shall all mankind be ever able, to yield him
condign and proportionable praise: no not in all eternity, for this his
blessing; which is not only to be infinite in continuance, but also
unmeasurable in the greatness and excellency of it.

Hitherto of the first part of the sentence, or judgment of our Savior, for
the acquiting and clearing of all true believers; against all both accusations
of their own consciences, whereby they cannot but judge themselves, to be in
themselves utterly unworthy of the glorious kingdom of God, and to be but
unprofitable servants, etc: as also against the malicious accusations of the
devil, our most malignant adversary; not without cause called the accuser of
the brethren: and finally against the accusations of the children of this
world, who when they can convict them of no grievous iniquity, whereof they
have not truly repented them: yet do usually condemn them as hypocrites.

NOw let us come to the reason, or rule of this first part of the sentence, or
judgment of our Savior, concerning them of his right hand.



For (as our Savior tells us, he will say) I was an hungered, and ye gave
me meat: I thirsted, and ye gave me drink: I was a stanger, and ye lodged me:

I was naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in
prison, and ye came unto me.

Explication.
These words of our Savior (as was said even now) contain a reason, and
therein also, that rule or law, according to the which, our Savior frames his
judgment. Let us therefore consider of them, in either respect.

And first, in what sense they are to be accounted a reason of that part of the
judgment, which our Savior has expressed.



They may well be so accounted in diverse respects.

First, in that they argue from a special instance, of the manifold effect and
working of Gods grace, in the hearts of those, whom he calls the blessed of
his Father, that they are so indeed: and that the kingdom of God it prepared
for all such.

Secondly, in that they show that the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and our
Savior himself, do so greatly esteem mercifulness, and the fruits thereof,
toward his needy and afflicted ones; when they proceed of true faith and
obedience to God: that he will of his infinite mercy, reward such as yield
and practice them, with no less reward then eternal life.

Thirdly, in that they contain a direction to the elect children of God, what
way they must take and walk in, to the end they may first glorify God here in
this world, and then be partakers of this glory of his heavenly kingdom for
ever afterward.

Finally, in that they show the children of God, how they may comfortably
assure themselves from the fruits and effects of their faith, that they are
true believers, the very elect of the Father, and heirs of his eternal
kingdom, prepared for them from the beginning.

Expsi. In all these respects indeed, well may these latter words of our
Savior, be a reason of the former part of his sentence or judgment,
concerning the godly: as may be proved by many testimonies of holy Scriptures.

But before we come to the proof of the particulars of this respective
reason: to the end we may carry the matter more plainly before us, we are to
consider in a few words, both the kind of the works here mentioned by our
Savior, and also the kinds of those persons, to whom they, are to be
performed.

The kind of the works, are of true christian mercy, pity and compassion.
Our Savior mentions four particulars: first, feeding, which may well
comprehend the giving both of meat and drink: secondly, lodging: thirdly,
clothing: fourthly, visiting: the which agrees both to the showing of mercy
upon the sick, and also upon such as be in prison. Some make six of them: 1.
giving of meat: 2. giving of drink: 3. lodging: 4. clothing: 5. visiting of
the sick: 6. visiting of prisoners. But we are not to stand much upon the
number, which was a thing that our Savior himself stood not upon. For
whereas there be other duties of mercy besides these: we may be sure that he
meant not to exclude any one of them. By the rehearsal of some, he points
to all the rest: making choice of those that are most sensible and familiar,
even such as are to be most generally practiced among his people.

The persons to whom these works of mercy are to be performed: they are (to
speak generally) all such as stand in need of the reliefs and succors
mentioned. We may reduce them to three heads. First, those that be ordinarily
in want: to wit, the poor which are every where dispersed among the rest of
the people of God: of whom our Savior has said before, The poor ye shall
always have with ye. And that also, by the very appointment of God: according
to the holy Proverb, which says, The poor and the rich meet together, the
Lord is the maker of them all. For as it is said elsewhere, the Lord makes
poor, and he makes rich, he makes high, and he makes low. Of these speaks
our Savior, Luke 14.12. When thou make a dinner or supper, call not thy
friends, nor thy brethren, nor thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors, etc: but
call the poor, the maimed, the lame and the blind. And thou shall be blessed,
because they cannot recompense thee: for thou shall be recompensed at the
resurrection of the just.

The second sort, may be understood of those, that through persecution, are
driven from house and home, for Christ and his gospels sake: concerning which
sort, our, Savior speaks, saying, When they persecute you in one City, flee
to another: he understanding it of such, as for whose escape God so provides;
that they do not by their flight, dishonor his name, or discourage and daunt
the weak brethren.

The third sort, are of those, to whom God denies the opportunity of fleeing:
or in their flight, or otherwise, be apprehended by the enemies of the Gospel,
and cast into prison: according to that saying of our Savior, Luke, 21.12.
They will deliver you into prisons. Of the which three sorts, the first, though
they have housen and lodging, (such as they are) may easily suffer hunger and
thirst, and also want clothing for them and their children. The second sort,
though they have clothing, and (it may be, for a while) money in their purses;
yet shall they want safe and comfortable lodging in their travel, if good
christians do not entertain them: yea in short time they may grow into their
tatters, and want money also to pay for victuals necessary for them. The third
sort, though they cannot be lodged at home; yet unless the case be very
straight, they may be visited and relieved with such things as they want,
though they be shut up in prison. Finally, some of every sort, are sometimes
sick: and then have need of special visiting and looking unto. And of all
these, stand the rither sort bound, to have a christian care to minister unto
them, according to their necessities: lest they should faint, and be
discouraged under their afflictions. Yea so do the richer sort stand bound,
that without the practice of these duties, they shall never be able to stand
with comfort before the Lord, in the great day of his judgment: as we shall
more fully see afterward, when we shall come to the other part of the
sentence, which contains the condemnation of the wicked.

Now touching the particular considerations of the reason, which our Savior
annexeth to the present part of his judgment, for the acquiting of the godly.

First, that the duties of compassion and mercy, which he mentions, are
special testimonies, declaring who are the blessed of God, for whom the
inheritance of the kingdom is prepared, (even from the effects or working of
Gods holy grace in them, to their sanctification) it may appear, Gal. 5.21.
The fruit of the Spirit is love, etc: goodness, faith, etc: against whom (says
the Apostle) there is no law. And James 2.13. Mercy rejoices against
judgment. Moreover, it may appear by that we read in the former Apostle,
Colos. 3.12. Now therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, put on
tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, etc. And thus (says our Savior
himself) shall men show themselves, to be the children of the most high. Luke,
6.35, 36.

Secondly, that mercifulness, and the fruits thereof, are of exceeding regard
and acceptance with God; it is evident in other places of holy Scripture:
though most notably in our present Text. Namely, it is evident in that the Lord
says by his holy Prophet, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: Hos. chap. 6.
verse 6. And our Savior himself shows it plainly, where he promises
assuredly, that a cup of cold water, given to any of his Disciples, in the name
of a Disciple, (that is, because he is a Disciple) shall not be unrewarded.

Thirdly, that the practice of the duties of mercy, is both the way to glorify
God, and also to attain to his kingdom of glory: it cannot be doubted of
those, that know how earnestly, and often, these duties are commanded unto us,
every where in the holy Scriptures. For a taste whereof, read Exodus chap. 22.
verses 21, 22, 23, etc. 27. Deuteronomy. 15.7, etc. Prou. 19.17. Isai. 58.6, 7. etc.
Ezekiel. chap. 18 7. Micah. 6.8. and Zech. 7. verses 8 9, 10. Luke 16.9. Make you
friends with the riches of iniquity, (riches being so called, because they are
usually either gotten by fraud and oppression, or unjustly detained from the
relieuing of the poor) that (says our Savior) when ye shall fail, (to wit,
when life shall fail ye) they may receive ye into everlasting habitations.
That is, that you walking in this way or exercising the duties of mercy, may
through the infinite mercy of God, be received into the kingdom of heaven.

Finally, that the conscionable care, and ready practice of those fruits of
mercy; are comfortable assurances to them that practice them, that they are
the children of God, for whom he has prepared his eternal kingdom: we may be
assured of it, from that saying of out Savior, Matt. 5. where he pronounces
the merciful blessed, and promises, that they shall obtain mercy. Likewise,
by the testimony of Saint John, 1. Epist. 3.14. We know that we are translated
from death unto life, because we love the brethren. The fruits of which love,
he does describe, to be in a principal part, the actions of mercy and
compassion, in relieuing such as want, with their worldly goods. verses 17, 18,
19.

Thus then we may perceive, how in sundry respects of great use and moment unto
us, the words of our Savior, (For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc)
may well be accounted a reason of the former part of his sentence, for the
acquiting of the godly.

As for those that can see no reason of this allegation of our Savior, but the
merit of the works there mentioned: they show themselves more then
purre-blinde. And though they seek for help, both from Grammar, and also from
Logic: yet neither of them, nor any of their riotous rhetoric will relieve
them, in the pride of their opinion.

The causall conjunction in Grammar, does indeed serve to show the reason of a
former sentence: but it does not necessarily show a reason from the cause of a
thing; but as often from the effect, and from other kind of arguments
likewise, as from the cause. And Logic also, teaches that there be diverse
kinds of causes, principal and less principal, etc. And of the principal
and chief causes, every one has a sufficient power, granted of God,
ordinarily to produce the proper effect. Yet that there should be a meritorious
cause, it cannot in the natural propriety of speech, which it uses, allow of
it. And least of all, can it allow, that the less principal cause, should in
any reason bear the name of merit, etc: such as are the works of the most
righteous, in comparison of their eternal salvation, though we ascribe the
most we may unto them.

Hitherto of the words of our Savior, in such sense as they may be accounted a
reason: and that in diverse respects, without any the least advancing of the
merit of man's works.

THe same words of our Savior, may likewise be esteemed, as a law or rule,
whereby he will frame or order his judgment.



It may evidently appear from hence, that our Savior will order his
judgment, according to his law and Gospel.

Explication and proof.
It is true that you say. For the faithful shall be acquitted by the Gospel,
whereunto the law gives witness: as we read, Romans 3.20, 21, 22. by the works
of the law, shall no flesh be justified in his sight: (that is, in the sight of
God) for by the law comes the knowledge of sin. But now is the
righteousness of God made manifest without the law having witness of the law,
and of the Prophets. To wit, the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus
Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe. And the wicked shall be condemned
by the law, which the Gospel establishes: as Romans 2.5, 6, etc to the 18.
verse. And chap. 3.31. Read also Matthew. 5.17, 18, 19.20. And John 3.18, 19,
20, 21. And chap. 12.47, 48. And Heb. 4.12, 13.

This is plain in our text, both on the behalf of the godly to their
salvation, and also to the condemnation of the wicked. For to the one, (as we
have already seen) he gives the praise of well doing, in obedience to the
law of God: which requires mercy above sacrifice. And the Gospel (as we know)
pronounces the merciful blessed: and promises, (as was alleged before) that
they shall find mercy. But contrariwise, (as we shall have further occasion
to consider, in the other part of the sentence or judgment of our Savior) he
shows that the unmercifulness of the wicked, which both the law and the
Gospel do condemn: is a great part of the cause of their condemnation. For as
we read in the new Testament, (beside the curse, which the law of God a
wardeth) there shall be judgment merciless, to them that show no mercy. Iam.
chap. 2.13.

Thus much concerning the words of our Savior, containing the reason or rule
of the first part of his judgment, as was said.

It follows now in the third place, that we come to those words of our
Savior, wherein he clears a doubt or scruple, which might arise from the
same words of the reason: in that he says not to the godly; The poor have
been hungry, and ye fed them, thirsty, and ye have given them drink, etc.
but thus; I was hungry, and ye fed me, etc. For how might this seem to be
so, insomuch as our Savior, while he was here upon earth, was not in such
poor estate, as is here described? Much less, can he be thought to be in any
want now, or ever since he ascended up into heaven. And besides, if it had
been so, that our Savior had been in continual distress and need of
succor, while he was in this world: yet could not this succouring of him be
performed by any, but such as were of that age wherein he lived.

To the clearing of this doubt therefore, our Savior does (in way of
prosopopei, or figure of speech, as it were) put the question into the mouths
of the faithful: and then he himself answers to the same.

Qu. In what words does he this?

An. Then (says our Savior) shall the righteous answer him, (that is, they
shall answer himself the King) saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and
fed thee? or a thirst, and gave the drink?

And when saw we thee a stranger, and lodged thee? or naked, and clothed thee?
Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

Explication.
These are the words of the scruple or doubt. And they are the words which our
Savior ascribes to the righteous: that is, to those who being justified by a
true and lively faith; are also in some measure fruitful in the works of
mercy, which are sometime called by the name of righteousness in the holy
Scriptures. Neither need it be any marvel unto vt, that they should use these
words of strange admiration, for the reasons above mentioned. And furthermore,
who would not marvel to hear a Prince, being in royal estate, to make report
of great succor to have been yielded him by such or such a poor subject of
his, when the same his subject did little know unto the present day, that it
was his Prince, whom he saw and tendered finding him in so pitiful distress,
had not he himself acknowledged it? Wherefore much rather may the righteous,
whom our Savior speaks of, have great admiration, we supposing they did
little think that the person whom they succored, was the Lord Jesus himself:
or that he would esteem it as if it had been done to himself in his great
need.

This speech also, may well show, that the disposition of those that be truly
godly, is not to stand much in the remembrance of the good things that they
have done already: but rather to judge themselves unprofitable because they
have done no more good. And being thus humbled in themselves, it is the^
property to rest only upon the comfort of Gods free grace and mercy: and not
upon the worthiness of any thing, that they themselves have done.



Then (says he) the King wall answer, and say unto them, Verily I say unto
you, in as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of those my brethren,
ye have done it to me.

Explication
This King, whom our Savior speaks or, is (as we know your Savior himself.
Let us therefore, consider so much the more reuerendly of that which is said:
as of that which contains matter both of necessary information, and also of
singular comfort, to all such as he speaks of. And the rather also; because
he utters that which he speaks, in the person of the great king of heaven.
For (as we observed before) when the words of Kings and great Princes of the
earth, are usually of great note; but especially when they sit down iudicially
to hear and give sentence: then surely, the words of this King of Kings, and
that concerning the most weighty and reverend judgment of all other; are
worthy, not only in these words, but also in the whole description and course
of the judgment, to be most reuerendly regarded of us.

And touching the present words, though they may well take away the former
scruple and admiration touching the manner of the speech of our Savior, I was
an hungered, etc. Yet may they justly put us in to another admiration like to
the former, that he should (as he says) account so highly of all that is done
to the poor and afflicted for his sake, as if he himself were in like
necessity and alike afflicted here on earth, and had the same things done to
him for his relief: and that therewithal, he does remember them more exactly
then we our selves, either can, or ought to do: yea that he does this, though
we do them not, in so perfect a measure, or manner, as we ought to do them for
his sake. Verily these considerations ought to engender very earnest thoughts
and purposes in us, to be more in love with these duties, and more to tender
such distressed persons then ever yet we have done.

And here withal we must needs confess to our own great reproof, and
likewise be heartily sorry, that we have not thought so earnestly and fully of
this matter, as we ought: that we have not practiced these excellent duties,
in such manner, or measure, as we should have done: that we have not beheld
the face of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the persons of the afflicted and poor
Christians: and that we have not loved them with such a dear love, as our
Savior is to be loved, and embraced of us. Wherefore, for our further relief
against our poverty; and failing in this behalf: let us weigh the golden
words of our Savior, with more try skoles and balance, then we have done.

First, we may easily perceive that our Savior is very earnestly desirous,
that we should receive this point with strong apprehension: for therefore he
does not barely speak it, but with serious asseueration thus, Verily, I say
unto you.

Secondly, he expresses his kind acceptance of these duties, by a particular
account of the performance of them, not only in a general sum as it were:
but even from one to one. For our Savior says, Insomuch as ye have done it to
one of these, ye have done it to me.

But not content with this; we see how (and I pray you let us well consider)
that he adds in the third place, that he does not only accept of that
succor, and relief, which is yielded to Christians of special calling and
grace (such as shine as stars among the rest) but of that also, which is
performed, even to the least of any of those, that do profess his name:
whether least in calling, or least in measure of gifts and graces, whosoever be
true hearted unto him.

Finally, that nothing might be wanting, which might encourage to these duties
of mercy and compassion toward every one of his poor and afflicted ones: our
Savior honors, even the least of them, with the honorable title and name
of his brethren. O how gracious is this benignity, of our most blessed and
glorious Lord and Savior! Blessed be his name forever. Whom would not these
words effectually move, being duly considered (whether on their part that yield
relief, or on their part that do endure affliction for Christ his sake) to
show all good faithfulness unto him, and to rejoice in him with unspeakable joy,
in what estate and condition so ever: seeing we may well perceive that the one
sort, as well as the other, are highly and pretiously esteemed of him?

For he that so dearly loves, and so highly esteems those that show mercy
to any for his sake; cannot but bear like love and affection, to those to whom
the mercy is showed: in as much as they suffer that affliction, which they
endure, in the cause of our Savior. And indeed, of both, they do perform
the more excellent duty, and service to our Savior: whosoever are content,
(need so requiring) to want all worldly comfort, yea to endure all torments,
for him, and his truths sake.

Thus therefore (as was said before) we may easily perceive, that our Savior
is very earnest in commending the works of mercy and compassion, such as he
has mentioned: yea, and all other of the same, or like kind, no doubt.

For (as has been already observed) our Savior in mentioning these for
instance, did not mind to exclude any other. And beside that; insomuch as
there are many other duties, of other sort and kind; and the same also more
excellent then these, in that they do more immediately, and directly concern
the Majesty of God, and are as the root of those: to wit, the true knowledge,
faith, fear, and love of God in Christ Jesus: these also will our Savior
assuredly crown in his servants. And on the contrary, insomuch as the
condemnation of the wicked, shall not proceed against them, only because of
their vnmerciful^es; but also for all other of their sins: as may appear,
Mat. 5.22. where angry and unadvised words come into judgment, and chap.
12.36.37. every idle word, and Eccles. 11.9. all youthful pranks, and chap.
12. of the same book, in the last verse. Every secret thing, and 2. cor: 5.10.
all that every man has done, whether it be good or evil. How then comes it
to pass, that our Savior makes express mention, only of the mercifulnes of
the godly, with the actions thereof, to their praise here: as afterward, of
unmercifulness only, to the reproof and condemnation of the wicked?

Question. What may be the reason hereof?

First, because through self-love, which is naturally most deeply rooted in
us; we are very hardly drawn to the performance of these duties of love to our
neighbors: yea most hardly to the duties of christian love to our christian
afflicted, and impouerished brethren; how sharp soever their afflictions be,
though it be hunger, (a very sharp sause, as we all may know,) or nakedness,
or any other.

Secondly, because these duties, are the most familiar and plain testimonies
of an upright heart toward Christ: whereas it is most usual with hypocrites to
rest in the external ceremonies of the worship of God, without any further
regard.

Thirdly, because as the children of God are more merciful; and in the fruits
of mercy, more plentiful and constant, to the succouring and helping of their
needy and helpless brethren here upon earth: by so much the more lively, they
do represent the divine image, and likeness of God their heavenly Father.

And contrariwise, because where unmercifulness is, there does easily lodge
cruelty, and all other sin. And for that, as any are more unmerciful and
cruel, so are they not only more unlike to Grd: but also more like to their
Father the devil, who bears this brand, that he is a murderer from the
beginning.

Explication. and proof.
These reasons may well suffice: and they have good warrant from the holy
scriptures of God.

For first, as touching the difficulty: the incessant instructions, rebukes,
and exhortations, with so many and often repeated promises and threatenings,
tending this way set down in the holy scriptures, are a plentiful and
demo^stratiue proof of it. Ter giuersatrix nostra caro est: and ad
benefaciendu^pigra. Alas our sluggish nature shukketh at it, when it comes to
any matter of contribution, from the purse to alms, or to any other holy use:
albeit we would seem to be with the forwardest in hearing, or talking of the
word, and in commending of well doing, etc.

Secondly, that these duties are of all other, the most familiar and plain
testimonies of an upright heart toward our Savior Christ: it may likewise be
evident from the holy scriptures, because fewer of such have been charged and
detected or hypocrisy, then of the other: as may appear by the usual
practice of the holy Prophets, who have from the want of these duties improued
the religion and worship of those, that were zealous in outward ceremonies: but
never convicted any of hypocrisy, who have proved themselves by the works of
mercy, Nulla re alia, itae declaratur generaliter, animus erga Christu^
sincerus atque ista allectione propter Christae. Musculus.
to be merciful men. And in this respect, well says a learned man, that
sincerity of heart toward Christ, is in no other thing so generally declared,
as in brotherly love for Christ's sake. For whereas love may be declared these
two ways, either to the parties themselves who are loved, or to others for
their sake: this latter, is a more sure confirmation then the former, in so
much as he that will do this, will much more do the other, if opportunity
shall serve: but it follows not so strongly, on the other side. Whereupon
very well concludes the same learned man. Non potest igitur certius declarari
qua simus erga Christum fide, and charitate, quam in ijs qui ad Christum
pertinent, and maxim illis qui conte^ptissimi sunt. It cannot be more
certainly declared, how faithful and loving we are toward Christ, then by
our dealing toward them, that belong unto him, and chiefly to them, that are
most contemptible among the rest.

Now thirdly, that by mercifulnes, and the works thereof, we do specially
resemble the image or God our heavenly Father, it may appear by calling to
mind the speech of our Savior, mentioned not long before, out of the 6. of S.
Luke, verses 35.^6. and Coloss: 3.12. And on the contrary, that the
unmerciful and cruel men, do thereby show themselves the children of the
Devil, and to bear his image: that one place of our Savior is very plain.
Ioh: 8.^4.

Thus therefore, all the reasons mentioned, why our Savior stands so
purposedlie upon the works of mercy, have their warrant from the holy
Scriptures.

And herewithall, we may see a lively representation of the state of the whole
true Christian Church here upon earth, in that it stands in these two sorts
of people; either those that are poor and afflicted for Christ, and his
Gospel sake: or th se that have a merciful regard of such, whosoever, for the
time, are in prosperity themselves Likewise, we may see on the contrary, what
the state and condition of the false or malignant church is, in that it
consists of such, as either do persecute the true faithful Christians, or at
the least, do neglect them, being persecuted. Let us therefore be careful to
show our selves, while we are at liberty, members of the true church of God,
in pitying and relieuing those that be in want, and in trouble, according to
this excellent doctrine of our Savior: and as we are admonished, Heb. 13.2.3.
Let brotherly love continue. Be not forgetful to lodge strangers. etc.
Remember them that are in bonds, as if ye were bound with them: and them that
are in affliction, as if ye were also afflicted in the body. Yea, let us be
prepared to suffer ourselves, if so God shall show it to be his good will, by
callng of us forth, thereunto. But in no wise, let us be like them that give
themselves to pleasure without all fellow-feeling of the afflictions of Joseph,
according to that reproof of the Prophet Amos, chapt: 6. verses, 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.

But yet one thing more. Insomuch as our Savior, in all his speech of mercy,
may seem to make no mention of any, to whom that mercy, which he will
reward, is showed: but of such as are Christians, even such as he calls his
brethren.



The Apostle Saint Paul, who both spoke and wrote by the spirit of our Savior
Christ, says plainly, that it is our duty, to do good unto all, but
specially to them of the household of faith, as we read, Gai: chap: 6. the 10.
verse.

Explication
It is true. All are to be succored, yea even our enemies, according to every
man's ability, and as just cause is offered: with such caution always, as it
must be to win them to the Lord: and so as the faithful in like necessity,
already gained and won, must have, as it were, the double portion.

But to speak fully of the right manner of exercising the fruits of mercy
and beneficence, it would require a larger treatise, A Treatise of christian
Beneficence.
then now were meet to be stood upon. I will refer you therefore, to that
treatise, which is already written of this argument: and published to be read
of you, at your best leisure. Only, this let us briefly put our selves in
mind of, that for want of due discretion in the exercise of these duties, the
mercies of many are of no reckoning before the Lord. As for example, when of
blind devotion, or ignorance, any are beneficial to Papists, and other
heretics: or of a fond pity to vagrant and vagabondly persons, as though
such were commended to our care, by our Savior. And so they are indeed, but to
such a care, as wherein it is of late years well provided for them, that they
should becaused to leave their wandering life, and to live so, as they may in a
better course and order be provided for. In which course, God of his infinite
mercy grant, that they may be duly looked unto. And as touching the present
instruction of our Savior, we may be sure, that they are no such disordered
persons, whose relief from door to door, he will so highly commend, and
reward, at the last day.

Wherefore, that we deceive not our selves, in mistaking the works of mercy,
which our Savior, according to this his holy doctrine, will then reward: these
things hereafter following, are very requisite.

First, that they themselves, who do show mercy, be true believers, and not
loose and carnal professors of the Gospel. For the works of mercy, either
of heathen men, or of hypocritical Christians, come not into this high
reckoning before God.

Secondly, that they have special regard of the faithful, in the exercise of
their mercy: and that, of love which they bear, not so much to them, as to
our Savior himself, who professes himself, to be an hungered, when they are
hungry, etc.

Thirdly, that they be not weary of well doing, for one or a few good works:
as our Savior gives to understand, by his multiplying of many works together.
Neither that we stay in the duties expressed, neglecting the rest: but that we
join all other of like kind with these. Such as are instruction to the
ignorant, counsel to the unstable, consolation to the feeble minded, remitting
of debts to those that have not to pay, lending to preserve those from debt,
and the danger thereof, who are ready to fall into it, preservation out of any
other danger, as of imprisonment, if we may by any lawful means deliver any
that they fall not unjustly into it: finally prayer, that alone, if we cannot be
otherwise helpful.

Fourthly, that they be not only beneficial to the Christians of greater
note, and common estimation in the Church; but also even to the meanest and
least among them: for so says our Savior expressly.

Fifthly, that they put no confidence in their works, how many, or how great so
ever they be in their own priuitie, or in the eye and judgment of any other
man. And such a disposition does our Savior seem to respect, when he
describes them saying, When saw we thee an hungered and fed thee? etc.

Sixthly, that they do not think, that these works of mercy, do privilege
them, that they should be negligent, and careless in any other duty of true
Christian love and godliness. For as we read, Math. 5.19.20. Whosoever breaks
any of the least commandments (of God) he shall be called the least in the
kingdom of God.

Finally, that we do no ways misconstrue this description of our Saviors
last judgment, we may not think that there shall be any long time granted,
for men to plead for themselves, after the manner used here below, in earthly
assizes and judgments. For all things shall doubtless, be both begun, and
also finished, with singular celeritie, and expedition: insomuch, as the
separation (as we have seen) is so made before hand, that the judgment of one
sort, shall be the common judgment of all of the same sort, as well touching the
godly as the wicked. Only the order is described, by our Savior, touching
certain of the circumstances, in such manner, as may best serve for the
instruction of those, that belong unto him, how they are, even to the end of
the world, to prepare themselves, that they may be saved, at his appearing: and
how in substance and effect, it shall be accomplished, though otherwise, for
the manner of it, it shall be so glorious and reverend, as now we cannot fully
conceive of it, no more then we are able to look upon the Sun, in the
strength of the brightness thereof.

And thus far be it spoken, concerning the former part of the sentence of our
Savior, for the acquiting of the faithful: as well touching the sentence it
self, as the reason, or law, and rule: and also concerning the clearing of
that doubt, which our Savior saw might arise from the same.

THe second part of the judgment, is yet behind.



Then (says our Savior) shall he (that is, the King) say unto them on the
left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which is prepared
for the devil, and his Angels. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat:
I thirsted, and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye lodged me not: I
was naked, and ye clothed me not: sick and in prison, and ye visited me not.

Then shall they also answer him, saying Lord when saw we thee an hungered,
or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not
minister unto thee?

Then shall he answer them, and say, Verily, I say unto you: in as much as ye
did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

Explication.
Our Savior having finished the first part of the judgment, he does in these
words, in like order describe the second: first setting down the sentence or
judgment it self: secondly, the reason or rule of it, and thirdly the
explication of the reason, to the justifying of the sentence, against the
excuse or plea of the wicked.

But before we come to the words of this part of our text, two things may not
unprofitably be observed of us. First, the reason of the order, why our Savior
Christ does first judge; that is to say, absolve and acquire, yea pronounce the
sentence of perfect salvation and glory, concerning the godly: before he will
come to give sentence of condemnation against the wicked. And secondly, to what
end our Savior should thus diligently set forth, and describe this latter part
of his judgment, seeing the godly are free from the condemnation of it: and as
for the wicked, they will not regard any thing that is said, to move them to
take the way to escape it.



This it a real demonstration, that the Lord delights more in the salvation
of the godly, then in the condemnation of the wicked, simply considered.

Explication and proof.
It is so indeed. And therefore does the Lord profess by his holy Prophet, that
he does not delight in the death of a sinner, but rather desires that he
might repent, and be saved: as we read, Ezeck 18. This also does the Lord
account the perfection of his glory, to be a God of infinite mercy, to the
salvation of all such as shall believe in the name of his Son, and unfeignedly
repent them of their sins: as Ephesians: 1.6. God the Father has predestined
us, to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will. To the praise of the glory of his grace.

And beside this, insomuch as the Lord had appointed in his counsel, that his
elect, as a part of their aduanceme^t, should judge the world: the Apostles to
sit upon twelve thrones to judge the 12. tribes of Israel, as we read, Mat:
19.28. and all other of the faithful in their measure and degree, as 1. Cor:
6, 2, 3 and Revel: 3.21. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me
in my throne, even as I overcame, and sit with my Father in his throne.

Nevertheless, this judging of the world, by the holy Apostles, and all other
the Saints of God, it is not so to be understood, as if either the one or the
other, should communicate with the sovereignty of our Savior, which is only
properly and entirely belonging to himself: but that they should, after a sort
judge and condemn the world, by their acknowledging, and consenting to the
righteousness of our Savior Christ executed therein.

Thus much concerning the first point.

Now secondly, to what end does our Savior describe his proceeding, which
shall be against the wicked, as well as he has done that which shall be on the
behalf of the godly? seeing (as was said) the godly are free from it, and the
wicked reprobates will not be reclaimed, or made careful to avoid it, by any
thing that may be said?



Though it is certain and true, that there is no condemnation to the godly,
Rom: 8.1. neither will the wicked by any means grow to be wise, as we read,
Isai: 26.10.11. Prou: 27.22. Yet it is of very good use in respect of either of
them.



First, in respect of the godly, who have great need both to be helped against
that security and carelesnes which is ready to creep upon them, if they
should not be awaked by the consideration of the fearful judgments of God,
and specially by the consideration of his last judgment: who also have like
need, to be comforted against the cruelties of the wicked, here in this life,
by the consideration of the most contrary state and condition wherein they
shall be, in the world to come. For one contrary is made more lightsome and
clear, by comparing it with the other, as if white and black were laid
together.

And in respect of the wicked, there is likewise very good use of the
publishing of this their last judgment.

For although they will not learn hereby to repent, that happily they might
escape it: yet it does some thing restrain them from extremity of wickedness,
which otherwise they would the rather run into.

And if it have not this effect, yet shall they be the rather, left without all
color of excuse.

These things are so plainly agreeable to the holy Scriptures, that we will
not stand to allege any particular proofs thereof at this time. None can, by
any color of reason, deny these uses of the description of the last
judgment, concerning the condemnation of the wicked.

And beside that which is already said, it is furthermore profitable to those
of the children of God, who are lying yet in their sins: to the end their
conversion may be the more speedily and effectually furthered thereby. For
who, hearing, and believing at any time, how woeful the state of the wicked
shall be; and that also to continue for ever and ever: will not (if there be
any the least grace) from this so fearful an admonition, begin to withdraw
himself from the ways of the wicked, that he may be delivered from the
partaking, of their most terrible torments?

But let us come to the words of our Savior.

Wherein, first concerning the sentence it self, let us obs rue the
contrariety, betwixt it and the former, in the several branches of it. For in
that; he calls and incourageth the godly to come unto him, saying, Come unto
me: he e he abandoneth the wicked from him, saying; Depart from me. There, he
calls the godly, the blessed of his Father: here, he calls the wicked,
cursed ones. There, he says, that the kingdom was prepared before the
foundations of the world, for the children of God: here, he affirms that
Hell fire is prepared for the wicked. There, he gives to understand, that the
godly shall have their communion with him, and the holy Angels: here, he
tells the wicked, that they shall have their fellowship with the Devil and
his wicked Angels.

The comparison thus touched; let us now consider of the latter part of the
sentence, more simply in the own nature: according to the several parts, or
members of it.

We may consider of them in this order. First, who the persons be, that shall
be condemned. Secondly, what the punishment is, whereunto they are to be
adjudged.

The persons are said to be such as are Cursed: and they are no doubt accursed
of God. Nevertheless, our Savior does not call them the Cursed of the Father,
or the cursed of God: as he had said of the godly, that they are the blessed
of the Father The reason may be, for that no man is simply cursed of God, but
by reason of his corruption and sin: whereby he makes himself justly
subject to the curse of God. For sin is the proper and immediate cause of
that curse, which falls upon any.

And the curse is the next forerunner of condemnation.

For this cause therefore, it may by good reason be conceived, that our Savior
Christ spares the name of God, or of the Father, though he had used it
before; that every man might find the cause of the curse in himself: and the
cause of blessing, to be in the free grace and mercy of God; who is the only
true and proper fountain thereof.

Furthermore, touching the persons, of whom this sentence shall be principally
pronounced: by the course and tenure of it, it is evident, that they are, and
shall be such, as be professors of the Gospel, both Jew and Gentile: yet
hypocritical Christians, because of their hypocrisy, are more accursed, then
they that never heard of the Gospel: according to the saying of our Savior,
that it shall be easier for them of Sodom and Gomorrha, at the day of
judgment, then for such.

Thus much for the Persons.

The punishment is to be considered, first in two several parts and degrees;
and then in some further amplifications of it: setting forth, both the
certainty of it, and also the most hideous, and woeful vncomfortablenesse of
it.

The first part of the punishment, is a separation from Christ, and from the
joys and glory of his heavenly kingdom for ever. Departye from me, says our
Savior.

As though he should say. Howsoever ye have presumed to boast of my name, and
to promise to your selves, the kingdom of heaven (as we know that the wicked
are ready, both to think and to speak, that they look to be saved as well
as the best) yet, says our Savior, Depart from me: ye have no part in me, or
in my coming, or with my redeemed. And as he said before, to the foolish
virgins, I know ye not: so does he speak to the same effect, here in this
place. This therefore, shall be the first degree of the punishment: that it
shall be a frustrating of all hope of happiness for ever. It may be called, the
punishment of deprivation, or loss of the greatest good, that might possibly
be obtained.

The second part, or degree of the punishment, may be called the punishment of
feeling or smart: yea of the enduring of the greatest evil, or woe, that can
befall any creature. This latter part of the punishment, is called fire, for
the sharpnes of it: yea it shall be fire of such a kind, as God shall make a
fit executioner of his most severe wrath. For let us not deceive our selves,
God is able as easily to do both the one and the other: as he has already
given to every creature, that nature and disposition, which they do presently
enjoy. The same punishment, is said to be everlasting; because it shall be such
a fiery vengeance, as shall always torment and burn: and yet never, either
consume and wast it self, or the matter which it shall burn. This everlasting
fire, shall not only torment the body, but also the soul. Yea the soul, not
only by the body; but properly, and in the own nature. For it shall be such a
fire, as shall torment the spiritual nature, of the very devils themselves.
Herein therefore, does their judgment exceed all humane judgments, that ever
were, or can be. For the most grievous of them, are but bodily; they cannot
touch the soul: they are but temporal; they cannot be prolonged for ever:
nay, they cannot extend further, then the term of the natural life. O
therefore, whatsoever the judgment of man shall be of us, or upon us: let us
be careful I beseech you, that we may escape this most heavy and everlasting
punishment, which shall proceed from the most terrible judgment, of the divine
Majesty of the eternal God. We do not without cause, pity those that run on
in their sins, as it were hasting a pace to this destruction. Let us learn
to pity our selves. And when we shall do so; let us magnify the goodness of
the Lord our God and heavenly Father, in this behalf: acknowledging, that he
has herein showed on us, his inestimable pity, and compassion. For otherwise,
we should be as careless, as any other are.

But let us proceed, to such further amplifications of this punishment, as the
words of our Savior, do point us unto: to wit, the certainty of it; and the
most woeful and hideous vncomfortablenes of it.

The certainty of it, is argued from the cause; in that our Savior says,
that it is prepared for the wicked: yea no doubt, even as certainly, as God
has prepared heaven for his elect children; according to the saying of our
Savior in the 3 of John. He that believes not, is condemned already: to wit,
if he harden his heart in his unbelief, against the doctrine of the Gospel? In
the last verse of the 30 chap: of the Prophet Isaiah, the Lord threatening the
destruction of the enemies of his Church (he alluding to a doolefull place,
near unto Jerusalem, where, through outrageous superstition, parents did most
unnaturally burn and torment their children, under pretense of sacrificing
them to God: as we read. 2. Chron: 28, 3, and ch: 33.6. And Ier 7.31.) the
Lord (I say) in that place of the Prophet Isaiah, alluding to that doolful
place of cruel superstition: he describes the most doolfull destruction of the
enemies of his church for ever, in these words. Tophteh (or as the name of the
same place is called Topheth, Ier: 7 31. alleged even now, and likewise, 2.
King. 23.10.) it is (says the Lord) prepared of old: it is even prepared for
the King: he has made it deep and large: the burning thereof is fire and
much wood: the breath of the Lord, like a river of brimstone does kindle it.
Whence it grew, that, Hell, the place of the eternal torment of the wicked,
was of the godly (the haters of this horrible idolatry) from the name of the
possessor of that place: who was the son of Hinnom, called the vallie of
Hinnom: according to that saying of our Savior, Mat: 5.22. Whosoever shall say
Fool, shall be worthy to be punished with Hell fire. The word which the
Evangelist uses, is Gehenna, with some little difference, or deflection from
the hebrewe words (Geh bhen-hinnom) the valley of Ben-Hinnom. So then, we may
say of Hel-fire and of the torment it self (as was said of the place of the
torment) that God has certainly prepared it of old, for the most miserable,
and perpetual torment, of all the wicked.

The last amplification of the punishment, which our Savior will adiudge the
wicked unto; is from an adiunct, as we may call it: namely, because therein,
they that have refused the communion of Christ, and his Church; shall have
their followship with the devil and his Angels. That is to say, with the whole
company of all devils, or wicked and unclean Spirits. For so are these words
of our Savior (the devil and his Angels) to be understood, according to that
Revel: 12.7. There was a battle in heaven, Michael (that is to say Christ) and
his Angels, fought against the dragon (that is the devil) and the dragon
fought, and his Angels, that is to say, all the rest of the devils. For so the
holy Scriptures speak of them, as being subject after a sort, to one
principal. Mat: 12.24. But herein, we must take heed that we be not over
curious. Only, these two points, are worthy our consideration. First, that
seeing this punishment of everlasting fire shall be so great, as it shall
torment the devils (according to that, Mat: 8.29. and 2. Pet: 2.4. etc, Jude
verse 6.) it must then needs be of that force, that it shall make the
stoutest among men, to tremble and quake under it. Secondly, that insomuch as
in our judgment (whatsoever the wicked think) it is a very uncomfortable
estate, to be yoked with Idolaters, Blasphemers, Traitors, Murderers, and
such like (for miserable comforters are they all) much more hideous shall it
be, for the wicked to have their joint portion of torment with all the devils
of Hell: whose temptations they have followed, in their wicked lusts, and
sinful pleasures all their life time.

Hitherto of the latter part of the judgment of our Savior against the
wicked: to wit, of the words of the sentence it self.

NOw follows the reason, or rule and law of the same.



For (says our Savior) I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I
thirsted, and ye gave me no drink.

I was a stranger, and ye lodged me not: I was naked, and ye clothed me not:
sick and in prison, and ye visited me not.

Explication.
This reason, or rule and law, whereby the judgment is ordered; is to be
understood, as containing in it a full and sufficient cause of the condemnation
of the wicked. For even unmercifulness alone, is of it self very damnable.
There shall be judgment merciless, to them that show no mercy, says Saint
James. And yet we may well understand (as was touched before) that it goes not
alone. For any sin, will easily lodge in the heart of the unmerciful man:
neithere shall any other sins of theirs be neglected in this judgment,
though this only be expressed. For (as we know, and as it has been
observed before) all angry and unadvised words shall come into judgment, Mat:
5.22. yea every idle and vain word: chap: 12, 36.37. Likewise all youthful
prankes, Eccles. 11.9. And chap: 12. the last verse. Every secret thing shall
come unto judgment. Yea, 2, Cor: 5.10. All things are reckoned within the
compass of the last judgment. All failings in the duties of our-seuerall
callings: and all transgressions of the law of God, whatsoever. The reason why
our Savior made choice of this sin of unmercifulness, for the conviction of
the wicked: has been already rendered, when we spoke of the contrary virtue
of the godly, in the other part of the judgment.

That also which was alleged before, to the praise of the godly, for their
fruits of mercy, through the gracious acceptance of our Savior: it serves
here, in his justice, to show the indignity of the unmercifulness of the
wicked; insomuch as he takes himself to be neglected, when as any needful or
afflicted Christian is not relieved.



The reason of this latter part of the judgment, is only against such, as
having this worlds good, do shut up their compassion, and close up their
hands, from their distressed brethren.

Explication and proof.
It is so in deed: the reason of our Savior is so to be understood. For it is
evident and clear, that even of those that are needy and distressed
themselves, our Savior has his blessed number: though they be such as be so
far from relieuing other, that they cannot succor themselves And besides,
sometimes, even those that gladly would relieve those Christians, that are shut
up in prison: cannot be permitted to have access unto them, or to send that
succor, which they desire they might. Some also, are so unapt to comfort those
that be in distress, either in prison or in grievous sickness. etc. that they
should in visiting of them more discomfort, then comfort them: much like unto
those, to whom the Apostle said, what do ye weeping and breaking my heart?
Act: 21, 13. Nevertheless, this we may be bold to say, that none of those do
belong to the kingdom of heaven, but shall be condemned by this sentence of
our Savior: whosoever have not an unfeigned willingness and desire, according to
their ability, and according to that just occasion which God gives unto them,
to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, etc. Or if they cannot themselves,
have no care to stir up, and persuade others thereunto, that are able. Or if
being able for wealth, and though unfit in some other respect (as was mentioned
even now) if they should not send their good will and the fruit thereof, by
others that are meet to be employed in such cases. Or if not able to do any
thing else, they should not be careful, to pray for me afflicted, as the church
did for Peter: when none might come at him, but his armed enemies and keepers.
Act: 12.5.

Such as should thus far fail in mercy, should show plainly, that they
have no true love to Christ, according to this his sentence here: nor any truth
of religion in them, as we may perceive by that which the Apostle James says,
chap: 1, 27. Pure religion and undefiled even before God the Father is this, to
visit the fatherles, and widows in their adversity, and to keep himself
unspotted of the world.

Here therefore (as we see) is most urgent and necessary cause offered, that
every one should suffer themselves to be earnestly admonished; yea that every
one, should most seriously admonish and warn themselves, to take heed, even
under pain of damnation; how he do neglect to practice the duties of mercy:
and namely those common and familiar duties, which our Savior does by name,
thus often, rehearse and report unto us. Let every one take heed, how he say,
or think himself not to be able; when God knows he is, and may well spare some
portion this way: if not much, yet of a little, to spare a little. And if the
meaner sort, be not to be excepted: much less are the richer; and least of al,
such as have greatest abundance. It is one principal duty wherewith the King
stands charged: to judge, deliver, and save the poor and needy, and him that
has no helper, and to be merciful unto him, Psalm: 72. v. 4.12.13.14. And Ps:
82.3.4. Neither let such as be greatly rich, think that it shall excuse then,
so give some small or dribling portion this way; when they are excessiuely
prodigal and expensiue in their own diet, and in feasting of their rich
friends: likewise in costly apparel, and buildings: in gaming and p^stimes,
etc. and some even in superstitious idolatry to dumb images, to dead Saints,
with neglect of the living.

Finally, insomuch as all such as do not feed the hungry, nor cloth the naked,
nor lodge the harbourles, etc: shall eue^ for their omissio^ of these duties, be
damned for ever to Hell fire; yea though it may be, they have gotten their
goods in lawful courses of trading, or otherwise by inheritance, etc: how may
any of those think, that they shall escape; whosoever, not only of pride, and
squaimish daintines, will not visit or look once upon the sick and forlorn;
but of contempt and hatred, do show themselves worse then the rich man, whose
soul was thrown down to hell, for not feeding and clothing poor Lazarus, as
we read, Luk, 16.19.20. etc? In so much as by their cruel oppressions, and
fraudulent courses, they famish such as had bread; strip and leave naked such
as had clothing; take the beds from such as had lodging; in that they
themselves will neither relieve the servants of God, nor willingly suffer
others that would, to do it, etc. Assuredly, the case of such, must needs
prove most woeful, at the day of the last judgment.

But it may be, they are not persuaded, that there shall be any such
judgment, as we speak of. Be it that they are not persuaded: yet they hear
what our Savior says. Wherefore, if they were wise; although it were but a
matter doubtful: they would make sure, and not hazard themselves so deeply, as
they do. Hitherto of the reason, or rule and law, of this latter part of the
sentence.

Now let us proceed to the clearing of this reason, against the reply of the
unmerciful. And first, let us hear the words of our Savior again.



Then (says he) shall they also answer him, saying, Lord when saw we thee an
hungered, or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did
not minist^r unto thee?

Then shall he answer them, and say, verily, I say unto you: in as much as ye
did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

Explication.
Here have we both the reply of the unmerciful, and also the answer of our
Savior, to the clearing of his foremer reason: and to make it, as it were,
current against them. Let us consider a little of either of them.

And first, touching the reply of the unmerciful; the very change of the form
of speech, in the more incitate contracting of it, in comparison of the former
speech ascribed to the righteous and merciful: it gives us just occasion to
observe the diverse, yea the contrary affection and spirit, wherewith the
speak.

The righteous (as we saw before) spoke with admiration, and with a modest
mind and spirit: but these speak hypocritically, as if they had bin reuerendly
affected toward our Savior, with a mind, willing and ready to justify
themselves: as if forsooth; they would never so greatly have failed Christ, if
they had at any time, seen him; either an hungered, or a thirst, or naked, etc.
And they go away very roundly with the matter, as if it were like to go
wholly on their side, or else they must have wrong etc. So that the speech is
fitted, so as it may well be ascribed to all Iustificiaries, and superstitious
persons who (like enough) seem to themselves, to be in nothing, failing to
Christ: seeing they give liberally to the maintenance of the Images, and
pictures, and false worship of Christ, and of his Saints departed this life:
and it may be that some of them do give liberally to the superstious poor,
to make to themselves beads-men, and to confirm them in their blind devotion,
and to augment their own merit, etc.

But our Savior, quickly strippeth all such of whatsoever they may pretend;
dispatching them with this answer, as it follows in the second part of our
present text: Verily, I say unto you: in as much as ye did it not to one of the
least of these (our Savior pointing as it were with the finger to his holy
Saints, and martyrs, and to all poor godly Christians, appearing before him)
ye did it not to me: says our Savior. Yea though it may be (as was said of us
before) they showed their superstitious, and iustificiarie mercy, to many of
their own brood, both almse-me^ and vagra^t people. For this is the nature of
all the wicked, that they will choose to show their mercy and liberality (such
as it is) to any: rather then to those, that do truly fear God, and withdraw
themselves, from all their wicked superstition and idolatry.

And this makes all their devotion, and mercy, thus vile and contemptible in
the sight of the Lord, that he will not once make mention of it.

And thus with one answer, and that in very serious manner; our Savior does at
once, both discover the vain confidence of hypocrites. and also, as it were
cloth the godly poor, even the least of them, with singular honor: in that he
does profess that he will account himself neglected, when they are not duly
tendered and regarded.

The which may worthily encourage us, and all other, even to the end of the
world: patiently and joyfully, to endure every kind of trial, wherewith it
shall please God to exercise us, for the testimony of his holy truth and
Gospel.

Thus far of the judgment of our Savior Christ in either part of it: both
for the acquiting of the godly, and also for the condemnation of the wicked.

IT remains only, that we do consider of the execution of the sentence,
both concerning the one sort, and also the other.



And these (says our Savior) shall go into everlasting pain, and the
righteous into life eternal.

Explication
These words, concerning the execution: our Savior speaks indeed, by way of
prediction and prophecy, until the time, that they are to be fulfilled.

Nevertheless, it is at sure and certain, that they shall in due season, take
their effect, according to the holy counsel and purpose of God; as if they
were already perfectly accomplished: according to the more full description
thereof. Matthew: 8.11.12. and Luke 13. verses 23.24.25.26.27.28.29.30. Where, by
occasion that one said to our Savior. Lord are there few that shall he
saved? He said to them (that is, to him that asked the question, and to the
rest that were present) Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many I say
unto ye, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. When the good man of
the house is risen up, and has shut to the door, and ye begin to stand
without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord Lord open to us, and he shall
answer and say unto you, I know ye not whence ye are. Then shall ye begin to
say, we have eat and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our
streates. But he shall say. I tell you, I know ye not whence ye are: depart
from me all ye workers of iniquite. There shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, when ye shall ^ee Abraham, and Isaak, and Jacob, and all the Prophets
in the kingdom of God, and your selves thrust out of doors. Then shall come
many from the East and from the West, and from the North, and from the South,
and shall sit at table in the kingdom of God. And again, Matthew: 13:41.42* 43.
The wicked shall be cast into a furnace of fire. There shall be wailing and
gnashing of teeth. Then shall the just men shine as the Sun in the kingdom
of their Father. He that has ears to hear, let him hear. Likewise, John,
chap: 5.29. And 2. These. 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. According also to the holy
Prophecy of Daniel, chap: 12.2, 3. And thus we see, that there are diverse
testimonies, for the further confirmation, of the full execution of either part
of this last sentence, and judgment, to be pronounced by our Savior.

But let us weigh them severally and a part.

And first, whereas our Savior affirms, that it is most sure, that the
wicked shall go into everlasting pain, yea even into the furnace of fire: and
therewithal also, into shame and perpetual contempt, as the Prophet Daniel
has foretold; where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: where also, beside
that the fire shall never be quenched (as our Savior affirms, Mark, 9.43)
the worm (to wit, of a guilty and convicted conscience) never dies, but
lies always gnawing as it were, and nipping, or stinging as a ferpent in the
bosom, according to that, Isai: chap: 66, 24. where shall be no rest either
day or night, Revel: chap 14.11. where also, as we have seen before, shall be
the most woeful and hiddeous company and fellowship of the devils: where also
death, and torment shall bear their full sway: Revel: chap: 20.10. and verses
14 15.

O therefore in all these respects, how heavy and fearful shall this
execution be! Heavy and fearful I say: first, in that it is a separation of
the wicked from him, in whose favorable presence only, stands the comfort
and happiness of life. It were an uncomfortable thing, for a subject to be
banished for ever from the presence of a gracious Prince here upon earth: as we
may take the example from Absalom, 2. Sam: 14.32. concerning the bitterness of
his banishment, from the Court of the King his Father. But what is this, in
comparison of that? The anger of an earthly King, is as the messengers of
death: Proverbs 16.14. how much more then, he indignation of the God of heaven?

We may fear the anger of any earthly King, more sometime, then there is
cause; but our fear, can at no time, exceed the anger of God, whenever it
is kindled against us: according to the Psalm: 7, 6, 7. Thou, even thou art to
be feared, and who shall stand in thy sight when thou art angry? And Psalm:
90, 11. Thine anger is according to thy fear. But specially, in the execution
of this last judgment, yea though we should consider it, but in this first
degree of it: in that the wicked shall for ever be abandoned from everlasting
life, and from the glory thereof.

But it is yet more fearful; in that they shall be punished with vexation
and torment, both bodies and souls; not for a certain space of time, and so
to end; but for ever and ever world without end: not to endure vexation and
torment in some small measure, but in all extremities easelesse, and
remediless, as well as perpetual and endless. For hence it is, that it is
compared to fire, yea to everlasting fire; and the same also so violent, that
it shall make the mighty devils to bewail their estate under the revenging
hand of God, in the midst of it: as we may perceive by that which we read,
Matthew: 8.29. and in the 6. verse of the Epistle of Jude, as was alleged
before: it being such a fire, as though it have a consuming nature; yet shall
it never consume and devour this fuel of Gods wrath, which shall be once
cast into it.

A long lingering grief (as we know) though it be not exceeding sharp: yet
it is, by reason of the continuance, very tedious. Much more tedious therefore,
must it needs be, if it be both grievous, and also of long durance. When King
Saul had his deaths wound, he accounted his misery the greater, because his
armor-bearer refused to kill him out of hand, 1. Sam: 31.4. And Deuteronomy:
28.65.66.67. It was threatened, as a heavy punishment of God upon the
Israelities (if they would not obey the commandments of God) that they should
have no rest, but be combred with a trembling heart, both night and day: so
that in the morning they should say, World God it were evening, and at evening,
Would God it were morning, for the fear of thine heart, which thou shall
fear, and for the sight of thine eyes, which thou shall see. But what is all
this, and all the most grievous diseases and torments of this life; though they
were continual by the colicke or gout, or any other: yea, though they met
altogether in one man, in comparison of the eternal torments and dolours of
Hell? Wherefore, dear brethren, let us by all means, take warning by this
doctrine of our blessed Savior: that we may be careful to avoid them.
Verily, the misery shall be above all our understanding, so woeful: that we
may justly account our selves happy, and blessed of God, if we may escape if;
whatsoever fiery affliction we endure here in this world: yea though it should
be all the days of our life; and the same also, prolonged never so many years.

Neither, let any wicked man, abiding in his sins, flatter himself, when he
hears these fearful things: saying, God forbid; as the wicked Pharisees
said to our Savior, when he spoke to them of this judgment of God, Luke,
20.16. For this part of the judgment, shall be as certainly executed, as that
other which follows in the next place: concerning the everlasting, and most
happy life of the godly.

Wherefore, to the end we do not weaken the comfort of our faith, concerning
the eternity of the blessed life: let us in no wise give place to any doubting,
or lessening of the terrors and torments of the eternal and cursed death. For
doubtless, the doubting of the one, would undermine, and weaken the assurance
of the other.

If any ask, when this execution shall be: he may easily learn from this
description of our Savior, that it shall follow immediately upon the
pronouncing of the sentence by him; whenever that shall be.

The going of the wicked into that everlasting pain, which our Savior
speaks of; shall not be with their good will, but no doubt, altogether
against their wills: like as the thief or traitor goes to the Gallows, or
to any other place of execution. Or rather, infinitely more unwillingly, then
they go: though they be most justly adjudged unto it. For they may be yet in
some hope; that God will at the last have mercy upon them: but these can have
no hope. All time of mercy, is utterly expired, and ended with them. Let this
suffice, touching the first part of the execution, concerning the condemnation
of the wicked.

The second part of the execution, which was the first of the sentence, or
judgment: that is now to be weighed of us; in that our Savior says, that the
righteous shall as certainly go into life eternal, as the wicked shall go
into everlasting pain. But they shall not go unwillingly (as was said even
now of the wicked) but most willingly, and ioyously, and thankfully to God, for
so inestimable an advancement: as Revel. 19.7, 8, 9.

The time when they shall go, shall be immediately after the sentence given:
that is to say, before the sentence shall be given against the wicked. Whereby
it may be evident, that our Savior does not here speak of the order of the
execution: but of the certainty of it. And the reason why he mentions the
execution of the latter part of the sentence first, is only according to that
method, or order of an hysterosis, very familiar in the holy Scriptures.

But leaving these points of circumstance; let us come to the matter it selfs
to the end we may conceive aright of the excellency of Gods eternal mercy,
toward the godly, in this inestimable blessing of eternal life.

To this purpose, it shall be good for us, to know first of all, that it is a
distinct blessing, from that life of God, which he communicates unto us in
this world; though it pleases him to give us a taste of eternal life, by the
first fruits of his holy Spirit: according to that Heb. 6.4.5. For that which
the unregenerate, and unsanctified, have only in taste; the children of God
have not only in taste, but also (as we may say) in sound and nourishable
digestion, in some measure: to their preservation, and strengthening, to the
full fruition of everlasting life, in the Kingdom of heaven. And therefore it
is, that this everlasting life, is called the life to come: to put a difference
betwixt the present life; yea, even betwixt it and that part of it, which we
do live here, after that we are borne again, and regenerated by the holy
Ghost, to newnes of life. As we read. 1. Tim. 4.8. and chap. 6.19. Read also
Mark, chap, 10.29.30. And therefore also it is said, that although Christ do
live in us: to wit, by his Spirit, Gal. 2, 20. Romans 8. verses, 9.10.11, and 2.
Cor. 5.17. Yet (as we read Colos, 3. verses, 3.4.) the same Apostle says
again, Our life is hid with God in Christ. Yea, so as it shall not be fully
revealed, in the glory of it: until the same our Savior Christ shall appear
in glory. And chap. 1.5. He calls it the hope which is laid up in heaven:
Heb. 6.18. According also to that of the Apostle John, 1. Epistle, 3.2. Dearly
beloved, now are we the Sons of God, but yet it does not appear what we
shall be: and we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him: for we
shall see him as he is.

Finally, 1. Cor. 15.19. If in this life only (says the Apostle Paul) we have
hope in Christ, we are of all men the most miserable.

Thus then, we are to distinguish betwixt the present life, which we now enjoy;
yea, that part of it which we live here in the Spirit: and betwixt that
eternal life, which our Savior will perfectly perform to the godly, at the
last day.

Nevertheless, the distinction is rather in the measure and degree of the
happiness and glory of it: then in the nature and kind of it. And yet again,
it is as much differing in the excellency of it, as a thing of the same kind
and quality may be. So that as we say of a man, that is grown up from mean
estate, and small gifts, to a high degree, and to great learning; that he is
now another man then he was before: in like manner, may we say of eternal
life, in comparison of the present life, yea even of the life of the most
godly; that it is another life.

The which, that we may yet the more clearly perceive, we are further to
understand; that beside our natural life, which is no better then a death in
sins and trespasses, and so of a clean contrary nature: there are three
degrees of that spiritual life, which God bestows upon his children.

First, that life, which they live in this world, after that he has
regenerated and borne them again, by the holy Ghost: which yet is always
vnpersit, and failing in godliness; and consequently, in spiritual and heavenly
comfort.

Secondly, the life of the soul, separated from the body, by the natural
death: which is thenceforth perfitly freed from sin, and from the combrance
of the corrupt body, and inioyeth some measure of a glorious and perfect rest.
Heb. 12.23.

Thirdly, the life both of body and soul, reunited again at the resurrection
of the body, at the last day. And this life, shall be most perfitly glorious
and happy: and is that which our Savior speaks of in this place. For as the
soul shall at that time be perfitly glorified; so also shall the body be: and
therefore shall it be no hindrance to the perpetual and full comfort and joy
of the soul, as it is always here in this life, through the distemperature
thereof; like as the soul it self, is not perfitly cleansed and sanctified, so
long as it remains in the corrupt body.

Furthermore, that we may yet help ourselves to the knowledge of eternal life,
what it is, in some measure; though in the perfection of it, it exceeds all
our knowledge: we are to consider of it, as consisting in these three heads.

First, in the perfect knowledge of the most gracious wisdom, and holy will
and counsel of God in Christ Jesus; so far as it is meet for the creature
to know, and to be made privy unto it: according to that saying of our Lord
Jesus Christ himself, John, 17.3. This is life eternal (that is to say; it is
both the way and means to attain unto eternal life, and also that wherein it
does in a great part consist) that they know thee to be the only true God, and
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. But this knowledge shall be more perfect in
the life to come, then it can be here in this present life. For as the Apostle
Paul says, concerning the time of our life here, We know in part, and we
prophecy in part. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in
part shall be abolished. 1. Cor. 13 9.1O. And verse, 12. For now we see through
a glass darkly, but then we shall see fac^ to face. Now I known part: but then
shall I know even as I am known. In which ^espect also, well may we use the
words of the same Apostle, in the same Epistle, chapter 2.9. The things which eye
has not seen, neither care has heard, neither came into man's heart, are
those which God has prepared for them that love him. And again, 2. Epistle,
chap. 12. verses, 3.4.

Secondly, ecternall life consists in the perfect fruition of the most
glorious goodness, and blessed felicity of God; so far, as it is meet for the
creature to be partaker thereof. In which respect it is, that our Savior
says, that we shall then be like unto the Angels of God in heaven. Math.
22.30. And that the Apostle Peter says, We shall have a heavenly inheritance,
immortal, and undefiled, and which fades not away, reserved in heaven for us.
1. Epist. 1.4. And in this respect also it is, that (as the Apostle Paul says)
We shall be enriched with a most rich, spiritual, and heavenly treasure, above
that we can conceive. Ephesians. 1.18. And further, that we shall be crowned with a
glorious and incorruptible crown. 2. Tim, 4.8.1. Pet. 5.4. Revel. 2.10. and
chapter 3.11. and verse, 21.

Read also John. 17.21.22.23.24 Where our Savior, by his most holy and
heavenly prayer, gives us to understand, that we shall then be in a singular
manner one with God, and with our Savior himself: that is to say, so far
forth, and so near, as the creature may be one with the Creator; the adopted
child with the heavenly Father; the servant with the Lord, or a friend with his
most near friend, etc: minding, willing, speaking, doing, and delighting in
the same things, with a most sweet holy, and heavenly consent: answerable (in
some measure) to that consent, which our Savior showed to be in him with God
the Father, in minding, speaking, and doing his will, with all chearefulnes,
while he was here in this world: and as he does now in the kingdom of heaven.

So that in the third place, well may we say, that the blessed estate of
eternal life, consists in most willing, ioious, and perfect obedience to the
will of God, to the perfect glorifying of his name, in and through our Lord
Jesus Christ; so far forth, as it is possible for the redeemed creature, to
yield meet glory and obedience to the Creator and Redeemer of it. As may
appear by that which is written Revel. chapter 4.10.11. and chapter 5. verses, 8.9.
etc. For then (as we know) shall sin, as well as death, and all corruption,
be utterly destroyed. So we read. 1. Cor. 15.53 54.55.56.

The benefit being thus great; yea, even above all estimation: and the same
also so to continue without all interruption, or the least decrease, and
failing for ever: according to that Re. 21.1.2.3.4.5.6.7. Let us incessantly,
be so much the more careful, to lay sure hold of it by faith; and to take the
right way and course, whereby we may most undoubtedly attain unto it: according
to the direction of our Savior, Luke 13.24 etc. as was alleged before. And as
we read chapter 12.33.34. and again, chapter 16.9. likewise Math. 6.19.20.21.
According also to the like direction of the Apostle Paul. 1. Tim. 6. verses.
11.12. and verses, 17.18.19.

It is surely a great comfort here, to a man that must leave his present place
of abode, and all that he has about him, and go into a far country: if he
know, that he shall go to take possession of a far better inheritance there.
But that comfort is nothing to this, if we be sure, that so soon as God shall
take us out of this world: he will give us a most rich and glorious
inheritance, in his heavenly kingdom.

And now for conclusion, this must all that be desirous of this most blessed
estate, well remember and assure themselves of; that the way unto it, is not by
pampering of our own bellies, with delicious and dainty fare, nor by clothing
of our own backs, with rich and costly garments, nor by getting to our selves
soft bedding, and rich hangings for our chambers, etc. as if we would make our
own houses our paradise, etc. There is no promise of blessing to this course:
but of necessity (as our Savior teaches us) we must feed the hungry, clothe
the naked. etc. Thus then the wicked, shall through the just judgment of God,
and of our Lord Jesus Christ, go into everlasting pains; and the godly into
everlasting life, of the free grace and mercy of God: he crowning their
imperfect obedience; that is, the work of his own grace in them; according to
that saying of the holy Apostle, Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death, but
the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Heherto of the ground of this Article of our faith, concerning the coming of
our Lord Ies: Ch: even of God the Son from heaven, to judge both the quick and
the dead. Whence; now it shall be the more easy, after so large adiscourse:
more briefly to gather together the other points remaining, touching the
meaning of the Article; the promise of our Saviors coming; the uses of it,
both for comfort, and also for duty; and finally, the danger of not believing
it. Of these things therefore, let us henceforth inquire, and that, even as
briefly as we can.

Question. And first, what is the meaning of the Article?

Answer. This Article teaches me, and every Christian, that we ought
undoubtedly to believe, that our Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of
God, who in our humane nature, ascended up into heaven and has there taken his
seat at the right hand of God, in most high Majesty and glory: shall at the
end of the world, even in the same our humane nature, descend in the clouds
from heaven, in the same his most high and heavenly Majesty and glory, to call
all mankind before his judgment seat: both raising up all those that shall be
dead before his coming, and also gathering together all that shall then be
living; and so shall give righteous judgment upon all, and every one, so
presented before him. That is, he shall for ever perfectly acquit, justify,
and glorify the godly: and eternally condemn, and punish the wicked.

Explication. and proof.
This in deed is the true meaning of this Article.

The which, because it is evident, from the holy Scriptures already
interpreted: it shall not be needful, to stand upon any further confirmation
of it.

The promise.
LIkewise also, the Promise of the coming of our Savior to the execution of
this his last judgment, has been sufficiently confirmed from the same
Scriptures, which have already been alleged and interpreted.

And namely in that our Savior himself has expressly assured us, that the
Son of man (that is, that he himself) both shall, and will come in his
glory, to this very end and purpose. Math. 24.30. and chap. 25 31. And again,
John, 14.3. and chapter, 21. verse. 22. and in sundry places beside. Moreover,
the Apostle Peter in his 2. Ep. chapter, 3 does mightily confirm it, against
the mockers of these last days of the world: of whom he prophesied long
before, that they would contemptuously reject this doctrine of the second
coming of our Savior, saying, Where is the promise of his coming.

The Apostle Peter (I say) does there, mightily confirm: that the same
promise, shall most assuredly be performed, to the intolerable terror and
smart of all such prophage and ungodly Atheists. The Lord (says he) is not
slack concerning his promise (as some men count slacknes) but he is patient
toward us, and would have no man to perish, but would all men to come to
repentance. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night.

The Comforts.
THus therefore, insomuch as the promise is so evident, from that which has
already been observed: let us, without any further delay, come to the use of
this Article.



The comfort hereof, is exceeding great to all true believers, even in the
expectation of it: but infinitely much more comfortable shall it be, when this
promise of his coming to judgment, shall be performed. And that in diverse
respects.



First, it is very comfortable (as touching the expectation) so often as we
think of it insomuch as no other shall be our Judge, but he that has loved us
so dearly, that he has given his life for us; and will for ever, be our most
merciful Savior.

Explication and proof.
This consideration ministereth very great comfort in deed. And in this respect
it is, that as we have seen before: our Savior, after that he has spoken at
large of those fearful signs, the forerunners of his coming to judgment;
he does nevertheless comfort his disciples, saying, as we may remember. Luk,
21.28. etc. When these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift
up your heads: for your redemption draws near.

To the which purpose also, serves that sweet parable, which he uses to
describe the greatness of this comfort: in that all the fearful signs of his
coming, shall be but as the tokens of a most welcome summer, after the cold
and troublesome storms of winter. For then (says our Savior) know ye, that
the kingdom of God is near: yea, even that kingdom of glory and felicity,
wherein all the faithful shall not only be delivered from all reproach, and
misery; but also be partakers of all happiness and glory. So that, like as
the faithful subjects of a loving Prince, are greatly comforted against the
present oppressions, and crucities, which any (risen up in rebellion) do
exercise upon than and their goods; so soon as they hear, that their Prince
hastes to come with his royal army, to suppress the rebels: (yea though
their trouble continue yet many days, before all things can be well quited:) so
likewise, yea infinitely much more comfortable to the godly, may the
expectation of the coming of our most gracious and mighty King and Savior
be; which here we speak of.

The Prophet Malachie, chap. 4. verse 3. compares this time to the comfortable
rising of the Sun. For behold (says he) the day comes, that shall burn as
an even, and all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble,
etc. But unto you that fear my name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise,
and health shall be under his wings, etc. And Psalm. 49. verse 14. (as the
verses are commonly distinguished) the same time of the last judgment of our
Savior, is compared to the cheerful morning, after a tedious, dark, and
uncomfortable night. For then (says the holy Prophet) shall the righteous have
dominion over the wicked, in that morning Ido mane. Upon which words, F. Iun:
notes, as much as was said before, in the allegation of the Prophet Malachie.
Illo (inquit) mane, quo resurgunt pij, quasi ex nocte sepulchri, cum videlicet
Sol iustitiae orietur Christus, secundo suo aduentu. Mal. 4. In that morning
(says he) in the which the godly do rise again, as it were from the night of
the grave: that is to say, at such time as Christ the Sun of righteousness
shall arise at his coming. And upon the same words, Master Calvin says
likewise, Aduentus Domini, iustar aurorae erit, qua tam electi, quam reprobi,
suo modo euigilent: priores seilicet, quia excussa tarditate and pigritia,
discussis etiam nebulis, claro intuitu, facie adfaciem, Christum Solemn
iustitiae, and in co plenum vitae fulgorem cernent, etc. That is: The coming
of the Lord shall be like the breaking of the day, in the which, as well the
elect as the reprobate, shall awake after their differing manner: to wit, the
former having shaken off all sluggishnesse, and scattered away all clouds,
they shall clearly behold Christ, the Son of righteousness, face to face,
and in him the full brightness of life, etc.

The Apostle Peter calls this time, the time of refreshing from the presence
of the Lord, and the time of the restoring of all things. Act. 3.19, 20. The
Apostle Paul speaks of it, as of the time of the revelation of the sons of
God: what manner of ones they shall be, at their inioying of the full fruits,
not only of the redemption of their souls; but also of their bodies. Romans 8
18, etc. 23. Read also to the same purpose, Philip. 3.20, 21. Colos. 3.4. And
the Apostle John, 1. Epist. 3.2. Likewise, Revel. 21.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And
verses 9.10, etc. It is compared to the time of a most joyful marriage. And at
that day, the faithful, not only Ministers of the word, but also all other,
shall be crowned with the crown of immortal glory. 1. Pet. 5.4. and 1. These.
2.19, 20 and 2. Tim. 4.8. They shall also be endued with a most rich and
everlasting heavenly inheritance, together with the same eternal glory and
praise. 1. Pet. 1.3, 4, 7.

Finally, (as was declared before) at this time; all the godly, though
specially the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, being the first in judgment
for their clearing: shall thenceforth, sit as it were upon thrones with our
Savior Christ to judge the wicked. According to that which we read first,
concerning the twelve Apostles. Matthew. 19.28, 29. And then, more generally,
concerning other Christians. 1. Cor. 6.2, 3. and Revel. 2.26, 27. and chap. 3,
21.

Thus then, even the very expectation of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
to judgment may justly be very comfortable: according as the Apostle Paul
calls the hope of this time, a blessed hope: Tit. 2.13. And whenas even the
first coming of our Savior into this world, in his taking of our nature, was
comfortable, in the hope of these blessings, though the hope was more remote,
as we may say; then much more comfortable may they be now, in that the hope is
more near: as we may well understand, from that saying of the Apostle Heb.
9.28. Christ being once offered, to take away the sins of many, shall appear
the second time, to them that look for him, without sin unto salvation.

Now therefore, seeing the expectation of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
to judgment, is thus comfortable; in that he that shall be our Judge, will be
our Savior: and so much the rather, by how much the day draws more and more
nearer: it must needs follow, that the coming it self, shall be most
comfortable of all; to so many, as shall at that day, be found faithful.



This is evident, from the due consideration of the ends of the coming: the
which have been already, (for the most part) mentioned, to show the comfort
of the expectation of him, in respect of the same his coming.

Explication.
They have been so indeed. For whereas the accomplishment of the judgment
which shall be; consists partly, in the removing of all anoiances and
hindrances of the happiness of the elect children of God, for ever: and
partly, in the conferring of all good things in full perfection, both for
measure, and also for the perpetuity of them. These good things have been
more fully rehearsed, and the evil things have been somewhat touched. But it
shall not be amiss, for you to make a brief rehearsal of either sort, that
upon a new occasion, we may make some further supply, of that which is yet
wanting.



The good things which he will then confer and bestow upon his Church, in
full perfection for ever: shall be these.

First, the eternal redemption and salvation both of the bodies, and also of
the souls, of all the elect of God.

Secondly, the renewing both of the heavens, and of all the earth, according to
the promise of our Savior, wherein shall dwell righteousness for ever.

Explication and proof.
These indeed, are the good things, in their several kinds; which shall at
that day, be conferred and bestowed upon all the whole Church of God: as we may
call to mind, from the 8. chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, alleged
before: and Revel. 21.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And then further, 9, 10, etc.
According also to that which we read, Acts, 3.19, 20. And 2. Pet. 3.12, 13.



At that day, our Savior will utterly subdue and suppress, every cruel
Antichrist and Tyrant from off the earth: yea and all the Devils, with Sin,
Death, and Hell, that they shall thenceforth never have any more to do with
any of the faithful, whom he will perfectly redeem and save out of all their
hands.

Explication and proof.
That our Savior, will then utterly, thus suppress these adversaries, to the
welfare and salvation of the Church: it is plentifully testified, 2. These. 2.8.
The Lord will consume the man of sin, with the Spirit of his mouth, and
abolish him with the brightness of his coming. Yea so, as it follows in the
same place; that no power, or craft of the devil, shall be able any longer to
uphold him. And this being spoken of the chief Antichrist: much rather shall
every other be cast down Read also Revel. 18.1, 3, etc. And chapter 19.
verses 20, 21. And chap. 20.10. The Devil that deceived them was cast into a
lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false Prophet shall be
tormented, even day and night, for evermore. And chap. 21.4. But as touching
the godly, God will wipe away all tears from their eyes: and there shall be no
more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, The Duties.
neither shall there be any more pain: for the first things are passed. But
(as it follows, verse 8.) the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable,
and murderers, etc. shall have their part in the take which burns with fire
and brimstone, which is the second death. So then, (as the holy Apostle St.
Paul writes, 1. Cor. 15.) at that time shall be brought to pass the saying
that is written, Death is swallowed up into victory. O death where is thy
sting? O grave where is thy victory? The sting of doath is sin: and the
strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, who has given us victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ. And well also may it be said then, according to
that Isai. 25. verses 1, 4, 8, 9. O Lord, thou art my God, I will exalt thee,
etc. Thou shall destroy death for ever, etc. Lo, this is our God, we have
waited for him, and he has saved us, etc. For this day, shall to the godly,
infinitely exceed all the joy of the deliverance of the people of Israel, out
of Egypt, or of their return out of their captivity in Babylon, etc.

Such therefore and so great, even above all estimate, is the use of this
Article, for the comfort of faith.

NOw let us examine likewise, of how great use it is, to make that most mighty
challenge, of special fruits of obedience, which if does (as it were with the
exceeding loud and shrill blast of a trumpet) call and cry out for, at our
hands: to the end we might be sound meet partakers of so inestimable comfort
for the present; and both of comfort and advancement at the last day, even for
ever and ever. For herein the holy Scriptures are very frequent and often; and
therewithal exceeding earnest, as the diligent Reader cannot, but he must
easily perceive: and as we (by the grace of God) will henceforth endeavor in a
good part, to make it evident, that it is so; by calling to mind, those things
which we have observed in this behalf.

Which therefore, (as well as you may remember) are the duties, which have been
showed out of the holy Scriptures,

First of all, it has been declared, that it is the duty of every faithful
Christian, to comfort themselves, And one to comfort another, (in the
expectation of the coming of our Savior to judgment) to go on forward in
the profession and obedience of his name and Gospel; against all grieuances and
discomforts whatsoever: and namely against all sinister judgments that any do
give forth, or conceive against us; while we be sure that we walk with a right
foot in the way of the Gospel.

And secondly, we are to stir up our hearts, to a longing, and loving desire;
and that also even with a patient waiting after this gracious appearance of our
Lord Jesus Christ: to the righting of all wrongs, and to the establishing of
all righteousness, and judgment, in his everlasting kingdom.

Explication and proof.
That we are to comfort our selves, in the assured expectation of the coming of
our Savior to his last judgment: it may be perceived of us, from that
encouragement and exhortation, which he himself gave to his Disciples, that
they should look up, and lift up their heads, as we saw before. And that we
should one of us comfort and encourage another; it is evident from that advise
which the Apostle Paul gave to the Thessalonians, 1. Ep. chapter 4.18. The Lord
himself shall descend from heaven, etc, Wherefore comfort your selves one
another with these words. And further, that we are from hence, to comfort our
selves against the sinister judgments of men, while we walk uprightly in our
callings before the Lord: it may appe^r from the example of the same Apostle,
in his own practice. 1. Cor. 4.3, 4. As touching me, I pass very little to be
judged of ye, or of man's judgment: no, I judge not mine own self. For I know
nothing by my self; yet am I not thereby justified: but he that judges me, is
the Lord Nevertheless, we must not so understand these words of the holy
Apostle, as though he did simply condemn all Judgments of men: after the
manner of wilful and inordinate, or hauty persons; who care not what any man
think of the^, though they walk in offensive ways. No nothing so. But his
meaning is, that he does principally seek to approve himself, in keeping says
and a good conscience, in the sight of God: whereby he was so guided, that he
could not easily give any just occasion, of any great offense in his
conversation toward me^.

And verily, of all courts and assizes, whether civil or Ecclesiastical; we
have all of us, most need to be chiefly careful, what shall (at this last
judgment) be either allowed, or disalowed, before the judgment seat of our
Savior Christ. For if happily, we shall keep so good a course, that we
shall be approved then: it mattereth not, who in the mean while, have judged
and condemned us. And as touching those that shall be then disalowed and
rejected, what shall it benefit them, though they have prevailed in all other
courts, so as every man has fallen before them?

The consideration of the righteous judgment of God; even here in this world,
has ground of much comfort: as we may see, by the practice of the servants of
God, who have from the unjust sentences of men, provoked to him as to the only
just Judge: as Psalm. 4.1. and Psalm. 7. And Psalm. 26.1. and 35.1, etc. 7. Read
also Job, chap. 19. verses 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. The reason is, because he is
the God of judgment, and he to whom all judgment does continually belong. For
as we read Psalm. 94. He that planted the ear, shall not he hear? etc. yea as
Abraham pleads rightly, Shall not the Judge of all the world do right? But
the full comfort depends upon this final judgment, that now we speak of.

Now secondly, that we are to have a loving and longing desire, with a patient
waiting for this fin all judgment, and appearing of our Savior: it may
appear unto us, in that the Apostles do describe the children of God by these
properties. First, that they love the appearing of our Savior. 2. Tim. 2.8.
Secondly, that they long after it. Revel. 22.17. and verse 20. Read also Song
of Songs, chap. 2.16, 17. and chap. 8. the last verse, as Tremellius and Iunius
do translate and interpret those words, Accurre etc. And thirdly, Luk, 12.27.
and Matthew. 24.46. they are pronounced Blessed, that do duly wait for it. For
the which property of waiting, see also 1. Cor. 1.7. Philipp. 3.20. Tit. 2.13.
And always remember, that watching must be evermore a companion of waiting.

But of this more anon. For to the end, that we may have this loving and
longing desire after the coming of our Savior Christ, with the comfort of a
good conscience: diverse other duties are necessary, as has been declared in
our course of ministry and preaching, concerning this Article.



To the end we may comfortably look for the coming of our Savior to
judgment: the due meditation of it must move us:

First, to the leaving and forsaking of all our sins, and the inordinate love
of this vain transitory world, with the fickle pleasures, profits, and cares
thereof: with godly sorrow for all the sins, and folies, which we have
committed, through the abuse of Gods long sufferance and patience toward us.

Secondly, to the careful watching against all sin, and vanity of heart and
life: with all the tentations thereof, for all time to come.

Thirdly, it must move us to the diligent study, and constant endeavor, to
mind and practice all good and godly duties, in the religious fear of God:
and namely of the duties of love, and mercy, in the relieuing and succouring
of poor distressed, and succourlesse Christians; and of pity and compassion
over poor sinners, in using all good means, such as are holy reproves,
instructions, counsels, persuasions, and prayers to God; if by any means they
might with our selves, (specially those that belong unto us) happily escape the
fearful damnation; and be blessed partakers of the salvation of that great
day.

Fourthly, it must move us to patience in all present sufferings: yea even with
ioyfulnesse, in the thought and meditation thereof.

Fifthly, it must restrain us from all false, or rash and uncharitable
judgment against any.

Finally, the meditation of the last judgment, must admonish and confirm us,
to hold fast the holy fellowship and communion of Saints, among the rest of
the faithful servants of God.

Explication.
It is very true. O therefore that it would please the Lord our God, and
heavenly Father, so to open the eyes of our minds, and to touch our hearts by
the singer of his holy Spirit, even for our Lord Jesus Christ sake: that we
might once thoroughly behold and consider the terror of that day, which shall
assuredly befull the wicked: and on the contrary, what that vnpeakeable joy
and glory is which our Savior Christ the Lord of life and glory, will give to
all that belong unto him. For then surely, it could not be, but the serious
meditation and remembrance of it, would have these blessed effects and workings
in our hearts, which you have spoken of.

Now therefore, to the end we may help our selves this way: let us consider
some testimonies of the holy Scriptures, which do call upon us, to make such
uses as have bin mentioned, from the reverend meditation and expectation of it.

And first of all, touching the leaving and forsaking of sin, by reason of
this judgment of our Savior which is to come: let us read and consider, Acts
3.18.19. Amend your lives therefore, (says the Apostle) and turn, that your
sins may be put away, when the time of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord. And he shall send Jesus Christ, who before was preached
unto you. Read also ch: 17.30.31. where the Apostle Paul endeavored by this
argument, to move the Athenians to repent of their former gross superstitions,
and idolatries. And ch: 24. v. 26. where he uses the same argument, to
persuade unhappy Foelix (if possibly it might have been) to repent of his
unjust and voluptuous life.

The which most weighty persuasion, because both the Athenians, and also Foelix
despised: nothing could prevail to do them good. We read not of any christian
church flourishing at Athe^s in the Apostles days, as were in many other
cities, to whom they directed their epistles: and namely in Thessalonica, of
which it is testified, that the citizens thereof, hearkening to this doctrine,
turned to God from idolles, to serve the loving and true God. And to look for
his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even Jesus who delivers
us from the wrath to come. 1. ep: 1.9.10. and so became one of the most famous
Churches in all the world.

And for the leaving of the whole vanity of this world; even to this purpose,
that we might set our hearts unfeignedly to walk in the fear of God: the
conclusion of the book of the Princely Preacher (inferred upon the whole
discourse going before, in the book called Ecclesiastes) is very notable, from
the weight of this argument, Let us hear the end of all, says K. Solomon,
Fear God, and keep his commandementes, for this is all that pertains to man.
For God will bring eueryworke unto judgment, with every secret thing, whether
it be good or evil. Read also Heb. 1. v. 10.11.12. and 1. ep: of John. ch: 2.
verses 15.16.17. and Philip: 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Wherefore, that we may effectually awaken our selves out of our natural
security, it is to singular purpose, that every one of us do bethink our
selves earnestly, of the coming, of this Judge, who is privy to all our
ways, in the whole course of our lives, childhood, youth, man's age, middle
age, and old age: and that both in our single life, and also in our married
estate, whether in magistracy, or in ministry of the word, etc: who also
judge righteous judgment, without respect of Person, etc.

It the malefactor would duly think of the coming of the earthly Judge, to go
his circuit of Assise, how he shall come with the power and authority of the
king; accompanied with all the Justices of the Shire, etc: to assist him in
doing of justice: specially if he did know before, that he could not escape,
but must be apprehended and brought before him; it would surely cause him to
take heed of breaking the Kings peace. Much more, would the due meditation of
the most glorious and fearful appearance of the most high K: of Kings our Lo:
Jesus, at the last day, be effectual to stay us from sinning against the
divine Majesty of God: seeing we may be sure, that none shall possibly escape
this universal judgment of his. For what is the greatness of any earthly
Prince, in comparison of the heavenly Majesty of this our divine Judge: such
as it shall be at that time? what is their company of Justices, etc: to the
train of infinite thousands of the holy Angels? And how little are their
temporal penalties, in comparison of Gods infinite and eternal judgment?

Wherefore, to the end we may take the right course to escape this most
fearful judgment of God: let us in the mean while, every one of us for our
parts, make our profitable use of all those judgments of God, which he
brings forth daily; in that he sends wars, plagues, famine, etc For all
of them, are sent as admonitors, remembrancers, and forerunners of that great
and last judgment.

For so (as we have seen before) does our Savior give to understand; in his
description of the foregoing signs of his coming to this judgment. And it is
that, which God has after a sort, commonly imprinted in the hearts of men.

For when things fall out any thing strangely, every one is ready to say. All
things grow so ill, that I think, the world is near to an end, etc.

Finally, we must well consider concerning this first point; that we must leave
and forsake our sins past, with godly sorrow for them: to the end we may
escape this judgment. For we know who tells us; that it is godly sorrow,
which causes true and unfeigned repentance.

Now touching the second point, that is to say, watchfulnes against sin, for
the time to come; we may read how it is persuaded, from the consideration of
this last judgment: namely, from the uncertain certainty of it. Mark, chap:
13. verse 32. For like as the death of every man is most certain, but the
point of the time thereof, unknown: so is the day of the general judgment. Yea
so uncertain, that (as our Savior himself says in that place of Saint
Mark) not only the Angels of heaven, but also the Son of God himself, in
that he is man, was before his resurrection ignorant of the day and hour of
it: and that the Father only, and no creature beside, was to that time privy
to it: though we should grant that our Savior since his glorification does
know it even in that he is man; all other remaining as ignorant of it still, as
ever before. Whereupon our Savior warns and exhorts all that they do
watch, lest they should be found unprepared: as we read, from the 33. verse, to
the end of that chapter; and as we have seen at large before. And Luke 21.34.
Take heed to your selves (says our Savior) lest your hearts should be
oppressed, etc. For as a snare shall it come, etc. Watch therefore, and pray
continually, that ye may be vouchsafed worthy to escape all these things.
Furthermore, touching watchfulnes against sin, from this argument of the last
judgment: read also, 1. These. 5. verses. 6.7. Therefore let us not sleep as
do other, but let us watch and be sober, etc. And Revel: 14.9.10.11. And ch:
16.15. Behold, I come as a thief: blessed is he that watches and keeps his
garments, lest he walk naked, and men see his filthiness.

Thirdly, for diligent study, and constant practice of godliness, in the fear
of God; how this is urged from the force of the same argument: read 1. Ioh:
2.28.29. Little children (says the Apostle) abide ye in him, that when he
shall appear, we may be bold, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.
If ye know that he is righteous, know ye that he which does righteously, is
borne of him. And chap: 3. verses 2.3. Dearly beloved, now are we the Sons of
God but yet it does not appear, what we shall be: and we know that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is. And every man that
has this hope in him, purges himself, even as he is pure. Read also, 1. Tim:
6.13.14. and 2. Ep: 4.1.2. Where a most earnest charge is laid upon the
Ministers of the Gospel, that they be faithful in their office; as they will
answer it at the appearing of our Savior, to judge all flesh.

This moved the Apostles themselves, to be careful in the discharge of their
duty, in their Preaching of the Gospel, 2. Cor: 5.9, 10. And generally, it
ought to move all, to the like care, in the duties of their several callings,
2. Pet: 3.11.12.13.14.

To this end also, tend all the parables of our Savior, whereof we have heard
before, Mat: ch: 24. and 25. and Luke 12.35, 36. etc. And in other places of
the Evangelists. Touching constancy in godliness; the holy Apostles did
earnestly pray for it, on the behalf of the Christians to whom they wrote:
even from this consideration, as Philip: 1, 9. etc. And 1. These: 3, 12.13. And
chap: 5, 23.24. For the obtaining of which grace of constancy; they give all
encouragement that they shall be partakers of it, whosoever will chearefully
seek after it: according to that, 1, Cor: 1, 8, 9. Our Lord Jesus Christ shall
confirm ye to the end, that ye may be blameles in his day. God is faithful,
etc. And in the Epistle of Jude, verse 24. God is able to keep us that we fall
not, and to present us faultles, before the presence of his glory, with joy.
And 1. These: 5, 9, 10.

Of the duties of love, and mercy toward Christians, being in outward want and
distress; how they are persuaded from the description of the last judgment,
by our Savior himself: we have seen before. And that it is mighty to move
us to pity poor sinners that lie in their sins, to their extreme peril
without repentance; whether they be our children, or servants, or friends, or
even our very enemies: we may consider from the exhortation of the Apostle
Jude, verses, 20, 21, 22, 23. But ye beloved, edisie your selves in your most
holy faith, etc. And have compassion of some, in putting difference. And other
save which fear, pulling them out of the fire, etc. We may consider it also,
from the example and practice of the Apostles themselves, mentioned a little
before. 2. Cor: 5. We knowing the terror of the Lord, (says Paul) do
persuade men, etc. And Colos: 1.28. We Preach Christ (says the same Apostle,
whom in the verse before, he calls the hope of glory) admonishing every man,
and teaching every man, in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect
in Christ Jesus, etc. And who I pray you, can but rue to think in his heart,
that either his wife, or his child, or his friend, yea or his enemies (as was
said) should through any default, or negligence on his part, be thrown into
endless, easeles, and remediles extremity of unspeakable torment?

Among other duties; it may not be forgotten of us, that we do stand bound, to
be very careful to celebrate most gratefully, the memorial of the death of
our Savior Christ, by our often resorting to the table of the Lord, from time
to time, in every generation, even till his coming again: as we are
admonished, 1. Cor: ch: 11.26.

To conclude this point. The care of performing these duties, faithfully and
constantly, in our several callings, with regardfull remembrance of this
coming of our Savior to judgment: It does cause exceeding joy to the
conscience of every Christian, as may appear from the example of the holy
Apostles and of other Christians. For they having care to have a good
conscience, in the hope of the resurrection of the dead, etc. Act: 24, 15, 16.
they did likewise obtain exceeding peace and joy to the same their
consciences, in hope of the same at the last day: according to that which we
read further, Phi: 3.20.21. 1. These. 2.19.20. For what is our hope or joy, or
crown of rejoicing? Are not you even it, in the presence of our Lord Jesus
Christ, at his coming? yes, ye are our glory and joy. And 2. Tim. 4. verses
6, 7.8. A like notable place to the same purpose.

Now fourthly, concerning patience, with ioyfulnes in all present troubles,
from the consideration of the same argument: beside the example of Paul, last
alleged, 2. Tim: 4.5. etc. wherein the same is evident: let us hearken to the
exhortation of the Apostle James, ch: 5. v 7. Be ye patient therefore (says
he) unto the coming of the Lord. Behold the husbandman waits for the
precious fruit of the earth etc. Read also, Heb: 10.32.35.36 And 1. Pet:
1.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. And ch: 4 12.13. Moreover, we have the promise, that if we
suffer with our Savior Christ, we shall be glorified with him. Rom: 8, 17, 18.
And 2. Tim: 2.11.12. It is a true saying, etc. And Luke 22. verses. 28.29.30.
Ye are they (says our Savior) who continued with me in my tentations.
Therefore I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed to me,
That ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and fit on seats, and
judge the twelve tribes of Israel.

Fifthly, that the reverend consideration of the last judgment of our Savior
Christ: ought to restrain us from rash and unadvised judging of others: the
Apostle Paul teaches us, Rom: 14. v. 10. etc. Why (says the holy Apostle)
do thou judge thy brother? or, why do thou despise thy brother? For we
shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ. For it is written; I
live, says the Lord, and every knee shall bow to me, and all tongues shall
confess unto God. So then every one of us shall give accounts of himself unto
God. Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but use your judgment
rather in this, that no man put an occasion to fall, or a stumbling block
before his brother. And James chapt: 4.12. There is one Lawgiuer, which is able
to save and to destroy. Who art thou that iudgest another man? and 1. Cor: 4.5.
Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will lighten things
that are in darkness, and make the counsels of the hearts manifest: and then
shall every man have praise of God. It is the same precept, which our Savior
himself gave. Matthew: 7.1. Judge not, that ye be not judged, etc. and Luk:
6.37. Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven.

As we are allwaies to beware of rash and uncharitable judging, and censuring
of our brethren: so then especially, when we are in the passions of anger,
and displeasure conceived against them. For then, as we are usually most
unadvised: so are we most ready to condemn them of hypocrisy, and of all to
naught. Every man is partial in his own cause. But our Savior will judge all
our judgments; yea even the judgments of all thrones: and he will reuerse
every unjust judgment.

Finally, concerning the last branch of the answer; that the meditation of the
last judgment, has great force to move us to the care of nourishing, and
holding fast, the holy fellowship and communion of Saints: it may appear by
the exhortation and admonition of the Apostle to the Heb: ch: 10.24.25.26. Let
us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works. Not forsaking
the fellowship which we have among our selves, as the manner of some is: but
let us exhort one another, and that so much the more, because ye see that the
day draws near. For if we sin willingly, after that we have received
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a
fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour the
adversaries. And besides, it is a true saying, that out of the bosom or lap
of the true Church of Christ, there is no salvation: to wit, for those that may
enjoy the communion of Saints, and do despise it. Joel: 2.32. Here also may
the prouerbiall speech have special good use. Look where the dead corpse is,
thither will the Eagles fly. Matthew: 24.28. God therefore of his infinite
goodness, vouchsafe so to open our eyes, and so to tou^h our hearts, that we
may make these holy and blessed uses, from thereuerend meditation of the most
glorious, and fearful appearance of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, when he shall come
to judge the world. Amen.

ANd now, that we may conclude the whole doctrine of this Article.



All such shall be taken at unawares: neither can it be, but they must needs
perish most woefully, even for ever and ever; from the most glorious presence
of the Lord our God.

And moreover, we may affirm it of like certainty, that they who do not
believe the second coming of our Savior Christ, according to the truth of the
holy Story, as yet to be fulfilled: have no true faith, to believe that he
is already come.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. For they have either of them, like warrant from the holy
Scriptures of God. And this is as plainly foretold, that it shall be; and also
the manner of it how: as the other was, before it was yet performed. Yea, our
Savior himself, in whom the former prophesies were fulfilled, does most
plainly foretell and assure his Church, of this: that it shall be as visiblie
and reallie performed, in the external view of the world, as that was. Yea
more universally, then that was. For as the holy Scriptures affirm, Every eye
shall see him.

Wherefore, most false and presumptuous is the heretical doctrine which H. N.
teaches his Family of love: it being so directly contrary to the doctrine
of our Savior, concerning the same; that he that runs, (as they say) may
see it, if we compare them together.

For first of all, as was said even now; The danger of not believing this
article.
the coming of our Savior to judgment shall be visible to all the world: the
coming which H N. tells his s^hollers of, is only visible and apparent to
those of his Family; or rather, it is (as he teaches) only spiritually
discerned, and inwardly felt of them.

Secondly, the coming of our Savior, shall be from heaven in the clouds,
according as he was taken up into heaven by a cloud. The coming which H. N.
fancieth is reallie and in truth, from the earth; or rather a strong delusion,
from the lying spirit of the Devil, out of hell as we may say: not from any of
the clouds of heaven, but from the most dark and clowdie conceit of his
carnal brain; though with such a glorious show of words, as if he were
taught it by an Angel of light, from the highest heaven.

Thirdly, the coming of our Savior, shall be with an audible sound of the
last trumpet, by the ministry of an Angel from heaven; and with a showt as
it were, and sensible moving of all creatures: the coming of H. N. is by his
base writings, which contrary to the truth of our Savior Christ, se^keth to
hide it self in dark corners. Neither does it willingly show it self, but to
such as hold themselves in great secrecy and stillnesse, as he himself
prescribes unto them.

The true coming of our Savior, shall be to raise up all bodily, out of their
graves; yea bodily to restore to life all the dead: whether buried in the
earth, or drowned in the waters, or burnt in the fire, or any other way
destroyed and consumed, from the beginning of the world, to the end thereof:
the counterfeit coming of H.N. is according to the fantastical Trumpet of his
doctrine, and by the hoarse sound thereof; only to raise up the minds of his
Family spiritually, while they do remain here upon the earth, in, or with
their bodies. That is to say, It is nothing else in truth, but by a spiritual
illusion, from the false and blasphemous ground of his heretical doctrine, to
raise up by his gracious word, as he calls it (whereof he pretends himself
to be a special Minister of God, and to that end, raised up from the dead)
the godly Nature, and very true Being of God, in all such as will embrace the
same his doctrine: the which very true Essence and Being, (as he says) lay
before dead in them, as it were in the grave of sin.

As touching the wicked that are dead in their sins, and departed this life;
or the godly departed in the faith: H. N. by his coming has no power to
raise them up at all, either bodily or spirituallie.

Neither is he so void of subtlety, that he will profess any thing in that
behalf, lest his forgerie should thence be easily espied, even of his simple
and unwary Disciples.

Moreover, as touching the godly, both departed this life from the beginning
of the world; and also such as shall be found living at his coming, our Savior
shall come to take them bodily up into heaven: the coming which H. N.
boasts of by his Ministry, is only to make them spirituallie happy; and
to set them as it were in a Fools paradise, by a speculatiue fancy, dreaming
of an happy estate here upon this earth. And so he shows himself, to all
those that have grace to try and examine his doctrine: to be a mere impostor,
and a most dangerous seducer.

Finally, the true coming of our blessed Lord and Savior, is yet to come:
the coming of that false Christ, which H. N. teaches, is (as he says)
already at this day. Neither, if we give him any credit: (that is, if we
will believe a most false and fantastical Heretic) is there any other day to
be looked for, as he both writes and affirms expressly in that his book,
which he calls The joyful Message.

The true coming of our most blessed Savior therefore, is not that coming
which the most accursed H. N. would have us to believe, without any further
expectation or waiting for. Let us therefore boldly reject N. H. with all his
false and heretical doctrine.

But we are not to reject him alone, but diverse other also, in respect of
their false conceits, against the truth of this Article, in any branch of it:
either concerning the blessed estate of the godly, or the cursed and woeful
estate of the wicked for ever and ever, by virtue of this judgment.

For it shall be in vain, to dream with the Chiliastes, as if after a
thousand years, the damned should be delivered from their torment: or with
those that are called Misericordes, who under pretense of Gods mercy, imagine
that he will condemn none to be punished eternally, but will after a certain
time, release them. Wherein, they making themselves more merciful then God:
they do thereby also, destroy his most glorious and eternal justice.

Of which sort of false interpreters of this last judgment of our Savior
Christ, we may read in Augustine, in his 21. book De ciuitate Dei, cap: 8, 9,
10. and 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

Unto whom also do the popish sort approach, in their fancies about limbus, and
their purgatory fire: as if sins could be otherwise satisfied for, then by
the blood of Jesus Christ; or otherwise be apprehended then by a true and
lively faith; to perfect justification, while men live here in this world.

Neither are they to be regarded, that vainly dispute of that everlasting
fire, which is threatened for the punishment of wicked men, and of the wicked
Angels: as though no spirit, were subject to the feeling of fire, etc. For God
knows well enough, to verify every judgment that he has denounced:
neither will he be failing in the execution of this the last of all; which shall
be as a perpetual sealing up, and ratifying of all the rest.

Finally, most damnable are those mockers which the Apostle Peter has
prophesied of; even all they, in whom the same prophecy is at this day
fulfilled: who account this doctrine of the coming of our Savior to judgment
no better then a fable; and therefore do despise all whatsoever is spoken of
it. But it is certain, that they shall one day find to their endless terror
and woe: that God will in good earnest, be avenged of all their mockings. For
he will surely come, and he will bring his wages with him, as the holy
Scriptures do teach: at what time, the full payment of the wicked, shall be no
more delaied, then the reward of the godly shall: according to that which we
read, Isai: ch: 40, 10. and ch: 62, 11. and Revel: 22.12.

Yea, both holy Scripture, and also reason, and the conscience of every one,
not seared as it were with a hot iron, and hardened: do euict, that it shall
and must be so. Touching the holy Scriptures, and the testimony thereof, we
have seen it so plentifully avouched before, that we need not now stand to
produce them again.

And that it stands upon good reason, every man that will not put out his
own eyes, may easily see.

For seeing God is just, it cannot be, but it must one day, go thenceforth
perfitly well with those whom he loves, and favors, and whom he has
persitly justified in our Savior Christ. And likewise it cannot be, but
perfect justice must one day, and for ever, be executed upon the wicked,
according to their demerites.

The which, because it is not in this world; which is a time of the long
suffering of God: it must needs be in an other. And so the Apostle Paul
reasons, and teaches us to reason, to our comfort: even as he taught the
Thessalonians, 2. Ep: chap: 1. verses 4, 5 6, 7, 8.9, 10, 11, 12. Your patient
enduring of afflictions and tribulations which ye suffer (says he) is a token
of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be accounted worthy of the
kingdom of God, for the which ye also suffer. For it is a righteous thing with
God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you. And to you that are
troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven,
with his mighty Angels, In flaming fire rendering vengeance, etc. And again,
1. Cor: 15.19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
the most miserable. But it is not so. And therefore shall that be generally
accomp^^^hed, concerning all afflicted Christians; and against all the wicked,
which is spoken of the rich man and Lazarus: You in your life time (will God
say) received pleasure, and the godly pains. Now therefore are they comforted,
and you are tormented. It is true, that as we read, 1, Pet: 4, 17, 18, 19.
Judgment begins at the house of God. But (as the same Apostle says
further) If it first begin at us, what shall be the end of them that obey not
the Gospel of God? And if the righteous be scarcely saved, where shall the
ungodly and sinner appear?

Justice also is accounted among men, to have the due course; though the full
judgment and execution of those that are committed to prison, be deferred til
the days appointed for the sessions and assizes. And therefore, why should we
not much rather, esteem the justice of God to be effectual, though the final
and full judgment day, which shall be as it were the general assizes for the
whole world, be deferred until the dissolution and end thereof?

And finally, the conscience no doubt of every man, that is not grossly
hardened; seeleth a kind of smmons in himself, concerning this last
judgment, as was said: according to that saying of the Apostle Paul, Rom: 2,
15. their conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one an other,
or excusing.

Wherefore, beloved in the Lord, howsoever it is with any mockers or
mis-interpreters of this holy Article of our faith: let us undoubtedly believe
it, in that true sense, which the holy Scriptures themselves, do report and
teach the same unto us. Yea let us believe it, as that which is necessary, for
the establishing of our faith, in all the rest: and for the confirming of the
whole fruit and benefit of them unto us for ever.

And in the hope thereof, let us (I beseech ye) carefully prepare our selves,
that we may be found such, as we ought to be, walking in the holy duties
above specified. And namely, let us not spare to judge our selves; to the end
we may prevent this judgment of the Lord: according to the instruction, and
admonition of the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor: 11.31. For (as he says) if we would
judge our selves, we should not be judged. And yet again he adds further,
that when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not
be condemned with the world. God give us grace, that we, with the rest of the
faithful, may make this blessed use of all our afflictions: yea grant it Lord,
we most humbly beseech thee, for Jesus Christ sake. Amen.

Thus far of the doctrine of our belief in the second Person of the Dietie
or Godhead, which is God the Son.

The end of the second Book.
THE DOCTRINE OF THE GOSPEL. THIRD BOOK. WHICH IS, A PROCEEDING IN AN ORDERLY
HANDELING OF THE Several Articles thereof: and namely, concerning our
Christian belief in God the holy Ghost, the third Person of the most holy,
glorious, and undivided Trinity: one only true and eternal God, to be
blessed and praised for ever.

WHEREUNTO IS ANNEXED, A LIKE HANdeling of the Articles of our belief,
concerning the Church of God, and those excellent prerogatives, which God
through Christ, has bestowed upon it.

1. Ep: of John, 5, 7. The holy Ghost is one with the Father and the Son.

And Gospel, 14.26. The Comforter, which is the holy Ghost (says the Son)
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring
all things to your remembrance which I have told you. And ch: 16.13. He is the
Spirit of truth, and leads into all truth.

Matthew: 12, 31, 32. Whosoever shall blaspheme the holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him: neither in this world, nor in the world to come.

T C
VERITAS (...) VVLNERA

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creed. 1606.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS THIRD Book briefly set down in the Table following.
Belief in God the holy Ghost, the third Person of the most holy, glorious,
and undivided Trinity.
THe Ground of this Article. page 1, 2, 3, 4. The sense and meaning of it. page
5. 6, 7, 8. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. The Promise of our sanctication by the holy
Ghost. page 15. The Comforts of Belief in the holy Ghost. page 16. 17. 18. The
Duties to be performed of us to him in respect of the same, yea simply in
respect of himself in that he is God. page 19. 20. The Danger of not believing
in God the holy Ghost. page 21. 22.
Belief that God has a holy Catholic Church.
The Ground and warrant, together with the sense and meaning according to the
same ground. page 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 31. The Promise which God
has made, to call and gather unto himself a holy catholic Church. page 32.
The Comforts arising from the same. page 33, 34, 35, 36. The Duties of every
true member of the holy catholic Church. page 37, ^8, 39. The Danger of not
believing that God has a holy catholic Church. page 40. 41.
Belief that in the holy catholic Church, there is a Communion of Saints.
The Ground and warrant of it: and therewithal, the sense and meaning agreeable
to the same ground. page 42. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49. The Promise which God
has made, that there should be a Communion of Saints in his holy catholic
Church. page 50. 51. The Comforts in respect of this holy Communion. page 51,
52, 53. The Duties of every member of the church in respect of the same. page
53, 54, 55, 56. The Danger of not believing: yea, and of not practicing the
duties belonging to this holy Communion. page 57, 58.
Belief that to every true member of the holy catholic Church, belongs
forgiveness of sins.
The Ground and warrant of it. page 59. 60. The sense and meaning of it. page
61. The Promise which God has made, to forgive the sins of every true member
of his Church. page 61. The Comforts arising from this Promise. page 62, 63.
The Duties belonging to God in respect of the same Comforts. page 63, 64, 65.
The Danger of not believing this Article. page 66, 67.
Belief that to every true member of the holy catholic Church of God,
belongs the blessed immortality of the soul.
The Ground and warrant of it. page 68. 69 70. The sense and meaning of it.
page 71. 72. The Promise of God touching the same. page 72. The Comforts
arising from thence. page 73. The Duties to be performed to God in regard
thereof. page 74. 75. The Danger of not believing the blessed immortality of
the sou^e. page 76. 77.
Belief that to every true member of the holy catholic Church of God,
belongs the glorious resurrection of the body.
The Ground of this Article. page 78. etc to 96. The sense and meaning
according to the same ground. page 96. 97. The Promise of God, that the bodies
of all and every true member of his Church shall rise again in glory. page 97.
The Comforts arising to our souls from this Article of our belief, touching
the glorious resurrection of our bodies. page 98. 99. The Duties to be
performed of us to our God and Father through Jesus Christ, both in our bodies
and also in our souls so long as we live here in this world, in respect of
the same both gracious Promise and Comforts. page 99, 100. 101. The Danger of
not believing this Article. page 102.
Belief that to every true member of the holy catholic Church of God,
belongs the inheritance of everlasting life, both in body and soul.
The Ground of this Article. page 103, 104. The sense and meaning. page 104.
105. The Promise of God, that the inheritance of this everlasting life both of
body and soul united together, does belong to every true member of his holy
Catholic Church. page 106. 107. The Comforts arising frrom this most gracious
Promise, to every believing soul. page 107, 108. 109. The Duties to be
performed of us to God in this life, under the certain hope of his performance
thereof unto us, in his due time. page 110. 111. 112. 113. The Danger of not
believing this Article. page 114. 115.
The Conclusion of the Doctrine of the Gospel, concerning the Articles of our
Christian belief.
The Ground of our Christian faith or Belief in a general consideration. page
115. 116. The Promise in general. page 116. 117. The Comfort generally
considered. page 117. 118. The Duty likewise in general. page 118, 119. The
Danger of unbelief and of disobedience to the doctrine of the Gospel in a like
general consideration. page 119. 120. A general description of the true
justifying faith in respect of all the Articles of our belief. page 121. 122.
These are the Contents of this third book.
THE DOCTRINE OF THE GOSPEL. III. Book.
Belief in God the holy Ghost.


I believe in God the holy Ghost.

Explication
In these words we make profession of our faith, in the third Person of the
blessed and glorious Trinity, God the holy Ghost. For in that we profess,
that we do believe in him, we do also acknowledge him, (together with the
Father and the Son) to be very God. For we may not believe many creature, no
not in any holy Angel of God, though they are spirits: but only in this
Spirit, who for most high excellencies sake, is called the holy Ghost, or the
Spirit of God: as we read very often in the holy Scriptures.



We have the like proofs for the Godhead of the holy Ghost, which we have
seen, and considered of before, for the proof of the Godhead of our Savior
Christ, the only begotten Son of the Father.



First, because the name of God: secondly, because the essential attributes,
or properties of the divine nature: thirdly, because the works of the Deity,
both in the creation and government of the world generally, and also in the
Church more specially: are all of them attributed to the holy Ghost, as of
right belonging to him, as well as to the Son, without any roberie done to
the divine Majesty.

And last of all; because the same duties of divine worship and honor, are due
to the holy Ghost, which do only belong to one and the same divine Majesty
of God.

Explication and proof.
That the name and title of God, is attributed to the holy Ghost; not in respect
of any excellency of gifts and ministry under God, but as of right, and
naturally appertaining unto him, from everlasting to everlasting: we may see
it plainly, Acts, chap. 5. verse 3. compared with the 4. verse. For whereas in
the 3. verse, the Apostle Peter had charged Ananias, by his dissembling to have
l^ed to the holy Ghost: in the very next verse (as it follows in the text) he
tells him plainly, that he had not lied unto men, but unto God Whereof also
the present punishment of death, Belief in God the holy Ghost.
which the holy Ghost inflicted upon him, The ground of the Article.
is a most plain proof. To this our purpose likewise, serves it notably;
that in many places of the holy Scriptures, the same speeches and actions are
indifferently ascribed to the Lord God Jehovah, and to the holy Ghost: which
verily should not have been, neither might without blasphemy have been done:
were not the holy Ghost very true and eternal God. As namely; where it is
thus written, Leuit. 16.2. The Lord (that is, the Lord God Jehovah) said to
Moses, Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all times into the
holy place, within the veil, before the Mercie-seate, etc. These words does
the Apostle, Heb. 9.8. ascribe to the holy Ghost, in that he says, that hereby
the holy Ghost signified this, that the way into the holiest of all, was not
yet opened, while as yet, the first Tabernacle was standing, etc.

Likewise in the 26. chap. of the book of the Prophet Moses, called Leuiticus,
verses 12, 13. where the Lord says, I will walk among you, and I will be your
God, and ye shall be my people. I am the Lord your God, which have brought ye
out of Egypt, etc. The Apostle Paul from the authority of these words,
concluding that God accounts faithful christians to be his Temples (for
says he, ye are the Temple of the living God. 2. Cor. 6.16.) he does use the
like speech under the name of the holy Ghost. 1. Epist. chap. 6.19. saying,
Know ye not, that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost, etc. And chap.
3.16. to the like effect, Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that
the Spirit of God dwells in you? For the latter part of the sentence, is the
proof of the former. And the^ it follows, If any man destroy the Temple of
God, him will God destroy: for the temple of God is holy, which ye are.

Furthermore, where it is said, Deuteronomy. chapter 9.18. that the children of Israel, in
former times provoked the Lord Jehovah to wrath: in the 63. chapter of Isai. verse
10. the holy Prophet charge them in the name of the Lord, that they vexed the
holy Ghost. And so it is laid to the charge of the latter Jews, by holy
Stephen, Act. 7.51. Ye have always resisted the holy Ghost: as your Fathers
aid, so do ye.

In like manner, the words which the Lord God uttered to his Prophet Isaiah,
chapter 6.9. Go and say unto this people, ye shall hear indeed, but ye shall not
understand: ye shall plainly see, and not perceive. Make the heart of this
people fat, etc. The same does the Apostle Paul allege against the obstinate
Jews, in the name of the holy Ghost, Act. 28.25. saying thus. Well spoke the
holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet unto your Fathers, saying, Go unto this
people, and say, By hearing ye shall bear and not understand, and seeing, ye
shall see and not perceive, etc.

So Heb. 3.7.8. the words which the holy Prophet spoke in the name of God,
Psalm. 95.7, 8. To day if we will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: they
are uttered by the Apostle, in the name of the holy Ghost: thus, Wherefore as
the holy Ghost says, To day if ye will hear his voice, etc. And again, chap.
10. of the same Epistle, the words which the Lord spoke by his Prophet
Jeremiah, ch: 31. verse 33. This shall be the covenant that I will make, etc.
The same does the Apostle attribute to the holy Ghost, in these words, The holy
Ghost also bears us record: for after that he had said before, This is the
Testament which I will make unto them after those days, says the Lord, etc.

Moreover, Mark, 12.36. David spoke by the holy Ghost, that which he uttered,
Psalm. 110. as our Savior testifies of him. And again, that which is recorded
of David's prophecy, concerning Judas, who betrayed our Savior: the holy Ghost
spoke it by David's mouth, as the Apostle Peter testifies, Act. 16.

Yea, all the holy Prophets of the Lord God, that ever were, by whose mouths
the Lord spoke, (as Zacharias, the father of John the Baptist witnesses, Luke
chapter 1. verses 68, and 70. And Peter also, Act. 3.21.) the same holy Prophets
are said in like manner, to speak by the holy Ghost: as the same Apostle
tells us again, in his 2. Ep. chapter 1. verse 21. For (says he) the prophecy
came not in old time, by the will of man: but holy men of God, spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost.

Thus then, insomuch as the holy Ghost, is so usually entitled to the name of
God: it may be esteemed a sufficient proof, that he is very true God, though we
had no other. But the rest which follow in the former answer, are of like
weight; and as certainly confirmed by the holy Scriptures: as we shall have
occasion to produce them hereafter, and therefore will not stay upon them here.

Nevertheless, that we may handle this Article in the same order, that we
have done all the former: let us insist, and stay a while, upon some one place
of Scripture, which may be remembered of us, for one special ground of it.



I have learned, that in the 12. chapter of the 1. Epist: to the Corinthians, from
the beginning of the chapter, to the 12. verse of the same: we have a very
convenient place.



Now, concerning spiritual gifts brethren, I would not have ye ignorant,
says the Apostle.

2 Ye know that ye were Gentiles, and were carried away unto dumb idols, as
ye were led.

3 Wherefore I declare unto ye that no man speaking by the Spirit of God,
calls Jesus execrable: also no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
holy Ghost.

4 Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit.

5 And there are diversities of administrations, but the same Lord.

6 And there are diversities of operations, but God is the same, who works
all in all.

7 But the manifestation of the Spirit, is given to every man, to profit
withal.

8 For to one is given by the Spirit, the word of wisdom: and to another, the
word of knowledge, by the same Spirit.

9 And to another is given faith, by the same Spirit: and to another, the gift
of healing, by the same Spirit.

10 And to another, the operation of great works: and to another, prophecy:
and to another, discerning of Spirits: and to another, diversities of tongues:
and to another, the interpretation of tongues.

11 And all these things, works even the same Spirit, distributing to every
man severally; even as he will.

Explication and proof.
It is true, that we do not read in any place of the holy scriptures, these
words, I believe in the holy Ghost, expressed together: no more then we do
these, I believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, etc.
Nevertheless, they are most truly diducted from the holy scriptures, by sound
interpretation and proof; to be one of the most necessary and fundamental
Articles of our true christian belief: as by Gods grace, we shall evidently
perceive, by a more large and ample discourse.

And we may well take this present scripture, which so plentifully affirms
the holy Ghost to be the whole and alone immediate author and worker of all
spiritual and heavenly grace, in the hearts of all the children of God: for
one special and sure ground and warrant of this Article; from whence also, we
may take the occasion of opening this whole doctrine.

And the rather may we make choice of it, because the holy Apostle sets it
down, as necessary for the correction of that ambitious perverting of the good
gifts and graces of God, which was crept in among the Corinthia^s; eue^ as if
they had bin homebred, and not inspired by the holy Ghost: and as though they
stood not bound to use them wholly to the glory of God, and to the profit of
the Church: but to their own praise, etc. Wherein, this came to pass among the
Corinthians, which is every where usual at all other times; that as the
sweeter wood does sooner breed worms, and the finer cloth is the more easily
taken with mothes: so they that have the greatest gifts, are soonest puffed up,
if they want the most holy grace of sanctification and humiliation; which is a
grace above all those other gifts and graces, wherewith (it may be) some wicked
men are endued for a time, in some singular measure, above many of the children
of God.

Let us therefore, as briefly as we can, call to mind the doctrine of this
portion of holy Scripture.

And first of all, let us consider, that the holy Apostle; to the end he
might, (through the blessing of God) the more effectually call the Corinthians
from their ambitious boasting and abusing of their gifts: he most prudently
puts them in mind of their former estate, how they were wretched idolaters,
etc. Whereof he tells them, that he would in no wise have them forgetfully
ignorant: but contrariwise, that they should duly call to mind, and consider
from whom they received every one of the same their gifts.

For this the Apostle might well think, that like as when our Savior called
for a piece of coin; and asked of those that demanded of him, whether they
should pay tribute to Caesar or no, whose superscription it was which it did
bear: and thereby resolved the question, and put his adversaries to silence,
seeing that was to be paid to Caesar, which did belong unto him: so he calling
the Corinthians to mind, that all the gifts which they had, did bear as it
were the Lords stamp; should thereby effectually induce, all those that had
any good meaning in them, to a conscionable applying of all their said gifts,
to the honor of the author and giver of them.

And to the very same purpose also, he does furthermore lay before them, the
extreme folly and madness of their former idolatry: such as they were
miserably carried away withal, before that God of his great mercy, had by his
holy Spirit, altered and changed their hearts. For from the contrary effects,
he argues the contrary causes: insomuch as it is the holy Ghost alone, who
both restrains from execration and cursing; and also moves to the honorable
acknowledging and reuerencing of the Lord Jesus. The world doubtless, and they
that be led by the devil, do hold our Savior Christ and his doctrine, for
accursed: and accordingly, do take delight both to speak themselves, and also
to cause others to speak cursedlie and reproachfullie, both of him, and also
of it: as we may take Plinies letter for an example, in his practice under
Traiane the persecuting Emperor. For so he writes unto the Emperor, that
besides other compulsions, he enforced weak christians to curse Christ, before
he would release them. Yea Paul himself we know (according to his own
profession, and by his bewailing of his sin: while he was persecuting Saul)
he labored all that he could, to make poor christians to blaspheme Christ,
and his holy Gospel.

But that we may go forward in our text: after that this our Apostle (being
now of that persecuting Saul, made a most loving and faithful instructor and
comforter of all true christians) I say, after that he has spoken thus
generally, of the author of all the gifts and graces wherewith the Corinthians
were endued; he comes to a particular rehearsal of them: all tending to this
end, that he might bring the Corinthians to see and consider with themselves,
that whither soever they turned their eyes, either to one kind of grace, or to
another; that all and every one of them were of the holy Ghost.

For which very cause it is, that in his particular rehearsal of the diverse
kinds of them, he does make often mention, of that Spirit, which gives all
according to the good pleasure of his will: and the same also, to the end the
whole Church, and every member thereof, might be edified and built up, in the
sound knowledge and faith of Christ, and all mutually knit together, in one
heart and mind: and not that any should be puffed up thereby, as we are
afterward to consider more at large.

In the mean while, this does very well follow, upon the present
consideration: that insomuch as, all the gifts and graces, which God bestowed
on his Church, are the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost: and that he
distributeth them severally as he will; to some one, to some another, to one
more, to another less, etc. And seeing the Apostle speaks indifferently of
them, to be the gifts of God, and the gifts of the holy Ghost: therefore we see
just cause, and very sufficient reason, why we ought to believe in the holy
Ghost.

But this will yet more fully and plainly appear, The meaning of the Article.
after that we have examined the doctrine of this Article of our faith in the
holy Ghost, according to our order observed hitherto, in all the former
Articles.

I would therefore, that in the next place, ye do show what you have learned
to be the meaning of this Article, I believe in the holy Ghost. For from hence,
may we well take the occasion, both to make all things the more plain, and
also to gather all mere proofs,

Say therefore, what is the meaning of it?

This article teaches me, and all Christians, to believe in the holy Ghost,
the third Person of the most holy and glorious Trinity, as being in Person
truly distinct, from the Persons both of the Father, and of the Son: and yet
nevertheless, in the unity of the Godhead, very true God, coessentiall, and
eternal, and in all infinite Majesty, wisdom, power, and glory, coequall
with them.

Explication and proof.
That the holy Ghost is a personal subsistence, distinct from the Father and
the Son: that is to say, that he is one, having his eternity, and Being:
and in his Being, eternity of omnipotence, infinitenes of wisdom, etc.
considered both more simply in himself, and also by relation in the
distinction of the Person; by reason of the most simple and entiere unity of
one and the same Godhead, wherein every Person of the holy Trinity, does
equally consist: it is evident from very many places of holy Scripture.

And first, that he is a Personal subsistence, and the same also distinct from
the Father, and the Son: he himself has declared it, by his manifesting of
himself, at the baptism of our Savior Christ, the Son of God, in the
bodily shape of a dove, Math. 3. And likewise, by his representing of himself,
in the vision of cloven tongues, over the heads of the Apostles, Act. 2. For
never did any quality, or affection, either of the mind of man, or of any
Angel, appear in any bodily shape, or external representation.

It is furthermore evident, by that form of Baptism which our Savior Christ
has prescribed, and commanded to his Church. For it were absurd, that any
creature should be baptized into the name of that which is no Person.

Moreover, what reason, or shadow of reason were there, why the holy Ghost
should be called by the name of God, if he had not a Personal being? But that
this is so; it has been declared before. The which also, will yet further
appear, when we come to show, that the holy Ghost, who is the searcher of the
heart of man; yea even of the deep things of God: which none can do but God
himself. ( For who has known his mind, or who was his counselor, but he
himself, to himself?) it will (I say) further appear, that he is a Personal
subsistence: when we shall come to show, that all the divine works of the
Godhead, are attributed to the holy Ghost, as well as to the Father, and to the
Son; as was touched in a word before.

The distinction of this Person of the holy Ghost, is likewise evident, by
that his distinct manifesting of himself, by descending from heaven, at the
baptism of the Son of God in our humane nature: when as the Father uttered
his voice, as remaining still in heaven. The same is evident also, by the
distinct rehearsal of him, with the Father and the Son, in the institution
of Baptism.

And that he is the third Person in the holy Trinity; the order of the same
rehearsal, does make it plain. And likewise, that place of the Apostle John,
in his 1. Ep: ch: 5. where he is in like manner, rehearsed in the third place.
Yet so as we, must understand, that neither the Father is first, nor the Son
second, nor the holy Ghost third, in precedence of time, or in dignity of
divine honor; but only in respect of the incomprehensible order, and manner
of the existence, or being of the divine nature: as was observed before, in
the general doctrine of the whole Trinity.

Wherefore also, it is truly affirmed here, that as the holy Ghost is
coessentiall, with the Father and the Son, (as the Apostle John testifies in
the chapter before alleged, saying, These three are one) so is he every way
coequall, and coeternall, both in wisdom, and power, etc: as by the more full
opening of this Article will clearelie appear.



I have learned from the interpretation of this Article; that I my self, and
every Christian, do stand bound to believe, that God the holy Ghost, has
always, without beginning heretofore, and even to this present, had his
ioynte-worke, or (as we may say) copartenership with the Father, and the
Son: both in purposing and decreeing, and also in ordering and effecting, all
the mighty works of Creation, and government; not only in the whole world,
generally or universally considered; but also more specially, in the new
creation as it were, and government of the holy Catholic church of God, and
in the sanctification of every particular member of it. Yea, and that he has
the same ioynt-worke, and counsel, for ever hereafter, to the perfecting of all
the counsels and works of God, both in mercy, and in judgment, world
without end.

I have learned also, that I for my part, do stand bound to believe in God the
holy Ghost, that he is my sanctifier, as well as the sanctifier of any other of
the elect people of God.

Explication. and proof.
This is a necessary addition, to make up the former answer. In the opening
whereof, that also shall by the grace of God, be yet more fully opened and
confirmed.

And first, touching the ioint-work of the holy Ghost, in the purposing and
effecting of the works of Creation, as being one God, together with the Father
and the Son: we find it evidently confirmed in the very beginning of the
holy Bible. the 2. verse of the first chapter, and verses 26. and 27. Likewise
ch: 2.7. The Lord God breathed the breath of life into man: to wit, by the
power and virtue of his eternal Spirit, creating the soul without any
earthly matter, or corruptible element. According to that saying of Elihu in
the book of Job, ch: 33.4. The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of
the Almighty has given me life. Read also Ps: 33.6. and 104, 29 30.31. and
Mal: 2.15. For God is the Father of Spirits, and the creator of all other
things, by his eternal word, and through that almighty Spirit of his, which is
the holy Ghost, in whom we do believe.

This being true, that the holy Ghost has his ioint-worke, in the purposing
and effecting of the works of Creation, together with the Father, and the
Son: there can be no cause, to doubt of his ioint-work in the upholding and
ordering of the same, seeing he is a Spirit of as infinite, and everlasting
wisdom, providence and government, as he is of almighty power and virtue.

But I have to that, which this Article of our faith, does principally
intend: that is, to see how the holy Ghost, has his most holy and divine
ioint-worke, together with the Father, and the Son, in the new creation, and
continual government of his Church in this world; even to the full
glorification of it in the world to come.

And where may we better begin to lay forth this excellent and high mystery,
then by taking a view of the ioint-worke of the holy Ghost, in bringing our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Savior of this his Church into the world: in preserving
and guiding him in the world: and in strengthening and confirming of him to
perform all things necessary, to the perfiting of the same his Churches
salvation, even till he left the world. For this may be in steed of spectacles,
and as it were a clear glass, to help the weakness of our dim eyesight, to
discern the better of all the rest.

First therefore; by whom was our Savior Christ conceived in the womb of the
blessed virgin; but by the holy Ghost? And wherefore by the holy Ghost; but
because he could not otherwise have taken man's nature, without the original
blot and stain of sin: that so he might be meet to be that unspotted, or
undefiled Lamb of God, which was to be made the only propitiatory sacrifice,
for the sins of men?

By the same holy Ghost it was, that our Savior grew, as in stature of
body; so also in wisdom of mind and spirit; until that, at the time of his
baptism, when he was to enter upon the public and open discharge of his
mediatorship; he received from the same holy Ghost, all holy gifts and graces,
not by measure, but most abundantly; to the most full and perfect furnishing
of him, to the absolute discharge of every part of that most high office which
was commiteed unto him. A public testimony whereof, was that his descending,
and lighting upon our Savior, which was mentioned before.

By the same holy Ghost, he was forthwith led into the wilderness, to make his
first encounter (as it were in combat hand to hand) against our arch-enemy the
Devil, on our behalf: that so he might be known to the Church, to be a far
other manner of person, then was Adam. For though he were more often, and
therewithal, more vehemently assalted then he was before his fall: yet was he
not overcome, but he did vanquish and overcome the Devil for ever.

By the same holy Ghost, he did preach the Doctrine of eternal life and
salvation, according as it is said to the same purpose, that the spirit of the
Lord was upon him: and that he was in a principal, yea in a pierles manner,
anointed with the holy Ghost, Isai: 61.1. etc Heb: 1.9. John, 3, 34.

By the same holy Ghost, and not of mere humane power, he did work all his
miracles. For so he has said of himself, as we read in the holy Gospel:
that he wrought them by the finger and spirit of God, Mat: 12, 28. Luke, 11.20.
And Act: 10.38. He was (says the Apostle Peter) ancinted with the holy Ghost,
and with power, and he was mighty in word and deed.

By the same holy Ghost, who was the author and orderer of his whole life, did
he also offer up himself unto God at his death: as we read, Heb: 9.14.
Through the eternal spirit (says the Apos:) offered he himself unto God,
without spot.

By the same holy Ghost, he was after his death, raised up from the dead, Rom:
8, 11. The spirit of God (says Paul) raised up Jesus from the dead. And 1, of
Pet: 3, 18 He was put to death (says Peter) concerning the flesh, but was
quickened by the spirit: that is, by his divine power which he in that he was
man, received from the holy Ghost. And likewise, after his resurrection, he
did through the holy Ghost, give commandments, even his divine and sovereign
commandments; to his holy Apostles. Act: 1.2. And being justified in the
spirit, he was at the last, raised up to glory, 1. Tim: 3.16.

Behold therefore, in this principal part of the more immediate work of the
holy Ghost, in the beginning and ordering of the whole mystery of our
redemption, in the mediation of our Savior: we have a representation, of that
which he does, in the whole manifesting, and applying of Jesus Christ, and of
all that he did and suffered, and thereby achieved, to the everlasting benefit
of his Church.

To the which end and purpose, let us proceed, and further observe, how that
like as after the ascension of our Savior Christ; his Disciples were
(according to his promise) replenished with the gifts and graces of the holy
Ghost, for the publishing of his Gospel; as we read, Luke, 24.49. Act: 1, 4, 5,
8. and chap: 2. v. 4, 17, 18, 33 and Ephesians. 3.5: so in former times, all
prophecy and revelation of the truth from time to time, was immediately given
to the Church, by no other, then by the same holy Ghost. 1. Pet: 1.10.11.12.
and 2. Pet: 1.19.20.21. and 2. Tim: 3.16.17.

And now yet further, let us likewise observe; that as the holy Ghost, both
is, and has been always, next and immediately, to the Church, from God the
Father, through the only begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ, the author of
all revelation of the truth, and of the bestowing of every good gift and grace:
so is he, and has always, in like manner, been the immediate sender,
commander, and governor, of all holy instruments, both ordinary, and
extraordinary, for the communicating of his graces to the people of God: as
Isay, 48.16. The Lord God (says the prophet) and his Spirit has sent me. So
Acts 13.2. The holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work
whereunto I have called them. And on the other side, Acts, 16.6, 7. it is
written, that the holy Ghost forbade them to preach the word in Asia, and that
he suffered them not to go into Bithynia. Read also 1. Pet. 1.12. The
Apostles and the rest preached the Gospel by the holy Ghost. And 1. Cor. 2.9,
etc. to the end of the chapter: and 2. Epist. 3.6. they are therefore called
Ministers of the Spirit, and not of the letter. And Revel. chapters first,
second and third, St. John being in the Spirit, did by the direction of the
holy Ghost, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ, write to the seven Churches in
Asia, as is evident by that often repeated and most grave admonition: Let him
that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says to the Churches. And Act. 20.28.
S. Paul directing his speech to the ordinary Pastors and Elders of the
Churches, charge them to take heed to themselves, and to all the slocke,
whereof the holy Ghost had made them Overseers, to feed the Church of God, etc.

And yet more particularly; to come to every of our selves. As our first and
natural living, moving, and being, is from God by the holy Ghost, as we have
seen from the creation: so, and in more special manner; is our new creation,
and our spiritual life, moving, and being in the same. For all whatsoever,
both entrance into the Church and kingdom of God, here in this life: and all
increase of grace therein, by the means, either of word, prayer, and
sacraments, or any other holy way appointed of God; even to the full preparing,
and making of us meet, for the inheritance of the life and glory to come: all
is by the holy Ghost, as we have the plain testimony of our Savior Christ
himself, John, 3. Except a man be borne of water, and of the holy Ghost, he
can neither see, nor enter into the kingdom of God. For the natural man
perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, etc. 1. Cor. 2.14. According
also, as our Savior Christ said to Peter, Matthew, 16.17. Flesh and blood has
not revealed it unto thee. So necessary is it, that the same Spirit, which is a
witness in heaven, together with the Father and the Son, should also be a
witness on the earth, with that water and blood, which flowed out of the side,
yea even from the very heart of our Savior Christ. 1. John, 5.7, 8. And chap.
2. of the same Epistle: it is the anointing of the holy Ghost says saint John,
which teaches faithful Christians, and leads them into all truth, as Christ
had promised that he would send him to that end. And chap. 4.4. Greater is he
that is in you, then he that is in the world. Also saint Peter says, 1. Epist.
1.2. We are elect, according to the foreknowledge of God, to the sanctification
of the Spirit. And verse 23. Our souls are purified in obeying the truth,
through the Spirit, to love brotherly without feining, etc. being borne a new,
not of mortal seed, but of immortal by the word of God, who lives for ever.
And Colos. 1.8. The love of Christians is by the Spirit. And verse 9. And
Ephesians. 1.17, 18. The knowledge of Christians, is called spiritual knowledge.
And touching faith, we read Gal. 5.5. that through the Spirit we wait for the
hope of righteousness through faith. Yea generally, the fruit of the Spirit,
is love, joy, and peace, etc: as in the same chapter, verses 22, 23. And Ephesians
5.9. The fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and
truth. Read also Romans 14, 17. The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. And all this, by the word
of God. For by it, does the Spirit give the spiritual life. 2. Cor. 3.6. and
verses 17, 18. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. And we are
changed into the image of the Lord, from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the
Lord.

And touching Prayer, it is the prayer of the Spirit only (that is to say, that
which the Spirit teaches, sa^ctifieth, and inableth us unto) which is
acceptable to God. And therefore it is said of the Spirit, that he helps our
infirmities, and teaches us to pray, etc. Romans 8.26, 27. Whence it is also,
that saint Jude exhorts christians to pray in the holy Ghost, to the edifying
of themselves, in their most holy faith: as verse 20. of his Epistle, And the
Apostle Paul, I will pray in the spirit, and sing in the spirit. 1. Cor. 14.
That is, I will both pray, and also praise God, as the holy Ghost shall teach
me. And Ephesians. 6.18.

Likewise, concerning the sacraments: first, Baptism; the very form of the
institution, shows that it is the holy Ghost, who must give that effect which
it signifies: according to that which is said, to note the true circumcision.
Phi. 3.3. We are (says S. Paul) the circu^cisio^ which worship God in spirit
And Christ is said in this respect to baptize with the holy Ghost, though he
baptized none with the outward element of water.

And 1. Cor: chap: 12, verse 13. By one spirit we are all baptized into one
body. Secondly, concerning the Lords Supper, our Savior Christ noting in the
use of it, the nature of faith, which feeds upon the flesh of Christ, and
drinks his blood: (both which, are presented by the bread and wine of that
Sacrament) he himself teaches, that it is the Spirit only which quickens:
and that otherwise, the flesh, (and therefore much rather the sign of the
flesh) profits nothing, John, 6. And again, 1. Cor: 12.13. we have been all
made to drink into one spirit.

Thus every way, it is the holy Ghost, who is from God the Father; and that
also by the mediation of our Lord Jesus Christ: the only immediate beginner
and perfiter of all grace in us. And it is the rather to be thoroughly weighed
of us; because, as the Apostle Paul says: Flesh and blood, cannot inherit the
kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 15.50. To him therefore, both faith, hope, and love,
invocation, and thanksgiving, fear, and obedience is due; as well as to the
Father, and the Son: as we shall see, when we come to the duties.

This is the true Christian faith of the Church of God, and of every true
member thereof, touching the holy Ghost; how many soever have believed aright:
though the doctrine thereof, has not been so fully and clearly revealed; till
the coming of Christ, at the time of his most holy anointing to the taking of
our nature unto him. God gave his people of Israel, his good spirit to instruct
the^ in former times: as Neh: 9.20. and Isai: 63.11.12, 13.14. Read also Ezekiel:
ch, 2. v. 2, etc. and chapter 11. v. 1.5. and chapter 36.25, 26, 27. And Ier: 31, 33.
conferred with Heb: 10, 15, 16, 17. And Isai: 59, 21. and Joel. 2:28. and Hagg:
2, 6. And this Spirit so often spoken of, is the holy Ghost. The Spirit of the
holy God, is also after a sort acknowledged even of the very heathen, as Dan:
4, 5, 6.

As for that which we read, Act: 19.2. where the late converted Disciples at
Ephesus, say they had not heard whether there be an holy Ghost; either they do
not mean, to speak so, concerning the third person of the holy Trinity, but
concerning the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, which had bin given in
other places, by the laying on of the hands of the Apostles: or if any think
they did mean so; the same must withal confess, that from their former
ignorance, this Article is for ever hereafter, more certainly confirmed to the
church of God, by that better instruction, which they received from the holy
Apostle.

But you have not yet showed, that the essential attributes or proprieties of
the God^e^d, are attributed to the holy Ghost, as well as to the Father and the
Son.

This must not in anywise be omitted of us, because the due consideration
hereof, is of great weight, to establish and confirm our hearts, to believe in
him.



The proofs are so many, as I am not able to make rehearsal of them, without
some help by your direction: nor then neither, but so as there will need some
further supply by your addition.

Explication
You may justly say so indeed. I will therefore help you what I can: provided
that you will stir up your self, to call to mind some one proof or other,
for every one of these divine attributes, as well as you may.



In this sense, the holy Ghost is called the eternal Spirit. Heb: 9.14.

Explication and proof.
It is true. Neither is any other Spirit; either Angel, or soul of man, so
called: though they be immortal and endless, by the decree of God. And further,
touching the eternity of the holy Ghost: we may prove it by the same reason,
that the Evangelist John proves the eternity of the Son. For insomuch as the
holy Ghost was in the beginning; that is, before any creature was, as well as
the Son: therefore we may conclude, that the one is eternal, as well as the
other. Neither is it possible, that the Father, and the Son, without this
their eternal Spirit; should ever have given any being to any creature: seeing
the immediate producing of the creature, and also the supporting of it, from
the first instant of the beginning of it, is from, and by the holy Ghost: as we
may perceive by that which we read: Gen: chap: 1. verse 2.



Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy
presence? says the holy Psalmist, Ps. 139.7.

Explication and proof.
This shows, that the presence of the holy Ghost, is as large (that is, every
where, and filling all places) as the Godhead of the father, and the Son.

This infinite and incomprehensible Majesty of the holy Ghost, may be partly
discerned of us, by that which is often testified: that from the beginning of
the world, to the end thereof, he has been, and will be present with the
children of God in special manner; dwelling (as it were) in the hearts of
thousands at one instant: and so from time to time, sanctifying, guiding, and
co^forting them all. And for a most evident instance thereof, let us consider it
by the abounda^ce of the gifts of the holy Ghost, poured forth upon the church,
in these last times of the world: since the ascension of our Savior Christ.
John, 7.38.39. Act: 2.17. 1. Cor: 12. yea, and in that it is expressly said,
that our Savior himself, in that he was man, was endued with the gifts of the
Spirit, not in measure. Thus may we argue the infinite Majesty, and
incomprehensible greatness of the holy Ghost: though not in any bodily
dimentions (which is contrary to the nature of any Spirit, and most of all of
the holy Ghost) but in a manner unsearchable to us, according to his invisible
nature, and most divine and secret virtue: John 3.8.

We will have forward.



The works of creation, and government, made and continued by him, together
with the Father and the Son, as has been declared before: do sufficiently
prove it to be so.

Explication. and proof.
It is very true. And besides, he is expressly called the power of the most
high. Luke, 1, 35. Read also, chap: 24, 29. and Act: 1.8. where the gifts of
the holy Ghost: are called the power of God from on high. And accordingly ch:
6, 10. the Evangelist testifies, that although many gain said Stephen (though
he was no Apostle) yet they were not able to resist the wisdom, and the
Spirit, by the which he spoke. Generally, all the graces bestowed upon the
Church, and every member thereof; they proceed from the power of the holy
Ghost. Our regeneration is called our Baptizing with the holy Ghost. John,
1.33. and Act: 11.16. And 2. Cor: 3.18. We are changed into the image of the
Lord, from glory to glory, by his Spirit, as we heard before. And Act: 9.31.
The Churches were multiplied by the comfort of the holy Ghost. And Ephesians: 3.16.
Christians are strengthened by the Spirit of God. Moreover: 2. These. 2.8. The
Lord will consume the man of sin, even wicked Antichrist, by the Spirit of
his mouth: that is, by the preaching of the Gospel, through the mighty power
of the holy Ghost.

Yea all that power, which our Savior had, in that he was man; he received it
from the holy Ghost: whether we look to the power of his doctrine, or of his
works: according to that, Act: 10.38. God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the
holy Ghost and with power. And Mat: 12, 28. compared with Luke, 11, 15. Our
Savior himself professes, that he did cast out devils by the Spirit of God:
whom he calls the finger; that is, the divine power, of God. Like as when the
Prophet Isaiah would note the perfect continuance of Gods power, without all
defect: he says, The hand of the Lord is not shortened. And the Prophet Micah
ch: 2.7. minding to signify as much, though to another end, asks the
Israelites, whether the Spirit of the Lord were shortened? As though he should
say, It is impossible: he is as able either to bless and prosper, or to curse
and plague, as ever he was. Thus we may see, an almighty power ascribed to the
holy Ghost: yea even the almighty power of God; seeing none is almighty but
he alone.

And next unto this, who can doubt of the infinite perfection and fulness of his
holiness; considering that he is in this respect, in a special manner, and in
way of a most chief excellency in himself, above all Spirits, called the
holy Ghost: as was observed in the beginning?

And in respect of all the elect, the Spirit of sanctificatton: because all
their holiness is wrought by him, Rom: 1, 4. And 1. Peter 1, 2. And 2. These:
2.13. He is also a most pure and clean Spirit, infinitely contrary to all
unclean Spirits of men, 1. Cor: 6, 11. and verses 17, 18.19.20. And Gal: 5,
16. etc: and to the wicked Angels, branded by the reproachful name of unclean
or foul Spirits, Mark, 1.23. etc, etc, 27. And chap: 5, 2. etc.

Let us now come to the rest.



In this respect (says the Prophet Isaiah) who has instructed the Spirit of
the Lord, and who was his counselor, or taught him?

Explication and proof.
So says he indeed, chap: 40.13. And seeing he has done all things in
excellent wisdom, without the advice or counsel of any creature, in any
point: it is plain, that he has all perfection, in, and of himself.

The same also may appear, with like evidence and plainnes, from the
testimony of Saint Paul, 1. Cor: 2.9.10. The things (says he) which eye has
not seen, nor ear has heard, etc. God has revealed them unto us, by his
Spirit: for the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God, etc.
Which things also (says the same Apostle, as it follows) we speak not in
words, which man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy Ghost teaches,
comparing spiritual things with spiritual things. And again, chap: 12. verse
4. etc. after that he has reckoned up the manifold gifts and graces, which God
bestows upon his Church, wisdom, knowledge, discerning of spirits, etc. He
concludes, that there are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit: as was
alleged before.

This spirit, gives our Savior gifts above measure (as we have seen
already) and the Church of Christ all abundance, from his fullness: teaching
them in all wisdom, etc. And therefore he must needs be in himself,
infinite in wisdom.

Now that we may proceed.



In this respect, he is called the spirit of truth; yea that spirit of truth,
which is incomparable and pierles: even the very truth it self.

Explication and proof.
It is our Saviors own testimony, John, chap: 14.17. and chap: 16.13. And the
testimony of his faithful Apostle, John, 1. Epistle, 5, 6. The spirit is
truth. And therefore also is it affirmed, that those things which the spirit
has foretold, must needs be performed: according to that saying of the Apostle
Peter, Act: 1.16. This Scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the
holy Ghost spoke by the mouth of David etc. Moreover, Ephesians. 1, 13.14. The
faithful are sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of
our inheritance, until the redemption of the possession purchased unto the
praise of his glory. And ch: 5.9. The fruit of the spirit is in all truth. And
1. Ioh: 5, 7. he is a joint witness of the truth, together with the Father, and
the Son, and of equal authority, and credit therein, with them.

He is so, and thorefore is called the Spirit of grace, and compassion (or as
some translate) of supplication and introatie.

Explication. and proof.
So we read, Zech: chap: 12.10. and Heb: 10.29. And the holy Ghost is so called,
because he both gives grace; and also certifieth us of that grace and favor,
and of that pity and compassion; which both the Father, and the Son, bear
toward us: yea, and stirs us up, and teaches us, how to entreat the same.
For (as the Apostle says, Rom: 5. verse* 5.) The love of God is shed abroad in
our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us. And chap: 8.16. The
Spirit bears, witness with our Spirit, that we are the children of God. And in
the same cha: verse, 26. The Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know
not what to pray as we ought: but the Spirit it self makes requests for us,
with fighes which cannot be expressed, etc. Moreover, Gal: 5.22. Love, joy,
long suffering, gentleness, and goodness, are the fruits of the Spirit in us.
And Ephesians. 5, 9. The fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness. And therefore the
holy Ghost himself, is in himself, most good and gracious. And so we read,
Nehem: 9.20. and Psalm: 143.10. He is called the good Spirit of God. And 2. Cor:
3, 6. The Spirit gives life. And verse 17, Where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty. And therefore also he is in himself most free, working,
and distributing all things as it pleases him. 1, Cor: 12. verse 11.

There is one special attribute, of the divine nature, or Godhead yet behind:
namely righteousness, or justice.



In the 30. chap: of Isaiah verse, 1. Woe to the rebellious children, says the
Lord, who take counsel, but not with me, and cover with a covering, but not by
my Spirit, that they may lay sin upon sin, etc.

Explication. and proof.
Here it is plain, that the Spirit of God, can abide no iniquity: no more then
either of the other persons in the Godhead. And beside; our Savior himself,
rehearses it for a divine property of the holy Ghost, to rebuke the world of
sin; which is unrighteousness: and to show, where true righteousness is to be
found: namely in Christ, through faith, and not in man's own corrupt and sinful
nature, or works. In which respect, the Apostle Paul says, that our Savior
was justified in the Spirit, 1. Tim: 3, 16. without whose righteousness,
apprehended by faith, through the Spirit, none can be justified in the sight of
God 1, Cor: 6, 11. Neither can we, without the sanctifying grace of the same
Spirit, through Christ, perform any duty of righteousness. For it is the
fruit of the spirit (alone) which is in all righteousness. Ephesians. 5, 9. And
they only, Who are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. Rom: 8, 14.
And 1. Cor: 12, 3. No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy
Ghost. As touching the rest, they provoke the Spirit of God against themselves,
to their destruction, Isai: 63, 10. They rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit:
therefore was (God) turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them.

We have a fearful example in those that tempted the holy Ghost, by their
hypocritical dealing, Act: 5, 3, etc. And most fearful is the estate of all
such, as do at any time, commit that sin, which is most properly called the
sin against the holy Ghost. For as our Savior affirms, this sin shall
never be forgiven. Thus the holy Ghost is perfectly righteous: yea in all
perfection of all divine attributes, equal to the Father, and the Son: and
therefore very true God together with them. Together I say: that we may be
admonished to understand this doctrine rightly. Not as though the holy Ghost
were God, separated from the Father, and the Son: or a God of himself,
absolutely and every way distinguished from them; but only in the unity of
essence, a distinct Person in the same Godhead; with the Father and the Son:
and so in an essential relation of person, one very God with the^. And
accordingly, I say so one: to the end we might be admonished, not to believe in
the holy Ghost, as a separated, or distinct God; but only, as in a distinct
person in the unity of one and the same God. And finally, that we might in
like manner, be herewithall advertised, that we are not to worship the holy
Ghost, in any imagined separation of his person, from one and the same Deity
of the Father and the Son: no more then we are to confound his person with
theirs. To the which End, Gregory Nazianzene.
worthy is that golden rule, or saying, of that godly and orthodoxe Father, to
be in continual remembrance, which is recorded in the more general doctrine
of the whole blessed and glorious Trinity.

I cannot think upon one (says he) but by and by, I am compassed about, with
the bright-shining of the three: and I cannot severally discern the three, but
I am speedily carried back to one. Whereupon also, worthily advises Master
Calvin, saying. Let it not once come into our minds, to imagine such a
trinity of Persons, as may deteine our thought in any several distraction,
and does not forthwith bring us back again to that same Unity. The name of
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, do give us to understand, that there is a true
distinction; lest any man should think them to be bare names of addition,
whereby God according to his works, should be diuersely entitled: but they
do only note a distinction, and not a division.

Thus much out of Master Calvin. Iustit: lib. 1. cap: 13. Sect. 17.

But now after this more large, and general discourse, I would gladly that you
would make some brief rehearsal of the principal works of the holy Ghost,
in the church of God: such as are for the particular benefit of every true
member of it.



First, the holy Ghost teaches and inlighteneth the mind, with the knowledge
of the truth.

Secondly, he assures, and confirms him whom he has thus taught the truth;
to believe the same.

Thirdly, he humbles and conuerteth the will, and affection of the heart, to
love and delight in it.

Finally, he helps, comfort, guides, and confirms, the whole man, both
body, and soul, and Spirit, to continue and increase in the obedience of the
same truth of God: against all the temptations, wherewith the flesh, the
Devil, and the world, would hinder; and if it were possible, utterly frustrate
any part of the same his most holy and blessed work.

Explication and proof.
For the first part of this answer; call to mind Nehem: chap: 9.20. mentioned
a little before. Read also. John, chap: 16. verse 13. The holy Ghost (as our
Savior teaches us) is the spirit of trutn, and leads into all truth. And
John, 1. Epistle chap: 2. verses 20.27. The holy Ghost, is called by the
Apostle, the anointing, which we have from our Savior that holy one of God,
This anointing which ye have received of him (says he) dwells in you, and
ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teaches you
all things.

Forth second part of the answer, read, Rom: 8.16. The Spirit of God bears
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. And 2. Cor: 4.13. The
spirit gives faith, Likewise, 1. Epistle 12, 9. Faith is given by the Spirit.
And Gal: 4.6. God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into four hearts,
which cries Abba. Father.

For the third part, read Psalm: 143.10. where the holy Prophet prays thus
Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God: let thy good Spirit lead me
into the land of righteousness. Or rather, as Trem: translateth, per terram
planam: as if the Prophet had said, Grant me to walk as on an even ground, or
in an even course (as we would say) sine offensa tui aut cuiusquam: without
the offense of thee o God, or of any man. Read also, Ezekiel: 36, 25, 26.27. And
Ier: 31.3. conferred with Heb: 8, 10. and chap: 10. verses 15.16. as was upon
another occasion alleged not long before.

For the proofs of the latter part, we shall have a more fit occasion to
speak of them, when we come to the Comforts: and therefore we will forbear
to produce them now.

In the mean season, we may not unprofitably look back to that which is set
down, in the doctrine of Repentance. 1. Book pages 70. 71.

Here also, to make all more full and plain: we will refer these most
gracious operations of the holy Ghost to these seven heads following.

First, that he inlighteneth the mind.

Secondly, that he renews the will.

Thirdly, that he comfort the feeble minded.

Fourthly, that he augmenteth and increases grace.

Fifthly, that he raises up such as fall.

Sixthly, that he makes them more strong against temptation.

Seventhly, that he governs the whole course of the life of Gods children.

The which also, as I have received them, well expressed in latin verse, by a
good Christian brother, one well affected at the hearing of this doctrine
preached: so will I set them down for the godly delight of the learned Reader:
and then will I briefly english the same, for the benefit of the rest.

1. Docet.
SPiritus erudiens, tenebras dispergit opacas
Mentis, vt aspiciat lumina sacra Dei. Ioh: 16.13. Neh: 9.20.

Spiritus art sua, diuinas perdocet arts,
Dogmata, quae ratio null a docere queat.
2. Regenerat.
Spiritus ingenitos praui constringit awores, John, ^, 5.

Mutat and affectus, quos facit esse nouos.
Spiritus ad luctum peccati peruehit altum,
Hinc dolor, hinc moeror, displi^^isse Deo.
Spiritus ex luctu cordis solatia gignit.
3. Consolatur.
Mentibus infundit gaudia quippe Deus. John, 14.1^,

Spiritus alta mouens remouet suspiria cordis,
Testis amoris inest, signat adesse Deum.
4. Auget.
Spiritus assiduis dotes accessibus anget,
Crescat vt in multum quod fuit ante parum: 2. Cor. 3.1^

Spiritus exauget vires, dum viribus adait
Vires, vt vigeat quod fuit ante nihil.
5. Erigit.
Spiritus illapsos quia vis data saepe vacillat,
Erigit and lapso^ spe i^het esse bona: Psalm: 51.10* 11.12.

Spiritus aduersis, cum men's sit languida rebus
Erigit, emergit men's modo prossa malis.
Spiritus erectos, vi^ cum sit lubrica vitae, Ephesians. 3.16.

Ne recidant firmat, si recidant que^uuat:
Spiritus imbelies diuinis im^uit army,
6. Confirmat.
Praelia prima decet, posteriora fugat.
Ipsius arma; fides, spes, and coelestia verba,
Quae sanctis scriptis edidit ipse Deus.
Spiritus his armis Satanae mendacia pellit, Ephesians. 6.1^ 11. etc.

His quisque tegitur tutos vbique manet.
Spiritus externis signis da^ pignora certa,
Vine verbis addens, pectora tarda mouet.
Spiritus hisce Dei diuinis dotibus auctum
Dirigit, and rectis passibus ire facit: Isai: 63.13.14. Psalm. 143.1^^

Spiritus acta regit, voces and corda gubernat,
7. Regit.
Ne cor, lingua, manus sint superata malis.
Spiritus in laetis, animum dat tristibus aequum. 1. These: 1.5.6. and 2. Ep:
2.13.14. etc.

Vt grates habeat men's in vtrisque Deo i^
Spiritus ornatos-donis regit art peritos,
Vt sint sancta Dei munera sancta viris.
Epilogus.
Solatur, Gignit, Firmat, Docet Erigit. Auget
Dirigit. Oranti Spiritus ista dabit.
The same in English. The Promise.

1. The holy Ghost does clear the mind,
2. He does renew the will:
3. He does the soul with comfort store,
4. He does all grace instill.
5. When weakness grows, and flesh preuailes,
And grace does take some foil:
The Spirit comes, and flesh subdues;
The devil does recoile.
6. With double strength, grace fenced is,
And so more strong to fight:
The next assaltes are soon represt,
What force may foil Gods might?
7. The holy Ghost of all man's life,
The guide and stay he is:
In all estates, weak man he holds,
Lest he should go amiss.
For left to self, as apt to straie,
Is man, as seely sheep:
And eke as apt to be destroide,
If God do not him keep.
Much less poor soul could he attain,
To happy state in heaven:
If holy Ghost of all his gifts,
Withdraw but one of them.
THe meaning of the Article thus explaned, let us now come to the promise.



In the 11. chapter of Saint Luke, verses 9.10.11.12, 13.

Rehearse you the words of the text.



I say unto you (says our Savior) ask, and it shall be given unto you:
seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every
one that asks, receives: and he that seeks, finds: and to him that
knocks, it shall be opened.

If a Son shall ask bread of any of you that is a Father, will he give him a
stone? or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?

Or if he ask an egg, will he give him a scorpion?

If ye then which are evil, can give good gifts to your children, how much
more shall your heavenly Father, give the holy Ghost, to them that desire him?

Explication and proof.
A most gracious promise; of a most glorious and merciful Father: and the same
also most sweetly and familiarly, illustrated and confirmed, by our most
blessed Lord and Savior; to help the weakness of our faith, touching the
assured persuasion of so singular a gift: even the gift of all gifts, as we
may say, etc. For our Savior Christ knew right well, how great our weakness
of apprehension is this way, in conscience of our unworthiness: beside our
slothfulness in seeking after it; the which he would by this his most
gracious encouragement, chase away.

Furthermore, it serves to this purpose very well; The Comforts.
that the holy Ghost is called the Spirit of promise; that is, the promised
Spirit. Ephesians: 1.13. And the promise of the Father, Act: 2.33. The which
promise of the Spirit, (that is, the accomplishment of which promise) we
receive through faith, as the Apostle Paul affirms, Gal: 3.14.

Wherefore, we most thankfully embracing this so high and pierlesse a promise:
let us now proceed to consider of the use of the doctrine, and faith of this
Article.

ANd first for comfort, whereunto the promise does very aptly make way.



The comfort of belief in God the holy Ghost, is most singular: and therefore
does our Savior himself entitle him, with name of the Comforter.

Explication and proof.
It is true, as we read John, chap: 14. verse 16. I will pray the Father (says
our Savior) and he will give ye another Comforter, that he may abide with ye
for ever. And verse 26. But the Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my name, he will teach ye all things, etc. And again, chap:
15.26. And chap: 16, 7.

And most worthily, is he called the Comforter; because he alone, does in
special m^aner, and most immediately comfort us, against al temptations, and
causes of discomfort.

And also, because he alone, does in like special manner, both give us the
present comfortable feeling of all the sweet mercies of God in this life: and
also the joyful assurance and hope of all good things, which are to come, as
we shall see a none.



First, against our actual sins and transgressions.

Secondly against our failings in all holy obedience.

Thirdly, against our original sin, and corruption of nature.

Fourthly, against the troubles and afflictions of this present evil world.

Fifthly, against the doubt of the truth of our faith, and repentance, and so of
our election to salvation.

Sixthly, against the discomfort of our continual infirmities, and often
renewed slips and falls.

Explication and proof.
These indeed, are the singular comforts, which the holy Ghost does daily renew
unto us, and that upon these occasions following.

For first, whereas the devil, and our own guilty and unbelieving hearts,
tempt us, that we must needs be condemned; through the just, judgment of God,
because of our manifold and great sins; insomuch as God is most just and must
needs take vengeance of all sinners: the holy Ghost assures us to our
comfort, that all our sins are punished in our Savior Christ: and that the
justice of God is fully satisfied by his death, so that they shall not be laid
any more to our charge.

Secondly, whereas the devil further obiecteth, that although this were true,
that our sins are satisfied for; yet we could not be accepted in the sight of
God, except we were righteous: the holy Ghost assures us further, that our
Savior Christ has fulfilled all righteousness for us; and that hereof, his
resurrection is an evident proof. And moreover, he assures us, that for our
Saviors sake, God will accept of our poor and imperfect obedience; so as it be
in truth, and that we do unfeignedly endeavor to increase more and more therein.

Thirdly, whereas the devil labors to trouble our consciences, because our
very nature is polluted, and defiled; yea and originally guilty of the common
f^l of mankind in Adam: and therefore that the Lord can take no pleasure in us;
although not only sins were forgiven, but also righteousness imputed: the holy
Ghost testifies to our further comfort, that our uery nature also, is
sanctified in the holiness of the nature of our Savior Christ.

Fourthlie; whereas the Devil replieth thus, How can it be, that all these
things should be true, and yet so many punishments, or crosses, and
afflictions, (call them what we will) should fall upon us daily: we are
comfortablie taught, and instructed by the holy Ghost, according to the
scriptures; that God does not always afflict his children for their sins,
nor in any wise, to take vengeance of them for the same: but to teach us more
and more to deny sin, and to draw us the nearer to him, and to make us more
fit for his heavenly Kingdom.

Fiftelie, whereas the Devil labors to bring us into doubt, whether we
have faith or no. (For then he knows, that if we have no faith, none of these
things do belong unto us.) Therefore the holy Ghost gives us comfortable
assurance of the truth of our faith, by the fruits and effects thereof: in
that he imboldeneth us to call upon God, as upon our Father, in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ: and in that he works in us a desire to walk in all
such good duties, as he has prepared for us to walk in. And hereby also, he
does most comfortably confirm unto us, that we are in the number of the elect
children of God, in that he gives witness to the truth of our faith, though it
is weak, and nothing so fruitful as it ought.

Finally, whereas the Devil to disprove the truth of our faith, and repentance,
and consequently of our election to salvation: does lay our daily falls
before us in our dish (as we may say) and brings to our remembrance, all the
sins we have committed since the time we have received the faith; and began
to repent, as we thought we did. Yea, and that before our repentance, we
committed more grievous sins; and continued longer in them, then ever did
any of the elect: the holy Ghost comfort us against these discouragements,
by renewing of our repentance daily, and by pouring some sweet sense of Gods
love into our hearts, and by assuring us thus humbled and cast down that the
grace of God abounds through Christ, so much the more, where sin has
abounded.

Thus, and many other ways does God the holy Ghost, as a most faithful
against the discomfort of every tentation: whereby, either the Devil, or the
world, or our own flesh would trouble and dismay us. See Luke 12.11.12.

Yea, and more then all this, he does (as was said) not only sweetly refresh
us, with many spiritual comforts here in this life: but also he assures us
in the comfortable hope of eternal happiness and glory, in the world to come.
So that the whole covenant of God, is most comfortably warranted unto us, by
the holy Ghost: according to the undoubted good will, and pleasure, both of the
Father, and also of the Son: according to that we read, Isaiah: 59.19.20.21.
and Ier: chap: 31. verse 31. etc, compared with Heb: chap: 10. verses,
14.15.16.17 And according to the testimonies of our Savior, alleged from the
Gospel of John. And according to that we read in the 1. Epistle of John,
chap: 5. verses 6, 7.8.

The Comforts, which every true believer may have, through his belief in God
the holy Ghost; they may be yet more fully perceived, by the manifold
similitudes, whereby the holy Ghost has expressed himself, what manner of one
he is unto us.



They are these Water, Fire, Oil, The hand or finger of God, A pen, A seal,
A witness, A pawn or pledge: and it may be, there are some other of like sort.

Explication and proof.
That the holy Ghost, the Author and inditour of all the holy Scriptures; does
by these comparisons express what manner of one he is, in his manifold
workings, and gracious effects in the hearts of all true believers; it is
evident by many places of the holy Scriptures. And first, concerning the
similitude of water, John, 3, 5. And ch: 7.37.38.39. And concerning fire, Mat:
3.11. Read also, Mal: 3.2.3. For that washing, purging, trying and fyning by
fire, are all through the operation of Gods Spirit. Concerning oil, read, 1.
John, 2. verses, Belief in God the holy Ghost.
20.27. Luke, 4.18. and Heb. 1.9, Concerning the hand or finger of God, The
Comforts.
Luke. 11.20. and Act. 7.21. Concerning the pen and hand writing of God, Heb.
10.15.16. Revel. 21.27. Concerning the seal of God. 2. Cor. 1.21.22. and
Ephesians. 4, 30. Concerning the witness of God, Romans 8.15.16. and 1, John, 5.
alleged a little before, and chap. 4.13. Concerning the pawn or pledge, or
earnest penny of the holy Ghost. 2. Cor. 1.22.

The reason why the holy Ghost, our blessed Comforter, compares himself to
water: is because he through the ministry of the Gospel, and by sprinckling
our souls with the blood of our Savior Christ, washes away the filth of our
sins. Ephesians. 5, 26. and 1. Cor. 6.11. and 1. Pet. 1. verse 2.

He compares himself to fire; because he burns out and wastes, the
dross of our natural corruption: and also, because he warmeth and cheareth
our hearts.

To oil; because he suppleth our souls benumbed, yea pitifully taken with the
dead palsy; and makes them apt and fit to the kingdom of God: and because
he furnishes us, with all graces necessary and meet for the same.

To the hand or finger of God; because he writes his laws in our hearts: and
frames us, to some measure of true love and obedience unto them.

To a seal and witness; because he puts us out of all question, concerning
our perfect redemption, and salvation, Ephesians. 1.13.14.

And in the like respect; he compares himself to an earnest-pennie, or pawn
and pledge, which binds the whole bargain among men. But God is yet more
faithful.

All these things, are full of exceeding great comfort, to every Christian
soul, that has learned truly to believe in God the holy Ghost, our most
gracious Comforter. For who duly considering, and believing, that the holy
Ghost (whom our Savior calls our Comforter) is equal with the Father and
the Son, one very true eternal God with them: and that he is entitled the
Spirit of adoption, of sanctification, and of all grace, and of life it self:
as Romans 8.11.2. Cor. 3.6. Gal 6.8. and that he is in respect of his operations
in the faithful, expressed by so many familiar and notable comparisons: who I
say, duly considers these things, but he must have his mind greatly
encouraged to look for all grace and comfort from him? And the rather, because
we are certified by himself in his holy Scriptures, that he is minded to
dwell with us, and in us, as in the Temple of God. Every particular
consideration, may well bring with it a special and several comfort: that he
will make us wise, that he will lead us into all truth, sanctify, revive,
quicken, and lead us unto everlasting life in his due time. Yea, so that
though we should for the present, find our selves very ignorant, unholy,
weak in faith, fainting in hope, destitute of all grace, and even as it were
in the dark shadow of death: yet we may conceive good hope, that we shall be
enlightened with knowledge, washed from filthiness, fined from dross, cheared
in heart, and made bold against all tentations and enemies of our spiritual
joy and peace.

Thus comfortable; yea infinitely above that I can express; may the comfort of
belief in the holy Ghost be: and that, not only in respect of private
persons, but also of whole Churches: in so much as by him, they are gathered to
Christ, and by his comfort multiplied, and increased from day to day: according
to the testimony of Saint Luke, Act. 9.31. and Ephesians. 2, 20.21.22.



As this Article shows us, by whom alone all holy and spiritual comfort is
immediately wrought and sealed up in our hearts: so it does in special manner
require, that all holy and spiritual fruits of obedience, be most willingly,
cheerfully, and constantly yielded unto him.

Belief in God the holy Ghost. Question.
There is good equity in it in deed. The Duties.
Which therefore ought those holy fruits to be? At the least, which are some of
the principal of them? For to rehearse them all, we were not able at this one
time.

First, our faith in God the holy Ghost, who is the only immediate worker of
all grace and comfort in our hearts; requires that we unfeignedly acknowledge
our own miserable nakedness, and poverty of soul and spirit: and that we are
altogether carnal, and corrupt in our selves, neither to have any power to
attain to any holy grace, or true comfort of our selves; but that all
spiritual riches, and inward beauty, or ornament of grace, with all sound
consolation, does proceed to us, immediately from his gracious working alone.

Secondly, it is for the same cause, our duty, to give most willing, joyous,
and reverend entertainment unto him; as to our most welcome guest: or rather,
as to the most honorable Lord, and governor of the house: whenever he shall
by his holy word, or any other means, knock at the door of our hearts.

Thirdly, it is our like bounden duty, to take most diligent heed; lest after
we have given him entertainment, we do at any time grieve him, by any
unkind, and unseemly dealing: but contrariwise, that we do by all means
procure, as much as lies in us; that he may take good contentment, and
pleasure, to abide for ever with us.

Fourthly, it is to the same end and purpose, our duty to follow his blessed
regiment, and direction in all things, and chiefly in the holy matters of Gods
divine worship: according to the instructions and commandments of the word of
God, which he himself has set forth unto us.

Finally (as was answered in the beginning) all and every one of the same
spiritual duties, of divine worship and honor: they are of most bounden
duty, to be yielded and performed to the holy Ghost; as well as to the
Father, and to the Son: to wit, faith, love, reverence, prayer,
thanksgiving, and such like.

Explication and proof.
For the first of these points, and to induce our hearts to the performance of
the duty there specified: read Matthew: 5.3. Where our Savior Christ begins
that his large and excellent Sermon upon the mount, with this asseueration;
that the poor in Spirit are (assuredly) blessed, and that the kingdom of God
is theirs. But on the contrary, it is as certainly affirmed in the holy
scriptures, that God resists the proud in Spirit. And Revel: 3.17. the holy
Ghost sharply reproves the Church of Laodicea, for that ouer-prowd conceit,
which it had of it self. Whereupon it is evident, that we cannot truly believe
in the holy Ghost; and so by faith have him dwelling in us: unless we be humble
in our selves, and do acknowledge that nullitie of goodness, that is of our
selves, in our own wicked nature.

For the second point, read in the same 3. chapt: of the Revel. verse 20.
Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in unto him, and I will sup with him, and be with me. To him
that overcomes. etc. Our Savior by his holy Spirit, comes as a Prince to
the poor man's house; bringing all his furniture, and provision with him: not
only for necessity, but also for delicacie, (as it were) hangings, plate,
jewels, and all kind of spiritual delights, and dainties. And shall we not
think it our part; to give his holy Spirit, most reverend and joyful
entertainment?

For the third point, read Ephesians: 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, by
whom ye are sealed to the day of redemption. A deed of gift, or any other
evidence of writing, is ratified, when it is once sealed: and so are we, as
belonging to the Lord, by the impression of his most holy and heavenly
Spirit. Yea so firmly, that none can disable our title, if we our selves do
not cancel it.

Now therefore; to the end we may not break off, or deface this blessed seal
of God: let us have tender and charie regard, of that which the Apostle says,
Grieve not the Spirit of God. Yea, let us diligently observe, that which he
says to the same end; both in the words going before, and also following
after: wherein he shows, wherewith the holy Ghost is grieved; namely, by
corrupt communication, and by bitterness, etc: by idolatry, and every other
kind of sin.

I^st therefore, is the reproof which Peter gives Ananias, and his wife: Act:
Belief in God the holy Ghost.
5. verses 3.9. And that also which Stephen gives the wicked rulers of the
Jews, chap: 7. verse 51. Read also, Heb: 3.7, 8.9.10.

Such unkind dealing with the holy Ghost, is the most unworthy, and greatest
indignity, that may be. Wherefore, let us, on the contrary (considering that
the holy Spirit of God, vouchsafes, of his infinite mercy, to be our nearest
and in-most friend) let us I say, esteem of him, and use him always as the
most honorable, dearest, and best welcome friend unto us, infinitely above all
other.

The acceptable fruits of the Spirit, are reckoned to be of three sorts,
Ephesians. 5.9. The fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and
truth. And Gal: 5. verses 22, 23, The same Apostle makes mention of nine. The
fruit of the Spirit (says he) is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekenes, temperance. For the interpretation, and distinction
of which graces: See Master Perkins upon this Article in his Exposition of the
Creed.

The way both of entertaining, and also of retaining this our best friend, as
it were in the chamber of our hearts: is, by giving our selves to the exercises
of prayer, of reading, hearing, and meditating of the word of God; to the
furthering of our knowledge, faith, and repentance: and by careful using of
the present measure of grace, which we have received, to the honor and glory
of God.

The way to loose this so honorable a guest, and the comfort of his abode in
our hearts: is by the neglect of these holy duties, wherewith only he is
delighted. And therefore says the holy Apostle (counselling us for our own
singular benefit) Quench not the Spirit: and to the same end, that we do in no
wise, despise Prophesying, but that we pray continually, etc. 1. These. 5.17.18,
19.20. And that we stir up the gift, which is already given us by the
Spirit, 2. Tim: 1.6.7. It is the conclusion of every Epistle, which our Savior
sent by the ministry of his Angel, and the Apostle John, to the 7, Churches
of Asia, Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says to the
Churches. Revel: ch: 2. and ch: 3.

To the which end, according to the fourth point of the Answer: let us consider
further, that God requires to be worshipped in Spirit and truth. John, 4.24.
and Philip. chap. 3. verse, 3. And Romans 8.1. where it is generally required,
that Christians do in all things walk after the Spirit, and not after the
flesh. And in the same chapter, that they do savor the things of the Spirit.
And mortify the deeds of the flesh, by the spirit, etc. Likewise Gal.
5.25.26. If we live in the Spirit (says the same Apostle) let us also walk
in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another,
envying one another. And chap. 6. verse, 1, he calls such as be more firmly
settled in godliness, spiritual men. And verse, 8. If we would have it go well
with us, and that we might be partakers of a good harvest, we must sow to the
Spirit. And Ephesians. 6.17. we must fight with the sword of the Spirit. We must
pray in the Spirit. verse, 18. And for the Spirit, that it may be given, and
continued unto us. Psalm. 51.10.11.12. And Psalm. 143.10.

Finally, touching the duties of divine worship and honor: that they are to be
yielded to the holy Ghost, as well as to the Father, and the Son: it may
appear.

First, concerning faith; insomuch as we are baptized into his name, together
with theirs. For we are to believe in him, into whose name we are baptized. And
Math. 10.20. our Savior incourageth his Disciples, to be without fear of
their adversaries; and not to be distrustfully careful, what to answer unto
them: Because the holy Ghost will be present with them. And Luke ch: 12. ver.
12. The holy Ghost will teach ye in the same hour, what ye ought to say.

Secondly, concerning the duty of love; it may be evident, from that which has
been alleged, concerning our duty, of not grieuing the Spirit, etc. For we
will never have this care, unless we shall bear a dutiful love, and
affection, toward the holy Ghost. We regard not to grieve them, whom we love
not.

Thirdly, concerning reverence or fear; it may easily be proved to be due: The
danger of not believing this Article.
yeat that it stands us in hand so to do; left we provoke his most fearful
wrath against us, as Ananias and Sapphira did; as Judas did; and as all those
shall do; whosoever rise up in contempt and rebellion against him.

Moreover, baptizing into the name of the holy Ghost, is a kind of invocation
and calling upon his name.

And so is the desire of the Apostle, that the communion of the holy Ghost,
might remain with the Corinthians. 2. Epist. chap. 13. verse 13.

And insomuch as ingratitude against the holy Ghost, is worthily condemned for
a most grievous sin, Heb. 10.29: justly is thankfulness to be esteemed, a
special duty belonging unto him. Neither is it to be neglected, that the
Apostle makes divine and honorable mention of the holy Ghost, in taking a
religious oath. Romans 9.1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience
bearing me witness in the holy Ghost.

Thus, the same duties of divine worship and honor, are due to the holy Ghost,
as well as to the Father and the Son: insomuch as he is in the unity of the
Godhead, very true God together with them.

NOw therefore, having hitherto seen, so plentiful, and sure a ground, and
warrant, for this Article: and also, what the meaning of it is: and what a
gracious promise we have for it: and of how singular an use it is, both for
comfort, and also to move unto all obedience: now, that we may at the last
conclude the whole doctrine of it.



Whosoever do not rightly believe in God the holy Ghost, nor unfeignedly obey
him; they have no true knowledge, nor faith, which is according to godliness:
neither do they, neither can they possibly, yield any true honor and
obedience, either to the Father, or to the Son. And therefore also, it must
needs be, that all such shall abide in the corruption of their profane nature,
and perish for ever therein.

It must needs be so; insomuch as the holy Ghost, (according as it has bin
truly affirmed sundry times before) is of all the three Persons of the blessed
Trinity, Explication and proof.
the only immediate worker of all grace, from the Father and the Son, in
every one that shall find any favor, before the divine Majesty of God. For
without his illumination and sanctification; we cannot but remain in
darkness and profaneness: according to the express testimony of our
Savior Christ, as has been also alleged before, out of the 3. chapter of
John, saying, Except a man be borne again of the holy Ghost, he cannot see
nor enter into the kingdom of God. And according to the testimony of Paul,
the Apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ. The natuarall man understands not the
things of the spirit of God, etc. 1. Cor. 2.14. And Romans verse 9. If any man
has not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his, etc. And Ephesians. 1.18. We
can have no entrance to the Father, but by the spirit of our Savior Christ.
And as no entrance, so no continuance; but only by continuance in that grace
and faith, which the holy Ghost once gives. Whence it is, that the sin against
the holy Ghost, (so properly called) is made unpardonable before God: and the
person guilty thereof, (if God do discover it) not to be prayed for of any:
because such a one does not sin of ignorance, nor of weakness of judgment,
in some one point or other; but of malice in a general contempt of the truth:
yea even of the Spirit of truth himself, the most gracious Teacher thereof.
Heb. 6.4, etc. And chapter 10.28, etc And 1. John, 5.16.17.

Wherefore, beloved in the Lord, we see that in every most weighty respect, we
have the greatest cause that may be; why we are, with all holy, religious, and
constant reverence, to believe, and obey the holy Ghost: as being one true and
everlasting God, to be blessed and adored for ever, together with the Father
and the Son. And on the contrary, we cannot but see; that we ought to take
heed most carefully, that we do not at any time, any manner of way,
blaspheme the holy Ghost, or give any occasion, that he should be blasphemed or
spoken evil of: either directly, or indirectly, by scoffing at any, because
they are of the spirit, or hot of the spirit, etc.

All such jesting, and all irreuerence, is exceeding dangerous: and therefore
let us all very heedefully, not only avoid the same, but also think, and
speak always, most reuerendly of this so high and glorious a Majesty.

And as for all such heretics, as fear not to affirm, that the holy Ghost is
not God; but a creature, or a name only of divine virtue and operation, etc:
let us utterly abhor all such their blasphemous heresies.

In which respect, to the end we might have before our eyes, some grave
admonition; I have thought it to good purpose (and so I trust will every godly
Reader) to set down that which the good Minister of Gods word Bastingius, has
written in his Commentaries upon the Palsgraues Catechism, to the same purpose.

The doctrine concerning the Deity of the holy Ghost (says this godly learned
Minister) has had four principal Adversaries.

First, those that have, and do contend; that the holy Ghost is nothing else,
then an internal operation, motion, or action, whereby God works effectually
in the hearts of the elect: Energeia.
but not to be any substance, much less a Person as Samosatenus, Seruetus, and
their scholars, who are all refuted very manifestly by this, that those
things are attributed to the holy Ghost in the scriptures* which do agree to
none, save only to God, and consequently to a Person truly subsisting, and
therefore also to a true substantial Being.

Secondly, this doctrine has had Macedonius an adversary against it, who
taught indeed, that the holy Ghost is a substance and a true Person, but yet
created (which also was the error of Arius) whereunto the Ecumenical Council,
held under Theodosius the Great, opposed it self, and gave it his deadly
wound. The words whereof are these, If it be created, how does it create? how
then does it sanctify? how does it quicken? how does it distribute graces? how
is it God? how does it search the deep things of God? how is he the
Comforter? how has he his joint place with the Father and the Son?

Of which Macedonius, John Cassianus, Chrysostomes scholar, writes after this
manner in his first book of the incarnation of the Lord: Macedonius also
(says he) uttered his blasphemy against the holy Ghost, with an incur^ble
impiety, in that although he said, that the Father and the Son are of the
same substance, yet he calling the holy Ghost a creature, was guilty of
blasphemy against the whole Deity, insomuch as nothing can be injured in the
Trinity, without injury done against the whole Trinity.

Now add unto these, in the third place, the Tritheites, who confessed
indeeded, that the holy Ghost is a Person* yea and that he is God, but yet
another God, beside the Father and the Son: albeit (in truth) the holy Ghost
is so of the same substance, or co-essential with the Father and the Son,
Homoousios.
that they be not sundry Gods, but one only Jehovah.

The fourth error, was the error of Sabellius, who stuck not to say, that the
holy Ghost was a divine Person, eternal and uncreated: but not a distinct
Person with the Father and the Son: the which, how repugnant it is to the
scriptures, we have likewise declared before.

And thus truly, have they waged battle against the Person of the holy Ghost.

Now, as touching his office, and the efficacy thereof, these following, did
not well understand what it is.

First, they which do think, that the elect may altogether loose, or fall away
from their faith, though it be sealed up in them by that holy spirit of
promise. But the truth is, that the Spirit of sanctification is never utterly
taken away, Energeia.
from such as are truly regenerated, and borne again. Only, the effectual
working of it, may be interrupted for a time, while the contrary lusts do
bear the sway: like as drunkenness does not altogether bereave men of their
wit, Belief that God has a holy catholic Church.
but only takes away the use of it for a while. The ground and meaning of the
Article.


And furthermore, the Romish Teachers do likewise err in that they require,
that men should always stand in doubt of the favor of God: seeing the holy
Ghost is therefore called the spirit of adoption, because he bears witness
of that free good will, wherewith the Father embraces us in the Son, and
teaches us also to cry, Abba Father. Thus much out of Ierimias Bastingius, a
faithful Minister of the word of God.

And thus, for the time of this our present inquiry; an end of the doctrine of
this Article: and therewithal, of the whole doctrine of the most blessed and
glorious Trinity: and so also an end of the first part of the most general
division of the Articles of our belief.

Now the same most blessed and glorious Trinity of distinct Persons, our one
only true and everlasting God, most wise, most holy; and most gracious: bless
it for ever unto us.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of
the holy Ghost, be with us all. Amen.

Belief that God has a holy Catholic Church.
Question. Answer. Explication and proof.
WHat follows in the Articles of our belief?

The holy catholic Church.

Here begins the second part of the Articles of our christian belief:
showing every Christian what he ought to believe, concerning the people of
God, called his Church. All which, is nothing else, but the effect of that
which is contained in the former part: which (as we have already seen,
teaches how we ought to believe in God, who is the only Author* Caller,
Redeemer, Iustifier, Sanctifier, and Glorifier of his Church.

And verily, it cannot be, that God the Father should give his Son to take
man's nature; and in the same to die for man, in vain: according to that, Gal.
2.21. Neither can it be, that both the Father, and the Son, should send the
holy Ghost to his Church, and into the hearts of his people: but to very
notable effect, and to the most singular good ends and purposes that might be.

Seeing our Savior Christ is ordained of God to be a King: he must of
necessity have a kingdom, and subjects therein; whom he may most graciously
protect and govern.

Seeing he is the great Pastor of the sheep: it cannot be, that he should be
without his fold and flock.

Seeing he is a spiritual and mystical head: he must have his members, to
make up the same his mystical body. In which respect, the Church is called,
the fullness of him that fills all in all things, etc. Ephesians* 1.23.

Seeing he is the foundation; who shall let that the building should not be
laid, and reared up, to the full perfecting thereof? Ephesians. 2.20, etc. and 1.
Pet. 2.4. etc. For God is not like the unwise builder, who lays a foundation,
and is not able to perform it: so that any should have occasion to reproach
him, as we read of that unadvised builder. Luke, 14.28, 29, 30. But he goes
forward with the work, to the admiration of all the beholders: whosoever have
eyes to discern the spiritual beauty of the same. Psalm. 11^.^2, 23. Isai.
54, ^, etc. And verses 11, 12, 13, etc.

Finally, seeing our Savior is a most fruitful and living vine: it cannot be,
but that both branches and fruit, must needs spring forth and spread
themselves abundantly, from him. John, 15.1, etc.

This most notable and fruitful effect, of the most holy and blessed Trinity,
God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: is (as was said even now) set forth in
this latter part of the Articles of our christian faith.

The which fruit, that we may gather rightly; and lay up in such sort, as it
may be a remaining fruit unto us for ever: we must first of all, according to
the change of the argument; diligently observe the change of the phrase of
speech henceforth used. For we do not profess, that we believe in the holy
Catholic Church, etc; as we do in God, both Father, Son, and holy Ghost:
but thus, I believe the holy Catholic Church, etc. That is to say, I believe
that God has a holy Catholic Church: wherein there is a communion of saints;
and to the which belongs most notable privileges of Gods rich favor and
grace: both for the comfort of every true member of the same holy Catholic
Church here in this life; and also for the everlasting happiness of them, in
the world to come.

This change of phrase is necessary to be diligently observed of us, (as was
said) because of the differing nature of the object, where about faith is
employed. For where as God is to be believed in, simply and without all
exception: the Church of God is not to be credited simply, and for it self;
but under the credit and authority of the word of God: so far forth only,
as it shall show it self a faithful isntrumental pillar, and vpholder of
that truth of the word, which God has betrusted it withal: according to
that, 1. Tim. 3.15. To the which end also, the order is worthy like diligent
regard: in that God, most worthily has the first place, and accordingly is
chiefly to be respected: and then the Church, with such limits as he has set.
Contrary to the practice of the Antichristian Church, which has chief care
for the advancement of it self, and the own traditions and inventions, (how
contrary so ever to the word of God) and little or no care for the glory of
God. And therefore, can have little or no true faith at all; according to the
definitive sentence of our Lord Jesus Christ, the only author and finisher of
the right christian faith. John, 5.44. How can ye believe (says he) who
receive honor one of another, and do not seek the honor that comes of God
alone?

These things observed more generally, concerning this latter part of our
belief: let us come to inquire of the particular Articles, in the same order
wherein we have inquired of the former.



The words of the Apostle Paul, which follow in the 12. chapter of his first
Epistle to the Corinthians, verses 12. and 13: may well be alleged to this
purpose.

Explication.
They may be so in very deed. And the rather also may we make special choice
of them; because they do immediately follow those words, which were alleged
before: for a ground of the former Article, concerning our belief in God the
holy Ghost. And further also, because that which follows in this same
chapter, from the very next verse; will serve very fitly, to open unto us the
next Article of our faith, which is concerning the communion of Saints: as we
shall see, when we shall by Gods grace, come unto it.

In the mean season, concerning our present occasion: rehearse you the words
of the Apostle, contained in the 12, and 13, verses mentioned by you: for
proof of this, that God has his holy Catholic Church.



As the body is one (says the Apostle) and has many members, and all the
members of that one body, being many, make but one body: even so is Christ.

13 For by one Spirit, we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews
or Grecians, whether bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one
Spirit,

Explication
From the interpretation of this text (in the sermon which was made upon it) ye
may remember (such I mean as were the hearers of it) that diverse things were
observed, which make much for the opening of this Article of the holy Catholic
Church. The which things, I will now by the grace of God, repeat again, as
briefly as I can: and so proceed to those other questions and answers, which
serve for the more full laying open of this matter.

And first of all, (as we were before advised, let us call to mind, and
consider; that according as in the former part of the chapter, albeit the
Apostle writing to the Corinthians, shows them particularly, from whom they
had received all their spiritual gifts and graces: does nevertheless, there
withal deliver a general doctrine; concerning the author and distributer of
all good gifts and graces, to all whosoever have any portion of them. So in
these words, though he does speak by a particular intendement, to inform the
same Corinthians, of their own particular estate and condition; in that they
for their parts were a Church of Christ, as well as any other City professing
faith in his name (like as every part of the Sea is called by the name of the
Sea, etc:) yet the doctrine contains a general direction or ground; from the
which we may discern what is, or ought to be, the estate and condition of
every true Church of Christ, throughout the whole world.

This Church of God therefore generally considered, is but one; as the Apostle
shows by the similitude of the natural body: the which though it have many
members, is yet but one body. Song of Songs, chapter 6. v. 8. And Ioh. 10.16.

Now whereas there are diverse kinds of bodies. First, natural; such as every
man carries about him now.

Secondly, spiritual; such as the faithful shall have endued with far more
excellent gifts, at the resurrection from the dead. 1. Cor. 15.44.

Thirdly, politic bodies; such as are civil corporations, whereof the King of
the Nation is the head* in a borrowed sense, or metaphorically. 1. Sam. chap.
15.17.

Fourthly, Mystical bodies; as for example, the Churches of God spiritually
united to our Savior Christ, the only immediate head, and vital quickener,
and governor thereof. Hence it is the more manifest, what manner of body the
Church is: by how much the similitude whereunto it is compared, is more
distinctly expressed.

So then, the Church of God to speak generally, (as we began to say) is but
one mystical and spiritual body, how many members soever it have; being
considered either in particular Churches, whether national (as we use to
speak) or in cities, or in country towns and villages: or whether it be
considered in regard of singular persons: and therefore is called Catholic, or
Universal.

Furthermore, it is so called, not only to note thereby the calling of the
Gentiles, to the fellowship of the faith, and covenant of Gods grace, with the
believing Jews; who from the time of Moses, were the only peculiar people of
God, above all other of the Nations: Ephesians. 2.16. and 3.6. but also to the end,
that under this name of catholic or universal, might be comprehended the
whole number of the elect; whomsoever God has ordained to salvation, from the
beginning of the world, to the end of the same: as well such as be called
already, as such as are to be called in every age of the world: and the same
also, out of every nation, far and near, and out of every estate and
condition of people; noble or unnoble, rich or poor, learned or unlearned,
young or old, man or woman: and all according to the free grace of God,
without respect of person. Yea the Church has this general name given unto
it; that it might not only comprehend that part of the Church, which is called
the militant part here on earth: but also that part which is already partly,
and in some measure, triumphant in heaven. According to that which we read,
Ephesians: 3.15. God is the Father of the whole family, in heaven and in earth.
Read also chap. 1. verses 9, 10, 11. And Colos. 1.19, 20, 21, 22. Heb. 12.22,
etc. And Gal. 4.26.

This then, is that which the holy Apostle says in our text; that in the one
only body of the Church of God here on earth, both Jew and Gentile, bond and
free, etc: are contained as the several members thereof. The which (as was
said) we may proportionably extend to the whole Church most generally taken;
that all is but one, etc. Read also Acts, 2. verse 39. The promise is made to
you, and to your children, and to all that are a far off, even as many as the
Lord our God shall call. Likewise, Ephesians. 2.13, etc. And Gal. 3. at the end of
the chapter. And Colos. 3.11. Neither Grecian nor Jew, circumcision nor
uncircumcision, neither Barbarian nor Scythian, neither bond nor free: none of
them are excepted from having their part in Christ; either because they are of
this or that nation, of this or that condition and calling, etc. Read also
Acts, 10.34, 35. Of a truth (says the Apostle Peter) I perceive that God is no
accepter of persons. But in every nation, he that fears him, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. And Revel. 5.9. Thou have redeemed us to
God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation,
etc. And chap. 7.9. I beheld (says Saint John) and lo, a great multitude,
which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and
tongues, stood before the throne, and before the lamb, clothed with long white
robes, and palms in their hands, etc. And verse 14, etc. These were they which
came out of great tribulation, etc.

This universality of the Catholic Church, is according to the ancient promise
of God, made to Abraham; that in his seed, all the nations of the world should
be blessed. It is also according to that more ancient and prophetical prayer
of Noah, Genesis 9.27. God persuade Iapheth, that he may dwell in the tents of
Shem. And yet before that; according to that most ancient promise of God, even
from the beginning of the world, Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman shall break
the Serpents head. Yea God, as a most provident Father, knowing that fraileman
would fall into sin, and so be the just cause of his own misery and ruin:
it pleased him of his infinite goodness and mercy, in the secret of his own
counsel and purpose, to ordain him a remedy, even before the foundations of
the world were laid. 1. Pet. 1.20.

Herein therefore, God has dealt with mankind, after the manner of wise and
loving Parents; who knowing that their young children are subject to burning,
or skalding, etc: will always have some thing prepared before hand, which may
be ready with them to help at any time of need. Yet that which man does upon
an uncertain fear, God did of certain knowledge without any doubt what would
ensue.

By reason that the Church is thus Catholic and universal, in the general
acception of it; therefore is it made a matter of faith: not that we should
believe in the Church; but because it is to be believed of us, according to the
holy Scriptures, that God has such a Church, as may justly be so termed. And
because also it is so firmly founded, and established in our Savior Christ,
according to the most sure and stable counsel of God: that nothing (no not the
gates of Hell) shall ever be able to prevail against it Mat. 16.18. Read also
Ps. 125. and Ier. 33.17, 18, etc. to the end of the chapter. Moreover, 2. Tim.
2.19. The foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal, The Lord
knows who are his, etc.

And that this universal Church (consisting both of Jew and Gentile) is
founded upon our Savior Christ, it is evident, Ephesians. 2.18. For (as the holy
Apostle says there) we both, (that is, both Jew and Gentile) have through
him, an entrance unto the Father, by one Spirit. And verse 22. In whom we are
also built together, to be the habitation of God, by the Spirit. By the Spirit
(says the Apostle) and that also through faith: to remove all conceit of any
bodily commixtion, or confusion of the Church, or members thereof, with Christ
bodily: and likewise, to show, that the spiritual union, is only by an inward
and effectual operation in the several members; and not by any infusio^ of the
essence of the godhead into the^.

Furthermore, by reason that the Church in the general acception of it, is
catholic and universal; it is said to be invisible, and not a matter of
sight: seeing it is both, in time exceeding any man's age; and in place, for the
present so far distant, touching the particular members, as one end of the
earth is distant from the other. And not only so; but also because touching
that part of it which is triumphant, it is as far removed from the whole earth;
as the heavens are in height, extended and stretched most high above it.

Qu. But is the Church of God here upon earth, no way visible?

An. Yes, if we speak of the Church, in regard of the particular assemblies
and congregations of it: in such places, times, and ages, as it pleases God to
make it visible, and apparent; by such external notes and marks, as he has
given to make it known by.

Explication and proof. Question.
It is true, as experience has proved heretofore, and as it does at this day,
manifestly confirm the same in many congregations and assemblies of people:
the name of God be infinitely blessed and praised for it* But which are those
outward marks, whereby the Church of God may be thus visibly discerned?

They are these. First, the public profession of the name of Christ, in the
hearing and obeying of his Gospel preached among them.

Secondly, public prayer and calling upon his name.

Thirdly, the open and public use, and celebration of his Sacraments.

Finally, the right and public use and administration of the spiritual
censures of that Church discipline, which our Savior has commanded.

Explication and proof.
They are so indeed. For wheresoever we, or any other, shall see these
ordinances of our Savior Christ in use; according to his word and
commandment: there are we to acknowledge the Church of God to be, in the
several assemblies thereof. And we for our parts, are to join with them in
the same, as it is the duty of all true members of the Church of Christ.
According to that we read, Acts, 2.42. that the Christians once baptized,
continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and
prayers. And therefore is the Church (considered after this sort, in the
particular assemblies and congregations of Christians, both Ministers and
people, thus obedient to Christ, in the true profession of his name, and
exercise of his holy ordinances) called the pillar and ground of the truth. 1.
Tim. 3.15. Therefore (I say) is it so called; because, resting and staying it
self, wholly upon our Savior Christ and his word: it does hold forth the same
and defend it, both for the sound instruction, edification, and comfort of it
self, and of those that are yet to be called: and also for the euiction and
overthrow of all contrary heresies. But not for that it has any power at all,
to come and command what new doctrines and devises it list, as the Church of
Rome presumes: to the snaring of men's consciences, and to the advancement of
ambitious Pastors, etc, without the warrant of Gods holy word, rightly
understood and interpreted according to that entier harmony and concent,
which it has, in, and with it self.

And touching the ordinances of our Savior, before expressed: read Mat. 28.
where (as we know well) our Savior has commanded his Apostles to teach and
baptize: yea to teach his Church to observe all things whatsoever he has
commanded them. Yea all things so, as nothing else is to be thrust upon his
Church. And answerable to this, is that of the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 11.20.23.
where he professes his conscionable regard of delivering nothing to the
Corinthians, which he had not received of the Lord. And concerning Church
government, and the censures thereof; we have the commandment of our Savior,
Matt. 18.17. Tell the Church. And likewise the practice of the Apostles, in the
Acts of the Apostles; according to the same commandment of our Savior: and
that with a most straight charge, that it should be continued until the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Tim. 6.14.

Nevertheless, this must be considered with all; that even in these
assemblies, which are to be accounted visible Churches of God: sometimes, and
in some places, these ordinances of our Savior Christ, are more purely and
entirely observed, then at other times, and in some other places: as we have
the Church of Judah and Israel for example of old. And as we find it to have
fallen out from time to time, even to this day. And thereupon we do justly
call and account some Churches, better reformed then other: and these, or
these, more corrupt and declining, or at the least, more defective and wanting
then the rest.

Quest. But has God no Church at all; but where these outward notes or marks
are visibly to be seen and discerned?

An. If there be none of them apparent, and in use; there can be no visible
Church of God, to the view of any mortal eye: nevertheless, there may be, and
oftentimes are, in the times and places of greatest corruption, or desolation,
where visible Churches have been; many true, though unknown members of the
invisible Church of God.

Explication and proof.
It may well be so indeed. Like as in the true visible Churches; many of them
that make an outward profession, are no true members of the Church: but very
hypocrites, though they be externally in the bosom of the Church. For (as the
Apostle Paul says) he is not a Jew, which is one outward: neither is that
Circumcision which is outward in the flesh. But he is a Jew, which is one
within, and the circumcision which is of the heart, in the spirit, not in the
letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God. Romans 2.28, 29.

So may we say of baptism, and of the whole profession of christianity, as
touching those, that make nothing else but a bare outward profession.

And contrariwise, according to that which was answered; we may truly say, that
where there is not any true public and outward profession of religion: yet may
there be some true worshippers of God, and true members of the true and
invisible church of God: as we may take those days, wherein the Prophet Elijah
lived, for an example. For although he could not comfort himself, in the
beholding of any true visible face of a Church in Israel; while wicked King
Ahab reigned, but thought himself to be as one left alone: yet God had in
secret reserved to himself, seven thousand that had not bowed the knee to
Baal. And Revel. 12.6. the Church is said to fly into the wilderness; where
she has a place prepared of God, that she might be fed for a certain season:
to the end she might avoid the extremity of affliction. And in the most
excellent song of King Solomon, she is compared to the doves which take their
flight to the holes of the rocks, etc: as being pursued and persecuted of the
wicked, who are fallen away from the true worship of God, to a false and
superstitious religion.

Whence it is, that we do necessarily affirm; that the Church which is
visible in the parts thereof, is either true or false, chaste or adulterous,
etc. And that in the true Church; some are true and kindly children: and that
other be hypocrites or false brethren. For they that are borne after the flesh
(as the Apostle teaches) will persecute them that are borne after the spirit:
as Ishmael did Isaak, even in Abraham's house. Gal. 4.29, 30. And many are
called, but few chosen: as our Savior himself affirms. Matthew. 22.14.

Of the true and elect Church of God, our Savior Christ (as was touched
before) is the only and alone invisible and mystical head; giving the life
and power of true faith and godliness to it, through his Spirit. And
therefore, the true Church, considered in her members; has sometime her
honorable denomination, even from the name of Christ himself: according as in
our present text. 1. Cor. chap. 12. verse 12. St. Paul says, that the natural
body resembles Christ: that is to say, Christ himself mystically considered
with his Church; which is therefore called the fullness of him that fills all
in all things: as was said before, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Read also Acts. 9.4. where
our Savior Christ professes himself to be persecuted, when they are
persecuted which do truly profess his name.

As for the civil Magistrate, yea even the King; though he be called the head
of the people and kingdom where he bears dominion: yet is he but a member;
though indeed a chief and principal member of the Church of our Lord Jesus
Christ. So that when the name of head, is attributed to the King: as we read
1. Sam. 15. verse 17. and 2. Chron. 20.27. and Psalm. 110.6. it is to be
understood metaphorically, and not mystically, and spiritually. For thus to be
the head of the Church, both generally, and in the several parts, it is only
belonging to our Savior Christ: who will not give this his glory to any
other. Neither in deed can any beside himself; perform the office and virtue
of a head, to the souls of the people and Church of God: as may further
appear, by that subjection, which is required of all Kings and Rulers in the
Church, and to the Church, in respect of Christ: Psalm: 2.10.11.12: and Isaiah,
chapt: 49.23.

Now of the false visible Church, which falsely names it self the catholic
Church; Antichrist is the head: so acknowledged of all those, that receive the
mark of the Beast, as the holy scriptures do speak: that is, he is the
head of so many, as do willingly submit themselves to his Antichristian
doctrine, and government: seeking spiritual life, and direction, with all
temporal peace and safety, from him. Revel: 13.11. etc. And ch: 17*

This Antichrist, the great false head of of the false catholic Church; is he
that presumptuously peruerteth the true doctrine of our Savior Christ's most
holy and high office: through his erroneous, and heretical, tyrannous, and
hypocritical assertions, practices, and devises. For he is idolatrous in his
worship; superstitious in his ceremonies; and proud and tyrannical in all his
government: imitating, or rather exceeding (here, in the west Church with us)
the princely state and pomp of the Roman Empire, which at the first was very
cruel against the Church of Christ; and therefore called the first beast,
Revel: 13.1. etc.

For whereas the Roman Empire, was at the first breaking forth of the Gospel;
notorious for putting of our Savior Christ the Lord of life and glory to
death; and afterward for murdering of many thousands of faithful Christians,
both in the East and West Church: the Pope of Rome, called the second beast,
having craftily gotten the power of the first beast, has himself been more
notorious for cruelty and pride, here in the west; then ever the other was,
either in the East or West.

Whereupon, most justly have we, with the true Churches of of our Savior
Christ, and with all true Christians; withdrawn and separated our sel^es, from
his most heretical, and tyrannous usurpation. Heretical (I say) again t our
Savior Christ in respect of the truth of his doctrine: and tyrannous also
against the gracious equity of his spiritual regencie and government. Yea and
beside these; presumptuous also, and traitorous against the just right and
authority of civil Kings and Princes, touching the sovereignty of their
civil policy and government for Christ, and his Gospel. And therefore also
according to our most bounde^ duty under our Savior Christ: we, from the
first shaking off, of the popish yoke of bondage, have labored with our only
soueriegne and supreme Governors next under our Lord Jesus Christ, as other
Churches have done with theirs; for the correction and restoring, both of
doctrine and discipline, from all Popish corruption and abuse, to the
sincerity and truth of the word and Gospel of God: and according as the right
ancient, and apostolic Christians have universally acknowledged and obeyed it,
eue^ from the first publishing of the Gospel; so far as they could attain
and retain it: until this Antichrist, as a great falls Prophet, and as a most
ambitious high Priest, and as a most usurping king, had subtly deceived, and
tyrannically oppressed the world.

Such is the doctrine of the true Church of God, concerning the universality
of it, or in that it is (as we use to speak) catholic: so near as God
vouchsafed us grace, to collect it from the ground and proportion of our text
of Scripture, propounded to that purpose: and therewithal also; according to
all other testimonies of holy Scripture, which give their further light to the
same.

But as touching the other title of the same Church of God.



Because it is sanctified, and set a part by the holy Ghost, according to the
will of God the Father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ; that all the members
thereof, being so sanctified unto God, both in their bodies, souls, and
Spirits: should carefully mind holiness; and endeavor to lead a holy life, in
obedience to all the holy laws and commandments of God, according to the
faith of the Gospel, all the days of our lives: contrary to that profane,
and ungodly disposition and practice, of the children of this world.

Explication and proof.
This in deed is the nature of holy things, that they should altogether differ
in use, from things common and profane: yea, and in inward truth, from all
things that have only an outward show of holiness and religion.

This holiness; touching both the fountain, and also the full perfection of it;
is only in our one only Lord God the Father: John, 17. verse, 11. In the
Son, Act. 4.27. In the holy Ghost, John, 14.26. According to that threefold
acclamation of the Angels, Isai, 6.3. Holy, holy, holy, Lord of Hosts. And as
God is very often called the holy one of Israel. And Exodus 28.36. Holiness is
ascribed to the Lord.

As touching our selves; it is only perfect to us, by imputation: in that our
Savior Christ is made of God, our sanctification. 1. Cor. 1.30. and Colos.
1.22. According also to that which our Savior himself says, John, 17. For
their sakes do I sanctify my self.

All our inherent, or infused sanctification, through the inhabitation, or
dwelling of the Spirit of God, and our Savior in us; it is at the best, but
inchoate only, and in part here in this life: and therefore it has need of
daily strengthening and increase, by all holy means, of the word, and prayer,
etc. according to that which we read, 1. Cor. 7.1. and chap. 5.8.9. and 2.
Epistle, 2.13.14. and Revel. 22.11. He that is holy, let him be holy, yea more
holy: as the words may well be understood. Yet so, as we must not dream of
any full perfection, to be in us, or in the Church of God, till it be
perfected in the heavens: that is, till that be fulfilled, whereof the Apostle
Paul speaks, Ephesians. 5.25.26.27, saying, that our Savior Christ will make his
Church glorious, and without spot, or wrinkle. And Saint John, Revel. 14.4. 5.
These are they, which are not defiled with women, for they are virgins. These
follow the Lamb whethersoeuer he goes: these are bought from men, being
first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb. And in their mouths was found no
guile: for they are without spot before the throne of God.

Thus much for this time, concerning the holiness of the Church, and why it is
called so.

As for the word Church it self, howsoever it is drawn to signify the
places, or houses of Gods worship: yet if we look to the Hebrew word Kaal,
used for the same, which signifies a congregation, or gathering together of
people: according to that we read Psalm. 22. verse, 22. and verse, 25. likewise
Psa. 26.12. and Psalm. 68.26. And again, if we consider the use of this other
Hebrew word gnedha, used to the same purpose, coming of tagnad which
signifies to come together at appointed times and seasons: as we read Exodus
12.3. and verses, 6.19. and 47. of that chapter, and in infinite places of the
old Testament. And if herewithall, we look to the Greek word ecclesia,
coming of eccaleo, which signifies to call forth, or to provoke and incite to
assemble together: as it is used, 1. Cor. 1. verse, 2 and every where in the
new Testament: we may easily perceive that our English word Church, used in
stead of them, notes properly that company of people, which God calls
together by the outward sound of his Gospel, and inward grace of his Spirit,
to the holy profession of his name, and practice of his divine worship, to his
glory, and their own salvation.

And thus having called to mind, the whole doctrine, for the interpretation of
the Article of our belief, concerning the holy Church of God, somewhat largely,
as it was preached unto you: I desire now, that you should in as few words as
you can, make it plain; what you have learned to believe, according to the
true meaning of this Article.

Question. What have you learned concerning this point?

Answer. This Article of my faith, teaches me to believe, that there is but
one holy catholic or universal Church; that is to say, one holy society or
fellowship of people, elected and called of God, through his free grace in
Jesus Christ: who also are through the same his free grace, justified and
sanctified in the name of Christ, by the holy Spirit of God, and no otherwise:
to the end they may in due time, be meet partakers of most blessed life and
glory, in his everlasting and heavenly kingdom.

Of the which catholic Church; it teaches me, as well as any other, in
particular: that I ought to believe firmly in my heart; and chearefully, and
boldly to profess and acknowledge with my mouth; and also dutifully to
express, by the actions of my life; that I am a true and lively member of it.

Explication and proof.
It is true: it teaches so much in deed. For that which is said of the
Corinthians, for their part. 1. Ep. 1. verse, 2. that they were a Church of
God. sanctified in Christ Jesus, Saints by calling, and such as called upon the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ; it agrees to every other congregation: yea, to
the whole Church of God, upon the face of the whole earth. According as in the
same place, he ioineth them with the rest of that time living, in these words,
Unto the Church that is at Corinth, etc: With all that call on the name of the
Lord Jesus, in every place, both their Lord and ours. But this they could not
do, unless they had been first Saints by calling, etc, as well as the
Corinthians: as will easily appear by comparing together that which the same
Apostle writes in the 6. cha. of the same Epistle, verse, 11. and chap. 12.3.
No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.

And furthermore, for election, and calling, and justification, and
glorification, lincked as it were in one golden chain: read Romans 8.29.30.
Those which God knew before* he also predestined, etc. Moreover, them whom
he did predestinate, them also he called* and whom he called them also he
justified, and whom he justified them he also glorified. The particular
apprehension of which calling, justification, and glory, is by the hand of
faith, as it follows. chap. 10. verses, 9.10.11.12.13. For if thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine heart, that God
raised him up from the dead, thou shall be saved.

For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth man
confesses to salvation.

For the Scripture says, whosoever believes in him, shall not be ashamed.

For there is no difference between the Jew and the Grecian: for he that is
Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him.

And touching the means of our external calling to this holy society of the
Church; to call upon the name of the Lord, as an effect of the election of God:
it is the preaching of the Gospel; as it follows in the same place, verse,
14. But how shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed? and how
shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they
hear without a Preacher? For even in this very respect, the Church has the
name Ecclesia, from the Greek language given unto it; because it is a
company, invited and called by the preaching of the Gospel, to believe in the
name of the Lord, and to call upon his name, etc: by an allusion to the civil
calling together of the Burgesses and free men of a City, by the voice or
sommons of the Crier. So that upon the premises, with the present observations
laid together; we may easily reduce all, as it were into an abridgement: if
we shall by a short definition, or description, show what the Church is.



The Church of God generally considered (according to the name catholic or
universal) it is the whole number of the children of GOD, elected, and chosen
through Jesus Christ, before the world was: and in due season, called,
justified, and sanctified to be one mystical^ body by faith in him, The
Promise.
and to be partakers of the same eternal happiness and glory with him, in
the kingdom of heaven.

Thus indeed it may be described more generally.



The Church more particularly considered, may be said to be any holy company
of people, truly believing, and worshipping God; according to the doctrine and
commandments of our Lord Jesus Christ: and after the example of the particular
Churches in the Apostles times, though not in so great perfection.

And as touching the particular members of the Church, whether more generally,
or more particularly considered: every one that truly believes, and obeys
the Gospel of our Savior Christ is to be accounted a true member thereof,
though there appear much weakness and imperfection in them.

Explication. and proof.
The ground and proofs of these things, have been laid forth before: and
therefore we will stay no longer about any further proof now; but come
forthwith, to the Promise: seeing as we have often said, and observed in the
Articles concerning our belief in God more directly; that faith looks
always to the Promise of God, as to the staff of her comfort. And so no doubt
it does also, in all the Articles now following, concerning the Church of God.



In the first chapter of the Prophet Hosea, the 10. verse, in these words. The
number of the children of Israel, shall be as the sand of the Sea, which cannot
be measured, nor told: and in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not
my people, it shall be said to them, Ye are the Sons of the living God.

And again, in the next chapter of the same prophecy, verse 23. I will sow
her unto me in the earth, and I will have mercy upon her that was not pitied,
and I will say to them that were not my people, Thou art my people, and they
shall say, Thou art my God.

Explication and proof.
These places of holy Scripture, were alleged for the proof of the promise of
the first Article of our belief, that God minded to be the God of the
Gentiles, as well as of the Jews: but they may well be called to remembrance,
and repeated here again. It may be to good purpose likewise, that we call to
mind some other proofs, for the more full confirmation of the same.

And first, that the promise of God, mentioned by his holy Prophet; is extended
even to us, and to every other nation, as well as to the Jews: we have the
warrant of the Apostle Paul, Romans 3.29. Is he the God of the Jews only, and
not of the Gentiles also? says the Apostle. And he answers himself by and
by, saying: Yes, even of the Gentiles also. And chap. 9. verses 24, 25, 26. God
declares the riches of his glory, upon the vessels of mercy which he has
prepared unto glory. Even us, which he has called, not of the Jews only,
but also of the Gentiles.

As he says also in Hosea, I will call them my people, etc. as it follows
in the text of the Prophet rehearsed already. Read also 1. Pet. 1.10, 11.
where the Apostle gives to understand, that the holy Prophets did generally
aim at this time of the uniting of the Jews to the Gentiles: as it may more
plainly appear chapter 2. of the same Epistle, verse 10: in that he alleged
the self same text to the Jews, which the Apostle Paul, the Apostle of the
Gentiles has alleged, for the calling of the Gentiles. Read also chapter 5.
verse 13.

But for the more full clearing of this; that the holy Prophets did aim at the
time of the calling of the Gentiles: The Comforts.
it is evident from their manifold predictions thereof; as we may read, Psalm:
22. verses 27, 28, 29.30.31. And Psalm: 47, and 72.1.9, 10.11. etc. and Psalm:
87. and in many other of the Psalms. Likewise Isai: chap: 2. verses 2.3.4, and
chap: 11, 9, 10.16. and ch: 19. verses 18.19. etc. to the end of the cha: And
chap: 49 6.7. etc. and ch: 60. and in sundry other places.

The same is also manifest, Mal: chap: 1, 11. For from the rising of the Sun,
unto the going down of the same (that is, over the face of the whole earth) my
name is great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered
unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name is great among the heathen,
says the Lord of Hosts.

There are many other places in the lesser Prophets, for the confirmation of
the same. But these may for the present, suffice for the proof of it: so that
it may well be reckoned for an Article of faith, to believe the calling of the
Gentiles, and that the Church of God consists both of Jews and also of them:
that is of all believers in every nation of the world.

Having therefore so good ground for the promise of these things: it follows
next, that we are to inquire after the right use of this Article. And first,
touching the comfort of our faith.



The comfort of believing this Article is very great to all true believers, not
only in regard of themselves, who are already incorporated into this
mystical and sacred body of the Church: but also in respect of such as are
daily to be added to the same, in the time of their calling, and
sanctification: insomuch as the full perfection of every member, depends upon
the gathering together of the full and whole number of the elect of God to the
inheritance of his heavenly kingdom.

Explication and proof.
So indeed we read, Heb: 11, 39.40. in these words following. And these all
(The Apostle speaks of many of the most ancient members of the holy catholic
Church of God) through faith, obtained good report, but received not the
promise, god providing a better thing for us, that they without us should not be
made perfect. And to the same end tends that which we read in the 12. ch:
ver: 22, 23, 24. Ye are come to the mount Sion, etc. And 1, These. 4, 15. This
(says the Apostle) we say unto you, by the word of the Lord, that we which
live, and are remaining at the comm^ng of the Lord, shall not prevent them
which sleep, etc. Wherefore comfort your selves, one another with these words.

And not only so; but the comfort is great also, in respect of the present
calling and society of the Church of God: and namely in the uniting of Jews
and Gentiles together. As Isai: 54.1. etc. Rejoice o barren (says the Prophet)
that did not bear: break forth into joy, and rejoice thou that did not
traued with child: for the desolate has more children then the married wife,
says the Lord, etc. And chap: 60.1. etc. Arise (o Jerusalem) be thou bright,
for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, etc. And
verse, 3, etc. And the Gentiles shall walk in thy light, and Kings at the
brightness of thy rising up. Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all
these are gathered and come to thee; thy Sons shall come from far, and thy
daughters shall be nourished at thy side. Then shall thou see, and shine, thine
heart shall be astonished, and enlarged, because the multitude of the Sea shall
be converted unto thee, and the riches of the Gentiles shall come unto thee,
etc. And ch: 66.10.11.12, 13, 14. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem (says God by his
Prophet) and be glad with her, all ye that love her: rejoice for joy with her,
all ye that mourn for her, that ye may suck, and ^e satisfied with the
breasts of her consolation: that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the
brightness of her glory.

For thus says the Lord, I will extend peace over her like a flood, and the
glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then shall ye suck, ye shall be
borne upon her sides, and be joyful upon her knees.

As one whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort you, and ye shall be
comforted in Jerusalem.

And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish
like an herb: and the hand of the Lord shall be known among his servants, and
his indignation against his enemies.

The ground of all the comfort of this Article, is that our Savior, who is the
living head of the Church; is, and will be for ever, the Savior of the whole
body: which he accounts to be so great a part of himself. As Ephesians. 1.22.23,
and chap: 5.23.

But that we may the more fully discern of the Comforts; let us consider of
them more particularly. First, in respect of the universality of it. Secondly,
in respect of the holiness. And thirdly, in regard of the chief cause, and
fountain of all: which is the most holy and gracious election of God.



It is a great comfort to every true believer, when he considers the
infinite largenes of Gods mercy; extending it self to thousand thousands: to
confirm him for his own part, in the hope of Gods mercy toward himself, he
being one poor soul among the rest.

Explication and proof.
It is true. There is none that has faith, so much as a grain of mustard
seed, so timorous and fearful, or so much doubting of the favor of God,
through conscience of sin: but the due meditation of the universal extent
and ouer-spreading of Gods mercy; must needs greatly relieve and raise up his
weak and feeble soul. For seeing the mercies of God, are (through his rich
grace, and bountifulnes) enlarged to the forgiving of the infinite sins of
whole nations, wherein are innumerable people; how many soever of them shall
truly repent and turn unto him: yea, so as no order, state or degree, is
excluded from grace, if they will come unto him in the name of his Son, (as
Isaiah, chap: 56.3.4, 5.6.7. And John 6, 37. All that the Father gives me
(says our Savior) shall come unto me: and him that comes to me, I cast not
away. Nay, as we see plainly, Mat: 11.28. he is most willing, tenderly to
embrace every one that comes to him; in that he says, Come to me all ye
that are weary and laden, and I will ease you, And ch: 18, 10.11, 12, 13, 14.)
How then should not the poorest and fearfullest soul be encouraged, to
conceive some measure of comfortable hope, that God has some drop of mercy
for him: how many, or how great soever his sins be? and how long soever, he
has continued in them?

Nevertheless: this on the other side, must be carefully looked unto; that the
largenes of Gods mercy do never make us secure: but contrariwise, that from
this consideration, we do stir up our selves to be so much the more studious
to walk in all good duty before him.

But of the duties more by and by. And of the forgiveness of sins more also
when we shall come to that Article.



Seeing God does impute the perfect holiness of our Savior Christ unto it; and
also for our Saviors sake, does accept us in that measure of holiness, which it
pleases him to communicate unto us: it is a singular comfort to every member
of the Church, that he shall not be shut out of the kingdom of heaven, among
the wicked and profane; but be admitted among the rest of the saints of God:
the least whereof is very dear and precious in his sight.

There is no doubt, but every one that is admitted into the kingdom of grace,
Explication and proof.
and abides therein; shall be received in due time, into the kingdom of
glory: according to that of our Savior to the Apostle Paul, Act: 26. verse
18. And Psalm. 116, 15. Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his
saints. This will be further confirmed from the consideration of the election of
God, which is the foundation of the Church, and of all the holiness of it.

Let us therefore come to the comfort which faith takes therein.



The comfort is exceeding great, in that the election of God is most sure, and
unchangeable: and therefore that none of the elect; that is, none that is a
member of the holy catholic Church, can possibly perish, but shall be most
certainly saved Expli. So indeed does our Savior assure us, Matthew: chap: 24
verse 24. It is not possible (says he) that the elect should be deceived by
any false Christ's, or false Prophets, that they should be drawn away from the
truth of God by them. And therefore, elsewhere he does worthily make this the
chief ground of every man's joy, to whom it does appertain: that his name is
written in heaven. Luke. 10.20. Whereupon also, arises this most comfortable
challenge, against all adversaries of our salvation: Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods elect. Rom: 8.33.

This comfort, is not only for every man's own self, who is for his part one
of the elect of God; but also in regard of the stabilitie of the whole church,
and every true member thereof: according to that of the same Apostle, 2. Tim:
2.19. The foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal, The Lord
knows who are his. And thus (as it is written, Heb: 6.18.19.) The stablenes
of the counsel of God afordeth us strong consolation, upon the which the ancre
of our souls: that is, the hope which is set before us, may be sure and
steadfast in heaven, against all the storms and tempests, which we shall meet
withal, while we sail (as it were) in the discomfortable and dangerous Sea of
this wicked and troublesome world. Read also, Mat: 16.18. The gates of hell
shall not overcome the Church. There be likewise many comfortable testimonies,
in the holy Prophets. As Psalm. 46.5. etc. God is in the midest of it, therefore
shall it not be moved. And Ps. 125, 1. They that trust in the Lord shall be as
mount Sion, etc. Isai: 54.17. All the weapons that are made against thee shall
not prosper, etc Joel: 2, 32. In mount Sion and in Jerusalem shall be
deliverance. And chap: 3, 20. Likewise Obad: verse 17. And Micah. 7.20. God
will perform his truth to Iaakob, and mercy to Abraham, etc.

But to the end we may have our part in this so singular a comfort. How may we
be assured, Hereby may we know that we are the elect of God, if so be we have
received his Spirit of adoption, and sanctification.

Explication and proof.
We may do so indeed. For so says the Apostle John, 1, Ep: ch: 4, 13. Hereby
we know that we dwell in God, and God in us, because he has given us of his
Spirit. The which Spirit also (as we have seen before) is as the earnest or
seal of our election to salution. And therefore it bears the name of the
Spirit of adoption, etc.



We may know it certainly by the inward effects, which the holy Spirit of God
works in us: and by the outward effects of holiness, which the same Spirit
inableth us to perform, and causes our Spirits to take delight and pleasure
therein, from a pure heart, with a good conscience, and through faith unfeigned.

Explication and proof.
You answer truly and well, For so does the Apostle John, (mentioned even now)
teach us, 1, Ep: chapter 2, v. 3. Hereby we are sure that we know him, if we keep
his commandments. And ch: 3, 23.24. This is his commandment, that we believe
in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave
commandment. For he that keeps his commandments, dwells in him, and he in
him: hereby we know that he abides in us even by the Spirit which he has
given us. Now this Spirit, leads us into the obedience of Gods commandments:
whereby also it is discerned to be in us. Provided always, that our obedience
be (as was answered) out of a pure heart* and of a good conscience, and of
faith unfeigned. According to that of the Apostle Paul. 1, Tim: 1, 5. Moreover,
the fruits of the Spirit, whereby his abiding in us, may be assured unto us,
are in many particulars reckoned up by the Apostle Paul, Gal: 5, 22, 23, And
Ephesians: 5. v. 9, and in many other places. Wherein, if we take delight, with care
to practice them in our lives: we may assure our selves, that God has given us
his Spirit.

And namely, The Duties.
if we shall be careful to acquaint our selves with prayer and supplication to
God: for the increase of these his good gifts and graces. For this is a
special property of the Spirit of adoption, and sanctification: as the same
Apostle teaches us, Rom: 8, 15. Whereby, and by the other fruits of
sanctification before mentioned; the Apostle does in the same place, verses 14,
and 16.17, assure us that we are such, as belong to God: and to whom, the
inheritance of the kingdom of God does belong. For (says he) as many as are
led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.

For ye have not received the spirit of bondage, to fear again: but ye have
received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The same spirit
bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. If we be
children, we are also heirs, even heirs annexed with Christ: if so be that we
suffer with him, that ^ee may also be glorified with him. And mark this well;
that among many other things, the holy Apostle shows us, that our willing
suffering with Christ, (that is while we walk in the holy ways of God) is a
sure token that we are in the number of the elect children of God.

For as he says further, verse 29. of the same chapter: Those whom God knew
before, he also predestined to be made like to the image of his Son: to
wit, even in the enduring of afflictions, etc. And to the same purpose of
comforting and encouraging of all such; that they are the undoubted children of
God: tends all that which follows, even to the end of that most comfortable
chapter. Whereunto also, the testimony of the Apostle Peter serves notably, in
the first chapter of his 2. Epistle verses, 5, 6, 7, 8.9, 10, 11. Therefore,
give all diligence thereunto* join moreover virtue with your faith, and with
virtue knowledge. And with knowledge temperance: and with temperance, patience:
and with patience, godliness: and with godliness, brotherly kindness: and with
brotherly kindness, love, etc. For (as the Apostle says) hereby we shall make
our calling and election sure. And he assures us in the name of the Lord; that
if we do these things, we shall never fall: but that an entrance shall be
ministered unto us abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

Read also, Ps: 15. where the Spirit of God, by his holy Prophet, makes the
same conclusion, from a rehearsal of sundry like virtues, in the former part
of the Psalm.

And thus we see, that the comfort of faith. concerning the Article of the holy
catholic Church of God, is very great, and manifold* in respect both of the
universality, and holiness of it, and chiefly in regard of the holy election of
God.

Hitherto therefore, of the use of the doctrine of this Article, for the
comfort of faith.

WE are now to inquire likewise, after the use of it, touching the fruits of
obedience: and that in the same order, wherein we have inquired of the Comforts.



Insomuch as there is but one Church of God, and that without it here is no
salvation: it is the duty of every one that belongs to God, to forsake
himself, and all wicked assemblies; and to join himself unto it, by
embracing the same faith, and living in obedience to the same word and Gospel
of God our Savior Christ, with a godly care of preserving the holy unity and
peace thereof.

And to this end, it is furthermore the duty of every true member of the
Church; to associate and join himself, to some particular Church, or
congregation of the people of God: and therein to continue, and abide. It is
likewise the duty of all particular and visible Churches, as well as of the
whole Church generally: faithfully to embrace, testify, and uphold the truth
of God, committed to the custody of it.

Finally, we do all stand bound always to enlarge our hearts to bless and
praise the Lord; for the largenes of his mercy, thus universally extended, to
all estates, and degrees of people, in every nation; and that also to every
generation, since the beginning of the world: but specially in these our days,
and since the time of the more full revelation of the Gospel.

Explication and proof.
All these duties, do belong to this comfort, by very good right, and with good
warrant from the word of God: and as the matter speaks very plainly, to every
reasonable man, even of it self. But let us see something, for the better
confirmation of them unto us.

And first, touching the first branch of the answer: we may well take one
special proof from the words of our Savior, who is the only head of this
one Church, Mat: 16.24. If any man will follow me, let him forsake himself,
and take up his cross, and follow me. Likewise, Luk, 9, 23. Here is a plain
proof, that we must forsake our selves. And herewithall, very fitly are we
admonished, that seeing we are to join our selves to the militant Church here
on earth: that therefore also we must purposedly dispose of our selves, to
bear our part, in the common afflictions thereof. In which respect, as
likewise to show that we must forsake the society of Idolaters, and profane
persons: the example of Moses is very notable, Heb: 11.24, 25.26 Read also
Psalm: 26, v. 4.5 But we have an express commandment, confirmed by many holy
reasons, and persuasions, 2. Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Be not unequally yoked
with infidels, etc (says the Apostle) come out from among them, and separate
your selves, says the Lord himself. Read also, Revel: 14, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
And ch: 18 4, 5, 6, 7 8. The reason is, for that no unclean thing, nor
whatsoever works abomination, or lies, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven: but they which are written in the Lambs book of life, cha: 21.27.
Verily, as there was no salvation in the days of Noah, out of the Arc: so is
there, at no time, any salvation to those, that are out of the Church of God.

Wherefore (touching the second branch of the answer) that it is our duty, to
join our selves to the Church, in the outward society of it: that is, in the
exercises of the true worship of God, for the confirmation of faith, etc. it is
that which our Savior Christ directs his spouse to do, she being desirous
to be guided by him; Song of Songs, ch: 1. v. 6, 7. And it may well be hence
observed, in that it is said, The Lord added to the Church from day to day such
as should be saved. Read also Heb: 10, 25 and ver. 29. where the Apostle
shows, that there is danger of perdition, to every one that shall withdraw
himself, after that he has once entered this holy fellowship. For the third
duty of the whole Church, and of all particular assemblies, or congregations:
which is, that they ought to be faithfvll vpholders and keepers; and as it were
pillars of the truth of God: read Deuteronomy: 31.9.10, 11.12.13. The law was
committed io the custody of the Priests, the Sons of Leui: for the common
benefit of the people of Israel, that they might by the^, hear, and learn,
and fear the Lord God, and keep and observe all the words of his law. And in
this very respect, the Church of God is called the pillar and ground of truth,
1. Tim: 3, 15. as we have seen before.

And now that according to the last branch; we ought always, and most
instantly praise the Lord, for the largenes of his grace and mercy, toward the
infinite thousands of the lost posterity of Adam: the heavenly vision of John
may teach us, Revel: chapter 5, v. 8.9.10. etc. Whereunto also, let us ad this, that
much less ought we to repine, or grudge at the receiving of any the poorest,
or most sinful to mercy; but contrariwise to be so much the more, yea more
and more thankful; by how much God does more plentifully magnify the riches
of his free mercy, not only toward our selves, but also toward every other:
and therefore to embrace them as brethren, and to rejoice in them and for them,
to the great praise of our most gracious and merciful God. Such are the
duties, arising from the comfort of faith, in regard of the universality of
the catholic church of God. It follows that we inquire into the duties of
every one, in respect of the holi^es of it.

It is the duty of every member, or particular person, in the Church of God;
first to apprehend by faith, the perfect holiness of our Savior Christ: who
alone is the only full fountain thereof.

Secondly, to seek to be partakers of some portion of the ouer-flowings of
this fulness.

And thirdly, to seek to further and increase holiness both in our selves, and
also in as many other, as possibly we may.

Explication and proof.
Seeing God has made our Savior, to be perfect sanctification and holiness unto
us, 1. Cor: 1, 30. Colos. 1, 22: it were extreme folly, not to lay hold on him
most gratefully, in this behalf. Yea and if we should not, as it were, open our
mouths wide, to receive of his fulness a meet portion of his abundant grace,
answerable to that, Ioh. 1, 15.16. And ch: 7, ver. 37.38.39. Read also, ch:
13.8.9. If I wash thee not (says our Savior to Peter) thou shall have no part
with me. And the same is affirmed generally, Heb: 12.14. Without holiness shall
no man see the Lord. And 2. Cor: 5.17. If any man be in Christ, let him be a
new creature. Old things are passed away: behold all things are become new.

And besides, how unseemly, yea how absurd a thing were it; that any polluted
and defiled member, should be joined to a most pure head: and to the rest of
the beautiful members thereof. This must needs be a dishonor, and an utter
disgracing, to the whole body. It were, as if a man should go about, to make
the glorious church of our Savior Christ like to that deformed image, which
Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream, the which having the head of gold, had feet
of iron, and dirtie clay. And would not the wicked (I pray you) take occasion
from hence, to speak evil of the name of God: and of our Savior Christ?
specially if such as have the places of eyes, or hands, in this body: should be
blind or lame, etc. Verily, that which the Apostle Paul notes, to be a
deformity in doctrine: namely, that any should lay hay or stubble upon the
precious foundation Christ Jesus, 1. Cor: 3, 11, 12. etc. the like deformity
must it breed, if any person should be laid upon this spiritual foundation,
which is not a living stone: I mean such a one, as is not quickened to the
care of a godly and holy life. Neither could there be any peace, to the
conscience of any such profane person: but he must needs be always in fear of
the just indignation and displeasure of God. This doubtless, were now unto us
(whom God has chosen to be the Temple of his Spirit) no less sin, then it
was unto the Jews, to profane the material Temple of Jerusalem, when they
made it a den of thieves, and a cageful of unclean birds. And therefore, we
might justly look for the like punishment of reiectio^, and casting off which
fell upon the^: if we should be found in the like sin.

Let us therefore, according to the third duty, be so far from al unseemly
continuance in our profannes, that we labor earnestly, after all increase of
true holiness, both in our selves, and in others: according to the exhortation
of the holy Apostle, 2. Cor: 7, 1. And Revel: 22, verse. 11. He that is holy,
let him be holy still: yea with increase of holiness, as the Angels meaning is.

But of this duty, of furthering holiness belonging to every Christian,
concerning his brother: it shall further appear what belongs unto us; in the
next Article, concerning the Communion of Saints.

Touching our present Article; the duties belonging to the comfort of Gods
eternal election of his Church, are yet behind.



First and principally; considering that the free grace of God (clean
contrary to the desert of our sin) is the only cause and fountain, of our
remssion, justification, and salvation* it is our bounden duty, to be most
heartily thankful to God, in this respect above all other; both for our
selves, and for all the rest of Gods elect: and also to abandon all opinion of
any worthiness and merit of our own, or of any other, save of our savior alone.

Secondly, we considering that God has chosen us of free grace; and justly
refused other, to the declaration of his justice in punishing their sin: this
ought to cause us, in rejoicing, to fear and tremble before the Majesty of
God; and to keep our hearts far from all proud and vain boasting against
others.

Thirdly, insomuch as the election of God, is a most deep and hidden secret
in the counsel of God, considered in it self: it is our parts to be the more
diligent in seeking to know it, from the effects of Gods Spirit within us; and
in the fruits of sanctification following upon the same, in the outward
actions of our lives.

Finally, the assurance of our election, ought to work contentment in our
hearts, against all wantes, or afflictions whatsoever beside: waiting with
patience, for our eternal happiness and salvation.

Explication and proof.
Touching that most bounden, and earnest thankefulnes which we owe unto God;
both for the free election of our selves, and others, to salvation: the example
of the elect Apostle Saint Paul, may be an excellent instruction unto us; what
we and all other, are to do in this respect. Ephesians: 1, verses 3, 4, 5, 6.
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. who has chosen
us in him, before the foundation of the world, etc. And 1, These. 3, 8, 9 We are
alive of ye, standfast in the Lord. For what thanks can we recompense to God
again for you, etc. And 2. Ep: 2, 13. But we ought always to give thanks to
God for you brethren, beloved of the Lord, because that God has from the
beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and
the faith of truth. And that this holy election of God, is freely of grace: the
same Apostle teaches plainly, Rom: 11.5.6. It is of grace says he, Whence he
reasons thus, And if it be of grace, then it is no more of works, etc.

Secondly, that we ought to walk in fear and reverence: considering the just
reprobation of others, no worse by nature then we our selves are: we are
admonished in the 20. verse of the same chap. Be not high minded, but fear.
And he rendereth a reason of the admonition, in the verse following: For (says
the Apostle) if God spared not the natural branches (that is the Jews) take
heed lest he also spare not thee. And Philip. 2, 12. Make an end of your
salvation with fear and trembling: he speaks of a reverend, and childlike
fear of God. For (says he further) it is God which works in you both the
will and the deed, even of his good pleasure. Do all things without murmuring
and reasonings, etc. As though he should say, if ye turn aside, from an humble
course of life, and from a godly disposition of your hearts before God: ye may
justly fear your own good estate, with a troublesome and doubtful fear, etc.

Thirdly, that we are to seek for the assurance of our election, from the
workings of Gods holy Spirit in us; and from the fruits of a godly life, Read
2, Pet. 1, 5. etc. 10 as was observed, and alleged before in the Comforts.
Read also Ephesians. 1, 4. God has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy, and without blame, before him in love. And Col:
3, 12. Now therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender
mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind, long suffering, forbearing one another and
forgiving one another, etc.

And now last of all, that the assurance of our election to salvation, should
be a sufficient comfort against al discontentments, or discomfort whatsoever:
waiting with patience for the fulfilling of the good pleasure of God in this
behalf. The Apostle Paul is a notable example, who suffered all things
gladly, for the elects sake, that they might also obtain the salvation which
is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory. 2, Tim: 2, 10. And therefore also
ought we to suffer all things willingly in thankfulness to God, for the election
it self. The greatest afflictions of this life, are but momentanie: but the
glory whereunto they prepare, and lead us; is most excellent, and eternally
weighty. 2. Cor: 4.17.

Thus much concerning the duties, which ought to attend upon the comfort of
this Article.

NOw therefore, that we may conclude the whole doctrine of it.



Such as do not believe that God has a holy catholic, or universal Church,
can have no true faith that they themselves are belonging to God: neither can
they have any part, in that happiness and glory, which belongs unto it.

And that without holiness, no m^n shall see the Lord it has been proved
before. Expli. It is very certain, according to the testimony of the Apostle,
The Danger of not believing this Article.
Heb: 12. verse 14. that no profane person, such as was Esau, shall ever see
the Lord to his comfort.

And further, that none have God for their Father, who have not the Church for
their mother; in such sense as it is called the mother of us all, Gal: 4, 26.
it may likewise be concluded, from that which was observed in the Comforts:
namely, that calling and all true comfort, and even salvation it self, is
ministerially attributed to the womb, breasts, and lap of the Church:
according to that Isai: 54, 1. and ch: 64.8.9.10, etc. And Psalm: 87, 4.5.

Let us therefore (dear brethren, beloved of the Lord) both young and old;
give all good diligence, that we may learn to know, and discern the true
Church of God, from every false Church, and synagogue of the devil, and
Antichrist: by the right ground and foundation of it first; and then by the
true notes and marks of it. The ground and foundation of the true Church, is
the doctrine of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief corner stone. In whom all the building coupled together, grows unto an
holy Temple in the Lord.

The outward notes, and marks; of the true Church (so far as it is visible,
and may outwardly be discerned of us) are the public preaching of the true,
Prophetical, and Apostolical doctrine, the right administration of the
Sacrament, etc. as has bin declared before. In which respect, most graciously
has the mercy of God shined upon us, in this our age; above many generations
before us: insomuch as we need not wander from Sea to Sea, to find out a
people, professing the true worship of God; but have every were, near hand,
and before our eyes: such assemblies, and congregations of true worshippers of
God, to whom we may comfortably join our selves.

And thus, having learned to know, and discern the true Church of God; and
the particular congregations thereof: let us carefully join our selves to
the^, like as the Eagle hastes to the dead corpse. And being once come unto
the Church: let us beware, that we never depart from it. For even hereby shall
it be known, that we are true members of the Church: if we cleave steadfastly
unto it. According to that of the Apostle John, 1. Ep: 2, 19. They went out
from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would have
continued with us. But (this comes to pass) that it might appear that they
are not all of us. Neither can any withdraw themselves from the church, no not
from the holy assemblies of it, where they may be frequented, without extreme
peril of destruction to their souls, as was declared before. The erroneous
and heretical doctrines to be avoided: as being contrary to the truth of this
Article of our faith, are many: whereinto also, very many (for want of due
care) have dangerously fallen.

And first, that doctrine of the Papists, which denying, or at the least,
making small reckoning of the true notes or marks of the church (the word and
the Sacraments): makes those especially, to be the true and constant marks of
the true visible church, which are not in truth any marks of it at all.
Likewise, that doctrine of the same false teachers, is to be avoided: which
altogether misconstrueth. and peruerteth, diverse of those marks, which may
have some place, if they be rightly understood.

The false notes, which they make to go constantly for marks of the true
church; are an orderly and interrupted succession of Bishops, with a successiue
ordination from hand to hand, and with a supereminence of one place and Bishop
above all the rest, whence (say they) the only true Church is to be
denominated and determined: and likewise a multitude of professors, holding of
that place, and of the Bishop there, which they say is only the Bishop of Rome.

Moreover, they tell us, that there must be, as a mark of the true Church, the
continuance of the power of working miracles; and also of prophecy to foretell
of things to come; with external happiness and prosperous success, above any
other Church besides.

These are the false marks; which the popish doctrine describes the true
Church by. But they are in deed the proper notes and marks of the false
boasting Antichristian Church; specially, ever since the time that they have
cunningly fitted all these things, to the upholding of their false and
Antichristian doctrine; and to the resistance and persecuting of the true
doctrine of our Savior Christ, and the Professors thereof: and most of all,
that doctrine, which concerns his Person and office; as our learned Defenders
of the truth, have in their writings, made it plentifully manifest, against
them: which were too long, and needless for us to stand upon now.

The notes and marks which they misconstrue, and altogether pervert; are
antiquity, universality, unity, powerful effect of doctrine singular
holiness and devotion of life, and such like: as Bellarmine the Iesuitical
Proctour of the Popish Church, reckons them to the number of fifteen in all.
For these, being rightly understood, they can by no means be appropriated to
the Church of Rome: such as it has been now of a long time. For their
doctrine (wherein they dissent from the true Churches of our Savior Christ now
departed from that Church) it is new, and not that which was from the
beginning. Their universality, in making the Church of Rome the universal
Church; is as if they should enclose, orbem in vrbe, the whole world in one
City: or at the least, it makes an exceeding great restraint of the large
circuit of the Church of Christ. Their unity, is no better then a conspiracy
against the truth of Christ. The power of their doctrine, nothing but a strong
deluding of those, that receive nor the love of the truth, that they may
believe lies, through the just vengeance of God: as God himself has
threatened. Their holiness, is but superstitious hypocrisy, etc.

All these things, both antiquity, universality, and the rest; are only to
be found to have been in truth, in the Churches that were before that ever t^
e Church of Rome was called the catholic Church: and since that time, among
those Christians and Christian Churches; which have either first dep^rted
themselves, or else have been borne and brought up since the departure of the
former: under a more kindly Mother, then the Stepmother of Rome has bin.

And this also we do well know, that this Article of our belief, was set
down many hundreds of years; before there was any appropriation of it to the
Church of Rome: though (as we willingly confess) it was then for a long time,
one of the true particular Churches of Christ: neither arrogated this title of
catholic Church, to it self.

Thus therefore, the Popish doctrine, concerning this Article, is in all these
points, to be avoided of us, as erroneous and heretical against the true
meaning of it. Yea, their exposition of the word Belief, as it is referred by
them to the Church: as though the meaning should be this; that Christians do
thereby profess, that they give religious credit to all that their Church
teaches, without any further examination and trial by the holy Scriptures: it
is utterly a false interpretation of it.

Likewise, the doctrine, and practice of the Donatistes, or of any other, who
contend that the Church must be perfectly holy here in this world; and
therefore do separate themselves from Christian assemblies, if so be all things
be not reformed according to their mind, and condemn them as if they were no
true Churches: this both their doctrine, and also their practice, are carefully
to be avoided of us; as contrary to the true faith of this Article. seeing God
has described his Church in this life (whether generally in the whole, or in
particular congregations) to be a mixed company of true Christians with
hipocrites: as tears among wheat: as good fish with bad, etc. Math. 13.

On the contrary; they are to be avoided, and condemned, as going against the
true belief of this Article: who, because the salvation of the Church, and of
every member thereof, is certain: therefore will have no care of a godly life.
Such as were the heretics called Prodestinat^, and many Libertines, even to
this day.

Belief that in the holy catholic Church of God, there is a communion of
Saints.
Finally, no person, void of the care of a godly and holy life, The ground and
meaning of the article.
is to be accounted a member of the true Church of God: which is always, in
some measure holy, in every member of it, even here in this world.

Nevertheless, we may not peremptorily exclude any profane person, from the
holy election of God, because of his present prophanenes: but using the means,
we are to hope still with patience, that many such may in due time, be
converted to God; and so declared to be of the number of those, whom he has
appointed to eternal life: though for a long time, they lay hidden from our
knowledge in this respect.

Belief that in the holy catholic Church of God, there is a communion of
Saints.
Question. Answer. Explication and proof.
LEt us now come to the next Article of our belief.

What is that?

It follows thus, The communion of Saints.

The words (I believe) are here to be understood again, as in the former
Article; and so they are in the rest of the articles following this: as though
they were expressed thus, I believe the communion of Saints: that is to say, I
believe that in the holy catholic Church of God, there is a communion of
Saints: and that to them belongs the forgiveness of sins, etc: as we shall
further consider hereafter.



Even that which follows in the former text of the Apostle Paul: from the 14.
verse of that 12. chapter of his first Ep. to the Corinthians; unto the end of
the chapter.

Explication.
This may well be the ground and warrant of it in deed: yea, and so forth also,
throughout the next chapter, and in the 16. chapter of the same Epistle: verses,
1.^. etc.

But because it might seem over long, to go through so long a text of
Scripture: let us stay our selves, for the ground of ^^ns Ar^ cle; upon that
which remains of the 12. chapter.

Thus it follows; For the body also (says S. Paul) is not one member, but
many.

15. I^ the foot would say, because I am not the hand I am not of the body: is
it therefore not of the body?

16 And if the ear would say, because I am not the eye, I am not of the body:
is it therefore not of the body?

17. If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were
hearing, where were the smelling?

18. But now has God disposed the members, every one of them in the body at
his own pleasure.

19. For if they were all one member, where were the body?

20. But now there are many members: yet but one body.

21. And the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee: nor the head
again to the feet, I have no need of you.

22. Yea, much rather, those members of the body, which seem to be more
feeble, are necessary.

23. And upon those members of the body, which we think most dishonest (or
more base) we put more honesty (or as we may read it, more honor) thereon:
and our uncomely parts have more comelines on. Atimotera. Timen perissoteran.


24. For our comely parts need it not: but God has tempered the body together,
and has given the more honor to that part which lacks.

25. Lest there should be any division in the body: but that the members should
have the same care one for another.

26. Therefore if one member suffer, all suffer with it: if one member be had
in honor, all the members rejoice with it.

27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in part.

Touching this text; before we come to the rehearsal of the doctrine,
delivered in the Sermon made upon it: let us observe, that it falls out very
well, and commodiously for us; that (according to the divine wisdom of the
holy Ghost, by whose direction the Apostle wrote) these Articles of our faith,
which are of so near affinity, Explication and proof.
are so nearely, and successively, conioined and knit together, in one and the
same chapter. For the doctrine of he holy Ghost, shows the immediate Caller
and Sanctifier both of the Church, and also of the communion of Saints. Again;
the doctrine of the Church, is (as we may say) the rule of the communion of
Saints. And the doctrine of the communion of Saints, is a further explication,
and unfolding of the true nature of the Church: it being here considered more
particularly, in the distinct members of it.

Now therefore in the former text (I mean in the 12. and 13. verses of this
chapter) the Apostle (as we have already seen) has showed, that the Church,
though it has many members, is yet but one body, and so has a holy and
mystical, or spiritual union with our Savior Christ the head of it. In our
present text, the same our Apostle declares further, that though it be one
only, yet it has many memb^rs: and that the diverse members, have diverse
faculties; and accordingly, diverse offices and functions. Yet so, as all tend
to the common conservation, and benefit, of the whole: as it is in the diverse
members of the natural body.

And thus; in a mystical, and spiritual union with our Savior Christ, by the
Spirit, through faith: the Church has also a holy communion, or (as we may
say) a community, or common unity; as touching the several parts, or
particular members thereof, among themselves.

This is briefly the sum and scope of all.

The which, that we may the more fully conceive; we are to understand, that the
communion of Saints, is of two sorts: as also their union is.

For first; all they to whom this name of Saints rightly agrees (that is to
say, all the true members of the Church, called, justified, and sanctified, in
our Lord Jesus Christ) they have by the mediation of the same our Lord Jesus,
their union with God the Father, and the holy Ghost: and they have also, their
union among themselves; as our Savior prays, John, 17.11. Holy Father, keep
them in thy name, even them whom thou have given me, that they may be one, as
we are. And again, verse, 20. etc. I pray not for these alone (says our
blessed Savior) but for them also; which shall believe in me, through their
word: That is, through the word of God, which my disciples shall preach. That
they all may be one, as thou O Father art in me, and I in thee: even that they
may be also one in us, that the world may believe that thou have sent me. And
the glory that thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be one as we
are one: I in them and thou in me; that they may be made perfect in one. And 1.
Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit.

And as they have their union, thus with God, and also among themselves; so
have they likewise, both their communion with God the Father, by the means of
our Savior Christ his Son, and through the holy Ghost: and also by the same
Spirit, their communion and fellowship among themselves. As, 1. Cor. 1, 9. God
is faithful by whom ye are called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord And, 2. Ep. chapter 13. ver. 13. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost, be with ye
all, Amen. And, 1. John, 1. verses 3.4 ^.6.7. That which we have seen and
heard, declare we unto you, that ye may also have fellowship with us, and that
our fellowship also may be with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ
etc. And Ephe. ch 4.3.4.5.6. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit, in
the bond of peace. There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in
one hope of your vocation. There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism: one God
and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in ye all. Read also
verses, 11.12. etc. He therefore gave some to be Apostles, etc. For the
gathering together of the Saints, etc. Till we all meet together (in the
unity of faith and knowledge of the Son of God) to a perfect man, etc. Whence
it follows; that neither can the body of the Church live without our Savior
Christ, the head thereof: neither yet any member of it, being severed from the
rest of the body.

This both union, and communion with our Savior Christ, and among our selves;
it is not by any commixtion of substances, or confusion of qualities: but by
faith, apprehending Christ; and by love, working among our selu^s. And either
of these (by the unsearchable operation, and bond of the Spirit, incorporating
us into Christ) makes us of one heart, mind, and spirit, in a sweet consent,
both with our Savior Christ. 1. Cor. 6.17. and also among our selves. Act.
4.32. and 1. Pet. 1.22.

But let us more distinctly inquire of the communion of Saints: according to
certain branches, and several degrees; for the more clear opening of it.

And first; insomuch as all our spiritual union and communion, both with God,
and also among our selves, and with all faithful Christians; is grounded upon
that union and communion, which we have with the only begotten Son of God our
Lord Jesus Christ: let us consider, what manner of communion that is. What have
you learned concerning this point?

I have been taught, that our communion with our Savior Christ, consists in
these four things.

First, in our partaking of the merit of his sufferings and obedience to God,
for us.

Secondly, in our partaking of Christ himself, in either nature of his Person:
as being both God and man, the head of his Church.

Thirdly, in our partaking of the virtue, and efficacy of the same his divine
Person: and of all that he has wrought, and suffered for us, in the same.

Fourthly, in our partaking of his dignity; in that through his grace. God has
adopted us to be his children: and made us all, Kings and Priests unto
himself.

Explication and proof.
Touching the first of these points of our communion with our Savior Christ,
read Romans 5.19. By the obedience of one, many are made righteous. And Ephesians.
1.7. We have our redemption by him, through his blood. That is, we are by his
death, ransomed from that most miserable captivity, and thraldom, wherein we
were through sin, under the wrath of God, and tyranny of the Devil. This
our partaking of the merit of our Saviors death and obedience; is the ground
of the other points which follow; touching his Person, and the whole efficacy
of his divine grace, and power, working in us: and therefore we do reckon it
in the first place.

Concerning the second point, this we must always remember; that our partaking
of either nature of the divine Person of our Savior, God and man; must be
understood, according to the co^municable properties of either nature.

For albeit the divine nature is in us (though in deed not essentially,
according to the heresy of the Manichies, but only by the energetical grace or
effectual operation of the holy Ghost: in such sense as it is said, 2. Pet. 1,
4 that we are partakers of the divine nature And 1. Cor. 1.30. that we are of
God in Christ: And 2. Ep. 5.17. that he that is in Christ is a new creature:
and Ephesians. 3.17. that Christ dwells in our hearts by faith: according also as
he has promised to be with his servants in the ministry of his word and
Gospel to the end of the world, Math. 28.20.) Yet to speak properly, the
humane nature is not so; but only in heaven, and not otherwise with us on
earth, then we are with him in heaven: he is by his holy Spirit with us, and
in us by spiritual presence and working: and we by faith, with him, and in him,
by spiritual apprehension and obedience unto him.

Nevertheless; by reason of the perpetual, and most near personal union of
the humane nature of our Savior with the divine, which is always every where
present by his Spirit: we also are by the same Spirit of his, firmly knit, to
his humane nature, how far so ever distant in place: and are made flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone, as we read, Ephe. 5.30. yea, we are knit also to
the divine nature, by means of the humane.

So that truly may it be affirmed of our Savior, both God and man; that he is
the vine, and we the branches: he our head, and we his members, etc. Not
barely, and by a naked metaphore, as one would say; but according to a real
truth, by an energeticall power, or effectual operation and working of the
Spirit of our Savior: as was said a little before. Yea, and that even in as
near a truth of conjunction, as the most spiritual manner that may be will
endure, or bear. For as it is plainly avouched, If any have not the spirit of
Christ, he is none of his. Romans 8.9. And, Know ye not your own selves (says
the same Apostle, 2. Cor. 13.5.) how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates.

Thirdly, touching the efficacy of the same his Person, through the death of
the humane nature: we read that our Savior both delivers us from the
guiltines and punishment of sin, and also from the power and tyranny of it and
of the devil. Likewise, as by his obedience, he has for his part fulfilled,
and on our part purchased all righteousness for us: so does he, as a fruit of
our perfect justification, by the imputation of his righteousness to us in the
sight of God; facio^ and frame us like to himself, in some measure of inhere^t
righteousness, by an infused grace of sanctification: in that (as the holy
Scriptures do plainly teach) he baptizeth us with the holy ghost, and that he
will at the last day, raise up our bodies, and make the^ like to his glorious
body; and give us both in bodies and souls, everlasting life and glory in the
heavens. Mat. 3.11. Romans 8.11. Phil. 3.20.21. Col. ch: 3. v. 4. 1. Ioh. 3.2.
But of the resurrection of the body, and of everlasting life, more afterward.

For the last point of our communion with our Savior Christ in some measure or
degree, of his most excellent dignity: read John, 1.12, etc. 1. Pet. 1. ver.
2.5, etc. Reu. 1.6. and chapter 5.10. And again, 1. Pet. ^.9. Ye are a chosen
generation, etc. But of this we have spoken more at large in the title Christ,
and in the comfortable fruits and benefits of our Saviors death.

Such therefore, is our most blessed and gracious communion with our Savior
Christ: whereunto he has vouchsafed, of his infinite mercy, to admit us: and
accordingly, to communicate and give his very self unto us, with all his most
precious and inestimable fruits and benefits.



The communion of Saints among themselves (as I have been taught) consists
in these four things.

Fist, in that joint title and interest, which every one has; to the enjoying
of the same blessings, both in this life, and also in the life to come: by one
and the same purchase of redemption and by the same free donation and gift of
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, in a lively and spiritual discerning, and comfortable perceiving of
our near conjunction with the rest of the body: answerable in a certain
proportion, to the knitting of the members of the natural body, under one and
the same natural head, by many veins, sinews, and strings.

Thirdly, it consists in the loving and kind employing of all gifts, which
any of the particular members receive of our Savior: whether external or
internal; to the mutual benefit of the whole body, for the furtherance, both
of the comfort and joy of this life, and also unto the glory of the life to
come, according to that power which is given to every one.

Fourthly the communion of Saints, consists in the fellowship, and
fellowfeeling of the like afflictions and sufferings: so long as we remain
here in this troublesome, and pers^cuting world.

Explication and proof.
For the proof of the first of these points: call here again to mind, Ephesians.
4.4. Ye are called in one hope ofyour vocation. Read also, how the same
Apostle joins all the faithful, in one like estate and condition of glory,
after this life, 1. Cor. 15.51, 52.53.1 These. 4.13, etc. Heb. 12.39, 40. And
Jude verse 3. The salvation of the Saints, is called the common salvation. And
Romans chap. 5.15, 16, 17. and chap. 6.23. The gift of God is eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. And touching the blessings of this life, they
who are the owners and possessors of them by civil right: are but Stewards and
disposer of them, for the relief of those that stand indeed, by that law of
love and compassion, which God has made to his Church.

The necessities of the poor, do entitle them to be owners or Lords of rich
men's liberality, in the phrase of the holy language of the Scriptures of God.
Prou. 3.27. The abundance of the one ought in duty, to supply the wants of
the other: according to that most notable Treatise of liberality, penned by
the holy Apostle. 2. Cor. chap. 8. and chap. 9. And according to the will and
commandment of God, testified. Gal. 6.16. and 1. John, 3.17, 18, etc. And in
many other places of the holy Scripture: as the Treatise of christian
benificence, printed a few years since, does abundantly declare.

The second branch of the Answer, is very evident in it self: insomuch as
otherwise, none can rightly understand, how to employ himself, for the
benefiting of other, though he had a desire so to do. Every one therefore, is
to know his place and calling; whether he be as the eye, or the hand, or
answerable to any other member of the body: and accordingly, he is to do the
proper duty of his office.

The third branch is notably confirmed and laid forth by the Apostle Paul, Romans
12.3, 4, etc. to the end of the chapter. 3. For I say (says he) through the
grace that is given unto me, to every one that is among you, that no man
presume to understand above that which is meet to understand: but that he
understand and according to sobriety, as God has dealt to every man the
measure of faith.

4 For as we have many members in one body, and all the members have not one
office.

5 So we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one, one another
members.

6 Seeing then that we have gifts that are diverse, according to the grace that
is given unto us, whether we have prophecy, let us prophecy according to the
proportion of faith: or an office, let us wait on the office: or he that
teaches, on teaching, etc.

And the same Apostle, Ephesians. 4.7, etc. 17. Read also 1. Pet. 4.10, 11. Let
every man, as he has received the gift, minister the same one to another, as
good disposers of the manifold grace of God, etc. And it is the very drift and
scope of our text, which we have chosen for the ground of this Article. But of
this more, when we come to the duties.

Now fourthly, touching christian communion and fellowship in sufferings: we
have our instruction, Romans chap. 12. verse 12. Rejoice with them that rejoice,
and weep with them that weep. Likewise Heb. 13.3. Remember them that are in
bonds, as though ye were bound with them, and them that are in affliction, as
if ye also were afflicted in body. And chap. 10.32, 33, 34. We have an example
of this part of the communion of Saints commended unto us.

And likewise, Revel. 1. verse 9. John calls himself a brother to the
faithful, and a companion with them in tribulation, and in the kingdom and
patience of Jesus Christ.

The Prophet David is also a notable example hereof; who in all his own
affliction, had a care over the afflictions of the Church: as that his prayer
Psalm. 25. verse 22. may be one notable instance, in that he says, Deliver
Israel O God out of all his troubles. Upon the which words, Master Calvin
writes very notably also, for the interpretation, saying, Mutuainter sanctos
societas, postulat vt singuli publicis miserijs affecti, apud Deum vno consensu
gemant. Hoc vero ad fidei confirmationem non parum valuit, quod David nihil se
a toto fidelium corpore seperatum habere cogitans, quas patiebatur iniurias,
sibi cum omnibuspijs duxit esse co^munes. Sed illa etiam tenenda ratio, vt dum
sua quisque mala deplorat, simul etiam curas and votasua extendat ad totam
ecclesiam.

The communion of Saints (says that holy interpreter) requires, that every
one having a common feeling of public calamities, should bemone their estate
to God with one consent. And this very thing, was of no small force to the
strengthening of David's faith, in that he taking nothing privately to himself,
as if he had been divided from the rest of the body of the faithful,
accounted all the injuries which he suffered, to be common to all the
faithful, as well as to himself. So that this rule also is to be followed of
us, that every one, in bewailing his own griefs, do extend the care of his
prayers, to desire the benefit of the whole Church.

But let us now return to our text, in the 12. chap. of the 1. Epist. to the
Corinthians: wherein as was said, St. Paul, treats of the communion of
Saints, by a reproof or correction of those falts and vices, which usually are
common hindrances of the same.



Self-love, a general fault and evil in all of us: it is a common hinderance
of this holy and brotherly communion.

And as evil fruits of the same self-love; selfe-pride, and vain glory,
joined with the contempt of other on the one hand: as touching those that have,
or at the least imagine that they have greater gifts; or be in any higher
room, and ofice of dignity above the rest.

And on the other hand: touching such as be in inferior places, or are limited
with meaner gifts; malignancy and envy against the preferment of those, whom
they do see to be preferred before them.

These are very grievous and noisome evils to hinder; yea mightily to
overthrow the holy communion of Saints: which ought to be of all hands most
diligently and tenderly watered by the streams of love; to the end it might
plentifully grow and flourish among all christians.

Explication and proof.
These indeed, are the evils which St. Paul discovers, as being the bane and
poison, to destroy all communion of Saints. Whereas on the contrary; all true
christian virtue, ought indeed to be as a stream, which the more full it is
in it self: should flow forth from it self, so much the more abundantly; to
the sweet refreshing and benefiting of others.

Such as have more special gifts then the rest, should resemble the candle,
which spends it self in giving light to all that are about it. And these
again, ought in the enjoying of the same light; peaceably and thankfully to
use it, as a help to the performance of every good duty, which belongs unto
them: to their better glorifying of God, in their several callings; and to the
better profiting of all other for his sake, as much as lies in them. We all,
well knowing and considering this; that every one in this kind of spending his
own gifts upon others; does thereby increase his own light, and is more
beneficial to himself: contrary to that which the poor candle does.

But let us (I pray you) see from the Apostles light; how excellently, and with
how notable evidence, all the evils above named, are reproved and convinced:
by the similitude of the natural body, which he has fitted to that purpose.

And first, for the correction of all malignant, envious, and froward persons;
serves all that which the Apostle writes from the 15. verse of our text, to
the 21* For (as we may easily observe) there be a number, who if they be but a
little offended, or not dealt withal to their own liking: will in a froward
mood, be ready to give over, al tender regard of christian fellowship and
duty. Leave them to themselves a while, and ye may as well hale the bear to
the stake, as them to any commendable service: either for the common benefit
of the Church of Christ, or for any private, or particular assistance and
relief.

The brutish unreasonableness of such; the holy Apostle discovers and
reproves, by a prosopopie, or speech figuratively attributed to the foot, and
to the ear of the body: the which two members, he produces as two sufficient
examples, to express and lay open the folly of the minds of men in this case,
verses 15, 16. For (says the Apostle) If the foot should say, Because I am
not the hand, I am not of the body: is it therefore not of the body?

And again, If the ear should say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the
body: is it therefore not of the body?

Nay rather, as the Apostle shows further, ver. 17. If these should have
their will; it must needs bring great confusion: yea an utter overthrow of tha
goodly order, which the most wise-God has set in the body. For (says the
Apostle) If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole
were hearing, where were the smelling?

Wherefore, from the contrary commodity, and excellent comeliness, of that
most wise order which God has established, as in the frame of nature, so for
the eutaxie and well ordering of his Church: the holy Apostle earnestly
disswadeth the former absurd and sottish waiwardnesse, in these words, verses
18, 19, 20. But now has God disposed the members, every one of them in the
body, at his own pleasure. For if they were all one member, where were the
body? But now there are many members, yet but one body.

So then, none can resist, or detract from this point of the Apostles doctrine;
but they shall by and by discover themselves, to be even fighters against God:
and against that very light of nature, from the which this similitude is taken.

And besides; what a folly is it for any to be waiward, or envious, etc:
seeing hereby, such as forsake the communion of Saints, do wilfully dispossess
themselves of those excellent things; which by continuance in faith, and love,
among the people of God, they might comfortably possess and enjoy as their
own: according to that, 1. Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. though we confess, that the
Apostle writes these words upon another occasion. For unto such as hold
faithfully the communion of Saints; all things are theirs: Whether it be Paul,
or Apollo or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death; whether they be things
present, or things to come, all are theirs. And they Christ's, and Christ Gods.

And seeing God will dispose of his graces, to whom, and in what measure he
thinks good, as it is meet he should: what mattereth it in effect; whether
we, or other, have this or that special gift and grace, more fit, either for
the common edification of the Church, or to the performance of this or that
more commendable service, in some more particular respect: so that God be
glorified, and the Church have the benefit? This is the scope, which every one
ought to aim at. And if this be obtained, what reason may any have, why he
should not rejoice and be glad of it: by whomsoever it is brought to pass; as
well as if he himself had been the instrument of it? Answerable to that of
the same Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.11. Whether it were I, or they, sow preach, and
so have ye believed. Read also Phi. chap. 1.18. Thus much concerning the evil
of frowardness, and envy, in the inferior members of the Church.

Now in the second place; touching the discovery and reproof of the
noisomeness of pride, and also of contempt, the companion or attendant upon
pride, in those that have greater gifts, and be in higher place and office: (I
speak of such as have not there withal that singular grace of God, to walk
humbly before him) the Apostle discovers and reproves it, from the light of
the former similitude of the natural body; as it follows verse 21, etc: to
the 28. verse: in that he reasons from that necessity, which the superior
and more excellent members of the body, have of the inferior; to show from
thence, the like necessity, which the principal members of the Church, have
of those which be in the lowest place or degree. For (says the Apostle) even
as the eye of the natural body, cannot say to the hand, I have no need of
thee. Nor the head again to the feet, I have no need of you: (For God has
disposed of the body in such sort, that there is no one member, which stands
not in need of another.) So likewise, it is in the mystical body of the church
of God. No christian of the rarest gifts among the rest; no not the Pastor,
which is as the eye to watch over, and to direct the rest: can with any good
reason, despise, or withdraw his loving affection, or helping hand, from the
weakest and poorest of the brethren. Nay rather, he shall find himself, at
one time or other, in this or that thing, to stand in need of his help: and
if no otherwise, yet of his prayer.

Howsoever it be: whether they stand in need of them or no; this is the
ordinance of God, that the stronger and wiser, must be the servant of the
weaker, and less instructed Christian: or else, he shall by his pride and
contempt, provoke the wrath of God against himself. For seeing none must
disdain the branches cut off, Romans 11, 18, etc: much less then, those which
are jointly ingrafted into Christ together with us.

This excellent indifferency, does the holy Apostle use in arbitrating this
difference, betwixt the Superior and Inferior; to the lincking of both in one
sacred society: and this he does, as one appointed of God himself, and endued
with all meet grace and authority, to take up the matter.

And according to his doctrine, for the instruction of all other: so was his
example also for his part, though he was one of the highest place. As Romans
1.11, 12. I long to see you (says the blessed Apostle) that I might bestow
among ye, some spiritual gift to strengthen you: That is, that I might be
comforted together with you, through our mutual faith, both yours and mine.
And again, 1. Cor. 9.19. Though I be free from all men, yet have I made my
self servant unto all men, that I might win the more. Unto the Jews I
become as a Jew, that I may win the Jews: to them that are under the law, as
though I were under the law, that I might win them that are under the law. To
them that are without the law, as though I were without the law, (when I am not
without law, as pertaining to God, but in the law through Christ) that I may
win them that are without the law. To the weak, I become as weak, that I
may win the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all
means save some. And this (says he) I do for the Gospels sake, that I might
be partaker thereof with you.

And again, chapter 10.32, 33. Give no offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the
Grecians, nor to the Church of God: Even as I please all men in all things not
seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they might be saved.

Yea, and yet further, seeing our Savior himself does not think himself
perfect without his Church, no not without the most inferior members of it:
how may any, never so great; despise the very least of the flock, for whom our
Savior has died? Read in the same Epistle, chap. 8. verse 2, 10, etc. Take
heed lest by any means etc For when ye sin against the brethren, and wound
their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ. Read also Song of Songs,
chapter 8 verses 8, 9.

Now certainly, there cannot be so great disparagement, betwixt the greatest
and least among Christians: as there is betwixt the greatest Christian that may
be, and Christ himself, who is the head. Wherefore, seeing he abaseth
himself so low, as to have an honorable regard of the lowest: how should it
not be meet, that every one of us, should according to the rule of the Apostle
of our Savior Christ, In giving honor, go one before another: as we read
Romans chap. 12. verse 10.

Hence then, we may perceive how necessary it is; that such as have the
greatest gifts of learning, of utterance, etc. should be earnestly admonished,
to take greatest heed, against these foul vices of pride, and vain glory,
and such like: which are most contrary to that holy and humble communion,
whereunto we are called in Christ Jesus. And that, so much the rather, because
man's corrupt heart, is too to easily puffed up, to take a swelling conceit of
it self, even by that which ought in truth, to cause it to be more humble and
careful to serve God and his Church: seeing by how much any has received more
then other, so much the more will God require of him; as our Savior
admonishes, Luke chapter 12.48.

But if any, instead of this humble and studious care, shoud turn aside to an
ambitious lifting up of himself above his brethren; let us consider well, that
other admonition of our Savior, which we read John, 5.44: namely, that it is
a hinderer of faith. For, How (says he) can ye believe, who receive honor one
of another, and seek not the honor which comes of God alone? And if it
hinders faith, that it can have no beginning; no doubt it will hinder the
proceeding of faith, wheresoever it finds entertainment, after that faith is
begun. Now, The Promise.
that honor which comes of God, whereof our Savior speaks; is that which
comes by our humbling of our selves to do service: according to that which
he says elsewhere, He that will be the greatest, let him be a servant to all.

Alas then, why should any be so foolish, as to pride themselves in their
gifts, how great soever they be? And much rather, how vain a thing is it for
any, (after that fondness which is in many) to fancy themselves, to be so much
the more worthy Christians before God: not because they have greater gifts of
the mind, but because they wear a better garment on their backs, or dwell in
a more fair house, etc. Whereas there is neither betternesse, nor any
goodness at all in these things, to prefer us before the greatest beggar,
that goes by the high way; in the sight of God. Nay contrariwise, we are so
much the worse by them, by how much they make us more proud: as the admonition
of the Apostle James, may let us well understand, as we read, chap. 2. verses
1, 2, 3, etc.

My brethren (says he) have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect
of persons. For if there come into your company, a man with a gold ring and in
goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment: And ye
have respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou
here in a good place: and ye say unto the poor stand thou here, or sit here
under my footestoole. Are ye not partial in your selves, and are become judges
of evil thoughts?

Thus earnest, yea and much more then thus, (as it follows) is the Apostle in
this point. So that all things duly weighed; we may justly conclude, that we
are only in truth so good, or so much better then other (civil respects only
excepted) by how much we are more vile and base in our own eyes: and as we
are therewithal, more careful to give greater glory to God; and to seek more
earnestly to further other in the way of the kingdom of God, by esteeming and
dealing, lovingly and honorably with the least of them.

This is the sum of the doctrine of this place, as the Apostle Paul's own
application shows, from the 27. verse, to the end of this 12. chapter.

HAving thus the ground, and meaning of this Article of the communion of
Saints: let us come to that which remains to be further considered of it.



We may read the gracious promise of it, in the 16 chapter of Leuiticus, the
11, and 12, verses, compared with that which is written, 2. Cor. 6.14, etc.

Rehearse these places.



Leuiticus 26. the Lord says thus by his faithful servant the Prophet Moses,
in the first of those places.

11 I will set my Tabernacle among ye, and my soul shall not loath ye.

12 Also I will walk among ye, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my
people.

And in the other place, thus writes the Apostle Paul. 2. Cor. 6.

14 Be ye not unequally yoked: for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? And what communion has light with darkness?

15 And what concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part has the believer
with the infidel?

16 And what agreement has the Temple of God with idols? for ye are the
Temple of the living God: as God has said, I will dwell among them, and walk
there: and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

17 Wherefore come ye out from among them, and separate your selves, says the
Lord: and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you.

18 And I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters,
says the Lord almighty.

Expli. Here indeed, we have the Promise, both of our communion with God in
Christ; and also of our communion among our selves: as the Apostle Paul
alleging the words of the Prophet Moses, does interpret, and apply the same.
And to the same purpose also, he alleges another place of holy Scripture, out
of the prophecy of Isaiah, chap. 52.11. And also a third, out of Jeremy chap.
31.1. To the which, we might add many other: as Isa. chap. 2. from the
beginning of the chapter, in these words: It shall be in the last dates, that
the mountain of the house of the Lord, shall be prepared in the top of the
mountains, etc. And many people shall say, Come and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, etc. And chap. 11. from the 6. verse, The woolfe also
shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie with the kid, etc. Then
shall none hurt nor destroy in all the mountain of my holiness: for the earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that cover the Sea.
And in that day the root of Ishai, which shall stand up for a sign unto the
people, the nations shall seek unto it, and his rest shall be glorious. Thus I
say, many other places might be added. But these shall suffice: considering
that many which concern the calling of the Gentiles, and therewithal, the
uniting of them in one body with the Jews; have been already alleged in the
former Article. From whence, we may the more easily call the^ again to mind.
And the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. chap. 1.9. celebrating the faithfulness of God,
in calling us to the fellowship of his Son: he has therein, no doubt, a
respect to the former promise.

NOw after the promise: the use of this Article, is next to be remembered. The
Comforts.




The comfort hereof, must needs be exceeding great: insomuch as herein, the
believing Christian is assured, that our Savior himself, and all whatsoever
belongs to the Church by him; is his for his part, as well as the portion of
any other: yea, that it is his jointly, together with all the members of our
Savior Christ, in this holy communion.

Explication and proof.
This must needs be exceedingly comfortable indeed: insomuch as our communion
with our Savior Christ, is the very root and ground of our christian
regeneration, and spiritual Being: that is, that we are Christians, or have
any truth of christianity at all: according to that saying of the Apostle, 1.
Cor. chap. 1.30. Ye are of God in Christ Jesus. And Ephesians 5.23. Christ is the
head of the Church, and the Savior of his body. And verse 30. We are members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.

Moreover, we having this near communion with our Savior Christ; we have
also by him, our communion with the whole most blessed Trinity: that is, with
the Father, and the holy Ghost; as well as with the Son. 2. Cor. chap. 13.
verse 13.

And having our communion with our Savior himself; we have also all things
with him, and by him from the Father, through the holy Ghost. Romans 8.32. For
seeing (as the Apostle says) God spared not his own Son, but gave him for
us all (to death:) how shall he not with him give us all things also? To this
purpose, call again to mind, that which was alleged, 1. Cor. chap. 1.30, 31.
and chap. 3.21, 22, 23. For hence it is evident; that insomuch as our Savior,
with his righteousness and holiness, is ours, by so perfect an union and
communion with him, and among our selves: it is no vain, or imaginary
imputation of his righteousness, whereby we are justified in the sight of God.
But it is a very true and real imputation, which faith apprehends: far
above all the exceptions, which the ignorant and skornefull Papists take up,
and cast forth at their pleasures, to make themselves sport with: even with
their own ignominy and shame. For who sees not (they only excepted that are
ignorant of the mystery of godliness) that to be justified by faith in our
Savior Christ, into whom we are spiritually incorporated; is a far other
manner of thing, then to say, that one man should live by another man's soul,
The Comforts.
or that he should be learned by another man's learning, etc. For there neither
is, nor can be, any such conjunction of any one man with another: as there is
betwixt our Savior and his whole Church, and with every particular member
thereof. Let the Papists therefore skorne as they list; the truth will in good
earnest, bear it self out, with full breast, to the justifying of it self
against them all.

Thus therefore, the communion of Saints is exceedingly comfortable, to every
true believing Christian, in regard of their most blessed communion: first,
with Christ Jesus himself. For this is the ground of all holy communion.

(...).
But is it not also comfortable, in respect of their own communion among
themselves, by the means of our Savior Christ?

(...).
Yes, for by our love to the brethren, in this communion of Saints: we have
assurance, that we are passed from death to life.

(...).
So indeed does the Apostle John, most comfortably affirm, 1. Epist. 3.14. We
know (says he) that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren. For there is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear.
chap. 4.18. And Colos. chapter 3.14. Love is the bond of perfectness.

The comfort which is to be found in the communion of Saints, is aptly
expressed, by sundry similitudes. For as many sticks make the warmer fire:
many flowers put together, make the sweeter smell: the compound water is more
delightful, then that which is simple, etc: so albeit every true Christian
apart, is acceptable to God, and has his measure of comfort, being alone by
himself: yet, when many join together in holy society; they are both more
pleasing to God, and also more joyful among themselves, in their mutual
exercises of religion, and in the practice of love one toward another. And this
is that which moved the Prophet David, so greatly to bewail his exile from
the Church of GOD; and so earnestly to desire, that he might be restored
again, to the exercises of Gods public worship; among the rest of Gods
people. Psalm. 42. and 84.

And note we also, that the comfort of faith, concerning the communion of
Saints; does extend it self, even to those Saints, which are departed this
life: insomuch as, seeing we believe as they did, we shall go to them, and be
where they are. That is to say, we shall rest in eternal happiness with them:
even with Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, etc: and likewise, with all our own right
dear christian friends and acquaintance, departed this life in the faith. And
thus it ministers unto us, a notable comfort against the fear of death: and
against all excessive lothnesse and unwillingness, to leave our friends that
are living: though their familiarity for the present is very sweet and
precious unto us. For the condition and estate of the faithful departed, is
far more happy, and more to be desired, then our present estate and condition
is.

Whereupon also it follows; that we ought to prepare our hearts, (when we
shall once have finished our course) to be desirous, and greatly longing, after
our more near communion with the excellent servants of God, whose faith is so
highly commended in the word of God: and with those, whose excellent virtues,
we have observed here in this life; who are now in the heavens with the Lord.
But this belongs to the Duties: of the which more by and by.

Neither is it to be neglected; that the communion of Saints, yields no small
comfort to the faithful, in their sufferings: seeing (as was observed before)
even therein also, consists part of it; so that no other thing befalls any,
but they have some other of the brethren, companions with them in it. The which
also, God turns in singular manner, to their mutual comfort: as 2. Cor. chapter
1. ve. 3, 4.5, 6, 7. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of mercies, and the God of all comort: Who comfort us in all our
tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any affliction,
by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. For as the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation abounds through Christ.
And whether we be afflicted it is for your consolation and salvation, which is
wrought in the enduring of the same sufferings, which we also suffer: or
whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation. And our hope
is steadfast concerning you* in as much as we know that as ye are partakers of
the sufferings, so (shall ye be) also of the consolation. Read likewise Ephesians.
3.13. Philip. 1.7. and chap. 3.17.18. Heb. 10.32.33.34.35. and 1. Pet. 5.8
9.10. Finally, 1. John. 3.16. Thus comfortable is our fellowship in sufferings.
Yea, and so much the rather, because as we suffer for Christ: so also he takes
himself to suffer with us after a sort. As Act. 9.4 Romans 8.17. Philip. 3.10.
Colos. 1.24.

To conclude the Comforts, and therewithal to make some passage to the duties.
Insomuch as they are so great, both in life and death, as has been declared:
O how great is their sin; whosoever without just cause, maliciously, or
profanely for filthy lucres sake; abuse the most grave censure of
excommunication, after the manner of the wicked Pharisees, John, chapter 9. verses,
22.35. and chap. 16.2. to the cutting off of any, from this holy communion, as
touching the outward society of it! For as touching that communion, which the
faithful have before God, no creature can bereave them of it.

Likewise, who can tell how grievous their sin is in the sight of God; who
shall hinder the course of the preaching of the Gospel, and of the
administration of the Sacraments, etc, from the hand and ministry of the
least of the faithful Ministers of the Gospel: whereby this communion of
Saints, is not only at the first begun; but also, is to be continually
cherished and confirmed? For assuredly, as the settled course of the ministry,
and worship commanded of God; is the means of settling, confirming, and
increasing of faith, and all grace, whereby the people of God enjoy their
blessed communion in Christ Jesus among themselves (according to the doctrine
of the 133. Psalm. Behold how good, and how delightful a thing it is, for
brethren also to dwell together, etc. For there the Lord has appointed
blessing and life for ever): so on the contrary; the dissoluing of the
ministry; is the decay of the people: according to the holy Proverb, cha.
29.18. Where there is no vision, (that is, no prophecy or preaching) there the
people decay.

And therefore (as was said) who can tell how grievous their sin is, who
hinder the preaching of the Gospel: and other the exercises of Gods holy
service and worship?

Wherefore also, let us, so much the more pretiously esteem the wonderful
goodness and mercy of God, in giving us the holy Ministry of his word, and
exercises of his divine worship, for the gathering together of his Saints unto
him, and to make known unto them, the certainty of his most sweet and
comfortable love toward them in Christ Jesus: and consequently, the certainty
of their most blessed and ioifull salvation by him. For verily, without this
ministry; howsoever it may be, that some for a time being destitute of it,
are nevertheless in the counsel of God appointed to salvation: yet until
they shall have the knowledge of it, and faith to believe it; how can they have
any more comfort in it, then a condemned person can have in the pardon which
his friend has obtained for him, at the Kings hands, until he shall be
certified of it? For unto that time, he is still in continual expectation and
fear of death.

THus much, concerning the Comforts of the communion of Saints. And
therewithal (as was said, for an entrance into the consideration of the
Duties) an intimation, how dear and precious the means of cherishing and
upholding the same holy communion ought to be unto us.

Some other duties, were by occasion touched in the interpreation of the
Article.

Now let us proceed to inquire into the Duties more purposedly. Which may they
be?

In that we have our communion with our Savior Christ, who is the fountain of
holiness: it teaches us, that it is our duty to withdraw our selves more and
more, The Duties.
from all prophanenes; and to labor to increase daily in sanctification and
holiness, both in our bodies, souls, and Spirits; and in all good fruits and
actions thereof; to the glory of God, and of our Savior Christ.

It teaches us thus much in deed. For otherwise, there could be no agreement,
or proportion at all, betwixt the head and the members: which were a monstrous
thing. ^^^licatio^ (...) ^roofe.


And therefore, as touching the first part of your answer: to wit, that it is
our duty, to withdraw our selves from all prophanenes, and vnholines: the
Apostle Paul says with great earnestnes, 1. Cor. 6.15. Know ye not that your
bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ, and
make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Do ye not know, that he which
coupleth himself with an harlot is one body? for two, says he, shall be one
flesh. But he that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit. Fly fornication, etc.
Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost, which is in you,
whom ye have of God? and ye are not your own. For ye are bought for a price:
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your Spirit: for they are Gods. And
2. Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, let him be a new creature.

And according to the other part of your answer, which was concerning labor
after increase of sanctification: our Savior himself says, John, 15.1. I am
the true vine, and my Father is the husband man. Every branch that bears not
fruit in me, he takes away: and every one that bears fruit; he purges
it, that it may bring forth more fruit. And verse. 5. I am the vine, ye are
the branches: he that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth
much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. And verse, 8. Herein is my
Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, and be made my Disciples. And this
is that which the Apostle prays for, in the behalf of the Thessalonians:
even a prier necessary for all Christians; that we may be sanctified
throughout: and that our whole Spirit, and soul and body may be kept
blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Ep. chapter 5. verse. 23.

Such is our duty, in regard of our holy communion with our Savior himself.

Now in that, through the same our Savior, we have our holy communion among
our selves.

^uestion.
What ought our duty to be in respect of this?

^nswer.
Every member of the Church of our Savior Christ stands bound, even for our
Saviors sake, heartily to desire; and in all loving and peaceable manner, to
procure by all means, according to every man's grace and power: the benefit and
blessing of every fellow member: yea, even of the whole body.

It is likewise the duty of every one, as I heard you say somewhat more
particularly a little before; carefully to use, and frequent, all those holy
means which God has sanctified, for the nourishing of this holy communion: to
wit, the preaching of the word, Prayer, the Sacraments, and whatsoever may
further us, unto the more profitable use of the^, according to the direction of
the holy word of God.

^xplication and proof.
Out of all question, either sort of these duties, do belong hereunto.

And first, as touching the former sort, it is evident that they do so, even
from that similitude of the body, which S. Paul has used; as may well be
observed from the near knitting of the members in the natural body: and from
their mutual tenderness each to other, answerable to the same their near
connection; and according to that sweet law which God has set in nature. For
seeing (as has been declared already) all Christians are most nearely linked
together in Christ Jesus; even by the bond of that Spirit of his, which is the
worker of all good and holy conjunction: and likewise, seeing that spiritual
head; to wit, our Lord Jesus Christ, from the which, every member of his body
receives life, is more lively and mighty in operation by infinite degrees;
then is the natural head of the natural body: therefore ought all Christians
to be most hearty, tender, and faithful, in their mutual love, to the
cherishing and hearting on of one another, in the way to the kingdom of
heaven. And for the very same cause, does our Apostle S. Paul, in the 13. chap.
immediately after this doctrine of our most near conjunction with our Savior
Christ contained in our text: treat of Christian love, as being in respet of
some fifteen or sixteen properties, which he there rehearses; the way of
all perfection. And as else where, he terms it, the bond of perfection; and
that which we ought to grow up and increase in continually: Colos. 3.14. and
Ephesians. 4 15. As touching the Apostles own example and practice, what it was:
we have seen before. Romans 1.11.12.1. Cor. 9.19. etc. Read also. 2. Ep.
11.28.29.

Now to the performance of this; every one according to that which has
likewise been set down before: is to have due regard what member he for his
part is in the body; whether an eye to foresee, or an ear to hearken after
things as a good intelligencer concerning the affairs of the Church, or a hand
to help the poor, or a foot to be commanded and employed about any meaner
service, etc. And accordingly, every one is to do the proper office of such or
such a member as he is. To the which end and purpose; here call again to mind,
Romans chapter 12. verses, 3.4.^. etc. And Ephesians. chapter 4. verses, 4.11.12.13.14.15.16.
and verse, 25, Read also Job, chapter 25.15. where we may see, how he for his part
was an eye to the blind, etc. And 1. John. 1.6.7. If we say we have fellowship
with God (says the Apostle) and walk in darkness, we lie and do not truly.
But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one
with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all
sin.

It ought to be in the Church of our Savior Christ, in regard of spiritual
graces, as it was in the gathering of Manna. All brought that which they
gathered to one heap, and all had their meet portion from the same heap
again: and so there was found sufficien^ for every man. So it ought also to be
in the communicating of bodily relief and succor: according to the excellent
doctrine of the Apostle Paul in that behalf. 2. Cor 8.13.14.15.

And hereof, we have the Church of Corinth, and other of the primitive
Churches, notable examples, for the best ordered, and most charitable
communion. Act. 4.32. etc. As the Sea fills all rivers, and all rivers run
again into the Sea: so should it be among the people of God. Every one ought
to love and tender all, and all again every one: the Minister, the people: and
the people their Ministers, etc. 1, These. 2.7.8.11.19.20. and cha.
5.12.13.14.15. Heb. 13. verses, 17.18. Philip. 2.1 2.3.4.

The love of the Saints, one toward another, and toward the whole Church, it
must be a holy love: that is, a more excellent love, their that which is
natural or civil and Philosophical: insomuch, as the corporation, whereof we
are memebers in the Church, is not a natural or civil body, but a sacred and
holy body as we have seen before.

For the precepts of which love: read Romans 12.9.10. etc. Gal. 6.1.2. Heb.
13.1.2.3. 1. Pet. 1.23. whereof we have David for one notable example. Psalm.
16.3. All my delight (says he) is in the Saints, etc.

Hitherto of the first sort of the duties, more generally considered.

Now touching the second sort, more particularly mentioned, in the second part
of the answer. First, for the preaching of the Gospel, that it is to be used as
a means to bring us, and to settle us, in this holy communion: read, 1. Ioh.
1.3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye may
have also fellowship with us, and that our fellowship also may be with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. In which respect also it is, that the
Apostle Paul does heartily praise God, for that fellowship which the
Philippians had in the Gospel, by the preaching thereof* as we read, chap. 1.
verses, 3. and 5. of that Epistle which he wrote unto them,

That the holy Sacraments are to be used to the same end: remember what the
Apostle Paul has written in our text. By one Spirit (says he) we are baptized
into one body, etc. And likewise in the same place, We are caused to drink
into one Sp rit. Let us consider also his earnest assertion in the same
Epistle, chap. 10.16.17. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion (that is a true sign and pledge of the communion) of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion (that is a true
sign, etc. as before) of the body of Christ. That is to say, Have not we that
truly believe in our Savior Christ, and who do by a true faith eat the
bread, and drink the wine of the Sacrament: have we not, I say, our very true
communion with the body and blood, though in a spiritual manner; yea, with the
whole humane nature; yea, and thereby even with whole Christ both God and man?
As though the Apostle should earnestly affirm, that we have our communion with
him assuredly. And as we have it with our Savior. so also we have it by him,
as certainly among our selves: as it follows in the words of the Apostle,
saying. For we that are many are one bread, and one body, because we are all
partakers of one bread. And all through one and the same Spirit, working in us
all. Call also to mind here again, Act. 2.42. etc. and chapter 4.32. and Ephesians.
4.3.4.5.6.

And for Prayer, read in the same Epistle to the Ephesians, cha. 6.18. Pray
always with all manner of Prayer, and supplication in the Spirit: and watch
thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints. And 2. Cor.
1.11. And Philip. 1.19. For I know (says the Apostle) that this shall turn to
my salvation through your prayer, and by the help of the Spirit of Jesus
Christ. And in the Epistle of Jude, verses, 20.21. etc Ye believed, edify your
selves in your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost, etc. And have
compassion of some in putting difference: and other save with fear pulling
them out of the fire.

Other means, serving for the furtherance of these holy ordinances of God; and
thereby of the communion of Saints: are more privately, loving instruction,
admonition, and exhortation, used of each Christian to other: according to that
instruction of the Apostle. Ephesians. 5.19.20.21. Speaking unto your selves in
Psalms* etc. Submitting your selves one to another in the fear of God. And
Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily while it is called to day, lest any of you
be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin. For we are made partakers of
Christ, if we keep sure unto the end, the beginning wherewith we are vpholden.

All this shows more fully, according to that which was touched a little
before; that we ought to make a most precious account, of the communion of
Saints: and to be very careful, every one for his part, and according to his
place and calling; to make a religious practice of the same.

^^^stion.
But who are to be accounted those Saints, which this Article speaks of?

^^^wer.
Every Christian, whosoever rightly believes, and dutifully obeieth the Gospel
of our Savior Christ, he is a Saint: even so many as are cleansed and
sanctified by the blood of Christ.

^^^lication (...) proof.
So indeed do the holy Scriptures speak, and so does God himself dispose of
this title: as it is evidently to be seen. 1. Cor. chapter 1. verse, 2. and chap.
14.33. And Ephesians. 5.3, Act. 9.41. And in many other places.

Let all profane persons take heed therefore, how they reproach this holy name
by their irreligious and devilish taunts; such as this is, A young Saint, an
old Devil, etc. Which kind of speech no doubt, the Devil himself, an
Arch-enemie of all true holiness, has set on foot, or rather on wheels, to
run without fear, on the tongues of his hellish Scholars. Whereas in truth,
we may say, more justly, A young Devil: that is, such a one as is diuelishly
minded in his youth, will prove an habitation for many devils, before he come
to be of any great years.

We must be Saints; yea, we must endeavor to be so even in our youth: or else
surely, we shall with greater difficulty, break out of the snare of the
Devil, and change our wicked disposition and manners, when we shall be old,
and so the more deeply saped in our sins: according to that notable
admonition of the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 13, 23. Can the black More change his
skirne, The danger of not believing Article.
etc^

NOw therefore to conclude this Article.

Ques. What is the danger of not believing it, and of not regarding to live as
a Saint even here upon earth, in care of leading a holy life in the Communion
of Saints?

All such as do not believe, love, and live as Saints, in the holy fellowship
and Communion of the faihfull people and church of God here, or at the least,
do not earnestly repent them while they live: they shall surely dye like
infidels, and profane persons (as they are,) and have their portion with the
devils in Hell torment, although they have bin borne and brought up in the
Church, and though they have made an external profession of the christian
faith.

The proof of this, has in effect been set down in this former Article. For
the danger, Explication and proof.
both here and also there, is all one. Let us not forsake our fellowship as the
manner of some is, says the holy Apostle to the Heb: chap: 10.25. The which
forsaking, he afterward calls, a withdrawing to perdition, in the last verse
of that chapter.

To the end, this heavy danger may be avoided; diverse heretical opinions,
and practices: and all licentious profanenes, are religiously and necessarily
to be shunned of us.

First, touching Communion; we must take heed of that false interpretation
which some give of it: and therewithal, that we do neither extend it too
far, neither yet contract it more then is meet.

The false interpretation which I speak of, is of them, which would have our
Communion with our Savior Christ, to be in a carnal or bodily manner: whether
they be Papists or any other.

The extent, arising also from false interpretation, is in the excess; the
opinion of the Anabaptists, who extend it to Community of goods: not only in
respect of use by charitable dispensation; but also in respect of possession
and civil right, to the overthrow of all property in them. And herewithall,
there want not some, who like the Nicolaitans of former times; would under this
color, bring in most shameful co^munitie of wives, among them of the own sect.
On the other side, the co^traction or defect is of those (whether Papists or
Familists, (...), or any other) who as much as lies in them, do exclude or
excommunicate any that do truly believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, from this
holy Communion. All such (I mean all such even of the best) whosoever do it
either of proud conceit in themselves: or otherwise presume to attempt it,
without just warrant and ground: they err in the defect of this Communion, in
that they exclude any that do of right belong unto it. Yea and (to speak of the
worst especially) they err in excess also; in that they enrole themselves as
the only Communicants, who in truth have no part at al in this holy Communion:
according to the saying of Peter to Simon Magus, Act: 8.21. Thou have neither
part, nor fellowship in this business: for thine heart is not right in the sight
of God.

Thus therefore in the first place, all heretical opinions, and practices,
touching Communion, are to be avoided of all such as desire unfeignedly to have
their part in it.

Secondly, touching the word Saints, diverse errors are likewise, necessarily
to be avoided, both on the right hand, and also on the left.

On the right hand; the opinion of all those, who imagine that there may be an
inherent perfection of holiness, in all that be true members of the Church, even
here in this life: as the Donatists, Nouatians (...) and Familists. And
likewise the Papists who restrain the name Saints, either to the departed out
of this life more generally, or else to such as the Pope canonizeth to be such,
in a more special manner. On the left hand; the opinion of the Libertines is
necessarily to be avoided, who make it their holiness, to do what they list: so
long as they retain a strong, that is to say, a devilish and presumptuous
conceit, that they are good Christians.

And this is indeed, the very perfection of all proud heretics, and Atheists:
that they imagine whatsoever they do, it is no sin in them. For they do
grow in the end, to have hard seared consciences, as the Apostle writes. 1.
Tim: 4, 1, 2, 3.

But the truth is; that albeit, like as the wooden leg fastened to a man's
thigh is no true member of the body: how like soever it be made to a man's
leg; and how feately soever it be fastened unto it: so neither is the
hipocriticall Christian, a true member of Jesus Christ, what great and apparent
show soever he makes.

Yet a true Christian, may for a season, be like a natural arm, or leg,
taken with the palsy: and by reason thereof, not able to do his kindly
office, till it be recovered again. He may be also, like to a man going a long
journey, out of the which he may now and then easily straie: till he be set
into the way again, by some skillful directour, who knows that part of the
way better then he. Yea doubtless, even he that is the most expert Christian,
may and does sometimes loose his way: according to the saying of the Apostle
James, In many things we sin all. Neither is it in vain, that like as our
Savior teaches all; yea even the best of all, to pray continually for the
forgiveness of sins: so in these Articles of our Belief, next this of the
Communion of Saints, follows that other of forgiveness of sins. So that it
may truly be said, and believed; that all Saints here on earth, do stand in
continual need of this most gracious privilege, whereof he has made this
blessed grant to his Church.

We are therefore diligently to take heed, that we do not misunderstand this
word Saints; no more then that other of Communion: as was observed in the
former place.

Now last of all (as was said) all they that would be safe from the danger,
which follows upon the not believing of this Article, must diligently beware
of all licentious profanenes: and that they have no fellowship with those, that
set themselves to hinder, as much as they can, all holy Communion, and
fellowship of Gods people. Of the which notwithstanding, there be some, that
glory to their shame, when they have brought any faithful minister of the
Gospel into disgrace, and so something alienated the affection of the people
from his ministry as they think. But alas, it is the most pitiful, and
base: yea the most woeful glory that may be. It is the easiest masterie in the
world, to discourage many weak and vnsetteled Christians, from going on
forward, in the ways of godliness. Well were it, that all such boasters would
consider duly, what befell Korah, Dathan, and Abiram in their like wicked
enterprise against Moses. Numb: 16. For doubtless, that fearful judgment of
God, may justly serve to admonish all men, to take heed not only how they
rise up against superior governors: but also, how they resist the least of
those, to whom God has given any rectorie, or authority, to govern in his
name.

Wherefore instead of this, let ouery one that loves the Communion of Saints,
and desires to have his part and portion therein: carefully and religiously
dispose of himself, that he walk very charily, lest by any means, he
should give any the least offense, to those that be weak. For surely we walk
as it were among brittle glasses: which if they be not very tenderly handled,
are easily broken. Yea the strongest of us, are our selves but frail vessels:
and if we take not good heed, may easily rush against the rock, to our own
great hurt if not to our utter destruction. Not only evil practices, with
purpose to hinder; but also all loosenes in example; and all unkind neglect of
mutual furthering every Christian his brother; is very prejudicial to the
Communion of Saints: and therefore on all hands, are they all to be carefully
shunned and avoided of us.

Thus much concerning the Article of the Communion of Saints.

Belief that to every true member of the Church of God, belongs forgiveness
of sins. The ground of the Article.

Question. Answer.
NOw what follows next, in the Articles of our Belief? I believe the
forgiveness of sins.

Explication
So indeed is the word of belief (yea even with particular application) to be
repeated here; as in the other Articles before: and as it ^s after this, to be
repeated, or at the least to be understood again.

And we are further also, here to understand thus much; that we having seen in
the two former Articles; first, that God has a Church: and secondly, what
manner of Church it is; and what is the estate and condition of it more
generally. We are now henceforth, to consider of certain particular
privileges, and prerogatives, whereby God has advanced his Church, and
company of Saints: above all other corporations, companies, or societies, in
all the world.

The number of these prerogatives, expressed in the Creed is small: but the
excellency of them is exceeding great; yea even above all estimation and price.

The first of them; to wit, forgiveness of sins: concerns more immediately
the chief comfort, and blessedness, of the faithful here in this present life.
The other two: that is to say, the resurrection of the body, and everlasting
life; to wit, both of body and soul together, after the resurrection: these
do belong to their glorious happiness, or blessing, in the kingdom of heaven.

Something has upon necessary occasion, been spoken of every of them. For
the forgiveness of sins, is a fruit of the death of our Savior Christ: as we
could not but then observe. And the resurrection of the body, as also
everlasting life: they are likewise fruits, both of the same his death, and
also of his resurrection, etc.

Nevertheless, we are to good purpose, (following the order of the Articles) to
speak more fully of the same things again. And that also, according to the
same order, which we have observed in all the other Articles, so near as we can.

As touching the first of the three, therefore.

forgiveness of sins?

In the 34. chap. of Exodus, verses 6, and, 7. We have one notable ground and
warrant of it.

Explication.
We have so indeed. For there the Lord proclaims himself, to be a most
gracious and merciful God, readily inclined to forgive sins.



Thus he speaks, The Lord the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious slow to
anger, and abundant in goodness and truth.

7. Reserving m^rcy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and
sin.

Explication
Here is a most gracious description of the divine nature, and disposition of
God; and that even by God himself, who knows himself best, and will most
faithfully, approve himself to be such a one, as he has proclaimed himself
to be: that is, a most gracious and merciful God, to all those that will seek
mercy at his hands. And therefore it is, that albeit he is just, yea most
perfitly just; that is to say, most pure and zealous in justice, even as a
burning fire, to devour all impenitent and obstinate sinners: yet he would have
us well to know, that there is also with him, perfect mercy: that is, most
tender and abundant pity, and compassion; for all those that will by mercy,
be moved to repent them unfeignedly of their sins.

For to this end; even immediately after the titles, which note his eternity
and power, Belief that to every true m mber of the Church of God belongs
forgiveness of sins.
in that he calls himself the Lord Jehovah, and the mighty God: he
rehearses his mercy in the next place; and that also with an excellent
amplification of the greatness and largenes, of the faithfulness, and constancy
of the same, before he speaks one word of his fearful justice.

And all this; to the encouragement of all poor sinners: whose guilty
consciences, must otherwise, of necessity terrify them, from his presence.
For the only ground and warrant of the forgiveness of sins, is the mercy of
God; and that even of his mere goodness, and grace: as we read, Isai: 43.25. I,
even I am he that puts away thine iniquities, for mine own sake: and I will
not remember thy sins, says the Lord.

The occasion of this, the Lord his proclaiming of himself; is worthy to be
observed: as we may read it recorded in the last part of the 33. chapter. For
Moses being ordained of God, to be a guide, and governor to the people of
Israel; he does in great wisdom desire the Lord to make it known, what his
nature and disposition is: to the end both he, and all the people, might the
better know, after what manner they ought to behave themselves, in all their
conversation before him. And Moses does the rather desire this of God now,
though he had before made himself known, by his publishing of his law:
because the Tables thereof, were at this time broken in pieces. This may plainly
teach us this lesson, that none can truly serve God, but they only, who truly
know, and duly consider, what manner of one the Lord our God is.

Now unto this notable place, out of Exodus: I will add one or two more, for
our further confirmation: and then we will proceed.

One of the places which I will allege, is written, Isai: chap: 43. verse 25.
where it is evident, that the Lord does by his holy Prophet, assure his people
of his gracious pardon, if happily they would turn unto him. Yea the Lord does
so, notwithstanding they had made him serve with their sins, and wearied him
with their iniquities, etc. Read also, chap: 48 8 9.10.11. I know (says the
Lord) that thou would transgress grievously: therefore have I called thee a
transgressour from the womb. For my names sake I will defer my wrath, and
for my praise will I refrain it from thee, that I cut thee not off. Behold, I
have fined thee, but not as silver: I have chosen thee in the furnace of
affliction. For mine own sake, for mine own sake I will do it: for how should
my name be polluted? Surely, I will not give my glory to another. What name?
and what glory is this that the Lord speaks of? No doubt, but it is that
name, and that glory, which he proclaimed at the entreaty of his faithful
servant Moses: as we saw before.

The practice and exercise of this mercy of God toward his people, is evident
in the book of the Judges: and Ps. 78. yea though they did very often provoke
God to have utterly cast them off. Read also, Ezekiel: ch: 16. in the end of the
chapter.

Behold it also in the prophecy of Jonah, even toward such as were strangers
from the common wealth of Israel: and therefore were not unto that time, of the
visible Church of God. Read the last cha: of the prophecy. Read alo Ps. 103.
It is a notable Scripture to this excellent purpose, both in the hypothesis, or
particular instance of David himself, verses, 1, 2.3.4.5. and also in the
thesis or general, concerning all that fear God, verses, 6.7.8. etc. even to
the end. Likewise. Ps. 130. I have waited on the Lord, etc. And again in the
same Psalm: Let Israel wait on the Lord: for with the Lord is mercy, and with
him is great redemption. And he will redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
The practice of which waiting, See Psalm: 123.

Wherefore, seeing God is so gracious and merciful, justly may we, in this
respect, cry out and wonder with the holy Prophet Micah, according to the three
last verses of his Prophecy, in these words: Who is a God like unto thee, who
takes away iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his
heritage, etc?

NOw that we may proceed, as we promised. The meaning of the Article.


Ques. What is the meaning of this Article, I do believe the forgiveness of
sins.

Ans. This Article teaches me and every Christian, to beleeu, that it is the
good will of God our heavenly Father, through the death and precious bloodshed
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to forgive; that is, as a most merciful Creditor, to
remit both the whole debt, and also the forfeiture of all our sins, whether
original or actual, as well in committing of evil as in omitting of good,
whether in thought, word, or deed: so that they shall never be laid to our
charge, no more then if we had never committed them. Yea, and herewithall, it
is the good will and pleasure of God, to impute the perfect righteousness, and
obedience of our Savior unto us: even as if we had performed all righteousness
our selves, so soon as we repent, and believe the Gospel. Whereof, the holy
Ghost is a most comfortable witness in the hearts of all his children.

Explication and proof.
So it is indeed. For our sins, being by the holy Ghost, according to the
Syrian phrase, compared to debts: the forgiveness of them, is as the remitting
of a debt, which we of our selves could never be able to pay: as has been
more fully declared, in the proof of the resurrection of our Savior by his
fifth appearance, after that he was risen again. And for the further proof of
the good will and pleasure of God herein, read Rom: 3.24.25. Ephesians. 1, 7.
Colos. 1, 14. and chap: 2.13. 1. John, 1.7. and ch: 2, verses, 1, 2. Read also,
Isai: 38.17. It was thy pleasure (says the godly King Hezekiah) to deliver my
soul, etc. and to cast all my sins behind thy back. And chap: 44.22. I have
put away thy transgressions like a cloud, and thy sins as a mist, says the
Lord to his people Israel. And Ps. 32. 5. Thou forgauest the punishment of my
sin, says King David. Call again to mind the 103. Psalm: And Micah 7.19.
God casts the sins of his people into the bottom of the Sea. Finally, he
is ready for his mercies sake, to forgive sins, answerable to the sum of
ten thousand talents. Matthew: 18.23.24. etc. 35. Read also, Luke, chap: 7.
verses 40, 41. etc.

FRom the meaning of the Article, let us come to the Promise. The Promise




We have many very gracious, and often renewed promises hereof, both old and
new, every where dispersed in the holy Scriptures of God.



Beside that which you rehearsed, Isai: 48. verses 8.9.10.11. You have pointed
us to another notable testimony, in the 31. chap: of Jeremy from the 30.
verse to the 35. of the same.

And chap: 33, the.8. verse.

And in the new Testament; the same promise is alleged, to belong (through
our Savior Christ:) to the believing Gentiles, as well as to the believing
Jews.

Explication
It is true, as we may read, Act: 2, 38, 39. And ch: 10.43. Rehearse the words
of some of the places which you have named.



In the 31. cha: of Jeremy, verses, 31. thus it is written: Behold, the days
come (says the Lord) that I will make a new covenant, etc. For I will forgive
their iniquity, and remember their sins no more.

And chap: 33.8. I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they
have sinned against me: yea, I will pardon all their iniquities, whereby they
have sinned against me. And it shall be to me a name, and an honor before all
the nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good that I do unto them,
etc.

Explication.
Let this suffice, out of the Prophet Jeremy, for this time. We may read the
like testimonies in other of the Prophets, beside those which have been
hitherto alleged. As Isai: 33.24. The people that dwell therein, shall have
their iniquity forgiven. Read also, Ezekiel: chap: 18. verse. 21. etc. 32.

All these promises of forgiveness of sins, do belong unto us Gentiles, The
Comforts.
now through our Savior Christ, as well as they did before to the Jews.

THe Promise being thus confirmed: the use of this Article is next. And first
for Comfort.



The comfort is every way very great; insomuch as the glory and happiness both
of our bodies and souls, in this life, and also in the life to come,
consists herein.

It is very true: as we read, Psalm: 32. in the beginning of the Psalm. And
Rom: 4.6.7.8. Explication and proof.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord imputes not sin. So that forgiveness of
sins, is (as one may say) an epitome or short sum of all the mercies of
God. Whence it is; that the Lord is said, Psalm. 103. (as was before alleged)
to crown us with his mercies and compassion. Verily, there is no goodness, or
dignity in our selves; whereof we may rejoice: or for the which, we may look
to be accepted with God. The mercy of our God is our only crown: the glory
of Gods free grace, is our only glory, etc.

No doubt, the comfort of this Article is singular, to all those that know
what Sin means. And it will the rather warm and cheer up our hearts: if
we shall consider, that beside our former sins, infinite and heinous in the
sight of Gods justice; we remain still very apt and prone to offend God, even
after that we are by his grace regenerated, and borne again. Yea if we shall
consider that we daily offend his divine Majesty, not only by forgetfulness
and neglect of many good duties; but also by rash and unwary committing of
much evil: according to that saying of Saint James, In maine things we sin
all.

Furthermore, the Comfort hereof, will be the more manifest to our consciences,
if we consider earnestly of the nature of sin: not only, how odious it is in
itself; but also how vile and abominable it makes our persons, both bodies
and souls, in the sight of God: how it keeps all good things from us; and
pulls down upon us all evil, Ier: 5.25. Isai: 59, 1, 2, 3. till it be
covered and forgiven in our Savior Christ.

But most clearly of all, will the comfort of this Article shine into our
hearts, if we shall duly look into the cause, and fountain, of the forgiveness
of all our sins: which would have pressed us down to the very bottom of the
gulf of Hell: to wit, the most free and amiable grace and favor of God our
heavenly Father, through his most blessed Son our Lord Jesus Christ, which is
better then our life; though naturally that is most precious unto us. According
to the 3, verse of the 63, Ps. Thy loving kindness is better then life. And Ps.
30, 5.

This makes our Baptism, exceedingly comfortable unto us: insomuch as the
whole blessed Trinity co^senteth, to make it a testimony of the forgiveness of
our sins, through the same most free grace, and rich favor, of our one only
true God. Mark. 1, 4. Act. 2, 38. and chap: 22.16. It makes the Supper of the
Lord in like manner, exceeding comfortable unto us; in that it is a further
pledge, and assurance, that our sins are forgiven, through the blood of our
Savior Christ, Mat: chap: 26. verses 26, 27, 28.

The largenes of this free grace of God, to the forgiveness of sins, through
our Lord Jesus Christ reaching up as it were to the heavens, Ps. 36. verses, 5.
and 7, and Ps. 103, 11, it enlarges the comfort of this most excellent
blessing: seeing God shows us plainly that he has abundance of mercy in
store; not only for the forgiveness of some few persons here and there; but
even for the forgiveness of his whole Church: that is, of so many thousands, yea
myriads of thousands of all sorts of people, as shall seek for mercy at his
hands, as was touched before. Yea, and not only for sinners of smaller degrees
in offenses; but also for the greatest sort of sinners above other: whosoever
among them, shall earnestly repent them, and truly believe the Gospel of our
Savior Christ, according to that most liberal, The Duties.
and sweet consolatorie encouragement of the Lord, by his holy Prophet Isaiah,
chap: 1.18. Come now, and let us reason together (says the Lord) though your
sins were as crimsin, they shall be made white as snow: though they be red
as skarlet; they shall be as woole. If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the
good things of the land. And chap: 40.1.2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people,
will your God say* Speak comfortably to Jerusalem and cry unto her, that her
warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she has received
of the Lords hand, double for all her sins.

Finally, the bowell-like tenderness of Gods mercy, is not the least cause of
the great comfort of this Article; as we may consider from these and such like
testimonies of holy Scripture: Psalm: 25, 6.7. and 79.8. Ier: 31.20. Lament:
3.22.23, Hos. 11.8.9. Joel: 2.13. Luke 1.7.8. and ch: 15, 20.

O how sweet therefore, ought this mercy of God to be unto us, in all these
respects! And the rather also, because the covenant of this forgiveness of
sins, is an everlasting covenant, Ier: 32, 40, 41. Which he has confirmed by
oath, and sealed with the blood of his Son; the which is therefore called the
blood of the everlasting covenant, Heb, 9.22.26. and ch: 13, verse 20. Of the
which blood it is further said in this respect; that it speaks better things
then the blood of Abel, which cried for vengeance against Caine, ch: 12.24.
Gen: 4, 10.

Thus we see, touching the first part of the use of this Article, that the
comfort of it, is exceeding great, to all true believers: even to so many as
have grace, to lay hold of this great mercy of God, to the assuring of
themselves of the forgiveness of their sins.

NOw let us come to the second part of the use of it, which concerns the
obedience of faith.

forgiveness of sins, challenges at the hands of all those to whom they are
forgiven? They are these which follow.

First, an humble acknowledgement of our selves to be grievous sinners, joined
with godly sorrow for them: and earnest prayer, for the forgiveness of them
all.

Secondly, most earnest and hearty thankefulnes to God, for his so infinite
and unspeakable mercy, as shows it self most clearly, in the forgiveness of
our most heinous and infinite sins.

Thirdly, exceeding love toward the Lord God our heavenly Father, according to
the greatness of his mercy: by how many the more, and the greater sins, he
does forgive us.

Fourthly, a reverend care, not to offend him any more, as heretofore we have
done: yea rather, a most earnest study, and desire, to please him better in
all things then yet we have done.

Fifthly, a ready and tender affection of mercifulnes, to forgive one another:
even as God our heavenly Father, in, and for our Saviors sake, has forgiven
us.

Finally, earnest resistance of all fears and doubts, touching Gods
faithfulness in forgiving the sins of our selves, or of any other that do
walk in these duties.

Explication and proof.
Concerning the first branch of this answer, to wit our acknowledging of our
selves to be grievous sinners: that it ought to be so; the truth of the
assertion it self that we are so; may be a sufficient warrant unto us. For the
proof of which assertion, that we are grievous sinners: read, 1. Kings 8, 46.
Eccl 7.22. There is no man that sins not. No not the regenerate, as their
own co^fessio^s plainly show: Paul, Rom: 7.14. etc. James ch: 3, 2. John, 1.
Ep: ch: 1.8.9.10. Read also, Psalm: 19.12. and 130.3. Proverbs ch: 20.9.

And though there are degrees of sinners; as well as of sins: yet every one for
his own part, ought to account himself among the chief, as Paul did. 1. Tim:
1. and Daniel ch: 9.

Yea, and though it were so, that a man did not know any thing of special
offense, by himself: yet seeing our Savior. who knows us all, better then
we do our selves; teaches us all to pray for forgiveness: it ought to be a
sufficient proof unto us, that we are great sinners, and that we do stand in
great need of forgiveness.

Neither is it in vain (as was touched before) that this Article of the
forgiveness of sins, is lincked with that other of the communion of Saints:
insomuch as not only in most holy things; but also in our most holy assembling
of our selves, and accompanying together, we do many ways offend. And that
not at our own Tables alone (which made holy Job to fear his children so much
as he did; and to be so careful as he was, to sanctify them by holy
exercises of religion, while they feasted one another: lest they should forget
themselves, and speak any thing to the dishonor of the name of God, cha: 1,
5,) but also even in the Lords house, and at his most holy Table. Which was the
cause, why God did appoint Aaron in the time of the law, to sacrifice for the
iniquity, even of the holy offerings of the children of Israel, Exodus: 28.38:
and why we are so earnestly admonished, to examine our selves when we come to
the Table of the Lord, etc. Wherefore let us always, and in all things, well
remember, that we are sinners; and that God could easily lay greater sins to
our charge, then we are ware of: and accordingly, let us without all
hypocrisy, acknowledge in his sight, that we are more grievous and miserable
sinners then we are privy unto. Let us, I say, do it without hypocrisy: for
else we should even herein, make our selves more abominable sinners, then in
any thing beside: Luke, 16, 15. Mat: 23. Neither could the Article of
forgiveness of sins be any Article of faith at all unto us, for our comfort;
unless we do acknowledge our selves to be sinners: and unless we see just
cause why we should be sorry for them; and pray earnestly always for the
forgiveness of them; according to the instruction of our Savior, Mat: 6, 12.
and according to the example and instruction of the Prophet David, Ps. 32, 5,
6. and Ps. 25, 7. and Ps. 51.

But here an objection may be made, how it may stand with faith, to pray still
for foriguenes of sins; seeing it is an Article of faith, to believe that
they are forgiven; at the least, those sins which have already been
committed; and for the forgiveness whereof, faithful prayer has been already
made.



First, this Article of the forgiveness of sins, presupposes true repentance,
to be in every one that has any true faith, to believe that his sins are
forgiven. Neither can it stand with any reason, that faith should disanull, or
any way prejudice prayer: which God has appointed to be the only subordinate
messenger and Spokes-man as it were of faith, for the entreaty of the
forgiveness of sins, through the mediation of our Savior Christ.

Secondly, no man does so firmly believe the forgiveness of former sins, by
former prayers: but by the renewing of his prayers for the forgiveness of the
same; he may be better assured, against all temptations of fears and
doubtings, that they are verily forgiven unto him.

Thirdly, faith by exercising of it self in prayer, to the further
strengthening of it self, touching the forgiveness of old sins: it does
therewithal, make it self, both more watchful against new sins, that they
be not wilfully committed; and also more comfortable in the assurance of the
forgiveness of those our sins of infirmity, and weakness, which we cease not
to commit day after day.

Finally, God does at once, and for ever after, forgive all the sins of true
believers: but yet upon this condition, that they continue in prayer for the
forgiveness of them; and for daily profiting in godly sorrow, and repentance for
the same, so long as they have a day, yea an hour to live in this sinful
world.

Explication and proof.
It is very true. For these are the continual, and (as we may say) essential
exercises, of a true and lively faith. And all that you have answered, stands
with uery good reason: to the end we may always keep our souls in true
humility, under the holy hand of God; and in greater watchfulnes against
sin; and in greater thankfulness to God; in the continual remembrance of his
most gracious mercy toward us herein.

And let us mark this, specially well; that we do not say, that we must
continually pray for forgiveness of sins past, as well as of sins present, as
though we were to be in continual doubt of the forgiveness of them: but to this
end that by the renewing of our prayers, we may grow more and more assured that
they are forgiven. Like as we do pray continually, that the kingdom of God
may come: that is, that it may more and more come; though we know, that God
does already in some measure, rule and reign in us, by his word, and holy
Spirit: and so in the first and third Petitions of the Lords Prayer.

But that we may make all things, as clear as we can, touching this point;
yet one thing more: and that is this. Insomuch as God of his most abundant
grace, forgiueth the sins of his children, most freely and perfitly for his
Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake; and so are we undoubtedly to believe: how
comes it then to pass, that the faithful do suffer afflictions all their
life long; and that they die at the last,

God neither sends death, nor any affliction at all, upon his children, as
punishments for any satisfaction touching the guiltines of sin; for the which
our Savior Christ has by his sufferings, and death, perfitly satisfied the
justice and wrath of God: but only of his fatherly goodness, he chastises them
to very gracious ends; and namely, to send them to Christ, and to further them
in the way of their salvation.

So it is in deed; 1. Book page 234. etc. to page 248. ^. 2. Book p^ges, 295.
2^^. And page 304.
as it has been more fully laid open in the doctrine of Gods Fatherly
Providence. Explication and proof.
For all the afflictions, or punishments for sin (call them what ye will)
which God lays upon his children, to whom he forgiueth sins: they are
appointed, and sanctified of God, to further their repentance; to exercise
their faith, and patience; to nourish the reverend fear of God in their
hearts; to make them more watchful against sin; to bring them out of love
with this sinful world; to stir them up to a greater longing after the
kingdom of heaven; and to other such like gracious ends and purposes: all
which cannot proceed from any other cause, then from the fatherly love of God
toward them. And therefore they must needs be of another nature, then those
plagues and punishments are, which God casts upon the wicked. Yea, the very
nature of death, is changed to the godly; in that it only sets the soul
free, from a sinful and corruptible body: that it may mount up to the kingdom
of heaven, and there be perfited among the souls of the faithful departed
before. And touching their bodies also, though they descend to the earth: yet
their very putrefying, is but a preparation, and (as one would say) a sowing of
them against the day of the glorious resurrection: which shall be as the day of
a most joyful harvest, to all the faithful children of God.

These things thus inserted by the way; let us now return to the second
branch of the duties, touching thankfulness due to God, for this so inestimable
a benefit of the forgiveness of sins. For the proof whereof, see the example
and practice of David, Psalm. 103.1.2.3. etc. See also the example and practice
of Paul. 1. Tim. 1.12.13. And Romans 7.24.25. who in either place, gives great
glory, and praise to God, in this behalf. And that also by good reason. For
seeing it belongs to God only, to forgive sins: therefore also does the
glory of forgiveness belong to his divine Majesty.

For the third branch, read Psalm. 116.1. etc. I love the Lord, because he has
heard my voice, and my prayers, etc. And Luk, 7.47. etc. She loved much (says
our Savior concerning the sinful woman, there mentioned) because many sins
are forgiven her.

For the fourth branch, read Psalm. 13^.4. Mercy is with the Lord, that he may
be feared. And John, 5.14. Behold thou art made whole (says our Savior to the
sick man whom he had healed) sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.
Read also, 1. Cor. 6.15. And John, 1. Ep. chapter 2.1. My babes, these things I
write unto you, that ye sin not, etc. What things? Even this, that the blood
of Christ cleanses us from sin, etc. as we read in the former chapter. And
Ezekiel. 16.63. the use of Gods mercy to Israel, is noted to be this, that the
people might remember their sins, and be ashamed, etc. The contrary neglect
of Gods mercy, is vehemently reproved. Ier. 2.19.20. in these words, The danger
of not believing this article.
Thine own wickedness (says the Lord by his holy Prophet) shall correct thee,
etc. For of old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst thy bonds, and thou
saiedst, I will no more transgress, but like an harlot thou runnest about upon
all high hills, and under all green trees, etc. Read also Ezekiel. chapter 33.13.

It is a most unworthy, and absurd thing, that any should so abuse the mercy of
God, in forgiving them many and great sins, that they should thereby be the
more licentious, and bold to commit sin. This doubtless, is such a
wickedness, as God cannot but severely punish: as the Apostle Jude does
vehemently denounce against such as turn the grace of our God into wantonness.

For the fifth branch read Luke 6.36. Be ye merciful (says our Savior) as
your Father is merciful. Ephesians. 4.32, Be ye courteous one to another (says the
Apostle of our Savior) and tender hearted, forgiving one the other, even as
God for Christ's sake forgave you. And Colos. 3.13. Forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel to another: even as Christ
forgave you, even so do ye.

To speak generally, Repentance is usually in the holy Scripture joined with
Faith, when forgiveness of sins is promised, or offered to poor sinners.
Neither does our Savior Christ give the one, without the other. Whereof also
our Baptism is jointly a sign and seal. Act. 2.38. and cha. 3.19. and cha.
5.31. And Romans 6.1. etc. God forbid (says S. Paul) that we should sin that
grace may abound. Nay rather, by how much God is more loath to punish us; yea
rather, more ready to forgive us as he is: by so much do we stand the more
straightly bound, to be more loath to offend his blessed Majesty: yea, to be by
all means, more studious to please him, in all things, as was well answered
before.

Now touching the last branch: that is, for the proof of the assurance of
forgiveness of sins, to all such as are thus qualified; yea, though through
infirmity, they sin in many things: read 1. John. 2.1. If any man sin, we
have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous Read also Heb.
13.8. and chapter 6.10. etc. to the end of the chapter. And Romans 3.25.26. and chapter
11.29. Our sins are many in deed, and exceeding great; but Gods mercies are
more and greater: as every true sorrowful soul may safely comfort it self.
Thus much of the Duties.

NOw to conclude this Article: what is the danger of not believing it, and of
not yielding due fruits of repentance, from the Comfort of it?

They that believe not the forgiveness of sins; yea the daily and continual
forgiveness of them, with acknowledgement, and bewailing of the same from day to
day: they can believe nothing to their sound consolation and comfort; insomuch
as they make the death of our Lord Jesus Christ of no powerful effect unto
them.

Likewise, for want of repentance, and amendment of life, all such debar
themselves, from all comfortable persuasion of forgiveness. Yea, they do make
themselves justly subject to the wages and forfeiture of sin, which is the
eternal destruction both of body and soul in he^l.

Explication and proof.
To the end we may avoid this danger; all heretical errors, against the true
belief of this Article, must be carefully avoided of us.

These errors are such, as either concern the Author of the forgiveness of
sins, which is God: or the meaning of the words, how far they are to be
extended: or the cause wherefore God forgiueth sins: or the fruit and effect
thereof.

First therefore, in so much as God only forgiueth sins; the error of
those, that attribute a subordinate power of forgiveness, to the Pope of Rome,
or to any other mortal and sinful man, is to be rejected as a blasphemy
against God. For as touching the power of the Ministry of the word, and keys
of the kingdom of heaven, committed unto the lawful Ministers thereof: that is
to say, first and principally to the holy Apostles, and then after them to
others, according to the will of God, Mat. 16.19. and chapter 18. ve. 18. and Ioh.
20. ve. 23. this consists only in the ministerial publishing and pronouncing
of forgiveness to all repenting sinners: and that in the name and authority of
God alone, they being merely his servants therein.

And whereas it is required, that every man should forgive his neighbor: this
is to be understood, as touching the wrong done particularly to the party
offended, and to the staying of all malicious desire of revenge, and of all
cursed and uncharitable imprecation, etc: but not touching the guiltines of the
sin, and offense done against God. For in this respect, it belongs only to
him to say, Surely I have pardoned, I will not destroy Job chapter 34.31. Read also
Psa. 51.4. Against thee, against thee only I have sinned, says King David.
And Psa. 130.8. With the Lord is mercy, etc. And he will redeem Israel from
all his iniquity. No Popish confession, or penance of theirs, is available
hereunto.

Secondly, the error of those, is to be rejected of us, who either restrain
the word Sins, only to sins unwillingly committed; as the Basilidian
heretics are said to have held: or else to those sins, that go before
baptism; as though all that follow, must at the least in some part, be
otherwise satisfied for, as Papists teach: or to those that went before the
falling back of any, after that they have bin baptized, and have once obtained
forgiveness; as the Cathari, and Nouatians, and some other have held: or to
those that went before the falling away of any before they have taken holy
orders, as the Luciferians restrained the sins, which they accounted
pardonable. Likewise, the Popish error of restraining the word of forgiveness to
eternal pains, is also to be rejected. For seeing no punishment to
satisfaction is due, but in respect of sin imputed: by what right may any be
inflicted to that end, if sin be already freely pardoned and forgiven, for that
satisfactions sake, which our Savior has made, and which God has accepted
for our full discharge?

In which respect also, we are to reject their devise of purgatory pains, to
continue after this life, as long as they of their bloody mercy, list
themselves to determine.

Thirdly, the heretical error of the same popish Deceivers, is to be rejected;
in that they do ascribe forgiveness of sins (at the least in some part) to the
operatorie and working virtue of the Sacraments, and to the merit of man's own
works: like as also the Messalians and Euchetae did to their works and prayers.
And like to the Heracleonites, and Helcosaites; who ascribed forgiveness to
anointing, and to other their ceremonies.

Fourthly, insomuch as God of his most free grace, and infinite mercy,
forgiueth us all our sins; to this end that we should not come into
condemnation, but have our present entrance into the assured hope of
everlasting life and glory: yea to a present enjoying of it by faith, as our
Savior himself assures all such as hear his word, and believe in him that
sent him. Ioh. chapter 5. ver. 24. We are therefore confidently to cast away all
doubtings of forgiveness, as touching our selves, and all that do truly believe;
and also all fears of purgatory fire, which the Popish Seducers scare and
confound their Disciples withal.

And as we are to beware of these four sorts of errors, and to hold firmly,
that all sins are pardonable; yea, freely and perfitly pardonable here in this
life, to all those that shall truly believe, and repent: so let us take heed of
four sorts of people especially, who are dangerous examples among us. The
first is the Popish sort of deceivers, whose errors against this Article we
have touched already. The second is of such as dream of a perfection of their
own inherent righteousness here in this life: so as they need not (save for
modesties sake, or rather in an hypocritical pretense) ask forgiveness of
sins. Such as are some of the Anabaptists, and Family of love. The third
sort, is of such as ask forgiveness of their own sins, but will not forgive
those, whom they are offended withal. Of who^ our Savior says, that they
seek forgiveness in vain. Math. 6.14.15. The fourth sort is of secure and
careless men; who lie in their sins, without any conscience, or remorse for
them, as Atheists and Libertines.

Let none of these think, unless they repent them of these their grievous
sins; that ever they shall find pardon, and forgiveness with the Lord:
howsoever they shall acquit and assoile themselves; as if no evil should come
unto them.

Thus much concerning the Article of the forgiveness of sins.

Belief that to every true member of the Church of God, belongs the blessed
immortality of the soul.
Quest. NOw what follows next in the Articles of our Belief? The ground of
it.


Answ. I believe the resurrection of the body.

Expli. In the former Articles, of this second part of our belief, which is
concerning the Church of God; we have seen one special privilege or
prerogative of it: to wit, the high benefit of the forgiveness of sins; the
which, as we have seen, makes every true member of the Church blessed, and
happy, even here in this present life.

The privileges or prerogatives now following, do belong to the life to come:
to wit, the resurrection of the body now last rehearsed; after the which
follows in the Articles of our belief, everlasting life: beyond the which,
nothing can furthermore be believed, or expected of us. Of these things
therefore, we are henceforth to inquire: and so will we do, if God permit.

Nevertheless, in so much as we enjoy one special benefit by our Savior
Christ after this life ended; before that our bodies shall rise again: that is
to say, the happy estate of our souls, in the blessed immortality thereof;
even from the time, that they leave the tabernacle of the mortal body: I hold
it very expedient, that for more plain and full explications sake, we do
here insert something concerning this point; before we come to the Article of
the resurrection of the body, which shall not be, till the last day, when both
body and soul (reunited together) shall be partakers of that everlasting life,
which the soul is partaker of, immediately after this life.

Belief that to every true member of the Church of God, belongs the blessed
immortality of the soul.


In the 5. chap. of the 2. Ep to the Corinthians, from the beginning of the
chapter, and so forth to the end of the 5. verse.

1. We (says the Apostle Paul) know that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building given of God: that is, an house
not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.

2. For therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with our house, which is from
heaven.

3. Because that if we clothed, we shall not be found naked.

4. For in deed, we that are in this tabernacle, sigh and are burdened, not
because we would be unclothed, but would be clothed upon, that mortality might
be swallowed up of life.

5. And he that has created us for this thing, is God, who also has given
unto us the earnest of the Spirit.

Explication and proof.
These words of the holy Apostle (as M. Calvin, that holy Interpreter well
observes) do not only concern the glorious restoring of the bodies of the
faithful, at the resurrection: but also that blessed estate of their souls,
which they shall enjoy in blessed immortality, all the mean while: even from
the time of the natural death of the body, whenever that shall be. For
though he makes some question at the first, whether they should be restrained
to the one, or to the other: yet he chooses rather, to understand the
Apostle, as intending to treat of them both. First, of the blessed immortality
of the soul: and then of the glorious resurrection of the body.

His words are these, In vtrouis sensu, nihil est inco^modi. Quanqua^ malo ita
accipere, vt initiu^ huius aedificij sit beatus status post morte^: consummatio
ante^ sit gloria vltimae resurrectionis. There is (says he) no inconvenience
in either of these interpretatio^^. Yet I had rather understand the Apostles
words so, as the blessed estate of the soul after death, should be the
beginning of this building: and the glory of the resurrection of the body at
the last, to be the perfiting of it.

And this exposition (as he says further) will the course of the Apostles text
rather approve. Hanc expositionem melius comprobabit Apostoli contextus. He
says also, that the Epitheta, or adition of words, whereby the Apostle sets
out the building which he speaks of, serve more fitly to confirm the
perpetuity of it. Epitheta (inquit) quae adiu^git huic aedificio, faciunt ad
perpetuitate^ melius co^firma^da^.

This therefore being the Apostles scope in general, let us a little more
particularly, consider the course of his speech.

And first, let us well observe, that he speaks of this Article of our faith,
as of a point certainly known, I mean this Article of the blessed
immortality of the soul: which is our present argument, beside the glorious
resurrection of the body, of the which we will defer to speak for a while.
Yea, let us observe, that the Apostle speaks of it, as of a matter, not
known of him alone, by particular revelation: but also of other the Apostles,
and Ministers of our Savior Christ, and of his Church; as one chief principle
of the religion of God, and of the common belief of his faithful people.

This knowledge and persuasion of faith, might well arise in the hearts of the
faithful, at this time which the apostle speaks of, from that light which our
Savior gave both by his doctrine and promise, and also by his practice. By
doctrine, in the parable of Lazarus, whose soul (as our Savior there
teaches) was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, so soon as it left the
body. Luke 16.22. And in that also he teaches further, concerning Abraham, and
the rest of the faithful, that they are and were ever since their natural
death, living in soul; and so shall be for ever and ever: insomuch as God, who
was, and is for ever, their God, is not the God of the dead, but of the living.
Mat. 22.32. Whence also, our Savior proves the resurrection of the body,
hereafter to follow; seeing God is not the God of the souls of the faithful
only, but of their bodies also: and therefore will undoubtedly raise them up
again. For these are so lincked together, in the counsel and purpose of God;
that grant the one, and ye grant the other: deny either of them, and ye deny
both: as we shall further perceive, by the Apostle Paul's reasoning, 1. Cor.
15.19. when we come to the Article of the resurrection of the body. In the
mean season, we see that our Savior has by doctrine confirmed the blessed
immortality of the souls of the faithful, after this life.

And touching his promise, he has thereby confirmed it to the thief that
repented of his sins, and believed in him on the Cross, saying, Today shall
thou be with me in Paradise. And by practice also, he confirmed the same in
that at his own death, he commended his own soul in the hands of his Father.
Luke 23.43.46. The same is testified concerning Stephen, who faithfully
commended his spirit, (that is, his soul) into the hands of the Lord Jesus:
who no doubt received it. Acts, 7.59. According to that Revel. 6.9, 10, 11.
where the souls of the Martyrs are said to lie under the altar: to wit, as
being under the blessed and safe protection of our Savior: for whose sake, and
upon who^ (after a sort) they offered and sacrificed themselves unto God: like
as Paul uses that manner of speech concerning himself. Phil. 2.17.


Neither was this, the knowledge, faith, and persuasion of the faithful, at the
coming of our Savior, and since that time only, by the light of his
doctrine, promise, and practice: but it has been likewise, the knowledge and
belief of the Church of God, in all former times; even from the beginning. For
so taught king Solomon, Eccl. 12.7. The body returns to the earth, even dust
as it was: but the Spirit returns to God that gave it. And David before him,
being of this belief, commended his soul into the hands of God. Into thy hand
(says he to God) I commend my spirit: for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of
truth. Ps. 31.5. Where, note we well, that the blessed immortality of the soul
is a fruit of our redemption. Yea Moses of more ancient time; and before him,
Abraham; and the rest of the Patriarks also before Abraham: they all lived and
died in this belief. Heb. ch: 11.13, 14, 15, 16. And chapter 12.23. it is written
of the souls of all the righteous, departed this life, even from the beginning
of the world: that they are in a perfect estate of happiness in heaven, so far
forth as they may be perfect; till the resurrection of the body. Hereof has the
Lord given a lively testimony from heaven, in that he took Elias up from the
earth: preventing thereby his natural death, as men ordinarily die. 2. King.
2.11. And before him, Henoch also, who was more near the first ages of the
world. Genesis chap. 5.24. And as we read. Heb. 11. 5. By faith was Henoch taken
away, that he should not see death, etc. This did God, of special grace and
favor; and for a reward to Henoch: because he walked with God, and had a care
in all things to please him.

This reward (out of all question) was the blessed immortality of his soul in
heaven: if not of the glorious change of his body also. And the immortality of
the soul of Moses and Elias, is plainly testified by their appearance, at the
transfiguration of our Savior Christ. Matthew. 17.3.

Thus, the belief of this Article, has been known and embraced, even from
the beginning of the world, to this day.

Yea, so famous has it been from the beginning; that the very heathen, have
retained a certain smacke of this doctrine: as it is evident in the writings
of their Philosophers, from time to time; even from among the Egyptians and
Caldeans, to the Grecians and Latinists, both Orators and Poets. As noble
Mornaeus shows at large, in his 15. chapter of Trueness of religion: though
these Philosophers had this doctrine rather by rote as it were, (as we say of
children) then by any religious assurance among them; for want of the lively
testimony and warrant of Gods holy word, which either they had not, or did not
duly regard.

But let us return to the Apostles words.

And in the second place, diligently observe we, that he opposes the estate of
the life to come, (whether before the resurrection, or after) to the estate of
this present life, so long as our our souls abide here in the body. This he
calls the earthly house of this tabernacle: that is, a flitting and
transitory estate: according to that, 1. Pet. 1.17. and 2. Epist. 1.13, 14.
Job, chapter 4.19. and Isai. 38.12. The other, he calls first, a building of God:
secondly, a house not made with hands: thirdly, eternal in the heavens:
fourthly, such a building as is from heaven: all which, cannot altogether agree
to the body alone.

Thirdly, this building, does the Apostle with the rest, (as he testifies of
them) desire to be clothed with; immediately after that they leave this earthly
tabernacle: because otherwise, (as he says) they should be found naked,
until the resurrection of the body.

Fourthly, the Apostle shows, that the faithful are not weary of this life,
because of the present afflictions and troubles thereof, through impatience:
but because they know, that this life ended, it is the good pleasure of God,
that they shall be no longer strangers from him; but come presently home unto
him into a blessed estate: waiting therein for the adoption, even the
redemption of their body, till afterward. Romans 8.23. This therefore is the
cause why they do long, till they may enjoy it, when once the time appointed
of God shall come. In soul first, the power of sin being extinguished: and
afterward in soul and body together; freed from all mortality and corruption,
for ever and ever.

Hereupon it is, that the Apostle, reasoning from the causes of that longing,
and sure confidence that the faithful have: he says first, that God has
created, or fitted them to this immortality, in his own purpose and counsel
even from the womb: and secondly, that he has in due time, given them the
assurance of it, by the earnest of his holy Spirit.

Thus much therefore, for the ground and warrant of the blessed immortality of
the souls of the faithful: even for all whosoever do truly believe in our
Savior Christ. For all and every one, have their part in all the benefits
purchased by him; as we may remember from the doctrine of the communion of
Saints.

immortality of the soul?

Ans. The meaning of it, is first, That the soul is created of God, The
meaning of it.
such a spiritual substance, distinct from the body of every man; and so
living in it self (...) causing life to the body; that though the body die,
yet it remains still in the own life: and by the ordinance of God, is not
subject to death, nor possible for ever to be extinguished* or to cease to hold
that proper existence or Being, which God has given unto it.

Secondly, the meaning of this Article is, that so soon as the natural life,
which the soul ministers to the body is ended: God receives the soul of
every true believer, into his heavenly kingdom. Where, he makes their estate
unspeakably more blessed then before; in that he gives unto them a most sweet
and comfortable fruit of all that christian knowledge, faith sanctification and
of every grace which they had obtained here in this life: and that even in all
meet and full perfection; so to continue for ever and ever, with the thousand
thousands of the holy Angels and Saints of God.

The meaning of this Article, may well be comprehended in these two branches.
Explication and proof.


But yet so, as the first branch of your answer, may well be extended, as well
to the souls of the wicked and infidells, as to the souls of all godly and
true believers.

For as touching their natural creation, in respect of their substance; and
also in regard of their faculties of understanding, memory, reasoning, will,
election or choice: and likewise in ministering life, sense and motion to the
body, they are naturally of the same kind. The one cannot die or be
extinguished, more then the other. For though it be said in the holy
Scriptures, that the wicked, and all unbelievers, shall perish, and die the
second death, etc: yet this perishing or death, is not to be understood, as
simply opposed to being and life, but to that good and blessed estate of life
and well being; which is only proper to the children of God, after this
natural life is ended. For this is very plain in the holy Scriptures, that
the misery and torment of the souls of the wicked, shall be perpetual, even
from the time of their natural death: and so to continue for ever. The worm
of their guilty conscience, shall never die: neither shall the fire of their
torment ever be quenched: as our Savior shows plainly in the parable of the
rich man. Luke, 16.22, etc. So then, the wicked are said to die a second death,
moreover and beside the natural death; in respect of their punishment and
torment, or destruction after this life: in such sense, as they are said, as
touching all grace and godliness, to be dead, even while they live here. For
like as they, while they live the natural life, are dead; because they want
the joy of godliness, and thereby of a good conscience, which is, (as we may
say) the life of our life: so, yea much rather, because after the end of the
natural and sinful life of the wicked, their torment begins never to end,
they may justly be said to pass to a second death: that is, from a death in
extremity of sin, to a death in extremity of an eternal punishment.

Thus, the immortality of the soul, belongs to the wicked, as well as to the
godly: so far forth, that their souls can no more die; that is, be
extinguished, or loosed their nature and Being; then the souls of the godly
can.

But as touching the good being or blessing of immortality: that is to say,
touching the blessed estate of the soul, in the continuance of it for ever, in
the favor of GOD: this belongs peculiarly to the children of God, who
through faith, and by the Spirit of God, do mortify sin in some measure
here in this life, and live unto God through that life which they live by the
Son of God: by whose grace, their souls are daily renewed and sanctified
unto him: as it is evident, by the testimonies and examples alleged before,
for the ground and warrant of this Article unto us.

And that the estate of the souls of the faithful are unspeakably blessed
with God after this life: we may be assured from that which we read, 1. Cor.
2.9. For the glory of it is such, as the eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
nor came into the heart of man, which God has prepared for them that love him.
The Promise.
And 2. Epist. chap. 12.4.

And that the same blessed estate of the faithful, shall be a fruit of that
care which they had here in their natural life time, to attain to true
christian knowledge, faith, etc: it may be evident from that which is written,
1. Cor. 13.12. that then shall be the perfection of that, which we have now but
in part. Read also Revel. chapter 7.14, 15, 16, 17. And chapter 14.3, 4, 5. and verses
12.13.

Whence also, it finally appears; that this unspeakable blessing, shall be
(as was answered) in the communion of all the thousands of the triumphant
Saints, and with the Angels: to all those that have had their part in the
communion of the militant Saints here on earth. According to that which we
read, Heb. chap. 12.22, 23. Ye are come unto the mount Sion, and to the City
of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and the company of innumerable
Angels, And to the congregation of the first borne, which are written in
heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect men.

Thus much briefly, concerning the meaning of this Article.



We have the promise of it, Psalm. 22. verse 26.

The poor (or meek, says the holy Prophet) shall eat and be satisfied: they
that seek after the Lord shall praise him: your heart shall live for ever.

Explication
This indeed may well be one testimony of Gods promise in this behalf. For by
the heart, the soul of man is usually signified in the Psalms, and in other
places of holy Scriptures.

There are many other testimonies to the same purpose. For all the promises of
everlasting life, after the natural life ended; they have the beginning of
their accomplishment, in this blessed immortality which we speak of: according
to that of James, chap. 1. verse 12. Blessed is the man that endures
tentation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the
Lord has promised to them that love him. Likewise, Revel. 2.7.17. And chap.
3.5.12.21: though these promises shall not have their perfect effect, till the
resurrection of the body: as we shall see further, when we come to that Article.

IN the mean season: our order requires, that we come to the use of the
present Article. And first, concerning the Comfort of it.



I heard a voice from heaven (says St. John, Revel. chap. 14. verse 13.)
saying unto me, write, ^lessed are the dead from the time that they die in the
Lord.

Even so says the Spirit: for they rest from their labors, and their works
do follow them.

Explication.
In these words of Saint John, we have a double comfort expressed; as belonging
to the faithful, even from the time that they die in the Lord: that is, for
the Lords cause, or in faith and repentance, as it becomes the servants of
God. First, that thenceforth they rest from their labors: that is, from all
the troubles and disquietments of this life; such as we read of, Eccles. 1.8.
All things are full of labor And Psalm. 90.10. According to that promise,
Revel. 6. verse 11. They shall rest for a little season, etc. And chap. 7.16.
They shall hunger no more nor thirst any more, etc. And God shall wipe all
tears from their eyes.

The second comfort of the faithful, immediately after their natural death;
is, that their works do follow them: that is to say, the fruit and reward of
all good things, which they have done in their life time. For God will perform
all his promises, which he of his bounteous goodness has made to the
obedience of his servants: in and for Christ's sake: according to that Ephesians.
6.24. The grace of God shall be to the immortality of all that love our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Thus then, Saint John pronouncing all the faithful blessed; he has showed
also, wherein they are blessed: yea so blessed; that they do know, and be
ioyously affected with the sweetness of the same their blessing; The Comforts.
far above al^ earthly blessing, which they ever tasted of before.

The solemn manner of the pronouncing of this blessing; in that it was
delivered to John from heaven, testified by the Spirit, and commanded to be
written and kept in holy record, to the end of the world: all makes this
blessing so much the more comfortable, to every one, to whom it belongs: that
is, to every one that apprehends it by faith. And that, not only because
they know they shall rest from their labors: but also for that they shall be
therewithal set out of the dangers of all their adversaries, both Satan and
his instruments, for ever. Yea, for that they shall enjoy there; far more
excellent comforts, then they shall leave behind them here on earth: whether
wife, child, dear friend, house and land, or any thing else. For all these
are small in comparison of the presence of our Savior Christ, and of the most
blessed fellowshippe of the Saints in heaven, with freedom from all motions of
sin, and with sweet liberty to rejoice and praise the Lord continually. And
so our Savior comfort his Disciples: Matthew. 19.29. where he shows, that
everlasting life weighs down all.

These considerations, do make death also, which is in it self very grievous
and horrible: to be rather welcome, then otherwise; when once the time
appointed is come, and that the heart is duly prepared: according to that of
the Apostle Paul, in the 1. chapter to the Philippians, verses 21, 22, 23. For
(says he) Christ is to me both in life and in death, advantage, etc. I desire
to be loosed and to be with Christ, which is best of all. And chap. 2. verses
17, 18. Though I be offered up upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I
am glad, and rejoice with ye all. For the same cause also, be ye glad and
rejoice with me.

Hence it is, that faithful Christians have sought out many pleasant
similitudes, to abate the fear of death; yea to help to raise up the heart in
a holy triumph against it: in that they compare it to a serpent that has lost
both poison and sting: or to a serpent that is painted, and hanged up for a
sign at the gate of some goodly Inn: or to the landing at a haven, after that
a man has for a long time, been dangerously tossed upon the troublesome sea:
or to the new casting of a precious vessel, to make it more beautiful and
glorious then before, etc. As they have been heretofore more fully alleged,
in the Comforts of faith, touching the Fatherly Providence of God: 1. Book,
pages, 247, 248.

And verily, the cause why we have oftentimes the less comfort, and holy
confidence against death: is for that we have not so earnestly instructed our
souls, in the persuasion of this blessed immortality, immediately after this
life is ended: but do suspend our comfort, and put it too far off, when we
will apprehend no comfort, till our thoughts come at the resurrection of our
bodies. I fear me, the Psychopannychie, or soule-sleeping after the natural
death, deceives many that be not professed Anabaptists: because they are not
in their life time, waking enough to meditate of this most sweet and
comfortable doctrine of the blessed immortality of the soul, immediately after
the bodily death. But the knowledge of this (says Master Calvin) is the cause
of that calm and quiet trust, which we repose in God. Haec cognitio nostrae
tranquillitatis, and fiduciae, causa est.

And would to God, that we could better consider of it. For assuredly, it is a
most inestimable benefit; that God has made our souls such a part of his
creation, as no earthly wight, or cruel Tyrant, no nor any power of Hell, can
destroy it: so that it need be afraid of nothing, save only to sin, and so
to offend the Majesty of God, who made it. And yet behold, for our comfort in
that respect also: how inestimable Gods mercy is, in that he has prepared for
our souls, a most sovereign remedy; in that so soon as they shall truly
repent that they have sinned: the blood of our Savior Christ, is a most
blessed counter-poison against all the contagion and peril of it.

Hitherto therefore of the use of this Article, for Comforts. The Duties.


THe use for Duties is next.

Qu. What ought they to be, in regard of the comfort of this so great and
inestimable a benefit?

An. As the benefit is greater, then we can esteem and value: so the duties
which belong unto it, are in due proportion, greater then we can perform.

Expli. It is true that you say. We cannot perform any duty, or duties
answerable to the greatness and worthiness of the benefit. Nevertheless,
this must not make us the more negligent, or slack: but we ought rather hereby
to provoke, and stir up our selves, to be more earnest, in the performance of
the best duties of thankfulness to God, that we may.



It is our bounden duty, so long as we live here; to endeavor to the uttermost
of our power, to serve and glorify God, with all the powers of our souls:
both with our understanding and judgment, and also with our will and
affection, and with all whatsoever is within us, which we have received of God.

It is our duty likewise, to the same end to be always instant with God by
prayer: that it may please him above all things, to sanctify us in our souls
and spirits unto him.

We our selves also, ought to be very careful, to keep our souls pure and
chaste unto God: lest at any time they should fall away, or decline from him.

Moreover, we are from the assurance of the blessed immortality of our souls;
to encourage our selves, against all the malice and violence of our
adversaries: not only of flesh and blood, but also of such as are spiritual.

Finally, we are in all our dangers, and at the point of death; with good
comfort, to commend our souls and spirits into the hands of our most gracious
and merciful God.

Explication. and proof.
These duties, do indeed belong to the Comfort of this Article: whereof let us
see some proof; to the stirring up of our selves, to make more conscience in
the performance of them.

And first, touching the first branch of the answer. Insomuch as it cannot be
denied, but we stand bound, with all holy care, to glorify God, with our
bodies and with all the members thereof; as we shall have just occasion to
observe more purposedly hereafter: we must needs acknowledge, that much
rather, ought we to do it with our souls; because from thence flow forth all
the actions of our lives. Prou. 4 23. Yea and so much the rather also, because
without the inward obedience of our souls and spirits, unto God; all external
obedience is of no account before him. Isai. 28. Matthew. 15. For as God is a
Spirit, so he requires to be spiritually worshipped and served, of all true
worshippers of him. John, 4. And that with all integrity, as the Prophet
gives to understand, in one instance, Psalm, 103. My soul praise thou the
Lord, and all that is within me, praise his holy name. Read also Psalm, 24.
verses 7, 8, 9, 10.

Secondly, that it is our duty to pray for the sanctification of our souls:
we are taught from the example and practice of the Apostle Paul. 1. These. 5.23.

Thirdly, concerning our own care, wherein we stand bound to watch over our
own souls, that we never suffer them to decline from the true love. and fear
of God: but may always keep the^ pure, chaste, and faithful unto him. Read
again Prou. 4.23. Keep thine heart with all diligence. Or thus, more near to
the original, or canonical text, With, or above all watchfulness, watch over
thine heart, etc. Read also Numbers, chap. 15. verses 37, 38, 39, 40, 41. And
Psalm, 73.23, 24, 25, etc. Yet I was always iwth thee: thou have holden me
by my right hand. Thou will guide me by thy counsel, and afterward receive
me to glory. Whom have I in heaven but the? and I have desired none in the
earth with thee. My flesh fails, and mine heart also: but God is the strength
of mine heart and my portion for ever. For lo, they that withdraw themselves
from thee shall perish: thou destroyest all them that go a whooring from thee.
As for me, it is good for me to draw near to God: therefore I have put my
trust in the Lord God, that I may declare all thy works.

Our soul is the principal, and most excellent part of us; upon the welfare
whereof, rests the welfare of our bodies also (so that the whole person of a
man, bears his denomination from the soul, according to the phrase of the
holy Scriptures: as Psalm. 3.2. and Psalm. 7.2. and 22. verses 20, 21, and 57.4.
and in many other places: according also, to that which is said of Jonathan,
that he loved David as his own soul. 1. Sam. 18.3. And therefore, by all
reason, we ought to be chiefly careful and charie over our souls, as we may
learn from many of the holy Psalms: where, above all things, the soul is
most often and most earnestly mentioned in prayer, as the chief jewel and
darling of every man. Where also, it is every way most tenderly cherished and
encouraged, by these and such like speeches, Let my soul live. O deliver my
soul. Why art thou cast down O my soul? My soul trust thou in the Lord. My
soul pants after God. My soul thirsts for God, etc.

Thus ought every one of us (beloved in the Lord) be most tender and charie
over our souls. But alas, if we examine our selves, by these paterns and
examples; it will be found, that for the most part, it is with us, as if our
souls were of very little estimation and price with us. All our care is
usually for our bodies; how we may pamper, adorn, and every way set out, and
advance them. But as for our poor souls; they are left in the sordes (suddes
I might have said:) they are left unswept, and ungarnished; altogether
forlorn, and unprovided for; famished and starued: unless it be to afford the
Devil his welcome, to make us seven fold more miserable, answerable to that
tricking which he is delighted with: according to the admonition of our
Savior, Matthew, chapter 12. verses 44, 45. And hereof, among other things;
the little regard which we have of the word of God, which is the only true
food, the staff, and stay, the store house, and wardrope, for the enriching
and decking of our souls: it is a special evidence; to argue against us, that
we make little account of our souls. Every one (I confess) will say that he
has a soul to save, etc: but how few do take the right way, or duly regard
the means of their salvation? It is evident therefore, that the most part,
have little or no true care at all, to have their souls saved. Let such
therefore, learn from this admonition, to better their duty herein: or else
let them know, that they must of necessity, miss of that salvation, which
they would seem to desire and look for.

But as touching those that have a true care of their souls; they may and
ought, according to the fourth branch of the Answer: comfortably to animate and
encourage themselves, against all crafts or violences of their adversaries, who
or whatsoever they be. According to that encouragement which our Savior
gives, Matthew. chap. 10. verse 28. Fear not them that can kill the body, but
are not able to kill the soul. And Luke, chap. 12. verse 4. I say unto ye my
friends, be not afraid of them that can kill the body, and after that, are not
able to do any more. But I will forewarne ye whom ye shall fear, etc. And
again, He that will loose his life for my sake, (says our Savior) shall
save it. How so? By loosing the natural life, he shall attain to a better
life: that is, his soul shall live more blessedly in heaven, then it can do
here on earth. Our Savior has abolished death, and brought life and
immortality to light, through the Gospel. 2. Tim. 1.10, Read also 2. Cor. 5.
verses 6, 7, 8, 9. Therefore we are always bold though we know that whiles we
abide in the body, we are absent from the Lord. For we walk by faith, and not
by fight.

Nevertheless, we are bold, and lone rather to remove out of the body, and to
dwell with the Lord. Mark this well, that the soul is at home with the Lord,
so soon as it leaves the body. Wherefore also, The Danger of not believing
this Article.
(as the Apostle adds further) We covet that both abiding here, and departing
from hence, (that is, both in life and in death) we may be acceptable to him.

Fifthly, all such may and ought, according to the last branch of the answer;
comfortably commend their souls to God, in all dangers: after the example of
David, Psalm. 31.5. And even at the point of death it self; after the example
of our Savior, Luke, 23.46. And of Stephen, Acts, 7.59. as we have seen
before.

Such are the duties of faith, concerning the comfort of the blessed
immortality of the soul.



Yes no doubt: the danger is very great. For the souls of all such, as do not
believe this blessed immortality or die in careless neglect of the means,
whereby they should attain unto it: they shall certainly be condemned to
extreme, and immortal, or endless misery, even from the very instant
departure of their soul from the body.

Explication and proof.
It is very true: as the parable of the voluptuous rich man, (of whom we read
in the holy Gospel) plainly shows. Luke, 16. His soul (as our Savior
gives there to understand) for forthwith in Hell torments. And so remained in
the same most woeful torments; neither could thenceforth by any entreaty,
obtain any release or ease. And Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape (says the holy
Apostle) if we neglect so great salvation as is offered us in the Gospel? All
such as harden their hearts in unbelief, are condemned already: John, 3.16:
and therefore no doubt, they shall not stay without all punishment, till the
day of the last judgment: but shall presently after this life, endure some
part of it.

Let us therefore, I beseech ye, take heed that we be not carried away, after
the example of the secure multitude: neither yet with any other sorts of the
wicked and ungodly, lest we fall with them, into this great and fearful
damnation.

To the which end and purpose, it is necessary, that we do arm our selves
against those heretical or atheistical and godless opinions, which be
contrary to this Article. As well theirs, who do simply deny the
immortality of the soul; as the opinion of them, that do suspend, (as we may
say) the immortality of it, till the time htat the bodies shall be raised
again: and so thus far join with the rest; that it is after a sort mortal,
and without all understanding or affection, for all that while.

They that do simply deny the souls immortality, are not only the
Sadduces, mentioned in the holy Scriptures, Acts, 23.8: who were heretics
sprung up among true worshippers of God and Christians: but also the Epicures,
who were as it were heretics, dissenting from the sounder sort of the
Philosophers, among the heathen: and all Atheists and godless persons, who are
justly odious to all other sorts of people in the world. So that it may seem
exceeding strange unto us, (if any impiety might be strange in the chair of
Rome) that Pope Paulus the third, should at his death, make such a confession
of his faith, or rather of his infidelity and atheism as this: that now he
should shortly make trial, whether the souls of men are immortal or no: and
likewise of two other things; to wit, whether there be a God, or any Hell: of
the which (as he confessed) he had been in doubt, all the days of his life
before.

Such as defer the immortality of the soul, till the resurrection of the
body, are some among those that are called Anabaptists: whose heresy is called
Psychopanychie, because they hold, that the soul sleeps: that is, has no
perceiuance of joy, etc: no more then the body has after it is dead, till it
be raised up again.

And thus, all of them seem erroneously to consent in this; that the soul of
man, is nothing else, but a certain vital power or faculty, consisting in a
perfect temperature of the body: and therefore has (as they imagine) no lively
Being, longer then life abides in the body.

But this consent of theirs, is no better then a most wicked and unfaithful
conspiracy against the truth of God: as it is most evidently to be proved
against them, both from the original of the soul: together with the manner of
the creation of it, differing as far from the original and creation of the
body, as heaven is differing from the earth, as has been decared before in the
doctrine of the Creation: and also from that which is said of the soul, that
it bears the image of God: yea even from the continual testimony of the
holy Scriptures, which speak of the soul, as of a distinct existence or
Being, beside the body: according as it is written, that it comes from God,
as from the Father of Spirits, and returns to him again, as to the Judge of
all men's souls and Spirits. According also as it is said; that the soul, or
Spirit being in man, is known of none, but of it self, beside of God, who is
the searcher of the heart: as we read. 1. Cor. 2.10.11.

So that to all who will understand; it is most plain, that the soul of man,
is not a bare faculty, or power of life, and motion, arising from the body: but
even that which does (as we may say) essentially quicken, sustain, and govern
the body; and all the members thereof so long as it abides in it: and that the
separation of it from the body, is only the death of the body, and not of it
self: as has been already declared, in the interpretation, and use of the
doctrine, concerning the same.

Wherefore, whatsoever either reasons from nature, or testimonies from holy
Scriptures, any of the above named heretics, or heretical disputers, do
pretend to serve to the maintenance of their wicked, heretical, and godless
fancies: they are nothing, but so many sophistications against all soundnes of
reason: and so many ignorant and false allegations, against the manifest truth
of the holy Scriptures.

The refutation whereof, being long, Vrsinus in his Commentaries of Catechism,
And in his Treatises of Divinity. In the Article of the Creation. And Mornaeus
in the 1^. and 15. chapters of his book of truenes of Religion.
and not so necessary (though profitable no doubt, to the right understanding
of many places of holy Scriptures, abused to that purpose) I had rather it
should be read in the writings of those that have learnedly discovered the
vanity of them: or to do it at some other time; then at this present to stand
upon them.

Only, this I will now add in a word; that upon the things already set down,
it is sufficiently cleared, that though the wicked, may easily cast away, and
damn their own souls; by following false principles, and by transgressing of
the holy rules of life, and of that obedience which God has set: yet they can
by no means extinguish them, or destroy their Being. But they must of
necessity come before God, to receive their judgment, and for ever and ever,
to endure their most woeful torment. Whereupon also, it is in like manner very
plain, that all such are most lamentably deluded by the Devil; whosoever do
think to relieve themselves, against any present troubles and distresses, by
murdering of themselves, as many do: insomuch as they do thereby hasten the
increase of their own most dreadful misery.

Thus much (as it were by the way) concerning this first benefit, which all
true believers enjoy by the death of our Savior Christ, so soon as this
natural and frail life of ours is ended: even the blessed estate of the soul
in heaven, so soon as it leaves this earthly, corruptible, and sinful body.

Belief that to every true member of the Church of God, The ground of the
article.
belongs the glorious resurrection of the body.
NOw let us return to the Article of the resurrection of the body it self, at
the last day: the which we may well reckon for a second benefit after this life.



It is laid down unto us at large, in the whole 15. chap. of the first Epistle
of S. Paul to the Corinthians.

Explication and proof.
It is so in deed. And we will at this time, answerable to our large handling of
the former Articles of our belief: take this most large warrant and
confirmation of it.

And the rather also, because it is so set down, and discussed by the holy
Apostle, that together with the certain proof of it, to the reproof of some
among the Corinthians, who began to call it into question; he does likewise
show the Meaning, and Promise, and use of the Article, both for Comfort, and
also for Duty, together with the Danger of not believing it: as we shall by
the grace of God, perceive by our examining of the Apostles most excellent
discourse.

But though the chapter be long; yet will we by the same grace of God, use such
brevity, as it shall not seem tedious to any Christian heart, that rejoices
in the truth of God.

The Apostle in this chapter, disputes, and determines, three very weighty
questions, to the end he might for ever put them out of all doubt, in the
Churches of God.

First, that there is a resurrection of the body.

Secondly, what manner of bodies, the bodies of the faithful shall be, when
they rise again: whosoever shall be found dead, from the beginning of the
world, to the end thereof.

Thirdly, how God will deal with the bodies of the faithful, whosoever of
them shall be found living upon the face of the earth, at the last day, when
our Savior shall come to judge the world.

The first of these questions, is disputed, and concluded, from the beginning
of the chapter, to the 35. verse.

The second, from the 35. verse to the 51.

The third, in the 51.52. and 53. verses. From the which so large a discourse
of the holy Apostle: we may fully and plainly understand the meaning of this
Article.

Moreover, the Comfort of this Article of our faith is set down, verses,
54.55.56.57. Wherein also is contained the Promise, from the prophetical
testimony of Hosea.

The Duties belonging to the Comfort of this Article, are to be seen, verse,
58.

And finally, the Danger of not believing this Article, is evident, even from
the second verse of this chapter. And again, verses, 13.14. etc. to the 20.
And yet again, verses, 29. and 32.

Let us therefore consider of these excellent points; treading (as it were) in
the foote-steppes of the holy Apostle: only reserving the Danger of not
believing, to the last place, according to our usual course.

And first of all; that singular wisdom is to be observed, which the Apostle
uses, in his entrance to treat of these things. For where as he knew well, that
the Devil would subtly take all the advantages that he could against the
truth, that it might be forsaken of the Corinthians: he does for the same
cause lay hold of all the advantages, which God had given him, for the
confirming, and settling of it, Belief that to every true member of the Church
of God, belogeth the glorious resurrection of the body.
in their hearts.

To this purpose, he does most prudently insinuate four special things,
which might justly be of good weight, to stay the hearts of the Corinthians, in
the assured belief of the whole doctrine of the Gospel generally.

First because he being, as they themselves were persuaded, a faithful Apostle
of Jesus Christ; had preached this truth unto them, according to the
commandment of Christ: was now, in like faithfulness, with all good assurance
ready, constantly to confirm it in all points, unto them.

Secondly, because they for their parts, had, by the grace of God, received and
embraced the same doctrine of the Gospel, in all points, for the truth of God:
as it is indeed.

Thirdly, because they had, for a good season, retained it faithfully, without
doubting of the truth of it; in any fundamental point especially: and
therefore could not now, without so much the greater note of lightness and
inconstancy, call any such point into question.

Fourthly, because in the entier belief of the Gospel, without exception
against any one foundamentall Article thereof, stands the salvation of all
Christians.



They are contained in the first two verses of the chapter in these words.

1. Moreover brethren (says the Apostle) I declare unto you the Gospel, which
I preached unto you which ye also have received, and wherein ye continue.

2. And whereby ye are saved ^f ye keep in memory, after what manner I
preached it unto you, except ye have believed in vain.

Explication
These words, as we may easily see, do contain those most wise insinuations of
the Apostle, expressed before.

Whereunto also, he annexeth these words of general caveat, Except ye have
believed in vain. Not that he would call into question, the truth and
constancy of their faith: but does admonish them to take heed, lest by any
means, they should fall away from any Article of it, and so hazard their
salvation.

Now in the next place; that is to say, from the beginning of the third verse,
and so forth unto the 12: the holy Apostle, intending to dispute more
particularly with all holy force of Apostolical argumentation, against such as
called the Article of the resurrection of the body into question: he does first
of all, most skilfully lay down, and confirm the bodily resurrection of our
Savior Christ: which is as it were the ground, and foundation, of the
resurrection of ours.

And he does it in this order.

First and foremost, from the Apostolical authority of his former preaching,
touching this point.

Secondly, from the authority of the former, or more ancient Scriptures of the
old Testament.

Thirdly, by an argument of paritie or equal comparison; in that the
resurrection of our Savior, is as certainly confirmed, both by prophetical,
and also historical testimony, as is his death, and burial, or any thing
else, that is written of him: and therefore ought to be as firmly believed, as
any other Article besides: even as they would look to be saved.

For as it is said concerning the law, that insomuch as one Lawe-giuer gave
all the commandments of the moral Law: none can so soon tread under foot,
and despise one, but he breaks, and violateth all; as we read James, 2.10:
so in the doctrine of the Gospel, in so much as all the Articles thereof, are
given by our one only Savior, and do concern one and the same entiere
salvation: none can deny any one of them, but he may justly be said, in effect
to deny them all.

And this is the cause, why the Apostle is so earnest in the proof of this
Article.

But let us hear the Apostles own words.

Quest. And first, which are his words, concerning his Apostolical authority?

Answ. Verse, 3. First of all (says he) I delivered unto you, that which I
received, how that Christ arose the third day, etc.

Expli. Here is a plain proof in deed, from his Apostolical authority,
confirmed by the authority of our Savior Christ himself: who put him into
the office of Apostleship, and delivered unto him, the doctrine which he had
preached.



He says to this end, that he preached the resurrection of our Savior,
according to the Scriptures.

Explication and proof.
He does so in deed, and namely in the 4. verse. And he may well affirm it, to
be according to the Scriptures. For as we have seen in the handling of the
Article of our Saviors rising the third day from the dead: that it was often
prophesied of, and foretold in the old Testament; both in the book of the
Psalms, and also in other places of the holy Prophets.



To this purpose he says, that he had preached the resurrection, according
to the Scriptures: as well as he had done the death, and burial of our Savior.

Explication.
It is true. And herein he puts the Corinthians well in mind, that they
ought by good reason, constantly to believe this Article, from the authority of
the holy Scriptures: as well as either of them.

And the rather also; because this is as certainly confirmed, by historical
testimonies of sufficient and authentical eyewitnesses, as either of the
other were: as the Apostle shows further, by six several appearances of our
Savior, after that he was risen from the dead, and came out of his grave: as
it follows in the text, verses. 5.6.7.8.

Let us hear the Apostles words.



He was seen of Cephas, (that is of, Peter) then of the twelve.

6 After that, he was seen of more then five hundredth brethren at once:
whereof many (says the Apostle) remain unto this present, and some also are
a sleep.

7. After that; he was seen of James: then of all the Apostles.

8. And last of all (says S. Paul) he was seen also of me, as of one borne
out of time.

Explication.
Here is very great evidence in deed, and an undoubted certainty, from
historical proof; touching the fulfilling of all former prophecies in this
behalf: as it must needs be acknowledged. And these manifold appearances of
our Savior Christ after his resurrection; were not only so many proofs and
confirmations of his own resurrection, as we have seen more at large, in the
opening of that Article: but they are also, as many proofs and assurances to
us; that if we believe in our Savior Christ, our bodies shall likewise be
raised up again to glory at the last day: as the Apostle in this place, gives
us further to understand.

And let us herewithall, well consider also; that in so much as the holy
Apostle S Paul, did by diligent and earnest preaching, deliver the testimony
of the witnesses here mentioned, concerning the sundry and often appearances
of our Savior, after that he was risen: that therefore they are to be esteemed
of necessary use, and profit, that they should be preached: and accordingly,
that all whatsoever diligence and care, which is used, both in preaching, and
hearing, and studying of them; is so authorized by the holy Apostle, that we
need not account our former labor therein, to be repented of; but rather,
that we are greatly to bless and praise God, with all our hearts; for his
gracious direction and assistance therein: and that we ought to have often
recourse to the same doctrine; and to be as ready to preach, and hear it
again, when just occasion shall be offered, as we were before.

Thus much, concerning the historical warrant, and confirmation, of the
resurrection of our Savior, according to the prophetical predictions, and
foretellings of the same.

Where; this is in no wise to be neglected, touching the Apostles own
testimony, which he has given unto it upon his own certain knowledge (in
that he saw our Savior, after his ascension; which he could not have done, if
he had not been risen again) that though he does after his wonted manner,
confess and bewail his sins, and utter his unworthiness to be an Apostle:
yet he does it in such sort; that is, with such holy skill, and dexterity;
that he does so much the rather, magnify the credit of his Apostleship, and
of this his present testimony: by how much he does more highly extol the
grace of God, in that he of his infinite mercy, had vouchsafed to appoint him,
though most unworthy, to that so high an office.

But letting fall all comparison: and leaving the matter indifferently to be
considered; he concludes after this manner: that whosoever were the
instruments of God, to Preach the doctrine which he speaks of; the
Corinthians could not deny, but that they had heard it preached; yea so
effectually, that by the grace of God, and blessing of his holy Spirit, they
were confirmed in their hearts, to believe the undoubted truth thereof.

And thus, he makes a notable transition, to the disputing of the first
question.



Last of all (says he, as we read, verses, 8.9 10.11.) he was seen also of
me, as of one borne out of time.

9. For I am the least of the Apostles, who am not meet to be called an
Apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.

10. But by the grace of God, I am that I am: and his grace which is in me, is
not in vain: but I labored more abundantly then they all: yet not I, but the
grace of God which is with me.

11. Wherefore, whether it were I, or they, so we preach and so have ye
believed.

Explication
Thus then, in these words, the divine art and skill of that holy wisdom,
which God gave to his blessed Apostle, is very plain: both for the upholding
of his Apostolical credit, in his unfeigned abasing of himself; and also in
his most commodious transition, from the ground of the question, to the
disputation it self: as we shall see further, by the words which follow in
the 12. verse.



Now (says Saint Paul upon the premises) if it be preached that Christ is
risen from the dead, how say some among ye, that there is no resurrection of
the dead.

Explication
Here it is plain, that the holy Apostle enters to dispute the first
question, from the former ground of our Saviors resurrection: by a sharp
encounter against the adversaries. The reason is, because our Savior did not
rise again, so much to declare himself to be in his own behalf perfitly
justified in the sight of God (seeing he had no sin of his own) as for the
sake of his Church: and to let it appear, that we poor sinners believing in
him, are by him justified, and delivered from our sins, and from all the
punishments thereof: and namely from death, that it should not prevail against
us; but that we should have the victory over it in the end.

Neither did our Savior rise again, as a private person; but as the head of
his Church: to the end that he might, in due time, draw all the members
thereof, after himself. And therefore it is, that the holy Apostle makes
these propositions equivalent, and conuersiue as one may say: If Christ be
risen, thou shall the faithful one day rise again: to wit, bodily, as Christ
is already so risen. And again, If any man say, that the faithful shall not
rise at the last day: it is (says the Apostle) as much as if he should say,
Christ himself is not risen. For so we read, verse 13. If there be no
resurrection of the dead, then Christ is not risen. And indeed, they that deny
the proper effect, do, (as we may well say) in effect deny, and annihilate,
or frustrate the cause it self. As for example, if one should affirm and say,
There shall be no So^mer, or any renewing of the fruits of the earth this next
year: it is as much as if he should say, that there shall be either no kindly
heat on the earth by the Sun, nor moisture of rain from the clouds of
heaven; or else no vegetative power in the root of grass, and trees, etc. nor
generatiue or pocreating power in any cattle, etc.

So then, this is the first reason of the Apostle, that the bodies of the
faithful shall rise again, as the proper and necessary effect: because our
Savior, who is in the most holy counsel and decree of God, appointed to be
the proper, powerful, and effectual cause thereof, is already risen again.

And that our Savior is so appointed of God; it is plainly testified, and
taught, in many places of the holy Scriptures. As Rom: 8.11. and chap: 14.9.
and 1. Cor: 6.14. and 2. Cor: 4, 14. Ephesians: 1.19.20. and ch: 2.5.6. Philip: 3,
20.21. 1. These. 4.14. and 1. Pet: 1, 2.3.4. etc.

The holy Apostle does use diverse other notable reasons, to prove the Article
in question: as we shall see hereafter. But before that he comes to any new
reason; he does to the further strengthening of this, set down diverse gross
and heretical absurdities, which must needs follow upon the denial of the
resurrection of our Savior. For as he gives plainly to understand, it is the
utter rasing, and overthrow, of all Christian religion.

And insomuch as he is thus careful, to confirm this Article of our Saviors
resurrection: it may justly, be no obscure argument to us, that they who
doubted of the bodily resurrection of the faithful; did therewithal, call
likewise into question, the truth of the bodily resurrection of our Savior: as
though it had been only represented in some vanishing and flitting
apparition, and not performed really and in very truth.

But far be it from us, and from every good Christian, once to admit any one
thought, that way. For then it should be an easy thing, for the devil to make
us to doubt of our own resurrection. And therefore not without great cause,
does the holy Apostle hedge up the way against this so dangerous a conceit, as
it were with a high hedge of sharp thrones, that we might never be driven
into it.





14. If Christ be not risen (says Saint Paul) then is our preaching vain,
and your faith is also vain.

15. And we are found also false witnesses of God: for we have testified of
God, that he has raised up Christ: who^ he has not raised up, if so be the
dead be not raised.

16. For if the dead be not raised, then is Christ not raised.

17. And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain: ye are yet in your
sins.

18. And so, they that are asleep in Christ, are perished.

Explication.
These are the words of the blessed Apostle, as they follow in our text,
verses, 14.15.16.17.18. And here the saying is made true, that one absurdity
granted, many other do follow upon it. The Apostle (as we see) reckons up
five or six of them.

First, that if our Savior Christ be not risen: then the Apostolical
ministry was a vain institution, and to no good effect.

Secondly, that the faith of the hearers was but a vain fancy, and no
powerful grace to eternal salvation.

Thirdly, the Apostles should therewithal be found false witnesses.

Yea so, as it is said in the fourth place, that God himself should be made
accessarie to this most fraudulent crime.

Fifthly, the Corinthians should have no true assurance of the forgiveness of
their sins.

Finally, all the faithful already departed this life, are perished, as dying
in a wrong belief.

All which (as was said) are most irreligious, yea heretical, and blasphemous
absurdities, most worthy to be abhorred of all true Christians.

In which words also (as we see) he urges again the equiualencie of these
propositions, The faithful shall not rise again bodily: And Christ is not
bodily risen again.

But of this more, when we shall come to consider of the danger of not
believing this Article.

In the mean season, let us proceed to the second reason, for the proof of
the resurrection of our bodies: as it follows in the 19. verse.



If in this life only (says the Apostle) we have hope in Christ, we are of
all men the most miserable.

Explication
These words must be understood, as spoken partly concerning our bodies, in
respect of those most cruel persecutions, which Christians are oftentimes
vexed withal, above any other sort of people; even for that special hatred,
which the wicked of the world, bear against the name and doctrine of our
Savior Christ: but they are chiefly uttered in regard that the immortality of
the soul, and the resurrection of the body to eternal life and glory, are
grounded upon one and the same foundation; so as the one cannot be denied,
without the denial of the other. Like as also, our Savior Christ, Mat: 22.
proves the resurrection of the body which is to come; from the present
immortality of the souls of the faithful: insomuch as either of them, have
like ground, from that covenant, which God has made with his people; calling
himself, the God of Abraham, Isaak, and Iaakob. For as our Savior says, he
is not the God of the dead, but of the living; as though he should have said,
God is the God of the whole persons of his confederates, both of their bodies,
and also of their souls; and therefore as they live immortality in their
souls, which are one part of his creation; so shall they also in their bodies.
But of this more in the promise.

This second reason thus concluded, from an absurdity, which must needs
follow, upon the denial of the resurrection of the body (insomuch as the
bodies of the faithful are oftentimes most cruelly persecuted here in this
world, where they are as strangers; while the wicked are at ease, and prosper,
growing as it were in their natural soil) the Apostle also, having before
noted many other absurdities, which might justly make all the adversaries of
this Artiticle, ashamed of their part: now henceforth, he does, (as it
follows in the text) call the adversaries thereof, back again to the ground
of the truth, called by them into question. And he affirms against them, that
there is most certainly a resurrection of the body to come, for the benefit
of the faithful: insomuch as our Savior is out of all doubt, bodily risen
again.

The which ground of the question, having been before so proved by him: he
does furthermore illustrate the same, by two notable similitudes, or
comparisons. The former whereof is set down in the 20. verse.



They are these. But now (says the Apostle) is Christ risen from the dead, and
was made the first fruits of them that slept.

Explication
This first similitude, or comparison, is taken from a certain ordinance of
God, prescribed (as we know) in his holy law: to illustrate and clear the
matter in question, after this manner. For like as when (according to the
appointment of God) the first fruits of the yearly renewing of the fruits of
the earth, were duly offered, as an homage, or rather as a religious profession
of spiritual allegiance, and subjection, due unto him: then, all the whole
crop of their corn, or increase of their vineyeards, or of the flocks of
their sheep, etc. were sanctified to the free use, and benefit, of the people
of God: so also, yea much rather; insomuch as God has ordained that the whole
Church should enjoy the benefit of bodily resurrection, by the resurrection of
our Savior: it cannot be, (as the Apostle gives to understand) but seeing our
Savior, who is as the first fruits, or a sacred pawn and pledge of the
resurrection, is risen again; the faithful also, shall do so; when the time,
thereunto appointed of God, is come.

This therefore, is the former of the two similitudes.



It follows in the 21. and 22. verses, in these words.

21. For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.

22. For as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

Explication
The holy Apostle, having (as we said) laid a sure foundation before:
observes now a good proportion in this his second comparison. For the
resurrection of our Savior, through his righteousness and obedience; and
therewithal by reason of his satisfaction for our sins: must needs be of as
great virtue, and grace, if not of greater, to give life and resurrection to
the bodies of his Saints after death; then Adams sin was, to bring death upon
the bodies of all mankind.

According to that which this same our Apostle writes, Rom, 5, verse 17. For
(as he says there) if by the offense of one, death reigned through one, much
more shall they which received the abundance of grace, and of the gift of
righteousness, reign in life through one, that is Jesus Christ And again,
verse 21. That as sin had reigned unto death so might grace also reign by
righteousness, unto eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. In the which
words, though the direct purpose of the Apostle, be to prove and illustrate
the doctrine of our justification by our Savior Christ: yet the force of his
reasons, and of that comparison which he makes; do extend themselves as
far, as does the present question which we have in hand: insomuch as the
resurrection of our bodies, is a fruit of that justification, which our Savior
has procured unto us, and to all that do truly believe in him.

Yet let us mark; that were as in our text, the Apostle says generally, that
as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ all shall be made alive: we must restrain
his words, answerable to the limits of the question in hand: that is, to the
resurrection of the bodies of the faithful.

For notwithstanding the bodies of the wicked shall rise again also: yet
because that shall not be, so properly, an effect of the resurrection of our
Savior; as of the justice of God, to take vengeance of their sin in their
bodies, as well as in their souls: therefore we are to disburthen this
question of that consideration at this time.

Now therefore, that we may proceed. Whereas it might be objected, and
demanded: why then do we not see the bodies of the faithful to rise again,
as the body of our Savior is risen? The holy Apostle does prudently prevent
that objection, as we may perceive by his words immediately following: to wit,
in the 23. verse.



They follow thus, But every man in his own order: the first fruits is
Christ, afterward they that are of Christ at his coming.

Explication and proof.
That is to say, Howsoever the faithful do not rise again the third day,
after that they dye, as our Savior did: no nor the third year; no nor many
hundreths of years after, as we have had experience by the space almost of
sixteen hundreds of years already, since the resurrection of our Savior:
yet the bodies of every one of them, shall certainly be raised up, at the time
appointed, and determined of God, to that end. Which time, all the faithful,
are with patience to wait for. Yea even with this mind, that it may
abundantly suffice us all, that we have the promise of God, for our assured
resurrection at the last day.

And this patient waiting for it by faith, is necessarily to be observed of us;
lest after the manner of proud and presumptuous heretics: we go about
ambitiously to prevent the Lord, to our utter destruction. For verily, the want
hereof, is no small cause, that many will needs have their heaven here: and
that therefore they willingly imagine, that the resurrection is past already,
etc. And so both destroy their own faith; and the faith of so many, as will be
led by them: as we shall have further occasion, to consider hereafter.

Hitherto of the two former reasons of the holy Apostle, for proof of the
first question: with the illustrations and comparisons, belonging unto them.

The third reason now follows. And that by occasion of the mention of the
time, when the resurrection of the bodies of the faithful shall be: to wit,
at the coming of our Savior, at the end of the world: as it follows,
verses, 24.25.26.27.28. Of the which words, because we have considered before,
in the Article of our Saviors coming to judge the world; so far forth as
concerns the diverse manner of the government of his kingdom, after that
day, from that which is now: we will not stand upon it here.

Only let us, for the present, consider how the Apostle does conclude, that
the resurrection of our bodies, and of the bodies of all the faithful that
shall then be found dead; shall be at that day.



If all the enemies of the faithful (whom God accounts his enemies also,)
shall at the coming of our Savior to give judgment at the last day, be
utterly and for ever subdued by him: then doubtless, Death, which is one
capital and chief enemy, and (as the Apostle says) the last enemy of the
rest; shall be subdued.

But all the enemies of the faithful shall be subdued (says the Apostle) yea
even from the first to the last. And therefore Death also together with them.

Explication
It is true. And consequently it follows thereupon, that the bodies of the
faithful, shall rise again to everlasting life. For otherwise, if their
bodies being overthrown by death, should never be raised up again: then
should death reign still, or rather tyrannize over them. But God will not
suffer the enemy, so to do. For seeing sin shall be utterly abolished,
which was the cause of death to the body: death it self shall also one day
cease, touching the bodies of the faithful; as well as their souls have
already escaped the second death. And so according to the words of our text,
God shall be all in all: insomuch as he raising up the bodies of his servants
to glory; shall cause his most glorious power, and the most rich grace of his
Gospel, to shine forth as well in their bodies as in their souls: when they
shall wholly live together in eternal glory with him; and when he shall
vouchsafe, together with the Son, and the holy Ghost, to live most perfectly,
and fully, in them all: according to the prayer of our Savior Christ made in
that behalf, in the 17. chap: of the Evangelist John.

This being the Apostles third reason: let us now come to the fourth, as it is
contained in the 29. verse.



Else (says Saint Paul) what shall they do who are baptized for dead? If the
dead rise not at all, why are they then baptized for dead?

Explication
In these words, Saint Paul reasons from that use, and end, whereunto our
Savior Christ ordained his Sacrament of holy baptism, in the outward washing
of the bodies of those, that should believe in his name: the which was, (no
doubt) as well to assure the baptized of the forgiveness of their sins, in
respect both of soul and also of body, as to teach them both in body and soul
to dye unto sin: and so consequently, to assure everlasting blessing, and
glorious salvation, to them both. Which could not be performed, unless the body
should rise again.

This seems to be the very true meaning, and intent of the holy Apostle,
directly serving to the purpose which he has in hand. As though he should
have said thus. If there should be no resurrection of the body, why should
the Sacrament of Baptism, the seal of the Lords covenant of salvation, be
applied unto it? What fruit, either have the faithful by it: to wit, in
respect of the body, who are already dead? Or what fruit may the living look
to find by it, in the same respect, when they shall be dead: if the hope of
the resurrection, be not assured unto them thereby?

And whereas the adversaries might peradventure allege; that it is a
sufficient use of Baptism, to assure the faithful of the salvation of their
souls: though the body have no fruit by it. Beside that this is an ignorant
restraint, of the most holy and gracious covenant of God: the Apostle has
sufficiently prevented this objection; seeing if any deny the one part of it,
he can have no true faith to believe the other, as in this his disputation he
gives plainly to understand: as we have partly observed already, and shall
further observe it to be so; by the reasons that follow, when we shall come
unto them.

In the mean while, we cannot deny, but that some words of the present text,
are diversely translated, and accordingly, diversely interpreted: as though the
Apostle should reason from some other ground, then from that which we have
alleged. But upon due consideration, it will be found (as I verily suppose)
that no other ground, will sufficiently uphold it to the purpose which is in
hand.

And therefore, whereas these words (Oi baptizomenoi huper toon necroon) are
translated of some thus, baptized over the dead; as though it had been, even
in the Apostles time, the manner of some, to baptize over the graves of the
dead: this surely, is very unlikely; I mean that the Apostle would ground his
reason upon such a groundles, or fond use, if any such were. And therefore,
this reading cannot well agree, to express the Apostles meaning.

Neither yet does that translation well agree, which has a respect to the
ancient custom of the faithful Jews; in that, to the nourishing of their
hope touching the resurrection of the body, they used to wash the bodies of
their dead, and then to imbalme them, before they buried them: as though the
Apostles words were to be translated thus, Else, what do they, which use
washing over the dead? and therefore that from this custom, the Apostle would
prove, that there is a resurrection of the body, seeing otherwise, this washing
should be in vain. For this also, though it be of more weight then the former,
as touching the matter alleged: yet it is not sufficiently agreeable to the
phrase, or construction of the words, which the Apostle uses.

Wherefore, we may rather hold our selves to the first translation, and sense
of the words, understanding the greek (huper) to be used by Saint Paul, as
the latin (pro) is used in this latin phrase, habere pro derelicto, as
Master Calvin well observes: so that he who is baptized, should be baptized
for dead, that is as one in a manner dead; even to dye more and more to sin,
but to live more and more unto God.

Nevertheless, in that Master Calvin interprets the Apostles words, as
though he should reason from the custom of such conuertes, as neglecting
baptism ouerlong; were yet at the last provoked in conscience to seek after
it, when they did see death any way approaching unto them, lest they should be
prevented of that benefit, and comfort, which they hoped to find by it:
though the interpretation be not lightly to be passed by; yet for my part, I
cannot rest in it, as in that which the Apostle would make the ground of his
reason. And Master Calvin himself worthily condemns it, for a great falt in
them that should so defer their Baptism, till they should be going out of
this life.

Finally, Master Francis Iunius so interprets these words, as if (huper,)
usually, and rightly turned (super) should nevertheless, according to the use of
the same, both greek and latin preposition in greek and latin writers, be
taken here, for (praeter, besides) or in the signification of (insuper,
moreover) as noting the continuance of the Sacrament of Baptism in the church
of God, by a constant course, for the comfort of the living, still: like as it
was found to be of comfortable use to those then dead, so long as they were
alive. As though the words of the Apostle were to be read thus, Else what do
they that are baptized still, or moreover, and beside those that are already
dead? because otherwise, it might be inferred, that unless the dead should
rise again, neither have the dead any fruit of baptism abiding them; to wit,
in respecct of their bodies, and so shall be disappointed of that which they
looked for by faith: neither have the living any reason, at the least in
respect of the body, why it should be continued among them. And this indeed may
the doubling of the question by the Apostle, import, Else what shall they do,
who are baptized? to wit, such as are already dead. And again, why are they
(namely they who are living) yet baptized? But howsoever it be, all must come
to this issue, that they who deny the resurrection of the body, do frustrate
the use of the Sacrament of baptism: at the least, in one special part of it.

Thus much, concerning the fourth reason: for the right understanding whereof,
we have cause, as we see, to pray to God, for his holy Spirit of judgment and
discretion.

The fifth reason is now to be considered of us.

It follows in the 30 verse.



The Apostles words are these.

30. Why are we also in ieoperdie every hour?

Evplicatio^
In these words, the holy Apostle reasons from that special work of the
grace of God in the hearts of his children; and namely of the Preachers of the
Gospel in those days: whereby they were made most willing, and courageous, to
expose and lay open their bodies, and natural lives, to all necessary
dangers: as they that made no reckoning of them, for the Gospels sake, having
an assured hope of a better resurrection: after the example of the more ancient
Martyrs, of whom we read honorable mention to be made, Heb: 11.35.

The which reason, the same our Apostle illustrateth from his own example; in
that he was most prodigal of his life (as one may say) in the cause of the
Gospel: as it follows in the 31. verse, and in the former part of the 32.



By our rejoicing (says Saint Paul) which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I
dye daily.

32. If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, what
does it advantage me?

Explication.
The meaning of Saint Paul is, to protest with great earnestnes, in manner of
taking an oath; or rather by an attestation and calling of the Corinthians
themselves to witness: that he for his part, for the comfortable hopes sake of a
better life; and even for the comforts sake of the resurrection of the body,
through faith in Jesus Christ, whom he calls the rejoicing both of himself
and of them) did as they might well perceive, carry his life continually as it
were in his hand, for the testimony of the truth. According to that which he
writes also, 2. Cor: 11.13. that he had been oftentimes near to death for
it: yea and that by all sorts of perils, and dangers, as we read in the 26
verse.

But here (as we see) he gives one special instance among the rest, which
could not, but be famously known unto them: in that he refused not to put
himself in danger, to have his body most cruelly torn in pieces, and devoured
by wild beasts at Ephesus. For to this punishment, it seems that he was
there condemned, for our Saviors sake, and his Gospel: and should have been
so destroyed, had not the Lord strengthened him, to overcome the wild beasts,
in fighting with them: and so to escape the danger, according to the law of
victory, in that the Ephesians their inhumane and barbarous custom which they
had to condemn men to that savage fight, to make themselves sport in the
beholding of it.

Now therefore (says the Apostle in this respect) what profit could I have
looked to have come unto me, by this my dangerous adventure: had not the hope
of the resurrection, animated me against the natural fear, and terror,
concerning the spoil of my body. The holy Apostle, no doubt, considered thus
with himself, that if he had made that adventure, in carnal respects, and
dyed in the combat; his death had been woeful: or if he should have escaped,
as by the mighty and powerful mercy of God he did; yet should the glory of
his manhood be a mere vain thing, when it should be said, Paul plaide the
man, so that he overcame wild beasts at Ephesus, etc.

And thus we may plainly perceive, that the holy Apostle does make the belief
of the resurrection of the body, the ground of all comfort, as touching the
sufferings of the body. Neither indeed, is there any just cause, why we should
make any doubt; but that as the body bears a great part, in that fight of all
afflictions (for all buffetings, scourges, imprisonments, rackings, etc. do
befall it) so God will give it a great part of that blessed reward, which he
has promised to give unto those, that shall suffer any such things in their
bodies for his truths sake.

Now the sixth reason, which is the last of those, which the Apostle Paul
uses, to prove the resurrection of the body, it is yet behind.



It is contained in these words.

32. If the dead be not raised up: let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
shall dye.

Explication
This last reason, takes his strength from another great absurdity, which
follows upon the denial of the resurrection of the body: even this so great
an absurdity, that the ungodly speech, and practice, of Epicures, and
Bellie-Gods (as we call them) should (clean contrary to the rule of Gods
blessed word and practice of his holy religion) have at the least some color,
and show of reason, in that they say, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow
weee shall dye.

Wherefore, seeing this so absurd, and godless an opinion, speech, and
practice, is to be utterly condemned of all men; like as God himself, most
severely condemns it, as we read, Isai: 22. verses, 13.14. it follows,
that even for the same cause also; that opinion, or doctrine whatsoever, which
would give encouragement, and license, to so great prophanenes; is with like
detestation, to be condemned of all true Christians. And of that sort, is the
denial of the resurrection of the body. Whereupon, worthily does the holy
Apostle set down a very grave admonition and reproof, against this wicked
opinion, and against that godless prophanenes which attends upon it; with an
earnest exhortation, to stir up the Corinthians, and all Christians to strive
to the contrary: as it follows in the two next verses of our text.

Question. Which are the Apostles words?

Answer. 33. Be not deceived (says S. Paul) evil speeches corrupt good
manners.

34. Awake to live righteously, and sin not: for some have not the knowledge
of God. I speak this to your shame.

Explication. In these words of S. Paul, his holy admonition is this; that the
Corinthians, and likewise all other, should beware, lest they should be at any
time seduced: under any pretense of reasoning about this matter, or concerning
any other principle of religion, for probability of disputations sake. For
such opposition of science falsely so called, is very dangerous, according to
that 1. Tim. 6.20.21. For (says the Apostle) while some do profess that
course, they have erred concerning the faith.

Yea, though it may be, that some Christians are not so disposed of themselves:
yet, as he gives them also to understand, it is very dangerous for them, to
have any familiarity with such kind of persons, and to lend their ear, to
their cauilling contradictions.

It is also, as he further aduertiseth the Corinthians, a fruit of an
ignorant, and unsettled mind, to be doubtful in any principle of religion. And
to be always learning, and never to come to a grounded persuasion of the
truth: is a shame to all such professors of the Gospel. Yea, it is the high
way to every heretical fancy: according to that rebuke which our Savior
gave the Sadduces, in telling them, that they erred, because they knew not the
Scriptures, nor the power of God. And the Apostle tells the Corinthians very
roundly, that it might justly be a special reproach unto any among them, to be
ignorant and unsettled: because God had most clearly set up the light of his
truth, and caused knowledge, and every good gift, fit to give knowledge, to
abound among them. Hitherto of the Apostles admonition and reproof.

His exhortation is this, that the Corinthians, and likewise all other
Christians (as was said before) should have great care, to awake in a right
manner, from all sin, all the days of their lives, here in this world: so
that holding faithfully and inuiolably this holy principle of religion,
together with all the rest of them; they might with the rest of Gods Saints,
rise again with their bodies, not to shame, but to immortal glory. And that
they should not under a pretense of spiritual awaking, and arising inwardly in
their mind, to embrace their own fancies, and therewithal to impugn the
doctrine of the resurrection of the body, as some among them did: because (as
he tells them) nothing else could ensue upon this course, but a profane
unjust, and godless life.

Thus far, has the holy Apostle proceeded, in the proof of the first
question, concerning the resurrection of the bodies of the faithful: to wit,
that it is a most sure, and certain truth, that they shall rise again at the
end of the world.

NOw follows the second question, touching the manner of the resurrection of
the same their bodies. And this question, is so lincked with the former, as
appears by the manner of the Apostles propounding, and handling of it: that
it may be evident unto us thereby, that he had to deal with some very waiward
persons; who would not easily be satisfied, with the former reasons, though
they are most weighty: but continuing still in their former doubt, did
prejudice the truth, with a further scruple, about the manner of the
resurrection, how, and after what sort, it should be.

Nevertheless, so great was, both the zeal of the Apostle for the glory of
God, in the justifying of his truth; and also his desire after the salvation of
all the children of God: that he refused not to answer to this question also;
even for their sakes (among those that were co^trarily minded) whosoever would
by any means be induced, to yield themselves teachable, and obedient to the
truth of God, in this point, at the last.

The lincking of this question, with the former, by such as were so waiwardly
disposed, is contained in the 35. verse.

And the further answer of the holy Apostle, both to the first thus repeated;
is as it follows more briefly, verses, 36.37.38: and then to the second,
newly propounded, by a more large discourse; as it follows thenceforth, from
the 3^. verse to the 51. of the chapter.

Question. First therefore, which are the words of either question, thus lincked
together: as they are ascribed by the Apostle, to the waiward persons, whom we
speak of?

They are these.

35. But some man (says the Apostle) will say, How are the dead raised up? and
with what manner of body come they forth?

Explication.
That these words, are uttered in the name of waiward persons: it is evident by
that answer which the Apostle gives unto them. For if they had been
teachable, and desirous to have been further informed; he would not have
answered so sharply, as he does: Thou fool, etc.

The first question therefore, is in these words, frowardly repeated again; as
presupposing an impossibility in the matter: in such sense, as the Epicures
before mentioned, are, in heathen writers, reported to ask scornfully, how the
world could possibly be made of nothing, what leauers, etc. were used, to the
making of that work?

The second, is also propounded with like mind; as though the first, being in
the opinion of the adversary unanswerable, this should so much the rather
prejudice the second: as if it were said thus, There is no likelihood at all,
that the body should possibly rise again. For who is so cunning, that he can
tell, what manner of bodies they should then be? whether such as they were
before, or no.

But let us come to see, how the Apostle does notably, both frustrate the
objection of impossibility, touching the first question: and also clear the
second, concerning the manner of the resurrection.



He does it in these words.

36. O fool (says he) that which thou sowest, is not quickened unless it die.

37. And that which thou sowest, thou do not sow that body which it shall be,
but bare corn as it falls, of wheat or some other.

38. But God gives it a body at his pleasure, even to every seed his own
body.

Explication.
Here the holy Apostle (as we see) does by a sharp rebuke (like unto that Gal.
3.1. O ye foolish Galatians, etc) with very grave and Apostolical authority,
set the ouer-wise among the Corinthians to school: that they might learn
their lesson, even from that common experience, which the yearly husbandry of
the husband man, afordeth to them, and to us all. For in so much as the corn
does usually die; that is to say, rotteth in the ground, before it takes
root, that then it may spring out of the earth: according to the rule of
Philosophy, that the corruption of one thing must make way, to the bringing
forth of another: and seeing also that we find, year after year, that God
gives the corn that was sown, a several body, according to his kind; yea
many grains, as it were so many several bodies for one: yea and beside the
multiplied grains of the corn it self, the stalk also, and the ear: why
then should it seem impossible to any, that God should from the same resolved
substance, raise up one and the same body again? Thus much therefore, more
briefly, for answer to the first question, thus waiwardly repeated by the
adversaries again.

The more large answer of the Apostle, to the second question; which is of the
manner of the resurrection, follows in the verses before mentioned. 39. etc.
51. The sum whereof is this; that our bodies shall be in a far differing
manner, at the resurrection, and for ever after: to that which they are now.

And the possibility of this also; the blessed Apostle Paul shows, from the
usual course of Gods dealing: in that he magnifieth his divine wisdom, and
power, in the variety of all his works, and in the several kinds thereof.
And first in his earthly creatures, which have life, compared among themselves.
And then also, in his heavenly creatures, compared both with earthly, and also
one of them with another.

Let us hear the Apostles words.

Question. Which are they?

Answer. They are these, as we read them, verses, 39.40.41.

39. All flesh is not the same flesh (says the Apostle) but there is one flesh
of men, and another flesh of beasts, and another of birds.

40. There are also heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies: but the glory of the
heavenly is one, and the glory of the earthly, is another.

41. There is another glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon, and
another glory of the stars: for one star differs from another star in
glory.

Explication
Here, as we may see; the variety of Gods most excellent wisdom, and the
infinitenes of his almighty power, do shine forth very clearly, both in the
earthly, and also in the heavenly creatures: the which he has created and made
at the first, and the which also he hitherto preserves, and maintains still,
in their several kinds. The earthly, as we see in the 39. verse: and both the
earthly and heavenly, in an unequal condition and degree. verses, 40.41.

Now, after the possibility of the resurrection of the body; and that also in a
manner very far differing from their present estate, declared by the
differing instances, of the former similitudes, or examples: the Apostle does
henceforth, apply the same instances, or examples, to express the matter in
hand; and says, Even so is the resurrection: that is to say, greatly differing
from that estate, wherein the bodies were before they fell down to the grave.
And he proceeds to show further, wherein that difference consists. First,
in three particular properties: and then more generally, in their estate more
entirely, and totally considered.

But let us hear the Apostle himself speak.

And first, concerning the three differing, or rather contrary properties, or
qualities, in the differing estate of the body.



He makes the application of the former instances, or similitudes, and
examples of the other creatures in these words, verses, 42.43.

42. So also (says the Apostle) is the resurrection of the dead. The body is
sown in corruption, and is raised in incorruption.

43. It is sown in dishonor, and is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness,
and is raised in power.

Explication
These contrary qualities, of one and the same body, do express the
difference, to be as great as possibly may be in the one estate, from the
other, though the substance of the body, is to be one and the same, in either
state and condition.

How our bodies are, for their present estate, corrupt, vile, and frail; we
have every one of us sensible experience: but what the incorruption, glory and
firm, and able constitution of them shall be (free from all diseases, etc) at
the resurrection, and thenceforth for ever: we shall not thoroughly discern;
till God vouchsafe to make us partakers of them. Nevertheless, this we know,
and it may well satisfy us; that our bodies shall in some measure, be made
like to the glorious body of our Savior Christ: as we read Philip. 3.21.

And whereas the Apostle expresses the death of our corruptible, ignominious,
and frail bodies, under the metaphore, or borrowed speech, of sowing; he does
it, to note that our bodies shall not be utterly extinguished by death: like as
our Savior speaks of his death, under the similitude of the wheat corn,
falling into the earth and dying, and so bringing forth much fruit, as we read
Ioh. 12.24. Like as also, to the same end; death it self, which falls upon
the bodies of the faithful, is compared to a sleep: as it follows in our
text afterward.

Such therefore is the differing estate, which shall be of the body at the
resurrection, from that which it is now; expressed by three particular
qualities in each estate: the one of the which estates, is in respect of the
same qualities; clean contrary to the other.

The entier and total difference, in each estate: is further expressed by one
more general contrariety, as was said.

Question. Which is that difference?

It is contained in the former part of the 44. verse, in these words of the
Apostle.

44. It is sown a natural body, and it is raised a spiritual body.

Explication.
By the natural body, the Apostle understands the estate and condition of our
bodies, such as it is by the common course of nature; mortal, and subject to
death, as we saw even now: insomuch as the soul which ministers life unto
it; Soma psychicon.
does in death, leave it. Whereupon, the Apostle calls it animale, of anima
the soul, wherewith the body is animated (as one may say) so long as the body
lives.

Soma pneumaticon.
By the spiritual body, he does not mean a body without a bodily, or natural
substance, and being: but a bodily substance, endued with such excellent
qualities, as were likewise mentioned before. Not so much proceeding from the
soul it self to the body, when it shall be reunited unto it: as from the holy
Spirit of God, the only immediate fountain of this spiritual estate of the
body, which he speaks of. So that by the Apostles description, the faithful
shall at the resurrection of their bodies; be in comparison, rather like Angels
at that time, then such men as they were before: that is, very corrupt and
vile, weak and frail, etc. According to that saying of our Savior Christ,
Luke, 20.35.36. They that shall be counted worthy to enjoy that world, and the
resurrection from the dead, neither marry wives, neither are married. For they
can die no more, for as much as they are equal to the Angels, (isangeloi) that
is in like estate and condition, touching immortality, with freedom from need
of all earthly food or clothing, etc. which now they cannot want. Nevertheless
they shall be of another kind of nature, or substance, chiefly in respect of
their bodies, then the Angels are. And then also, it follows in the same
sentence of our Savior, that they are the Sons of God, since they are the
children of the resurrection.

Now because this distinction of the body, into a natural, and a spiritual
body, might seem strange: therefore does the Apostle, in this latter part of
this 44. verse, affirm it of his Apostolical authority, and credit; that
there is a natural body, and that there is also a spiritual body.

And not only so, but he also confirms the first member of the distinction,
by the authority of the holy Scripture, saying thus; As it is also written (to
wit, Genesis chap. 2. verse, 7.) The first man Adam, was made a living soul. And
then he does again, of his own Apostolical authority, as a faithful
interpreter of the will of God: supply the other member of it, saying further,
that the last Adam (that is to say, our Savior Christ) was made a quickening
Spirit. That is, such a one, as was not only endued with a reasonable soul
like unto us, but also h^d in our nature which he took unto him, the Spirit of
God; mighty to raise up, and quicken our bodies after death, as well as he did
his own: and as well as in the mean season, he is mighty, and effectual, by
the same his Spirit, to regenerate, sanctify, and seal us up, both bodies and
souls, to the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven. Whereof also, he has
already taken possession on our behalf, in his body; now made perfitly
spiritual: to the end, that we with our bodies (when once they shall be made
spiritual, like to his) might likewise be made partakers of it, with him.

And yet with this caution (as the Apostle further adds) that according as in
the order of creation, the natural was before the spiritual: so must we be
content to remain in this world, natural; and only in some part, or measure,
spiritual, until the resurrection: when (and not till then) we shall be
wholly spiritual, in such sense, as has already been interpreted.

And for the further clearing of this point, the Apostle proceeds, in making
a more full comparison, or rather opposition, betwixt Adam and our Savior
Christ, as the words of the text will plainly declare.

Qu. What is that which he writes concerning this matter?

An. In the latter part of the 44. verse before mentioned, and so forth to to
the 50. verse, thus the holy Apostle writes.

44 There is (says he) a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.

45 As it is also written, The first man Adam was made a living soul: and the
last Adam was made a quickening spirit.

46 Howbeit, that was not first made, which is spiritual: but that which is
natural, and afterward that which is spiritual.

47 The first man is of the earth, earthly: the second man, is the Lord from
heaven.

48 As is the earthly, such are they that be earthly: and as is the heavenly,
such also shall the heavenly be.

49 And as we have borne the image of the earthly, so shall we bear the image
of the heavenly.

Explication
Herein, is plainly contained, the full ground and explication of that
distinction, which the Apostle made of the body, into natural, and spiritual.

We are here also to observe; that like as, albeit our Savior is called
spiritual, because of the abundance of the spirit which was in him, in most
singular manner and measure; he is not for all that, denied to be natural: that
is, to have a natural soul, as other men have. So in that it is said, he is
the Lord from heaven; to wit, in regard of his eternal Godhead: it is in no
wise the meaning of the Apostle, to deny his true assuming of the humane
nature here on earth, from the substance of the Virgin Marie.

And let it likewise be observed, in the same holy Apostles oppositiue
comparison, betwixt our Lord Jesus Christ, and Adam: that as the image of the
earthly, notes the very like nature of our body, with the body of Adam here on
earth: so the image of the heavenly, notes the very like estate of that body
which our Savior now enjoys, being in heaven.

Now in the verse next following; that is, in the 50: for the conclusion of
this point; he shows the reason, why he is so large in making plain the
distinction of the body natural, and spiritual: namely, for that it is a
certain truth, that our bodies in this corrupt and frail estate, wherein they
be now; cannot inherit the kingdom of God.

The words of the holy Apostle are these, This say I brethren, that flesh and
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither shall corruption (that is,
our bodies as they are now corruptible) inherit incorruption. That is, they
cannot inherit that place, which God has prepared only for such as shall be
freed from all corruption and frailty, as well of body as of soul.

And thus has Saint Paul cleared the second question, touching the manner of
the resurrection of the body: to the establishing of the faith of the
Corinthians, and of all other Christians, against all contradictions to the
same.

NOw yet furthermore, to the end there might be no occasion of any further
doubt, about this so necessary an Article: he enters upon the third question,
which he saw would be demanded. That is, what should become of the bodies of
all those Christians, which should be ^ound living at the last day, when as
all dead bodies shall be raised up out of their graves.



Behold (says he) I show ye a secret thing. We shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed.

53 In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet: for the
trumpet shall blow, and the dead shall be raised up incorruptible, and we
shall be changed.

53 For this corruptible must put on incorruption: and this mortal must put on
immortality.

Expli. In these verses, 51, 52, 53. the holy Apostle does (as we see) stir
us up to the diligent consideration of that which he writes. He tells us,
that he reports a great secret. Now secrets, as we know, in other matters*
are diligently harkened unto. Much more ought we to harken to those divine
secrets, which God by his holy servants, the Prophets and Apostles, do make
known unto us.

But what is this secret? We shall not all sleep (says this our Apostle) that
is, we shall not all die and rest in the grave, after the usual manner: but we
shall all be changed. Wherein first, the Apostle compares death to a sleep,
to signify that death is not an utter destruction of the body, as was touched
before: seeing that, as the body (though deprived of all sensible use of the
senses, as one may say) yet awaketh in the morning, and finds all after a
sort renewed: so the body, after that it has slept his full sleep, till the
last day; shall then rise again in that morning, to receive life, sense, and
motion: according to that, Psalm. 49.14. The righteous shall have dominion in
that morning. Illo mane. 1. quo resurg^nt pij, quasi ex nocte sepulchri; cum
videlicet Sol iustitiae orietur Christus, secundo aduentu suo. Vt site Iunius.
See more to this purpose in the 2. Book, page 609. where this sentence is
englished.

Secondly, the Apostle shows in these words, We shall all he changed: what
shall be instead of a death and resurrection, to all such as shall be found
living at the coming of our Savior to judge the world. When as to speak
properly; they shall neither die, nor rise again: but only be after a
wonderful manner, set in the same glorious estate with the other.

Thirdly, in the words next following: the holy Apostle giving us to
understand, that this change of the faithful, who shall be found living at the
coming of our Savior; together with the change of all other creatures, and
the raising up of all the dead; being to be done with greater expedition, then
all things were made at the first: it serves notably, to set forth the
almighty power of God herein. And therewithal, mightily to strengthen our
faith, against all doubtings about the matter. And yet not so, that the moment
which the Apostle speaks of, is precisely to be urged, further then to note
singular expedition, for so great and magnifice^t a work: far above that any
would think, how it could be so soon wrought. Like as Lament. chap. 4.6. it is
said by the holy Prophet, that Sodom was destroyed, as it were in a moment:
because it was done in a short time, even soon after that goodly sunshine
morning, wherein Lot went out of it. Read also Numb. 16. verses 21.45.

Fourthly, in the same verse, the holy Apostle tells us yet further; what
shall be the isntrumental cause of this change, and of the general
resurrection: namely, the sound of the trumpet of God: even that which 1. These.
4. he tells us, shall be sounded by the Archangel of God. And the same no
doubt, in far more glorious manner, sounding to all the world: then at the
giving of the law of God to the people of Israel. This trumpet, out of all
question, is not that which H. N. has challenged to himself, with a most
shrill and loud blasphemy: as if he were appointed of God, to be the man that
should by his doctrine, raise up all the Lords dead, as he says.

Finally, the holy Apostle St. Paul, for the further strengthening of our
faith, concerning this change; and the resurrection of all the faithful to
glory: he assures us in the last verse, that it is the very determined
decree of GOD, (whose counsel and purpose nothing can possibly frustrate) that
it must be so. For (says he) this corruptible, must put on incorruption, and
this mortal, must put on immortality.

Concerning which words of the holy Apostle, note we diligently, that for
further evidence and confirmations sake; he does as it were point with the
finger, to this very body which we carry about with us: as though he should
say; even this, and no other then every man's own body, shall certainly rise
again: according as Job (guided by the same Spirit of faith) says in the 1^.
chapter of his book, verses 25, etc. O that my words were now written, etc.
For I am sure that my Redeemer lives, and that the last man shall rise to
stand upon the earth. And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet
shall I see God in my flesh. Whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall
behold, and no other for me, after my reins are consumed, with my bosom. As
though he should say, though both bark and belly, even the thickest part of
the body, be wholly consumed to dust, etc: yet shall I see the Lord my Redeemer.

For like as our Savior Christ at his first coming, in all the cures which he
did, both to the bodies, and also to the souls of men; he did not give them
other souls, nor other members, to their decayed, lame, or withered bodies,
but only a new renewed quality and disposition, to either of them: (as sight
to the same eyes, hearing to the same ears, strength to the same legs, which
before were lame: as for example, concerning the ear of Malchus, which Peter
struck off; our Savior Christ did not make another ear to grow out of his
head, but caused the same ear, to grow to his head again: for as the holy
Evangelist writes, he touched that ear which was stricken off, and healed the
man. Luke, 22.51.) so at his second coming, our Savior will not give men
other bodies, but he will by his mighty power, raise up the very same bodies,
though by his grace endued with far more excellent qualities, and advanced to a
far more excellent estate then they were in before: I speak of the bodies of
the faithful.

Nevertheless, even concerning the wicked, this also is very equal and just,
that the very same should be raised up again: insomuch as the same that have
sinned, and died in sin, are to be punished in the justice of God, and no
other for them; as well as that the same bodies of the faithful, which have
been redeemed, and done faithful service to God, should of his mercy be
rewarded; and no other instead of them.

This is the rather to be diligently observed, and soundly digested in our
minds: because some, not considering the almighty power of God, have in their
weakness been carried away to think, that though we shall rise again, yet
it must be with other bodies.

Wherefore (beloved) let us be the more careful, so to settle and resolve our
selves, in the belief of the almighty power of our God and Savior Jesus
Christ, with like assurance of the good pleasure of his divine will in this
behalf: that we may be thoroughly persuaded, that no burning of our bodies in
the fire, no devouring of them by wild hearts, or by the ravening fowls of
the air, etc: can possibly hinder, that God should not easily gather together
the same substance, and the smallest resolved dust of it: even the same very
first matter, whereof the body was composed, and framed at the first.

But yet more careful ought we to be against the heresy of H. N. who makes
no reckoning of the resurrection of the body at all. And as a fruit thereof, in
the 6. chapter of his Documentall sentences, fears not to contradict the
plain meaning of the Apostle, in that he says, that This mortal, must put on
immortality: for he earnestly affirms, (though most faithlesly and
heretically) that Paul does not speak these words of the earthly creature,
but of the living word, etc.

These are the words of H. N. Verily (says he) the mortal whereof Paul
witnesses is not any creature of the earthly flesh and blood: but it is the
living word and Being of GOD, which in the beginning was immortal in the
manhood, and is for our sins cause become mortal. A most ignorant and
heretical blasphemy, and a most manifest falsifying of the meaning of the
holy Apostle.

Hitherto of the ground and warrant of this Article, concerning the
resurrection of the body: from this one most notable, and plentiful testimony
and confirmation of the Apostle Paul, thus far forth in this 15. chapter of
his ^. Epistle to the Corinthians.

THere are store of other testimonies in the holy Scriptures, to confirm the
same unto us, as an Article of faith usually received, even from more ancient
times: and that no doubt, according to the belief of the faithful in the true
Church of God, from the beginning of the world. For like as for the
confirmation of this Article to the christian Church; our Savior Christ being
upon earth, raised diverse out of their graves, as we have seen heretofore,
among the miraculous works which he wrought. And after that again, the
Apostles by his power, did the like: as Peter raised Dorcas from death to life,
etc. So from the beginning, God wrought some like miraculous works, for the
confirmation of the faith of his people therein, in all ages that went before.
For as we read in the holy Story, 2. Kings, 13.21. A dead man touching the
bones of Elisha, revived, and stood upon his feet. Yea as God took away
Elijah: so, long before that; he took Henoch away bodily into heaven, for any
thing we know to the contrary. Abraham also, considered that God was able to
raise up Isaak even from the dead from whence also (as says the Apostle) he
received him after a sort. Heb. 11.19. And in the same chapter, verse 35. The
women received their dead raised to life: as for example, the widow of Sarepta,
her son, at the prayer of Eliah; and the Shunamite, her son at the prayer
of Elisha. Other also (as the Apostle says further) were racked, and would not
be delivered, that they might receive a better resurrection. The which may be
exemplified, from the answer of the mother of her seven children, martyred
under Antiochus, in the 7. chap. of the 2. Book of Maccabees.

What the belief of Job was, we saw but a while since. We may read other
testimonies, Isai. 26.14. and Ezekiel. chap. 37. the whole chapter. In the which
places, the holy Prophets, strengthened the faith of the people of God,
touching their return out of captivity; by an allusion, or argument taken from
the resurrection of the dead: as though they should have said, ye believe that
which is a greater matter, as a received Article of your faith; and therefore
let not your hearts doubt of this. And more directly to this purpose; the Angel
of God testifies to the Prophet Daniel, the certainty of the resurrection of
all flesh: that is, of the godly to everlasting life, but of the wicked to
shame and perpetual contempt. Dan. chap. 12.2. And verse 13. he tells Daniel
himself, that he for his part, should stand up in his lot, at the end of his
days.

Thus we may perceive, that the resurrection of the body, has been received
as an Article of faith, not only in the christian Church, since the coming of
our Savior in the flesh; but also in the true Church, even from the beginning,
and in all ages, among all true believers, unto the time of the same his
coming: according to that which we read, John, 11.24. where Martha answering
our Savior according to the common faith; says to our Savior, concerning her
brother Lazarus: I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the
last day. And Acts. 24.15. the Apostle Paul testifies of the Jews, that they
looked for the resurrection of the dead.

The meaning of the Article.
NOw after this large discourse, touching the ground and warrant of this
Article: it follows in the next place, that you are to show what the meaning
of it is.

I believe the resurrection of the body?

They teach me, and every true Christian, to believe, that according to the
holy decree of God, and for a public declaration of his divine justice and
hatred against sin, in the fight of all the world; death is appointed to
all: so that even the most godly, by reason of that sin which is yet in part
abiding in them, The meaning of the Article.
must die the natural death, which is a separation of the soul from the body
for a time; whereupon it follows, that the body returns to the earth from
whence it was taken; (those only excepted, who shall be found living upon the
face of the earth, at the coming of our Savior Christ to judgment:) yet for
the worthiness of the death, and satisfaction, which the same our Savior has
made to God for us; and by the effectual working of his divine power; I do
believe, that both I my self, and also that all which have died already, or
shall hereafter die in the Lord; shall at the last day, be bodily raised up, to
a most blessed and glorious estate, our souls being united unto them again;
and thence forth, so to remain for ever and ever.

Ex. The proof of all this, we have seen before. Only let us briefly call to
mind, that which we read Heb. 9.27, 28. As it is appointed to men that they
shall once die, and after that comes the judgment. So Christ was once offered
to take away the sins of many, and unto them that look for him, shall he
appear the second time without sin unto salvation. Read also Eccles. 12.7.
and 1. These. 4.15, 16, 17.

NOw let us go forward.

The Promise
that our bodies shall rise again?

We have the promise of God, prophetically set down by the Prophet Hosea,
chap. 13. verse 14. alleged by the Apostle Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 15.54. as it
follows thus in that chapter.

54 So when this corruptible has put on incorruption, and this mortal has
put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass, the saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up into victory.

Explication and proof.
The holy Apostle does fitly allege the testimony of the Prophet, to this
purpose. And we may likewise allege all the prophecies of the old Testament,
touching the resurrection of the body, for the confirmation of the same promise
of God in this behalf.

But the fundamental ground of this promise, is that most gracious covenant,
which God has made with Abraham, Isaak and Jacob: and in them, through our
Savior Christ with all true believers, touching everlasting happiness and
salvation, both of soul and body. For thus does our Savior himself
interpret the tenure of Gods blessed covenant; to the refelling of the
Sadduces, who denied the resurrection of the body: as we read, and as has
been mentioned before. Math. 22.31.32. For so soon as he has alleged the
words of the covenant, I am the God of Abraham, etc: he infers straight way
against them, that God is not the God of the dead, but the God of the living.
That is to say, they whose God the Lord is, do both presently live with God,
in the blessed immortality of their souls, after this life ended: and also
shall for ever live with their bodies, after that they shall be raised up
again. For God is the God of the whole persons of his servants, and not of one
part of them only. As he has created both soul and body; and as he has
redeemed them both: so no doubt, he will save them both. 1. Cor. chapter, 6.
verse 20. Romans 8.23.

Touching this promise, our Savior is yet more express and plain. John, 6.
verses 39, 40.



This is the Fathers will, who has sent me (says our Savior) that of all
which he has given me, I should loose nothing, but should raise it up again
the last day.

40 And this is the will of him that sent me, that every man which sees the
Son, and believes in him should have everlasting life: and I will raise him
up at the last day.

Explication
This will of the Father, includes no doubt a promise of the effectual
performance of the good pleasure of the same his divine will.

Belief that to every true member of the church of God belongs the
inheritance of everlasting life.
And let us in these words observe likewise, the most holy consent, The Comforts.
both of the Father, and also of the Son, touching the assurance of our
resurrection. And again, chap. 5. verse 21. As the Father raises up the dead,
and quickens them, so the Son quickens whom he will. Read also verses
28, 29. And for the consent of the holy Ghost, together with the Father and the
Son, we read Romans 8.11. If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the
dead, dwell in you: he that raises up Christ from the dead, will also quicken
your mortal bodies, by his spirit that dwells in you.

THus therefore, having the Ground, Meaning, and Promise of this Article:

This also is expressed by the Apostle Paul, in the 15. chapter of his first
Epistle to the Corinthians, as it follows, verses 55, 56, 57. in these words.

55 O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory?

56 The sting of death is sin: and the strength of sin is the law.

57 But thanks be unto God, who has given us victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Explication and proof.
Here is matter of singular comfort indeed, in that Death, with all his power,
shall be vanquished, his prison gates set opon, and all his prisoners
delivered: in that also sin shall cease, and every curse, and the whole
irritating power of the law, shall be abolished.

Surely the discomfort of death and the grave, is very heavy and grievous to
the natural man. Yea we have all of us experience in our selves; that if the
least member we have be hurt, and so in danger to perish from the rest of the
body: we are very careful for it. It greeueth us once to think, that we should
loose the least joint: and we rejoice greatly, so soon as we perceive the
recovery of it. How must it not then be much more comfortable, to be assured
of the restoring of the whole body: seeing it must for a time, after a sort,
wholly perish. This moved David to sing with joy, in the midst of his
troubles, that his flesh should rest in hope. Psalm. 16.9. It gave singular
comfort to Job in his grievous calamity, as we heard but a while since, Job,
19. It has always imboldned, both former and latter Martyrs, to endure all
their torments cheerfully. Heb. 11.35.

Dear friends, as they are loath to part: so they are very joyful and glad to
meet again. God himself, has so lincked the soul and body, in such a
concordable consent, and mutual delight each in other: that as they are most
loath to part a sunder; so it cannot but be an exceeding joy to the soul, to
have an assurance of their most blessed meeting again. And the rather, because
death shall never sunder them any more: but they shall live together most
blessedly; in all joy and glory for ever. Luk, 20.35.36. For they can die no
more (says our Savior) for as much as they are equal to the Angels, and are
the Sons of God, seeing they are the children of the resurrection: as was
alleged before.

To all good men, sin, and the hateful tyranny thereof, is more grievous,
then death. And therefore to be delivered from it, and from all irritation and
provoking of the law: must needs also be matter of special great comfort.

The comfortable hope of the resurrection, makes all things the more
comfortable, to all true believers.

In this respect, the most gracious and faithful covenant of God, spoken of
before; is the more comfortable, because it extends it self to the body:
seeing as the mercy of God is perfect; so no doubt he will be a perfect
Savior. And as he forgiueth the sin both of body and of soul; so will he
remove the punishment from both: yea doubtless, he will save and glorify both.

In this respect, the sufferings of our Savior, having been in body, as well
as in soul; are the more comfortable: because body as well as soul, is
redeemed by him.

Belief that to every true member of the church of God belongs the glorious
resurrection of the body.
In this respect, the resurrection of our Savior, The Duties.
and his bodily ascension up into heaven, etc: are the more comfortable;
because the members must be made like to the head; and because our Savior
being a King, will every way most perfectly benefit his subjects. For seeing as
the heathen man could say, every kingdom is (euergesia) that is, a benefiting
of the subjects belonging to it: most of all must the perfect kingdom of our
Savior Christ, be a most perfect benefiting, or rather a beatifying or making
of the subjects thereof blessed and happy in the highest degree.

In this respect, the own bodily sufferings of the faithful, are comfortable
unto them: they knowing; that seeing they suffer in body with Christ, they
shall be glorified also in body with him, as well as in soul: according to
that of the Apostle, Romans 8.17. Yea, and seeing other creatures shall be
restored, (as it follows in the same text) much rather shall the bodies of
men, as we read, verse 23. of the chapter. And likewiise 1. Cor. 16.20. they
are bought with a price. Doubtless insomuch as the bodies of the faithful,
bear the violence of all cruel persecutions for the Lords cause: he will not
suffer the^ to want their reward.

In this respect, the sacrament of Baptism is the more comfortable, as we have
seen in the fourth reason of the Apostle. The like may be said of the Lords
Supper, whereof the body is partaker. For seeing the tree of life, should have
been a sufficient means, or assurance of everlasting life to Adam, both in
soul and body, if he had abode faithful to God: much more will our Savior
sacramentally represented, yea wholly given unto us in this Sacrament; be the
author and means of eternal life unto us.

Thus comfortable, is the assured hope of the resurrection of the body, to all
those that apprehend it by a true and lively faith: so that not in vain may
they comfort themselves, and one of them comfort another in this respect, as
Paul exhorts and incourageth the believing Thessalonians, 1. Epist. 4 18.
Wherefore much more shall the comfort of the fruition it self be; when once we
shall be made partakers of it.

But till that time come, it is necessary that we do not only diligently
learn to know, but also carefully endeavor to practice those duties, which
this comfortable hope, justly challenges at our hands: and which are as it
were, the way to the obtaining of it at the last.



They are set forth unto us by the Apostle Paul in the former alleged, 15.
chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, as it follows, verses 57.
and 58. which are the last verses of the chapter.



Thanks be unto God (says he) who has given us victory, through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

58 Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, immovable, abundant
always in the work of the Lord: for as much as ye know that your labor is
not in vain in the Lord.

Explication
These words of the Apostle, do notably set forth unto us, the duties belonging
to the comfort of the resurrection: partly by his own practice, and partly by
his exhortation made to the Corinthians.

The Apostles practice commends unto us most hearty thankfulness to God, as
one particular duty, most boundenly belonging to him, through the Lord Jesus
Christ, in this respect. And that not without very just cause, seeing it is a
very great and gracious benefit.

The which duty of thankfulness, would to God we had grace to remember to
perform every day that we rise out of our beds, more heartily then hitherto we
have done. For our bed may not ^naptly represent unto us our graves: and our
sleep in our beds, that sleep of death which our bodies must have in the
grave. And likewise, every mornings vprising from the sleep of the night, may
not unfitly put us in mind of our resurrection, which shall be at the last day:
and therewithal of this duty of thankfulness (which we speak of) for that
comfortable assurance, which he has given us concerning the same.

The exhortation of the Apostle, moves the Corinthians, and likewise all other
Christians more generally: first, to constancy in the assured belief of this
Article of the Gospel, as well as of all the rest, against the false doctrine
of all deceivers: in which respect he says, Therefore my beloved brethren, be
ye steadfast and immovable. And secondly, it provoke to diligence in all good
duties of obedience to God, to the uttermost of our power; both with soul and
also with body, all the days of our lives: according to the same assurance of
immortality, not only to the soul presently after the death of the body; as we
have seen before: but also to the body, from the time of the resurrection of
the same.

So that by this time, we may see how truly it was said in our entrance to
treat of this Article; that this one fifteenth chapter of the Apostle Saint
Paul, contains not only the ground and warrant of it: but also there
withal, the true Meaning of it: and the Promise: and the Duties belonging unto
it: yea and the Danger also of not believing it: as we shall have occasion to
consider, in the conclusion of our inquiry concerning this Article.

But before we come to that: it may be profitable for us; first to see how the
duties above mentioned, are called for, as fruits belonging to the comfort of
the resurrection which we speak of: and secondly, what other duties do belong
to the same.



In the 2. Epistle to the Corinthians, chap. 4. verses 13, 14, 15. thus we
read.

13 Because we have the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I
believed, and therefore have I spoken: we also (says the Apostle) do believe,
and therefore we speak.

14 Knowing that he which has raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also
by Jesus, and shall set us with you.

15 For all things are for your sakes, that most plenteous grace, by the
thanksgiving of many, may redound to the praise of God.

Explication
Here no doubt, the resurrection of our bodies apprehended by faith, is made one
special cause of this thanksgiving, whereof the Apostle speaks: as depending
upon the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Show now likewise, some other testimonies of holy Scripture, for constancy in
the faith, and for the care of all good duty: as a fruit of the comfort of the
same faith, touching the said resurrection.



It follows in the 16. verse of the 4 chapter of the 2. Epistle to the
Corinthians before alleged, thus.

16 Therefore (says the Apostle) we faint not, but though our outward man
perish, yet the inward man is renewed daily.

Explication and proof.
To this purpose also, well may that serve, Acts, 24.15, 16. Where the same our
Apostle, professes in an excellent profession of his faith: that he had hope
toward God, that the resurrection of the dead (which the Jews themselves also
did generally look for) shall be both of just and unjust. And herein (says he
further) I endeavor my self to have always a clear conscience, toward God
and toward men. Read also Philip. chapter 3. verses 7, 8, etc. The things
(says the same Apostle again) which were advantage unto me, the same I
accounted loss for Christ's sake, etc. And verse 11. If by any means I might
attain unto the resurrection of the dead. Not that the Apostle doubted of his
attaining unto it: but he speaks so, to note the excellency of that which
he labored after; as being worthy all labor that may be employed about it:
as it is further evident, verses 12.13, 14. Whereupon he does furthermore
exhort the Philippians, yea and all other Christians; to follow his example,
verse 15. in these words: Let us therefore (says he) as many as be perfect,
(that is, upright and entier) be thus minded, etc. For (as we know) many
seem to pray often, for a joyful resurrection: but they regard not to take
the right course, in rising first from the death of sin. etc.

Some also do make the same prayer for their friends; but they pray to late,
because they pray not till they be dead: as also because they themselves lie
dead in that sins, and trespasses, following the works of wickedness with
wicked diligence; as if nothing else were worthy to be labored after.

But we (beloved in the Lord) duly considering the excellent glory, whereunto
God of his infinite mercy has appointed our bodies: let us always esteem it
an ouer-base thing, to apply any precious member of them, to the vile service
of sin, and Satan: either our eyes to unchaste looks, or to read any
ungodly books: or our ears to hearken to lewd or unfruitful discourses by
word of mouth, or any wicked and ungodly speeches whatsoever: or our hands to
take bribes, or to work any deceit: or our feet to carry our bodies to any
wicked company, etc.

But contrariwise, let us use them to carry us to the house of God, and to
frequent the company of the godly; that we may learn both to mind, speak
and do those things which be good, and godly: according to the exhortation of
Saint Paul, from the consideration of this benefit of the resurrection. 1. Cor.
6. verses, 14.15. saying, God has raised up the Lord, and he will raise us up
by his power. And, Know ye not (says he further) that your bodies are the
members of Christ: Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the
members of an harlot? God forbid, etc. And verses, 19.20. Ye are not your own.
For ye are bought for a price: therefore glorify ye God both in your body and
in your spirit: for they are Gods. And Romans 8.11.12. after that he has made
like mention of the resurrection, Therefore brethren (says he) we are debtors
not to the flesh, to live after the flesh: For if ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die: but if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye shall
live. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.

And let us note well, that as the due consideration of death, is an effectual
bridle, to withdraw us from the ouer-curious, and delicious pampering and
tricking of our bodies; which in this our present mortal estate are but worms
meat, as was noted in the doctrine of Gods Fatherly providence, page, 254. or
at the least shall corrupt and turn to be worms: so the Christian meditation
of the resurrection of the same our poor and frail bodies to everlasting
glory; contains a mighty persuasion, to move and excite all true believers,
constantly to employ their whole bodies, and every part and member of them;
only to those honorable services, whereunto the Lord has created them.

Though we do not thus, we shall rise again in deed: but not to salvation
and glory, but to condemnation; and that most justly even to eternal reproach
and misery.

Thus much, concerning other testimonies of holy Scripture, belonging to the
former duties, beside that of the Apostle Paul. 1. Cor. 15.



The comfort hereof, does furthermore require, that we do account our selves
but strangers here in this world; and therefore not to addict our minds
inordinately to any of the pleasures, and profits, or aduancements thereof: no
not to those, that being rightly used, are lawful and good.

Nay rather, it requires on the contrary, that we settle our hearts,
patiently to expect, and endure all bodily afflictions of this life, yea even
death it self; both our own, and of our dearest friends: yea, if need do so
require, the most cruel death, and torturings of our bodies, for Christ and
his Gospels sake.

Explication
It is very true, according to that instruction which Saint Paul gives. 1.
These. 4.13.14. saying, The danger of not believing this Articles.
I would not brethren have ye ignorant concerning them which are a sleep, that
ye sorrow not even as other which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus
is dead, and risen: even so them which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with
him. Where note, that the hope of the resurrection to eternal life (as M.
Calvin says very well) is the mother of patience. Spes (inquit) beatae
immortalitatis, patientiae matter est. And of this patience, we have those holy
Martyrs, who have given their lives to testify the truth, for notable
examples: as we may see, if we call again to mind, that which is written,
Heb. 10.32. etc. and chap. 11.35. etc. Read also chap. 13, 1.2.3. And 2. Cor.
4.17.18. And so forth from the beginning of the next chapter, to the 12. verse.
For as we have considered heretofore: the doctrine of the Apostle in that
place, does respect the immortality both of the soul, and also of the body;
after the resurrection thereof. Where also, we are plainly taught, that we
ought (after the example of the faithful in former times) to live as strangers
here in this world, minding a better City, etc. As also Heb. 11. verse, 13.
etc.

Thus far of the duties.



Such as do not believe this Article, believe nothing, as they ought to
believe the same.

Neither is it possible, that they should be heartily willing, at any need, to
give their lives for our Savior Christ, and his Gospels sake: but
contrariwise, that by a cowardly seeking (by the denial of him in time of
danger) to save their lives; they must needs loose their lives, and their
souls too, for ever and ever.

Explication and proof.
This may be evident unto us, from that which we have heard before, in the
opening of the reasons which the Apostle has used, to confirm this Article.
For there he affirms plainly that they who deny the resurrection of the
bodies of the faithful, do therwithal, deny the resurrection of our Savior
himself as we may see. 1. Cor. 15. verse, 13. And again, verses, 15.16. For,
If there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen. And yet
again, If the dead be not raised, then is Christ not raised. And thus it
cannot be, but they frustrate all. To the which purpose also, serves the
second reason, and also the fourth, fifth, and sixth, as they have been
interpreted and explaned, in the same chapter.

Of this sort of unbelievers, were the Sadduces, as we have seen before.
Likewise Hymineus and Philetus, 2. Tim. 2.16.17.18. who affirmed that the
resurrection is past already: and by that their heretical doctrine, destroyed
the faith of certain, as the Apostle says.

Of this heretical stock, or lineage, is H. N. with his schismatical Family
of love, who make nothing but an allegory of the bodily resurrection: though
it be most simply, and plainly affirmed in the holy Scriptures, as we have
seen. Whence it is also, that the scholars of this Family, are so dastardly,
and of so evil consciences; that by shameful dissemblings, they shun all
open and plain profession of that which they hold: so soon as they see
themselves to be in danger of suffering any bodily affliction for the same.

Danaeus that learned writer, reckons up unto us, 19. sorts of heretics on a
row, which denied the resurrection of the body: to wit, the Simonians, the
Saturninians, the Basilidians, the Carpocratians, the Valentinians, the
Marcites, the Ophites, the Caians, the Sethians, the Archontikes, the
Cerdonians, the Marcionites, the Apellites, the Seuerians, the Bardesanistes,
the Heraclites, the Seleucians, the Hermians, and the Procitans. And we know
besides, how the fine witted Athenians, mocked at the Apostle Paul, so soon as
he had made mention of the resurrection from the dead.

Wherefore, to the end we may avoid this so great, and so common a danger,
whereinto so many have fallen: let us I beseech you, make the more precious
account, of that blessed diligence, which the holy Apostle has used in the
proof of this Article. The which, seeing he has done it so substantially, and
plentifully; that none can desire, either greater strength of reason, or more
comfortable ground of holy Scripture, to put the matter out of all doubt for
ever: let us so look to the almighty power of God; and so rest our selves upon
his most gracious good will and pleasure herein, through our Lord Jesus Christ:
that abandoning all erroneous, and heretical conceits, we may firmly hold
the truth of this most comfortable Article. And from the comfort of it, let us
likewise, have care to walk in all those good duties, which may guide us to
the blessed fruition of it: to the glory of God, and to our own everlasting
comfort, and salvation, both in body and soul together. Amen.

Belief that to every true member of the Church of God, belongs the
inheritance of everlasting life.


The last Article is this, I believe that there is an everlasting life.



We have a plain proof and warrant of it, Act. 13. verses, 46 47.48. in these
words.

46. Then Paul and Barnabas spoke boldly aad said, It was necessary that the
word of God should first have been spoken unto you: but seeing ye put it from
you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the
Gentiles.

47. For so has the Lord commanded us, saying, I have made thee a light of the
Gentiles, that thou should be the salvation to the end of the world.

48. And when the Gentiles heard it, they were glad, and glorified the word of
the Lord: and as many as were ordained to everlasting life, believed.

Many worthy things are contained in these words.

Explication
First, as we easily see; both the Apostle Paul, and also Barnabas consenting
with him, do not coldly or doubtfully affirm: but with singular boldness and
resolution, give an assured testimony of the everlasting life of all the
faithful.

Secondly, they show by what means, God guides, and draws his children, to
the inheritance of everlasting life: to wit, by the preaching of the Gospel of
our Savior Christ unto them, which is the word of life and salvation. The
which, because many of the obstinate Jews, refused to hearken unto and
embrace: they are said to refuse everlasting life it self, thereby most
graciously offered unto them.

Thirdly, they describe, who they be, to whom everlasting life belongs:
namely, to these that do believe, and embrace the Gospel, whereby our Savior
Christ is preached unto them. Not only to such among the Jews, but also to
every such one, among us the Gentiles.

Finally, they testify of our singular comfort; that it is the eternal decree,
and counsel of God, that it should be so.

To the end therefore (beloved in the Lord) that we may stir up our selves,
to the embracing of the doctrine, and faith of this Article: Let us consider of
it, (according as it is in deed) as of that which contains the chief benefit;
yea, even the only full perfiting of all, whatsoever the manifold and most
precious benefits, which our Savior Christ has purchased, and obtained for
us. It is that very scope, which God himself propounded to himself, in his
own most sacred purpose: to the glorious and eternal praise of the riches of
his grace, even before the world was. And for this cause it is; that (as our
Savior himself affirms) God has given his only begotten Son to be borne
of a woman, The ground of the article.
and to die for our sins. As John, 3.16. So God loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life. To this purpose also, God has poured forth his
Spirit upon his Church, to testify his glorious grace: and to guide us to the
obtaining of this everlasting life. The wisdom of the Spirit is life and
peace. Romans 8.6. and verse, 11.

As this everlasting life, is the chiefest blessing of all other: so has God
most graciously manifested, and confirmed the same to his Church, from time to
time. He did it to Adam in his paradise, even from the beginning of the
creation: in that he gave him the tree of life, to be a Sacrament to him of
immortality, if he would have continued faithful in his obedience to God. And
after that by disobedience, he had lost it; and therewithal pulled death upon
himself, and his posterity: such was the gracious goodness of God, that for
his recovery, he gave him the promise of our Savior Christ, who should be to
him, and to all that should believe in the same our Savior, more effectual to
their salvation, then that tree of life could be to Adam; as we are given to
understand, by that allusion which the Spirit of God makes thereunto, when
this benefit of everlasting life is assured unto us. Revel. chapter 2.7. And
again, chapter 22.2.

Moreover, for a real confirmation of this his most gracious purpose, to
bestow this unspeakable blessing upon his people: it pleased God, to take
away faithful Henoch before death, into his heavenly kingdom, out of this
world: so that (as the holy Scripture testifies) He saw not death, Genesis 5.21.
and Heb. 11.5. In like manner, for the confirmation hereof to the ages
following; he took up the Prophet Elijah from earth into heaven, so that he
died not after the common manner of men.

The burnt-offerings of the law, ascending by fire from the altar up to
heauenward (from whence they were called in the holy language, gnoioth, of
gnala, ascendere to ascend): they represented to the faithful, that their
sins are so done away, by the sacrifice of Christ: and their persons so
accepted; that the way to heaven, is by his sufferings, prepared for them. The
scape-goate also in the law, may not unfitly be a representation hereof. To
speak all in a word, the promise of everlasting life, to the Church, and
people of God; was (as we may say) the life of the covenant of God, made at the
first: and often renewed to his people, and namely to Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob;
according to that interpretation, which our Savior himself gave of it,
against the contrary error of the Sadduces, as we have seen before. Whence
also, he says expressly, Ioh. 17.3. This is eternal life, that they know thee
the only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. And the Apostle of
our Savior. 2. Tim, 2.9.10. certifieth us, that our salvation was given us,
through Jesus Christ, before the world was. But (as he says further) is now
made manifest, by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished
death, and brought life and immortality to light, through the Gospel. That is
to say; it is now more clearly, and more generally made manifest in the
Church, then it was before.

Thus then, we seeing that this Article has sufficient ground, and warrant, in
the holy Scriptures: let us in the next place, come to the sense and meaning of
it.

The meaning of the article.
I believe the everlasting life?

It teaches me and all Christians, to believe that after this natural life
ended, there is another life, and another world, which God has prepared, and
will certainly give to his elect: wherein the whole catholic Church of Christ
shall glorify and praise God; and be partakers of his heavenly glory for ever,
through the worthiness, and efficacy of the death, and resurrection, of our
Savior Christ, who to the same end and purpose, lives and reigns for ever
and ever with him.

It teaches me also, to believe that I my self, being a member of this Church
of God; The meaning of the Article.
shall have my part, and portion, in this everlasting life, and in the happiness
and glory thereof in soul first after my bodily death, immediately; and at the
appearance of our Savior Christ to judge the world, both in body and soul
together, world without end.

Yea, I believe acccrding to this Article, that through faith, I have already
an entrance into everlasting life: even while I remain yet in this transitory
world, and in that mortal body which I carry about with me here.

It is true: according to that of our Savior Christ, John 5.^4 Verily, verily,
I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me,
has everlasting life, Explication. and proof.
and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death unto life.
Likewise, according to that of the Apostle Paul, alleged before, Romans,
8.6. The wisdom of the Spirit is life, and peace. And verse 10. If Christ be
in you, the body is dead, because of sin: but the Spirit is life for
righteousness sake. Read also, Gal: 2.20. Thus I live, not I now, but Christ
lives in me. And Colos: 3 4. When Christ which is our life shall appear, then
shall ye also appear with him in glory. And 1. Pet: 1, 3, 4. We are now
begotten to a lively hope, to an inheritance immortal* etc. And ver. 23. Being
borne anew, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, etc. And 1, Ioh: 3.14 We
know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren.

To the better, and more distinct understanding of this Article, it is
necessary that we do first of all, presuppose three things.

The first, is the spiritual death of the soul, in a separation from the
favor and love of God.

The second, is the natural death of the body, which is caused by the
separation of the soul from it: both of them being fruits of sin, though to
the godly, by the mercies of god, through our L: Ie: Ch: the bodily death, is
but the way to a better life: that is, to this most endless and happy life,
whereof we speak.

The third, is the reuniting of the soul to the body, at the resurrection
thereof. Of the which things we have heard before. And the Apostle
comprehends them all, in one sentence: where he shows what is the issue of
all Gods mercies toward us, through our Savior Christ: saying thus, Rom: chap:
5, 21. That as sin had reigned unto death, so might grace also reign by
righteousness unto eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. And ch: 6.23.
The wages of sin is death: but the gift of God, is eternal life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

It is further also necessary, to the understanding of this Article, that we
do consider, what manner of life, this everlasting life is: namely, such a
life, as for the excellency and glory of it, is incomprehensible: yea so as
the most sharp sighted of the servants of God, could not comprehend and
discern the hidden excellency of it: as we may read, 1. Cor: 13.9.10.11.12.
and 2. Ep: 12.1, 2.3. We know in part, says Saint Paul, etc. And Colos: 3,
ver. 4, Our life is hidden with Christ in God. Likewise says the Apostle John,
2. Ep: 3.1, 2. We know not what we shall be. Revel: ch: 21, and cha: 22. We may
easily perceive, that the Spirit gives us to understand, that no creature, no
nor al creatures either under heaven, or in the visible heavens are sufficient,
fully to express the perfect glory of it. For as there we read, the light of
the Sun is accounted too base a light for it, etc.

It is such an eternal life (says the same Apostle) as has immortal glory
joined with it. 2. Tim: 2.10. And 2. Cor: 4.17. a most excellent glory of full
weight, yea above all weighing by any humane balance. etc.

Nevertheless, it is meet; yea rather so much the more necessary: that we
should succor, and relieve the weakness of our understanding, by such
similitudes, whereby it pleases God, to shadow it forth unto us. And namely,
in that he compares it to the enjoying of an inheritance. Act: 20.32. Rom:
8.17. And Ephesians: 1, 18* of a rich and glorious inheritance. And Colos. 1.12. of
an inheritance of the Saints in light. And 1, Pet: 1, 4 (as was alleged
before) of an inheritance immortal and undefiled, that never fades, etc.

In that also, he compares it to a jewel, which is better worth, The Promise.
then all whatsoever beside: as Matt: 13. in the parable of the precious
pearl, and also of the treasure hidden in the field. Moreover, in that he
compares it to a crown, Revel: 2.10, yea to an incorruptible crown of glory,
1. Pet: 5.4.

Now all these things (as we know) they are matters of great reckoning, here
among men: I mean riches, and possessions, specially the inheritance and posse
sion of a kingdom. And therefore, most justly may the durable riches, and
inheritance of the heavenly kingdom of God, be of most precious account with
us.

But beside these; let us come to our own persons; and see what they shall be.
Of the which it is said first, concerning our bodies, that in this everlasting
life, they shall be made glorious, and immortal, to the end they may be meet
receptacles and habitations for our souls. Wherefore, seeing our bodies shall
shine like the stars of the firmament, Dan: 12, 3. Yea like to the Sun,
Mat: 13.43. Yea seeing our bodies shall be made like to the glorious body of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Philip: 3.21. How great then shall be the excellency
and glory of our souls, at that day! We shall no doubt, at that time, be as a
bright shining Temple, for the holy Ghost to dwell in for ever and ever.

Our bodies are now the Temple of God, through our Savior Christ: though they
be yet mortal, and sinful, 1. Cor: 6.19. much more therefore shall they be
so, at the resurrection. Our estate and condition, as it shall be then, is
compared to a perpetual Sabbath, and blessed rest with the Lord: to rejoice
before him, in all spiritual duties, which he has prepared for us to exercise
our selves in: according to that which is written, Isai: 66.21.22.23. Revel:
5.11.12. etc. and chap: 7. verse 10. and chap: 14.2.

Thus much for the meaning of this Article.



In the 11. chap: of Saint John, verses, 25.26. our Savior said to Martha, I
am the resurrection and the life: he that believes in me, though he were dead,
yet shall he live. And whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never dye.
Beleeuest thou this? says our Savior.

Explication
In this Scripture, after that Martha had made profession of her faith to our
Savior, concerning the general resurrection at the last day, according to the
common faith of the people of God, as has been declared before: but yet, not
being able, perfitly to believe, that our Savior Christ could presently raise
up her brother Lazarus, who had been dead four days in his grave: he does by
this speech of his, relieve the weakness of her faith in this particular, by
setting down a general doctrine, for the confirmation of his divine power, not
only touching the resurrection of the body, and therewithal of the reuniting
of the body and soul together; but also concerning the continuance of the life
of the same body, together with the soul, for ever.

To this purpose, he says first in this text, I am the resurrection, and the
life: that is, he by whose, both merit of death, and also efficacy of divine
power, the bodies of all the faithful, both men and women, shall be raised up
again to everlasting life. According as else where, it is written, that life
is in him: and that he quickens whom he will, John, 1, 4. and chap: 5, 21.
And 1. Ep: 5.20. that he, together with the Father, is very God, and eternal
life: that is to say, that he is the very author, and giver of eternal life,
to all that do belong unto him.

Then in the next place, our Savior shows further, by what instrument,
everlasting life is apprehended, and obtained from him; namely, by faith: that
is, by a persuasion of his power, and good will herein, according to the divine
promise of God. By the which faith also, our Savior gives to understand, that
everlasting life is begun even in this life: yea so begun, that death shall
never prevail against it, as was declared before. For though the body dye, yet
the soul shall live, and wait for the raising up of the body, to live for
ever with it.

And this benefit (says our Savior) is general to all, how many soever
shall believe in me: insomuch as none of those shall never dye; to wit, the
second death, Revel: 2, 11. and John 8.51 And Luke 20, 36. After the
resurrection they can dye no more.

Finally, our Savior, by asking Martha, whether she did believe that which he
had said: he does thereby stir up her heart, to give credit to his word.
As though he should have said. It is thy part Martha, without all doubting, to
be thoroughly established in the belief of that which I say. The which being
spoken by our Savior to Martha, for her instruction and confirmation: it is
likewise, to be taken, and applied to our selves, for our instruction, and
confirmation; who do hear, and read that which is thus written, and recorded,
concerning this Article.

But unto this one place of holy Scripture, we might add many other, every
where repeated in the Bible of God. As for example, 1. John, chap: 2. verses
25. This is the promise which the Father has promised us, even eternal life.
And Titus 1. verses 1.2.3. God that cannot lie, has promised it, before the
world began.

Read also, 1. Tim: 1, 16, 17. This is a true (or faithful) saying, and worthy
to be received by all means (or worthy all allowance) that Jesus Christ came
into the world, to save sinners. Yea to save all that shall believe in him,
with an eternal salvation.

And chap: 4, 8. Godliness has the promise of the life present, and of that
which is to come. And 2. Ep: 4, 8. Henceforth (says the same Apostle) is laid
up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge, will
give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also which love his
appearing. And 2, Cor: 13.4. We shall live with Christ through the power of
God. Here also call to mind again, Psalm: 22, 27. Your heart shall live for
ever. And Dan: 7, verses 26, 27. The judgment shall sit, and they shall take
away his dominion: that is, the dominion of every Tyrant, and persecuter of the
Church, to consume and to destroy it to the end. And the kingdom, and
dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be
given to the holy people of the most high, whose kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom, and all powers shall serve and obey him.



We may know it, by the beginning of it in our hearts, here in this life, by
true faith, and repentance: by our longing after it: by our joy in the hope and
expectation of it: and finally, by our holy laboring and striving after it,

Explication and proof.
To such no doubt, the promise of God does certainly belong: according to that,
Rom: 2, 7. God will give eternal life, to them that by continuance in
wel-dooing, seek glory, and honor, and immortality. But we must understand,
that he will give it of free grace, and that for our Savior Christ his sake:
and not for any merit of their wel-dooing. They that are true members of the
Church militant here on earth, shall be members of the Church triumphant in
heaven They that have a true entrance, and so abide in the kingdom of grace:
they shall both enter, and also abide for ever, in the kingdom of glory. But
of this, some thing has been said in the Article of the Church: and more is
to be said, in the duties of this Article. And therefore, here we end,
concerning the Promise.

THe use for comforf, follows next. The Comforts.




The comfort of faith, in respect of this Article, is every way comfortable:
yea it is even the comfort of all comforts; that God has appointed us to
immortality and glory. It is as one may say, the general sealing up, The
Comforts.
and ratifying of the whole comfort of the Gospel, to all true believers.

Quest. It is true that you say. But can you show it to be so, by any
particulars?

Ans. First of all, this Article brings singular comfort with it, in that as
it contains the greatest benefit; even that, in the fruition whereof, all
other are perfitted unto us: so it is most graciously assured unto us, by the
whole blessed Trinity; as that which is on our behalf, the final end, why
our Savior Christ took our humane nature, and that in the same, he wrought
and suffered all that he did both work, and also suffer, for us.

Secondly, because we enjoy the beginning, and as it were the first fruits of
the comfort of everlasting life, here in this world: through the gracious
presence, and working of the holy Ghost, in our hearts.

Thirdly, because the custody of this most precious, and excellent benefit,
is more sure and safe, in the hand of God for us, then if it were in our own
keeping.

Fourthly, because this everlasting life, shall put a blessed end to all
discomfort, and remove all causes and occasions thereof for ever.

Finally; because that comfort which it shall bring with it, is not only the
greatest comfort, containing all causes of comfort and rejoicing in it: but
also, because in the greatness, and perfection thereof, it shall continue world
without end.

Explication and proof.
That this benefit is the greatest; and even the perfitting of all other the
benefits of God unto us: it is evident, in that according to the last part of
the first branch, it is the chief end, on our behalf, wherefore our Savior
Christ took our nature, etc. as has been declared before. Yea it is even of
it self evident, that this benefit, is the very perfiting of all the rest: in
such sort, that all particular comforts, flow as it were into this great Sea
of all comfort.

And that the comfort of it is, and may justly be the greater unto us; in that
it is most graciously assured unto us, by the whole blessed Trinity: we cannot
but conceive, from that which we read, 1. John, 5.4.5.6.7.8. etc. 13. if we
shall advisedly ponder, and weigh the same.

And yet more particularly, (says our Savior to the woman of Samaria, John,
4.10,) If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is, that says unto thee,
Give me drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee
water of life. And verse, 14. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give
him, shall never be more a thirst: but the water which I will give him, shall
be in him, a well of water springing up to everlasting life, And chap: 6.35. I
am the bread of life. And again in the same chapter, yea again, and again,
verses, 40.47.48.50.51. And chap: 17.^. The Father (says our Savior) has
given the Son power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life, to al
them that he has given unto him. Yea our Savior himself, is in this respect,
called the Father of eternity: that is, the author and giver of eternity to
his Church, from the Father, Isai: 9.6. And 1. John, chap: 1. verse 1. he is
called, The word of life, as having the fountain of everlasting life in
himself, in that he is God in the flesh, John 1.1. etc. And ch: 14.6. I (says
he himself) am the way, the truth, and the life.

For the proof of the second branch: read, John, 5.24. Verily, verily (says
our Savior) I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes in him that
sent me has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation. And chap:
6.54.55.56. Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed, etc. And chap: 10. verse 10. I am come that my
sheep might have life, and have it in abundance And verse 28. I do give unto
them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them
out of my hands, etc. And Luke, 10.24. Marie has chosen the good part, which
shall not be taken from her. Here call again to mind, 1. John. 3, 14. And
Rom: 8.6. Moreover Philip: 3.20. Our conversation (says the Apostle Paul) is
in heaven. And 2. Peter, 1.11. By adding of virtue to virtue (says the Apostle
Peter) an entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord, and Savior Jesus
Christ, is abundantly ministered unto us. And Act: 11.17.18. Forasmuch as God
gave them (that is the Gentiles) a like gift as he did unto us (says the same
Apostle) when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ: who was I, that I could let
God? When they (that is, the rest of the Apostles) heard these things they held
their peace, (as Saint Luke writes) and glorified God, saying, Then has God
also granted to the Gentiles, repentance unto life.

Now for the proof of the third branch: beside these testimonies, even now
rehearsed, John 10, 28. and Luke, 10, 42. read also, 1. Pet: 1, 3, 4, 5. etc.
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his
abundant mercy, has begotten us again, unto a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. To an inheritance immortal and
undefiled, and which fades not away, reserved in heaven for ye, who are kept
by the power of God (phrouroumenous, kept as by a garrison of soldiers) through
faith unto salvation, which is prepared to be showed at the last time. That is
to say, as touching the perfection of it, etc. Read also, 2, Tim: 2, 19. The
foundation of God remains sure, etc. And Rom: 2, 29. The gifts and calling of
God, are without repentance. And 1, Cor: 1, 8, 9. God will confirm ye unto
the end, that ye may be blameles in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. For God
is faithful, by whom ye are called to the fellowship of his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord. And Phil: 1, 6. I am persuaded (says he) of this same thing,
that he who has begun this good work in ye, will perform it unto the day
of Jesus Christ. and 1. These. 5, 23, 24. Now the very God of peace, sanctify
ye, etc: Faithful is he which calls you, who will also do it.

Alas, if our salvation were in our own custody; we should loose it upon
every assult of our adversaries: like as gold is easily taken out of the hands
of little children, that rather play withal, then mind to lay it up safely.
And like as, if a poor man, dwelling in a weak cottage, should be known to
have a great treasure by him: it might easily be taken from him. And in the
mean season, it could not but put him in so much the greater fear, by how
much the treasure should be of greater value. It would trouble him in the day,
it would not let him sleep quietly in the night, etc. But now it is happy with
us, that our chief treasure, even our life and salvation for ever; is in the
safe-keeping of God: most steadfast and sure as we have partly seen. And as we
may see further, Heb: 6, 18.19, 20 So that herein we may have strong
consolation, 2. These: 2, 16. Yea joy unspeakable and glorious, 1. Pet: 1, 8.

The fourth branch of the answer, may be confirmed by that which we read 1.
Cor: 15.54, 55.56. And that also, according to the former testimonies of the
holy Prophets, Isai: 25.8. and Hosea, chap: 13. verse 14. as we have seen in
the former Article. It may be confirmed also, by other proofs: as 1. These: 4,
13. etc. And Revel: 21, 4. according to that mentioned even now, Isai: 25, 8.
And according to that further testimony of the same Prophet, which we may
read, chap: 65, verses 16, 17, 18, 19.

For the proof of the last branch: read, Revel: 21, 7. He that overcomes
(says the Lord) shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall
be my Son. And verse 22. etc I saw no Temple therein: for the Lord God
almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it. And the city has no need of
the Sun, etc. And chap: 22, 1, 2. etc.

So that in this respect, we may bouldly and comfortably say, as the Prophet
Isaiah encourages us ch: 25.9. saying, In that day shall me^ say, This is our
God: we have waited for him, and he will save us. This is the Lord, we have
waited for him: we will rejoice, and be joyful in his salvation. According also
as S. Paul, making mention of the Book of life, wherein the names of the
faithful and elect people of God, are as it were registered, and written: most
comfortably incourageth the Philippians, chap: 4, verses 3, 4. to rejoice
always in the Lord: yea again to rejoice. And our Savior Christ, Luke, 10,
20. Rejoice not in this (says he to his disciples) that the Devils are
subdued, but rather that your names are written in the book of life.

Thus much concerning the use of this last Article of our Belief, for the
comfort of faith.

Quest. Now in the next place, what is the use of it, The Duties.
in respect of that duty and obedience, which the comfort of faith ought to
yield?

Ans. As the comfort of faith, in respect of this Article, is (as we may say)
the sealing up and confirmation of all comfort: so the duty ought to be the
daily bettering, and perfitting of all duty; in the continual expectation of
the same.

Quest. How may this be?

Ans. The due consideration of this last benefit, which is the benefit of
benefits, as we may call it: is most effectual, to move every true believer,
to these duties following.

First, to make little account of this transitory life, or of any, or all the
vain profits, pleasures, and honors thereof, in comparison of it.

Secondly, the faith and assurance of everlasting life, is likewise most
effectual, to move all Christians, that have already made an entrance into
it; with all holy care, and good conscience, to cherish the beginnings thereof:
and to walk on forward in the right way, which leads to the full fruition of
it. And thereafter, to bend all counsels, studies, and desires; as to the only
true scope, and mark to be aimed at, in the whole course of our natural
life: so that God may have the whole praise, and glory of all.

Thirdly, it imboldeneth the faithful servants of God, to make little account
of all the bitter afflictions of this life: so as they may, by any means,
attain to this everlasting life, and the most pure and blessed joys thereof.

Fourthly, it has singular force, spiritually to inamour the hearts of all
true believers, with a most earnest desire, and longing after it: and
therewithal, after the restoring of all things, which God has purposed at that
time to restore, that the same our God, may then be all in all.

Fifthly, seeing the word of God, and Preaching thereof, is the principal
means, to bring us to the knowledge, faith, and spiritual possession, of the
beginnings, and as it were first fruits of this so unspeakable and
incomprehensible a benefit, and inheritance purchased for us, by our Savior
Christ: it cannot be, but it must mightily provoke al true Christians, to love
this word of God, and the Preaching, and Preachers of it; but chiefly our
Savior himself, who is preached unto them, and who has given himself for us
all, with most hearty love, and zealous affection.

Finally insomuch as we cannot sufficiently praise, and glorify God, for this
inestimable benefit, in the short race of this our natural life: therefore it
is our duty to purpose, and desire most earnestly; not only to glorify his
name, while we live here; but also even for the same cause chiefly, to desire
to live for ever, to the end we may praise, and glorify him with all his
Saints for this inestimable benefit, world without end.

Explication and proof.
It cannot be denied, but that it ought to be so. Yea verily; the true faith and
persuasion of the inheritance of everlasting life: cannot but work al these
gracious and blessed effects in the hearts of all true Christians.

And first of all, as touching the first effect (and that also with very good
reason, why it should be so) what may we think these earthly and vanishing
riches to be, but only a shadow of riches, in comparison of the durable
treasure of heavenly and eternal happiness? what are all carnal pleasures which
flit in a moment, and are so much the sooner at an end, by how much they are
more vehement: what are they, I say being compared with this most pure, and
spiritual joy, which abides in all holy perfection, for ever? What is all
earthly honor, and all worldly ensigns of honor, chains, bracelets, etc. to
the dignity, of being the Sons and daughters of the most high God, and
heirs of his heavenly kingdom.

What is this present life, which is but as a vapoure, full of all labor and
sorrow, etc. to this everlasting, and most blessed life? Let us read the book
of the Preacher, with due attention: and we shall confess with king Solomon,
that it is so. Read also, Mat: 6, 19. etc. where our Savior (who is greater
then king Solomon) tells us that the moth and cancker, do fret and consume
al earthly treasures: and therefore counsels us, with most wise counsel, to
lay up treasures for our selves in heaven, that our hearts may be fixed there.

Read also, Luke, 12.32.33.34. And chap: 16, 8, 9. Make ye friends (says
our Savior) of the riches of iniquity, etc. And John 6, 27. Labor not for
the meat which perishes, but for the meat which endures to everlasting
life, which the Son of man will give unto you: for him has God the Father
sealed. To the which purpose, consider also, and meditate diligently, upon the
example of Saint Paul, Philip: 3, 7. etc, and verses 20.21. And upon the
example of Moses, Heb: 11.24. etc. And upon that instruction, which Saint Paul
gives Timotheus, 2. Ep: chap: 2, verses 1.2. etc. to the end of the 13. verse.

And secondly, for the proof of the second branch of the answer: the same
examples, may likewise well serve. Consider furthermore, the often
exhortations, contained in the holy Scriptures; where this chief benefit of
everlasting life, is used for a chief reason, to move every estate, and
condition of the servants of God: both rich and poor, magistrate and minister
of the word, etc. to the duties both of their several callings; and also to
those that belong to them in common; in that they are Christians. As for
example, Gal: chap: 6. verses 7.8, 9.10. Be not deceived (says the holy
Apostle) God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also
reap. For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh, reap corruption:
but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit, reap life everlasting.
Let us not therefore be weary of well-doing: for in due season we shall
reap, if we faint not. While therefore we have time, let us do good to all
men, but specially to them that are of the household of faith. And 1. Tim: chap:
6. verses 17, 18.19. Charge them that are rich in this world, etc. that they
do good and be rich in good works, and ready to distribute, and communicate.
Laying up in store for themselves, a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may obtain eternal life. And touching the duty of Ministers of the
Gospel, Read, 1. Pet: 5.1.2.3.4. The Elders which are among you, I beseech,
who am also an Elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a
partaker of the glory that shall be revealed. Feed the flock of God, etc. And
when the chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive an incorruptible
crown of glory. And 1, Tim: 6.12. Fight the good fight of faith (says Saint
Paul to Timotheus) lay thou hold of eternal life, whereunto thou art also
called. etc. Now more generally, concerning all Christians, read, 1. These.
5.8.9.10, etc. Let us which are of the day be sober, etc. For God has not
appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain salvation, by the means of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who died for us, etc. Wherefore exhort ye one another, etc. Read
also, Titus 2, 11. etc. The grace of God, which brings salvation unto all men
has appeared. And teaches us that we should deny ungodliness, etc. And 1.
John chap: 3, verse 3. Every man that has this hope, purges himself, etc.
And in the Epistle of Jude, verses 20.21. Beloved edify your selves, etc.
looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life.

From these, and such like places of holy Scripture, we see plainly, what ought
to be the scope of every man's natural life, and of all the studies, and
actions thereof: and that, even because God has ordained us, to this
everlasting life. And not without very just, and weighty reason: seeing (as was
touched before) if we look to have our entrance, and eternal abiding in the
kingdom of glory: we must of necessity have first of all, an entrance, and
some continuance also, and proceeding, in the duties of the kingdom of grace.
And that even from the first time of our calling; so long as God shall of his
goodness, prolong our lives.

Read Eccles. 12, 1. etc. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, etc.
And Luke. 13. verse 24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, etc, Heb:
3:12.13, 14. And 2. Pet: chap: 2. verses 5.6.7, 10, 11.

But how I pray you, is this performed, or minded of us? Do we not see the
clean contrary, among all sorts, and estates of people? Every man almost,
seeks after worldly riches, and honors: how money may come merrily in; that
they may live in pleasures, and build their neastes on high, etc. Everlasting
life, is the least part of the thoughts of the greatest part of all sorts of
people. Very few study, and labor, to walk in the ways of the kingdom of
heaven. Would to God we would better bethink our selves, of the holy doctrine
of the Gospel, concerning the vanity of riches, the uncertainty of life, and
the fearful event of all inordinate joys, and endeavors, after the vain
things of this transitory world. Read the parable of the secure and voluptuous
rich man, Luke, 12, 15, 16. Thou fool (says our Savior) this night will they
take away thy soul, etc. Read also, chap: 16, 19. etc. The rich man died, and
was cast down to Hell torments. And as our Savior says else where, What
shall it profit a man, to win the whole world, if he loose his soul?

Verily, the benefit of our natural life, ought to be of great weight with us,
to move us to glorify God, the giver of it: as Psalm: 95, verse 6. and Ps: 100.
But infinitely much more ought the promise, and assurance of everlasting life,
to provoke us hereunto. Thus much concerning the second branch of the answer.

For the proof of the third branch: read Rom: 8, 18. I count (says the
Apostle) that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the
glory, which shall be showed unto us. Likewise 2. Cor: 4.16, 17, 18. And 1,
Pet: 4, 12, 13, 14, and 19. Read also, the encouragement which our Savior gave
unto all his Disciples, Luke 6, 20, 23. Blessed are ye, when men hate ye, etc.
Rejoice in that day and be glad: for great is your reward in heaven.

David having the promise of the kingdom of Israel; waited for it with
patience; endured many afflictions; and fought many a battle; that it might be
established unto him. And shall not the promise of God, touching everlasting
life, and the heavenly kingdom of glory: encourage us, to pass through such
afflictions, as God has prepared to try and exercise us withal? Shall we not
willingly fight those spiritual battles, which God has appointed us to
fight, against our spiritual adversaries?

But let us come to the fourth branch. For the proof whereof, read Rom:
8.22.23. We know (says S. Paul) that every creature groneth with us, etc. Now
if other creatures do groan, waiting with fervent desire, until the Sons of
God shall be revealed: how can it be, that they themselves, should not long
after the perfiting of their own redemption? Read also, 2. Cor: 5, 2. We sigh,
desiring to be clothed with our house, which is from heaven. And 2, Tim: 4.8.
it is a note of the faithful, to love the appearing of Christ. And Revel: 22,
20. S. John is a notable example unto us herein. So is also the Church, in the
Song of Songs, chap: 2, 17. And likewise, in the conclusion of the Song, Until
the day break, and the shadows fly away: return my well-beloved, etc. And
Psalm: 106. verses 4.5. Remember me O Lord (says the holy Prophet) with the
favor of thy people: visit me with thy salvation. That I may see the felicity
of thy chosen, and rejoice in the joy of thy people, and glory with thine
inheritance.

Peter seeing a representation of this heavenly glory, at the transfiguration
of our Savior Christ: was exceedingly affected with it. Master (says he to
our Savior) it is good for us to be here: if thou will, let us make here three
tabernacles, etc. Yea the souls of the righteous in heaven, have a kind of
longing after the perfiting of the glory of the Saints of God: Revel: 6, 10,
11. Why therefore do not we long more earnestly after it our selves? Verily,
because we do not duly consider of the excellency of this life, and the glory
to come: because we are too much lingering, and doting, after the pleasures,
and delights of this life, etc. No doubt, there are a great many thousands in
the world, who would gladly make their heaven here: yea they are willing to
loose heaven for ever, to enjoy their earthly prosperity, for a few years.
This is most gross, and carnal infidelity.

Let us, for our parts, contrariwise so comfort our hearts, in the assured
faith of Gods word, and promise; that looking, and longing after the blessed
appearance of the glory of the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ: we
may be partakers of his glory, when he shall appear. Tit: 2, 13. and 1, Pet:
4, 13.

Now for the first part of the answer, let us read 2, Tim: 1, 10. Our Savior
Jesus Christ (says S. Paul) has brought life and immortality to (...) through
the Gospel. Whereunto I am appointed a Preacher, etc. And 2. Cor: 2 1. We are
(says he again) the sweet savor of life unto life to them that are saved
That is to say, we are so, by our preaching. And chap. 3.6. God has made us
this Ministers of the new Testament, not of the letter, but of the Spirit: for
the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. And chap. 4. verses, 3.4, etc.
If our Gospel be then hidden, it is hidden to them that are lost, In whom the
God of this world has blinded the minds, etc. And Acts, 20.32. Now brethren I
commend ye to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build
further, and to give ye an inheritance among all them that are sanctified.
According to that which our Savior Christ said to the same Apostle, at this
conversion: as we read it reported by himself, and the Evangelist Luke, Act.
26. verses 17.18. I have appeared unto thee, to this purpose (says our
Savior) to appoint thee a Minister and a witness, etc. Delivering thee from the
people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee, To open their eyes,
that they may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them
which are sanctified by faith in me. According also to that profession of
Peter, to our Savior Christ, John, 6.68. saying, Master, thou have the words
of eternal life. Moreover, according to that which we read, Act. 5.20. Where
the Doctrine of the Gospel, is called the words of life. And chap. 13.26. The
words of this salvation. O therefore how preciously ought we to esteem this
inestimable jewel of the word of God, and the preaching thereof! But chiefly,
how ought we to esteem of our Savior himself, whose word it is, and by whom
we have this inheritance of everlasting life assured unto us! For says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 6.24. To all such as love our Lord Jesus Christ, grace shall be
unto them, to their immortality.

Finally, the benefit of everlasting life is so great, even in the eternity of
it; beside that incomparable glory, and most pure joy, which belongs unto it:
that it cannot, but carry the mind of the true believer, to purpose, above all
that he can presently comprehend, concerning the full excellency of it; not
only temporally to praise, but also to vow eternal praises to God, the
Author of this so blessed, and eternal a life. According to that of the holy
Prophet, Psalm. 145.1. O my God and King, I will extol thee: and I will bless thy
name for ever and ever. And verse, 21. My mouth shall speak the praise of the
Lord, and all flesh shall bless his holy name for ever and ever. Likewise Psalm.
41.13. And 72. verses, 17.18.19. Romans chap. 16.27. And 1. Tim. chap. 1.17. And
1. Pet. 5.10.11. And in the Epistle of S. Jude, verses, 24.25.

And in this respect, very aptly, is the estate and condition of this life,
compared to the celebration of a perpetual Sabbath. The which, that we may
do, with perpetual joy, when that time shall come: let us I beseech ye, while
we live here in this life; be careful, religiously to celebrate, and
sanctify, the weekly Christian Sabbaths of our Lord Jesus Christ, with all
holy joy and delight therein. For if we shall neglect them; yea, if we will not
make them our delight, nor consecrate the^, as glorious to the Lord, as the
Lord himself speaks by his holy Prophet, Isaiah, chap 58.13: how may we
think, that we shall be prepared, to the sanctifying of an eternal Sabbath
unto him? If one day in seven, be as a tedious burden unto us: how shall we
account it our happiness, to be with the Lord, to glorify and praise his
Majesty, without ceasing, for ever and ever, among the rest of his Saints
world without end?

Thus much concerning the Duties.

NOw therefore to conclude this Article, The Danger of not believing this
article.
What is the danger of not believing,

Unless that by faith, and repentance, coming from the true knowledge of God
in Christ our eternal Savior, we have an entrance into this everlasting
life, while we be here in this world: we shall never be partakers of the full,
and perfect fruition of it, The Danger of not believing this article.
in the kingdom of heaven.

Expl. It is true: according to that which our Savior Christ affirms very
earnestly to Nicodemus, in the 3 chap. of John, verses, 3.5. saying, Verily,
verily, except a man be borne again, he cannot see (nor enter) into the
kingdom of God. Much less therefore, can he attain to the full and perfect
fruition of it. Read also Romans 6.21.22. What fruit (says the Apostle) had ye
then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? For the end of those things
is death. But now being freed from sin, and made servants unto God, ye have
your fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life. Likewise chap. 8.1.2. etc.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit, etc. But verse, 6. The wisdom of the
flesh is death, And verse, 13. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die.
Wherefore, as the same Apostle writes. 2. Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ,
let him be a new creature, etc. And 2. Tim. 2.19.20.21. The foundation of God
remains sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows who are his, and let
every one that calls (or names) the name of Christ (no onomazoon to onoma
Christou) depart from iniquity. Notwithstanding in a great house, are not only
vessels of gold, and of silver, but also of wood, and of earth, and some for
honor, and some unto dishonor. If any man therefore purge himself from
these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, etc, Read also, 1. John, 3.14. He that
loves not his brother, abides in death. And verse, 15. Whosoever hates his
brother, he is a man-slaier: and ye know that no man-slaier has eternal life
abiding in him.

Verily, not to believe this Article, which is the chief effect of all the
rest: is in effect, as much as to deny faith to all the former Articles, both
concerning God himself, and also concerning his Church. So that the misery of
all such, must needs be most grievous, and infinite: as we shall see further,
when we come to consider of the general danger of not believing.

Wherefore, beloved in the Lord, (I speak to all both young and old) we may
all of us easily perceive, the necessity of believing, and obeying the
doctrine of this Article: yea, and that in a special respect, and reference to
all the rest; insomuch as, according to that which was said in the beginning:
this Article is the end, and scope of all, to the praise of the glorious
riches, of the most free grace, and infinite mercies of God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord; to whom be all praise, and glory, ascribed as most due, for
ever and ever, Amen.

The errors and herisies to be avoided, which are contrary to the true belief
of this last Article: are such as hereafter do follow.

First, the heretical opinion of the Corinthians, Nepotians, Chiliasts, and of
those that are called Aeternals: who are recorded to have held, that the
eternal life, which shall be after the resurrection, consists in bodily
pleasures, to be had here on earth: and the same to continue only for the
space of one thousand of years.

Secondly, the opinion of the Popuzians, who say that eternal life, and the
celestial Jerusalem, is here on earth. And like to this, the opinion of the
Pelagians and Celestians, who are said to affirm, that eternal life is
without the kingdom, and paradise of God. Moreover, the opinion of the
Adamites, who have taught, that the congregations, or companies of the Church
here on earth, are the true paradise. All which, though they seem not to
define eternal life so grossly as the former: yet it is manifest, that they do
greatly err, from the truth taught us in the holy Scriptures: and therefore are
justly to be condemned of us, and of all true Christians.

H. N. also, and his family, what fair show so ever they make; are justly to
be condemned in this point, as well as in many other: because they hold
everlasting life, to be nothing else, but their imagined perfection, in the
embracing, and holding of their communaltie of love, according to the pretended
gracious word, and doctrine of H. N. For so he interprets this Article, in
the 7. chap. of his first Exhortation, in the 44. Section that everlasting life
is a true light of men. And to this purpose, he alleges that in the first
chapter of the Evangelist John: where the Evangelist, speaking of our Savior,
calls him by the name of the true light. So that, by the doctrine of H. N.
the Deity of our Savior Christ, and the everlasting life of the same H. N.
and his scholars, are all one. He makes the eternal, and uncreated, and
beginningles life of God, and the created or regenerated life of the Saints, to
be the same.

And that his meaning is so blasphemous, and absurd: he makes it very
plain, in his 15. chapter of the same his Exhortation, Sect. 1. in these words
of his, The true light (understand it my Son says he) is the everlasting
life it self: and by them, to whom it is come and manifested, in the obedience
of the gracious word, and his service of love, it is to a light of men, to the
preservation in the godliness, to all such as believe therein. And this is that
allegorical propagation of H. N. his Christ, to a blessing of all the
generations of the earth, as he often speaks. He proceeds in a further
description of the same his true light: and says, That it has his original
forth-comming out of the lovely Being, and true mind of the eternal life it
self. Yea he says further, Sect. 3. that this true light and eternal life,
brings with him the Mercie-seate of the Kingly Majesty, which is God,
Christ, and the holy Ghost it self: also all spiritual treasures and heavenly
riches: and all love and peace in the godliness.

Thus H. N. runs on in his spiritual frenzy, most unskillfully, and
absurdly, confounding all things, clean contrary to that which he pretends
to make a most distinct declaration.

But let all such, as desire not to be seduced, and led aside from the true
Christian faith of the Gospel, neither in this Article, nor in any of the
rest: take heed of H. N. as of a most dangerous and deep Deceiuer: as that
faithful servant of God, Master Knewstub, has notably discovered him, to the
true Church of God, so to be. To whose godly and learned writings, I would
willingly send such, as should stand in any special need of help, against
his most deceiuable and heretical doctrine.

Thus much shall suffice, at this time, for a warning, against his perverting
of the truth of our present Article. And thus also, an end of our particular
inquiry, concerning every Article of our Christian belief.

Belief generally considered.
NOw furthermore, you (the people of Culford I mean: to whom especially this
ministry, and service of the Gospel has been performed, through the great
mercy of God, by his most unworthy servant) may remember; that unto this
particular inquiry into the ground or warrant, and into the meaning, promise,
use, etc. of every particular Article: there was added in the same order, a
brief suruay of the ground and warrant of faith; and likewise of the promise;
and of the use, both for comfort and duty; and of the danger of not believing,
and not obeying the Gospel; more generally, from such places of holy
Scripture, we could find to serve most fitly thereunto: all to this end, that
we might in a more short view, discern what the nature of the true justifying
faith is.

It shall not be unprofitable for us (as I trust) to call over these things
again, as briefly as we can.



We have the warrant of our Savior Christ himself in the 5, chap. of his
Evangelist John, the 39. and 40. verses in these words.

Belief generally considered.
39. Search the Scriptures (says he) for in them ye think to have eternal
life, The general ground.
and they are they which testify of me.

40. But ye will not come to me, that ye might have life.

Explication.
Some read the words of our Savior in this wise, Ye search the Scriptures, etc.
But whether we read them as a commandment, or as a commendation, or
testimony; given of the Jews thus far forth, that they did in deed, use a
certain diligence in reading the holy Scriptures of God: the principal thing
which our Savior intended to teach the Jews, is this; that he himself is
propounded in the same Scriptures, as the principal argument, and object of
true justifying faith. So that the whole Scriptures, both doctrinall,
historical, and prophetical, do principally aim at him, as at the chief
scope or mark: to the end, that the belief of all the faithful, might be
firmly grounded in God, through him.

And therefore he earnestly reproves the Jews; for that in their reading of
the holy Scriptures, they were curious about external ceremonies, and many
other things: but did not observe the right scope, and intent of them; which
was, and is, wholly to lead us unto our Savior Christ: whom they negligentlie
passed by.

This reproof of the Jews, may well be our instruction, to prove unto us,
that the holy Scriptures are the only ground of faith: and also, that they are
as a key, to open and interpret unto us, the right meaning of the holy
Scriptures: to the grounding, and establishing of our belief aright, that so
we may be made wise unto salvation, according to that 2. Tim. 3.16.17. The holy
Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through the faith which
is in Christ Jesus. That is to say, through that faith which rests upon him,
etc.

How the holy Scriptures, do every where point, and direct our faith, to our
Savior Christ, as to the only ground and stay of it: it has been declared
before, in the proof of his resurrection, by his fourth appearance. 2. Book,
pages, 375. 376. etc. to page, 382.

WHerefore, leaving this point: and therewithal observing (as in the second
place) a general rule for the right understanding of the whole doctrine of
faith: according to that saying of our Savior, John, 17.3. This is life
eternal, that they know thee the only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ.

Let us now come to the general promise, or to all the promises of faith, The
general Promise.
so as we may speak of them most generally.



We have our warrant for this, in the testimony of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 3. verses,
21.22.23. in that he says:

21. Let no man rejoice in men: for all things are yours.

22. Whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death: whether they be things present, or things to come, all are yours.

23. And ye Christ's, and Christ Gods.

And again, 2. Cor. 1 20.

20. All the promises of God are in him (that is, in Jesus Christ the Son of
God) yea: and in him they are Amen (says the Apostle) unto the glory of God
through us.

Explication.
That is to say, through our preaching: in so much as God gave this gracious
blessing to the Corinthians, to have their faith established in our Savior
Christ the Son of God, through the promises which God has made in him: the
which Christ, with the same promises, Paul, and Siluantis, and Timotheus had
preached unto them. The like blessing, no doubt, does God give to his people at
this day, by the faithful preaching of the promises of the same Gospel of our
Savior, to the praise of his mercies in the same his Son.

And let us note well concerning this point; that howsoever God has made
manifold promises in his law, to those that shall obey him, The general
comfort.
as we read Leuit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28: yet because they in themselves barely
considered, do stand upon a condition that is impossible to be performed of us
(insomuch as the perfect justice of God requires perfect obedience) therefore we
must of necessity, seek all our relief from our Savior Christ, that so
through him, we may be partakers of the gracious promises of the Gospel. For
unless we do find our relief by him: certainly, the curses are too near
neighbors, or borderers, to those blessings of the law.

Thus much generally for the Promises of God, whereon faith rests it self.

THe general Comfort of faith is next.



The holy Apostle Saint Paul declares the manifold comfort of faith, by
reckoning up the excellent benefits which do attend upon it. Romans chap. 5. in
the first verse, and so forth, in many other, as they follow in that chapter.

He does so indeed. It shall therefore through the blessing of God, be good
and comfortable unto us,

Then (says the Apostle) being justified by faith, we have peace toward God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

2 By whom also we have had access (or have been brought) through faith unto
this grace wherein we stand, and do rejoice under the hope of the glory of
God. Ten prosagogen eschecamen.


3 Neither do we so only, but we rejoice also in tribulations, knowing that
tribulation brings forth patience.

4 And patience experience, and experience hope.

5 And hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the holy Ghost, who is given unto us.

Explication and proof.
Here are many excellent benefits in deed, which we do enjoy, from the mercy
of God, through faith: even such, as do make the comfort of faith, every way
very great; as we have seen by the interpretation of them.

We may call the same to mind likewise, from that which we have considered,
and heard in the sermon made upon the 4, 5, 6, and 7, verses of the 4. chapter
of the Epistle to the Philippians. Where, the holy Apostle, encouraging the
faithful, most comfortably to rejoice in the Lord: and admonishing them to
take heed, against such evils as would hinder their joy: to wit, impatience,
and distrustful, or distracting care. And therewithal exhorting them, in
stead thereof, to commit themselves to the care of the Lord, for all time to
come; with thankfulness also, for all former and present blessings: he
assures them, that then, the peace of God, which passes all understanding
shall preserve their hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.

Read also Psalm. 119. verses 49, 50. Remember the promise made to thy servant
(says the holy Prophet) wherein thou have caused me to trust. It is my comfort
in my trouble: for thy promise has quickened me. And verse 103. O how sweet
are thy promises to my mouth! yea more then honey to my mouth.

Moreover, how must it not be, that faith should be exceedingly comfortable,
insomuch as it is given us of GOD, to be that shield of defense; which does
quench all those fiery darts, which the devil most mischieuously, throws
against us? Ephesians. 6.16. Seeing also, faith is our victory, whereby we overcome
the world: which is another great and dangerous enemy? 1. John, 5.4, 5. Seeing
that by faith, we are the Sons of God in Christ Jesus? Gal. 4.26. Seeing by
faith, we have all our liuelihood (as we may say) from the hand of God? as it
is written, The just shall live by his faith. Hab. ch: 2.4. and Romans 1.17. And
Gal. 2.20. By faith (says the Apostle) I live in the Son of God. And so do all
other true believers live in him by their faith, and he in them by his holy
Spirit. John, 14.18, 19, 20, etc. Finally, seeing we are saved by the grace of
God, through faith? Ephesians. 2.8. For in all these repspects we must needs
acknowledge, that the sweet comfort of faith, is exceeding great, to all those
that have it, and do truly know what it means.

NOw therefore, let us come to the duties in general. The general duty.




Even they which do follow in the 4. chapter of the Epistle to the
Philippians, verses 8, and 9. in these words.

8 Furthermore brethren (says the Apostle) whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, bosa semna.
(or grave and reverend) whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things pertain
to love, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, or if
there be any praise, think on these things.

9 Which ye have both learned and received, and heard, and seen in me: those
things do, and the God of peace shall be with you.

Explication.
Here we see plainly, that as the comfort was manifold; so the duty is likewise
very large and general: yea in such ample sort; that it is evident, that true
Christian faith, cannot be idle: but it must be to the great reproach of those
who do profess themselves to be Christians.

Like as it cannot, but be to the shame of such a servant of a family, as
having much business to do in his Masters house: should take a stool, and
set him down loitering, and do nothing at all. As you may remember, how it
was declared at large, in the explication of the several sorts, of those
manifold duties, which are comprehended in this text.

The same also, we saw further confirmed unto us, from the exhortation of the
same Apostle, Romans 12. verses 1, 2. Wherein the Apostle reasons very
earnestly, from the mercies, yea from the tender mercies of God; (dia toon
oictir moon) which are as the fountain of all the promises: as ye heard in the
interpretation of that Scripture, unto you. The words of the Apostle are worthy
our rehersall.

I beseech ye therefore brethren (says the holy Apostle) by the mercies of
God, that ye give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable serving of God.

2 And facion not your selves, like unto this world, but be ye changed by the
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good will of God,
acceptable, and perfect.

Explication.
Here it is of it self plain, that the Apostle moves Christians to all
dutifulness, from the due consideration of the tender mercies of God.

Ye heard furthermore, the same point confirmed unto you, from another like
earnest exhortation, which the same Apostle made to the Corinthians; as we
read 2. Cor 7. in the first verse of that chapter: where he reasons to the
same end, very strongly, and with great authority, from the promises of God,
which flow most clearly, to the refreshing of our souls, from that most pure
fountain of his mercies.



See ng then (says he) we have these promises, dearly beloved, let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, and
grow up to full holiness in the fear of God.

Explication
The promises which the Apostle speaks of, are set down in the former
chapter: and namely; that God will be a Father to his people, if they will be
true worshippers of him.

From the which words now rehearsed; ye may remember, that beside other things
it was taught unto you that then we are said to cleanse our selves, when we use
the means of cleansing. That is to say, when we sorrow with godly sorrow for our
sins, unto true repentance: and so often, as to the same end, and to the
furtherance thereof, we do with reverence, and in the fear of God, read and
hear the word of God; making our prayers unto him, for mercy and forgiveness,
and for grace to forsake our sins, etc.

Likewise, we are said to renew our own minds; when we do dutifully serve
Gods holy providence, in using the same means, The general danger of
unbelief and disobedience to the Gospel.
which he has appointed and sanctified, for our renewment. Whereas to speak
properly, it is nevertheless, God only, and the work of his holy Spirit,
whichh cleanses and renews us, and causes us to grow in grace, with all the
increases which we attain unto: as well as he alone works all good
beginnings in us. But in that we are exhorted to grow up to full holiness; it
is evident, that it will in no wise stand with good duty: that any of us
should content our selves, to know God only far off; and aloof (as we may
say) as the manner of the most is: but it is our duty, most carefully to
prepare our selves, to draw near to him, in the reverend fear of his most
gracious Majesty. We must grow from faith to faith, as it were from one age
of Christianity to another: from childehoode, to man's estate, etc. We must
serve God, both outwardly and inwardly, with body and with soul: even from the
most secret, and hidden power, and inclination thereof.

These are briefly, the excellent instructions, contained in these holy
Scriptures. In the urging whereof, I was, and now am still, the more earnest;
because whereas every one seems to lay ready hold on this, that God is good,
and that he is a merciful God, as he is indeed: very few make conscience to
reason from his mercies, to provoke themselves thereby, to be more careful to
serve and obey him. Yea so much the rather have I been the more earnest, as my
duty binds me, because the most part of people do most undutifully, and
vngratiously abuse all the goodness and mercies of God, to imbolden themselves
to security, yea to a greater licentiousness in their sins: which no doubt,
is a most grievous and horrible sin, in the sight of GOD; and cannot but
very fearfully endanger all such graceless persons, to the most heavy wrath
of God.



In the 2. chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, verses 1, 2, 3, 4. thus
writes the Apostle.

1 Wherefore we ought diligently to give heed to the things which we have
heard, lest at any time we should let them slip.

2 For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience, received a just recompense of reward.

3 How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first
began to be preached by the Lord, and (afterward) was confirmed to us, by
them that heard him.

4 God bearing witness thereunto, both with signs, and wonders, and with
diverse miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost, according to his own will.

Explication.
Here we have a three fold comparison. One betwixt the Law and the Gospel.
Another betwixt the chief instruments, which God used to publish his law; to
wit, his holy Angels: and the chief publisher of the Gospel; that is, the
Son of God himself, of infinite excellency and authority above all Angels.
The third betwixt the contrary uses, and ends of the one and of the other. The
law by reason of sin, armeth the curse, through the righteous judgment of
God: but the Gospel offers salvation to all true believers, through the free
grace and mercy of God. All of these comparisons, agree in this; generally to
declare, the exceeding great danger of not believing, and of not obeying the
Gospel: insomuch as the mercy of God, most graciously and most honorably
offered thereby, even to the eternal salvation of all such, as will thankfully
receive it; is most wretchedly despised and rejected through unbelief.

We know also, what our Savior the Son of God himself, has most fearfully
pronounced, Matthew chap. 11.20, 21, etc: namely, that it shall be easier for the
Citizens of Tyrus and Sidon, and for them of the land of Sodom in the day of
judgment: then for such as neglect his Gospel, ratified and confirmed, by so
many miracles, as he wrought to the same end. Read also Heb. chap. 10.26. etc.
and chap. 12.18, etc. 29. the like amplification of the greatness of this
sin; agreeable to the former testimony and declaration, in the second
chapter.

It is a most fearful saying, which we read, 2. These. 1.7, 8, 9, 10. where
the Apostle affirms, that The Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven,
with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that
do not know God, and which obey not unto the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Who shall be punished with everlasting perd tion, from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power, When he shall come to be glorified in
his Saints, and to be made marvelous in all them that believe.

Likewise, in the first Epistle of Peter, chap. 4. verses 17, 18. The time is
come (says the Apostle) that judgment must begin at the house of God. If it
first begin at us, what shall be the end of them which obey not the Gospel of
God? And if the righteous be scarcely saved, where shall the ungodly, and the
sinner appear?

The greatness, and consequently the danger of the sin of unbelief, is
notably expressed by the Apostle John, in his first Epistle, chap. 5. verse 10.
in that he says, that it is even as much as if one should go about to make
God a liar: which is most horrible, once to think. Read also 2. Epist. verses
8, 9. Look to your selves (says he to that elect Lady to whom he writes,
and to her children) that we loose not the things which we have done but that
we may receive a full reward. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the
doctrine of Christ, has not God. But contrariwise, (as it follows in the
same verse) he that continues in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the
Father and the Son.

If ye believe not (says the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 7.9.) ye shall not be
established. It is a general sentence, to show that the mind of man is
always uncertain, and restless: further then it is settled by faith, to
repose it self wholly in the living God.

Finally, for the danger of unbelief, and disobedience to the Gospel, read
the fearful, but most true doctrine of our Savior Christ, John, 3. verses
18, 19.20 21.

He that believes (in the Son) shall not be condemned: but he that believes
not, is condemned already, because he believes not in the name of the only
begotten Son of God.

And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil.

For every man that does evil, hates the light; neither comes he to the
light, lest his deeds should be reproved.

But he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds might be made
manifest, that they are wrought according to God.

And again, verse 36. He that believes in the Son (says John the Baptist)
has everlasting life: and he that obeys not the Son, shall not see life,
but the wrath of God abides on him.

Thus we see the exceeding great danger of unbelief, and disobedience to the
Gospel, plentifully confirmed unto us. God of his infinite mercy, give us grace
to make our best use and profit, by the gracious admonitions and warnings,
which are given us against the same.

NOw, for a general conclusion of the whole doctrine of our christian belief:
one thing yet further I desire to deliver, and set down unto you. That is to
say; that from that which has been hitherto said, for the interpretation and
use of all and every of the Articles thereof: we may so clearly understand
what manner of faith that is, whereby we are justified in the sight of God;
that the question of our justification by faith, may by the due consideration
thereof, be easily decided by us.

For, we may easily perceive, that it is such a faith, as is grounded wholly
upon the infallible warrant of the most holy and canonical Scriptures of God
rightly understood: and not upon any humane traditions, True justifying faith
generally considered.
or unwritten verities, as they are called. Such a faith, as looks directly
to the grauous promises of God: and not to those blind encouragements, and
ouerweening persuasions or hopes, which carnal confidence suggesteth. Such a
faith, as yields that only true comfort, wherewith the heart of man may
soundly, and boldly, comfort and rejoice it self. Such a faith, as works by
love, and is plentiful in all good duties, both toward God and man. Gal chap.
5. verse 6. Phil. chap. 1.11. In which respect, it is worthily called the faith
of the truth which is according to godliness, under the hope of eternal life.
Tit. chap. 1. verses 1, 2.

It is no idle and dead faith, such as Saint James does justly condemn, chap.
2, verse 14, etc. It is not a bare historical, or inwrapped says, to believe
as the Church believes: nor any doubting faith, as if it were good modesty so
to believe: such as the Popish Teachers deceive the people withal. It is no
such faith, as carnal gospellers do make boast of: and in the same their
boasting, fear not to turn the grace of God into wantonness.

Finally, it is no such faith, as is void of the power of godliness.

Whereupon also, it likewise follows; that he is no true Christian, whosoever
he be: that has such a kind of idle, historical, inwrapped, or doubting
faith. Neither is the carnal, or loose worshipper, any true, or kindly, and
faithful worshipper of God: but only such, as be very careful to glorify
God, and to dispose of all their ways aright, in obedience to all the laws
and commandments of God. According as God himself has solemnly determined
this matter in the 50. Psalm: namely, in the last verse of the Psalm,
speaking thus by his holy Prophet, He that offers praise, shall glorify me:
and to him that disposes his way aright, I will show the salvation of God.

Such as will truly serve and please God: must worship him seriously, and in
good earnest. They must also be constant: or else all former labor is lost.
The true faithful Christian, continuing constant: must therewith also
increase. For as we read, Rom 1.16, 17. The Gospel is the power of God to
salvation, etc. whereby the righteousness of God, is revealed from faith to
faith.

And therefore it is, that the same Apostle makes his prayer for the
Thessalonians, 2. Epist, chap. 1.11. that God would make them worthy of his
calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of
faith, with power That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in
them, and they in him, according to the grace of our God, and of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Read also Ephesians. 4 verse 11, 12, 13, etc. And the Apostle Peter, 2.
Epist. 3.18. Grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, to him be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Moreover, this we must know, that albeit faith is of a working nature: yet to
speak properly, it does not justify by works; but only, in that it
apprehends Christ, whom God has made the Lord our righteousness: yea to be
even all in all, unto us, and for us. 1. Cor. 1.30. and Colos. 2.9, 10.
Whereupon it is, that the Apostle Paul often affirms: yea that he
plentifully, and strongly disputes and proves, that our justification is of
the free grace and mercy of God: namely in his Epistles, written to the Romans,
and to the Galatians.

So that faith it self, has no power to justify, otherwise then as an
isntrumental cause: and that also by the mere grace of God, which inableth
it, to apprehend and lay hold upon our Savior Christ and his righteousness.
Neither has it any power at all to work, but through the sanctification of
the holy Ghost. And both of these powers also, are diligently to be
distinguished For as both the fire, and the Sun, have their double force;
that is, to give light, and to make warm: yet do they neither warm by their
light, nor give light by their warmth: so, albeit faith does inlighten the mind
to behold the favor and grace of God in Christ Jesus; and also inflameth the
heart, to be zealous of all good works, to the glory of God: yet does it no
more justify by working; then fire, or the Sun do burn by that light which
they give.

Yea, and to speak more properly; it is God only, who justifies sinners, as
the alone efficient cause and fountain of justification; and that even through
his mere grace, in that he forgiueth their sins for Jesus Christ's sake; and
imputes his righteousness unto them. Romans 3.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. And 2. Cor.
5.21. as was said before. As for works of obedience; they are fruits only,
declaring the truth of that faith which justifies. And so is the Apostle James
to be understood, as has been showed more at large, in the beginning of this
part of our Treasury.

Finally, it may well be observed, that when we speak generally of
justification by faith: we may understand justification, to be a general
fruit, of believing the whole doctrine of salvation, contained in all the
Articles of our belief: as well concerning God the Father, and the holy Ghost,
as the Son, etc. without neglect of any of them, though with a special
respect, and relying upon the sufferings and death of our Savior Christ.

These are the things which I thought good to add unto all former particulars,
for a general conclusion, of the whole doctrine of our christian belief.

Now God of his infinite mercy, make us truly wise, with all his Saints and
elect children, unto our eternal salvation: in the right understanding,
believing, and obeying of the great mystery of Godliness, in Jesus Christ our
Lord. To whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost, one true and eternal God,
be all praise, honor, and glory, both now, and for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Verses Eucharisticall: or of thanksgiving: to the honor and praise of our
most gracious good God.
THe Gospel is a Jewel rare,
And hidden from our sight:
Gospel.
This present work a key it is,
To bring it unto light.
Faith is the hand, whose proper it is
Thereon to lay sure hold:
Faith. Justification.
This book, this hand does guide unto
This precious pearl of gold.
And by this Faith which holds it,
Made just, and saved we be:
This saving Justice herein is
At full revealed to thee.
Repentance with the fruits thereof,
From lively Faith that springs:
Repentance.
Within this Book unfolded is,
And many heavenly things.
To wit, the chiefest Principles,
Of doctrine pure and sound:
Twelve Articles, whereof we have
Articles of faith.
Of Faith, from Scriptures ground.
The virtues of which precious pearls,
So rare and known to few:
Are here found out, and clearly laid
All open to thy view.
One God. Three Persons.
The glory of the Trinity,
One God in persons three:
The Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
Presented are to thee.
The Father of Almighty power,
Father. Creation.
The first among the rest:
His frame of world right glorious,
Is lively here expressed.
Whose wise and holy Providence,
This mighty frame does guide:
Providence.
Who all, for all, but most of all;
Does for his Saints provide.
His only Son, our only Lord,
And Savior most dear;
Son. Conception. Birth.
Whose wonderful Conception,
Whose like we do not hear:
In womb of Marie Virgin still,
By holy Ghost conceived;
Yea borne; and as all children be,
Into this world conuey'd.
Life. Doctrine. Miracles. Sufferings. Death.
His holy life, his doctrine sweet,
His wonders strange and rare:
His bitter and his cursed death,
Here lively painted are.
Burial. Descension. Resurrection Ascension.
His burial, and power of death,
On him thus brought to grave:
His third days resurrection;
Ascension eke we have.
Sitting at the Fathers right hand. Intercession.
His sitting at the Fathers hand,
In kingly Majesty;
There making intercession,
For us continually.
His coming in the clouds as Judge,
Last judgment.
With power and terror great:
When all the Nations shall be brought
Before his judgment seat.
Even thus; our full redemption,
Redemption.
From sin and pains of hell:
Wrought by the Son of God alone;
This Book declares well.
Next unto whom, on holy Ghost,
Holy Ghost.
Third Person, we rely:
Who to his lively members all,
All comforts does apply.
These lively members are dispersed
Catholic Church.
Throughout the world so wide:
In heavenly mansions, some with Christ;
Are placed to abide.
All which make universal Church,
A joint communion:
Communion of Saints.
Of Saints a holy fellowship;
One head, and body one.
Forgiveness of sins.
Whose sins and great offenses are,
Forgiven and discharged:
And so from woeful bondage, they
For ever are enlarged.
Their bodies at the day of Doom,
Resurrection of the body.
In honor all shall rise:
To be united to their souls,
Made holy, strong, and wise.
A life eternal live they shall,
Life everlasting.
In glory there to reign:
All tears from eyes shall wiped be,
And never feel more pain.
These mysteries profound and deep,
Which reason cannot reach:
All plainly here unfolded are,
This light Gods grace did teach.
Now blessed be that Lord our God,
And praised be his name;
Who by his spirit, to servant his,
Both heart and hand did frame:
In Judgment sound, with wisdom like,
In method plain and clear;
This Volume large, to finish quite,
All glory most d^e to our one only most w^se, almighti^, and euer^iuing God.
As now it does appear.
All lets so often, all trialls great,
All doubts, all fears, all pain:
All ended are, with comfort much;
A sweet contenting gain.
Now Father dear, we thee entreat
Even for thy Christ his sake;
To bless this work to those good ends,
For which we pains did take.
Even for the glory of thy name,
And honor of thy Son:
By comfort of the holy Ghost,
Whereby it was begun.
That we in faith may know thee Lord
One God in Persons three:
To serve the here, and after death,
To reign for aye with thee.
Amen.
Richard Blackerbie, Minister of the Word.

To the Christian Reader.
THey who have taken no small pains for thee (good Christian Reader) do
entreat thee to take a little pains for them, and also for thy self: in
mending with thy pen the typographical errata, or any other escapes which God
shall discover unto thee, in thy Book. Favorably considering this with thy
self, that in a work of much and long business of this kind; easily will many
humane infirmities of the eye, both of the body, and also of the mind, mix
themselves: yea even with the best and most careful endeavors, about the most
holy and weighty things we have to deal withal. Such as in the compass of
the present labor, are these which follow, and (as we hope) very few beside,
of any great moment. Such as they be, we pray you to correct in manner as
follows.

In the Preface.
PAge. 2. line 18 read populous for popular. P. 7. l. 26. put out not.

In the Contents of the first Book.
Page. 1. line 21. for page, read pages. And line 26. for 109. 105.

In the first Book.
Page. 3. line 19. for rightous. read rigorous. P. 10. l. 36. read work. And
line 39. malicious. P. 12. l. 3. please. P. 15. l. 23. for 13. read 12. 3. P.
18. l. 30. Ep^:, for 3. P. 22, last line, ad after disobedience these words,
many were made sinners: so by the obedience. P. 59. 5. lines of the ^orme page
printed again. P: 107. l. 3^. read capacity. And P. 108. l. 14. gravity. P.
126: in the margin misericordia.

In the second Book.
Page, 2 line 8. a comma wanting after Jesus. And line. 40. that is for the. P.
15. l. 2. for 6. read 61. And line 19. for would, could. And line 51. of
Christ, put out of. P. 24 l. 34. read therefore. P: 26. l. 12. a more, for more
a. And line 21. read ch: 5. for 3. P. 33. l. 36. 1. Tim, 2. P. 35. l. 20. in
Bardelauistae, u. ^ for n. P: 47. l. 16. read and of the apprehension. And line
20. read adds for and. P. 50. line 2. for of our, read of the birth of our. ^
54, l. 48, love is for hope. And l. 56, they for we. P: 57. l. 19 of his, for
of the benefit of his. P. 65. l. 8. by means of diete, for any mean^esse of
diete. P. 69. 13. the most for his most. P. 76. 41. put out 4. P. 78. 37. read
appointed to a. P: 82, 35 behoofull for us to. P. 84. 1^. for 52. read 42. P.
90. 19. read for mouth may, mouth that we may. And P. 128. 24 for sodder,
soder. And l. 35, for and gives, ^^e gives. P: 129. 50. read hypothesie for
hypocrisy. P. 150, 1, for though, read because. P. 153, 19, put out, or
accusation. and ^, 2^ read all other as well in their superior as inferior
places. and l. 21, al^o how to P 159. l. 5. imitation (...) for imitation And
l. 24, ^a^e for have. and line. 39. for who rather, read whether. P: 160. 37.
put our self. P: 164. 2. read though for according, And P 165, 1, two other,
for two vvorthie, P. 16^, 38 And, for At. P: 167, 41. read So perf tly obedient
was he to God and so perfitly loving, etc. P: 17^, read pictured. and 17, tell
all my. and 48. had done their. P: 183, 23, for as, read was. P: 184, 20 for
28. read 2, 8. P. 185, 18. read, have my hope any way. P: 186, 3, read not but
he. P. 189, l. 40, 41, read so great mercy being so great and, P: 190. 55.
read. This first p 19 19, for then, read even. p. 203, 12. for are, read we
are. p. 212, 24, read him that. And 213. 3 but half. And 214, 5. soul for
son p: 215. last line, that ever they. p. 227, 49, read mighty. And 232, 37.
seeing. And 23^, scourge for scorn. And 277, 20. then by his. And 291. 32,
committing for omitting. p. 335, 51, read tutissi^am. p. 340, 39, read, The
comfort (I say) is etc. And 141, l. 46. 47, the the humanity. And 377, 22, let
go. And 503, 32, for of, read upon. and 412, 47, but a limme, for but for a
time. p 430, line 2, occup^tion is for occasion and l: 6, occasion for
ocupation. p: 432, 20, thus for then p. 448, 40, for selves the, read selves to
be the. And last ^ne, though some more. p. 450, 54, read gardedst. And 455, 24,
so the coming. And 458, for them: but, read for them: it cannot b^ but And
459, 13, first thing the. And 460. 39, mind all these things (to p. 463, l. 4,
renew p. 464, 1, wickednesses. And l. 28, Paul v^^verse. p. 476, 36, commanded.
p. 483, 39. Beth gra^ijah. p. 502, 1, therefore. p. 505, 23, Laterane. p 518,
4, mercy. p 524. last line, read ^^iritual for special. p. 525, 9, for very,
read verif ed. p. 529, 6, Council p. 530, were into a. p: 536, 28, vehistahaui.
p: 539, 44, read (ye^ though they be of the. for (no not of the p: 545, 55, for
of then, read of these things. p: 551, 7, read Iz el p: 5^2, 20. read willingly
^alking in. p. 563, 28. for Genesis 8, read 19. p. 610, 33. for of 21, read also
of.

In that which remains, such has been the blessing of God, that ^e trust
very few escapes shall be found like unto these.

And thus (good Christian Reader) craving thy friendly assi^^ance for the
correcting of that which has escaped us: we commend thee and all the holy
labors of e^^y of us; to the most gracious and honorable blessing of God our
heavenly Father, (to the spiritual ^enefit of us all,) by the most blessed and
effectual operation of the holy Ghost, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Thine as their own: even ^^olly in the Lord. R. A. R. B.


