A Brief and true Relation of the Discovery of the North part of Virginia;
being a most pleasant, fruitful and commodious soil: Made this present year
1602, by Captain Bartholomew Gosnold, Captain Bartholowmew Gilbert, and
diverse other gentlemen their associats, by the permission of the honorable
knight, Sir WALTER RALEGH, etc. Written by M. John Brereton one of the voyage.
Whereunto is annexed a Treatise, of M. Edward Hayes, containing important
inducements for the planting in those parts, and finding a passage that way to
the South sea, and China. With diverse instructions of special moment newly
added in this second impression.

LONDINI, Impensis Geor. Bishop. 1602.

To the honorable, Sir WALTER RALEGH, Knight, Captain of her Majesty's
Guards, Lord Warden of the Stanneries, Lieutenant of Cornwall, and Governor of
the Isle of Iersey.
Honorable sir,
being earnestly requested by a dear friend, to put down in writing, some
true relation of our late performed voyage to the North parts of Virginia; at
length I resolved to satisfy his request, who also emboldened me to direct the
same to your honorable consideration; to whom indeed of duty it pertains.

May it please your Lordship therefore to understand, that upon the six and
twentieth of March 1602, being Friday, we went from Falmouth, being in all, two
and thirty persons, in a small bark of Dartmouth, called The Concord, holding
a course for the North part of Virginia: and although by chance the wind
favored us not at first as we wished, but enforced us so far to the
Southward, They fell with S. Marie, one of the Acores.
as we fell with S. Marie, one of the islands of the Acores (which was not much
out of our way) but holding our course directly from thence, we made our
journey shorter (than hitherto accustomed) by the better part of a thousand
leagues, yet were we longer in our passage than we expected; which happened,
for that our bark being weak, we were loath to press her with much sail;
also, our sailers being few, and they none of the best, we bare (except in
fair weather) but low sail; besides, our going upon an unknown coast, made
us not ouer-bolde to stand in with the shore, but in open weather; which caused
us to be certain days in sounding, before we discovered the coast, the
weather being by chance, somewhat foggie. But on Friday the fourteenth of May,
They discovered land the 14. of May.
early in the morning, we made the land, being full of fair trees, the land
somewhat low, certain hummocks or hills lying into the land, the shore full
of white sand, but very stony or rocky. And standing fair along by the
shore, about twelve of the clock the same day, Eight Indians come aboard of
them.
we came to an anchor, where eight Indians, in a Baskeshallop with mast and
sail, an iron grapple, and a kettle of Copper, came boldly aboard us, one of
them apparelled with a wastcoat and breeches of black serdge, made after our
sea-fashion, hose and shoes on his feet; all the rest (saving one that had a
pair of breeches of blue cloth) were naked. The description of them.
These people are of tall stature, broad and grim visage, of a black swart
complexion, their eie-browes painted white; their weapons are bows and
arrows. It seemed by some words and signs they made, that some Basks or of S,
John de Luz, have fished or traded in this place, being in the latitude of 43.
degrees. But riding here, in no very good harbor, and withal, doubting the
weather, about three of the clock the same day in the afternoon we weighed,
and standing Southerly off into sea the rest of that day and the night
following, with a fresh gale of wind, in the morning we found our selves
embaied with a mighty headland; but coming to an anchor about nine of the
clock the same day, within a league of the shore, we hoised out the one half
of our shallop, and captain Bartholmew Gosnold, Their first landing.
my self, and three others, went ashore, being a white sandy and very bold
shore; and marching all that afternoon with our muskets on our necks, on the
highest hills which we saw (the weather very hot) at length we perceived this
headland to be parcel of the maine, and sundry Islands lying almost round
about it: so returning (toward evening) to our shallop (for by that time, the
other part was brought ashore and set together) we espied an Indian, Another
Indian.
a young man, of proper stature, and of a pleasing countenance; and after some
familiarity with him, we left him at the sea side, and returned to our ship;
where, in five or six hours absence, we had pestered our ship so with Cod
fish, Anexcellent Codfishing.
that we threw numbers of them ouer-boord again: and surely, I am persuaded
that in the months of March, April, and May, there is upon this coast, better
fishing, and in as great plenty, as in Newfound-land: for the sculles of
Mackerell, herrings, Cod, and other fish, that we daily saw as we went and came
from the shore, were wonderful; and besides, the places where we took these
Cods (and might in a few days have laden our ship) were but in seven fadome
water, and within less than a league of the shore: where, in Newfound-land
they fish in forty or fifty fadome water, and far off. From this place, we
sailed round about this headland, A great headland.
almost all the points of the compass, the shore very bold: but as no coast
is free from dangers, so I am persuaded, this is as free as any. The land
somewhat low, full of goodly woods, but in some places plain. At length we
were come amongst many fair Islands, Many fair Islands.
which we had partly discerned at our first landing; all lying within a league
or two one of another, and the outermost not above six or seven leagues from
the maine: The first Island called Marthaes vineyard.
but coming to an anchor under one of them, which was about three or four
leagues from the maine, captain Gosnold, my self, and some others, went
ashore, and going round about it, we found it to be four English miles in
compass, without house or inhabitant, saving a little old house made of
boughs, covered with bark, an old piece of a wear of the Indians, to catch
fish, and one or two places, where they had made fires. The chiefest trees of
this Island, are Beeches Beeches.
and Cedars; Cedars.
the outward parts all ouergrowen with low bushie trees, three or four foot
in height, which bear some kind of fruits, as appeared by their blossoms;
Strawberries, red and white, as sweet and much bigger than ours in England:
Rasberies, Gooseberies, Hurtleberies, and such an incredible store of Uines,
Uines in abundance.
as well in the wooddie part of the Island, where they run upon every tree, as
on the outward parts, that we could not go for treading upon them: also, many
springs Springs.
of excellent sweet water, and a great standing lake A Lake.
of fresh water, near the sea side, an English mile in compass, which is
maintained with the springs running exceeding pleasantly through the wooddie
grounds which are very rockie. Here are also in this Island, great store of
Dear, Dear.
which we saw, and other beasts, Other beasts.
as appeared by their tracks; as also diverse fowls, as Cranes, Cranes.
Hernshawes, Hernshawes.
Bitters, Bitters.
Geese, Geese.
Mallards, Mallards.
Teales Teales.
and other fowls, in great plenty; also, great store of Pease, which grow in
certain plots all the Island over. On the North side of this Island we found
many huge bones and ribs of Whales. This Island, as also all the rest of
these Islands, are full of all sorts of stones fit for building; the sea sides
all covered with stones, many of them glistring and shining like mineral
stones, and very rockie: also, the rest of these Islands are replenished with
these commodities, and upon some of them, inhabitants; as upon as Island to the
Northward, and within two leagues of this; yet we found no towns, nor many of
their houses, although we saw many Indians, which are tall big boned men, all
naked, saving they cover their privy parts with a black tewed skin, much like
a Black smiths apron, tied about their middle and between their legs behind:
they gave us of their fish ready boiled, (which they carried in a basket made
of twigges, not unlike our osier) whereof we did eat, and judged them to be
fresh water fish: they gave us also of their Tobacco, Tobacco.
which they drink green, but dried into powder, very strong and pleasant, and
much better than any I have tasted in England: the necks of their pipes are
made of clay hard dried, (whereof in that Island is great store both red and
white) the other part is a piece of hollow copper, very finely closed and
semented together. We gave unto them certain trifles, as knives, points, and
such like, which they much esteemed. From hence we went to another Island,
Elizabeth's Island.
to the Northwest of this, and within a league or two of the maine, which we
found to be greater than before we imagined, being 16. English miles at the
least in compass; for it contains many pieces or necks of land, which differ
nothing from several Islands, saving that certain banks of small breadth, do
like bridges, join them to this Island. On the outsides of this Island are
many plain places of grass, abundance of Strawberies and other berries before
mentioned. In mid May we did sow in this Island (for a trial) in sundry
places, Wheat, Barley, Oats, and Pease, Wheat, Barley, and Oats sowed, came up
nine inches in fourteen days.
which in fourteen days were sprung up nine inches and more. The soil is fat
and lusty, the upper crust of gray color; but a foot or less in depth, of
the color of our hempelands in England; and being thus apt for these and the
like grains; the sowing or setting (after the ground is cleansed) is no greater
labor, than if you should set or sow in one of our best prepared gardens in
England. This Island is full of high timbred Oaks, Oaks.
their leaves thrice so broad as ours; Ceders, Cedars.
straight and tall; Beech, Beech.
Elm, Elm.
hollie, Hollie.
Walnut trees Walnut trees.
in abundance, the fruit as big as ours, as appeared by those we found under
the trees, which had lien all the year ungathered; Haslenut trees, Cherry
trees, Cherry trees.
the leaf, bark and bigness not differing from ours in England, but the
stalk bears the blossoms or fruit at the end thereof, like a cluster of
Grapes, forty or fifty in a bunch; Sassafras trees Sassafras trees.
great plenty all the Island over, a tree of high price and profit; also
diverse other fruit trees, Diverse other trees.
some of them with strange barks, of an Orange color, in feeling soft and
smoothe like Ueluet: in the thickest parts of these woods, you may see a
furlong or more round about. On the Northwest side of this Island, near to the
sea side, is a standing Lake of fresh water, almost three English miles A lake
three miles about.
in compass, in the midst whereof stands a plot of woody ground, an acre in
quantity or not above: this Lake is full of small Tortoises, Small Tortoises.
and exceedingly frequented with all sorts of fowls before rehearsed, which
breed, some low on the banks, and others on low trees about this Lake in great
abundance, whose young ones of all sorts we took and eat at our pleasure: but
all these fowls are much bigger than ours in England. Abundance of fowls,
much bigger than ours in England.
Also, in every Island, and almost in every part of every Island, are great
store of Ground nuts, Ground nuts.
forty together on a string, some of them as big as hens eggs; they grow
not two inches under ground: the which nuts we found to be as good as Potatoes.
Also, diverse sorts of shellfish, Shell fish.
as Scalops, Muscles, Cockles, Lobsters, Crabs, Oisters, and Wilks, exeeding
good and very great. But not to cloy you with particular rehearsal of such
things as God and Nature has bestowed on these places, in comparison whereof,
the most fertile part of al England is (of it self) but barren; we went in our
light-horsman from this Island to the maine, right against this Island some two
leagues off, where coming ashore, we stood a while like men ravished at the
beauty The exceeding beauty of the maine land.
and delicacie of this sweet soil; for besides diverse clear Lakes Great Lakes.
of fresh water (whereof we saw no end) Modowes Large meadows.
very large and full of green grass; even the most woody places (I speak
only of such as I saw) do grow so distinct and apart, one tree from another,
upon green grassie ground, somewhat higher than the Plains, as if Nature
would show her self above her power, artificial. Hard by, we espied seven
Indians, Seven Indians.
and cumming up to them, at first they expressed some fear; but being
emboldned by our courteous usage, and some trifles which we gave them, they
followed us to a neck of land, which we imagined had been severed from the
maine; but finding it otherwise, we perceived a broad harbor or rivers A broad
river.
mouth, which ran up into the maine: and because the day was far spent, we
were forced to return to the Island from whence we came, leaving the discovery
of this harbor, A good harbor.
for a time of better leisure. Of the goodness of which harbor, as also of
many others thereabouts, there is small doubt, considering that all the
Islands, as also the maine (where we were) is all rockie grounds and broken
lands. Now the next day, we determined to fortify our selves in a little plot
of ground in the midst of the Lake above mentioned, The English house.
where we built an house, and covered it with sedge, which grew about this lake
in great abundance; in building whereof, we spent three weeks and more: but
the second day after our coming from the maine, we espied 11 canowes or boats,
with fifty Indians in them, Eleven canows with fifty Indians in them.
coming toward us from this part of the maine, where we, two days before
landed; and being loath they should discover our fortification, we went out on
the sea side to meet them; and coming somewhat near them, they all sat down
upon the stones, calling aloud to us (as we rightly ghessed) to do the like, a
little distance from them: having sat a while in this order, captain Gosnold
willed me to go unto them, to see what countenance they would make; but as
soon as I came up unto them, one of them, to whom I had given a knife two
days before in the maine, knew me, (whom I also very well remembered) and
smiling upon me, spoke somewhat unto their lord or captain, Their captain.
which sat in the midst of them, who presently rose up and took a large Beauer
skin from one that stood about him, and gave it unto me, which I requited for
that time the best I could: but I, pointing toward captain Gosnold, made
signs unto him, that he was our captain, and desirous to be his friend, and
enter league with him, which (as I perceived) he understood, and made signs of
joy: whereupon captain Gosnold with the rest of his company, being twenty in
all, came up unto them; and after many signs of gratulations (captain Gosnold
presenting their Lord with certain trifles which they wondered at, and highly
esteemed) we became very great friends, and sent for meat aboard our shallop,
and gave them such meats as we had then ready dressed, whereof they misliked
nothing but our mustard, whereat they made many a sour face. While we were
thus merry, one of them had conveyed a target of ours into one of their canowes,
which we suffered, only to try whether they were in subjection to this Lord
to whom we made signs (by showing him another of the same likeness, and
pointing to the canow) what one of his company had done: who suddenly
expressed some fear, and speaking angerly to one about him (as we perceived by
his countenance) caused it presently to be brought back again. So the rest of
the day we spent in trading with them for Furs, Several sorts of Furs.
which are Beauers, Luzernes, Marterns, Otters, Wild-cat skins, very large
and deep Furre, black Foxes, Conie skins, of the color of our Hares, but
somewhat less, Dear skins, very large, Seal skins, and other beasts
skins, to us unknown. They have also great store of Copper, Red Copper in
abundance.
some very read; and some of a paler color; none of them but have chains,
earings or collars of this metal: they head some of their arrows herewith
much like our broad arrow heads, very workmanly made. Their chains Chains.
are many hollow pieces semented together, each piece of the bigness of one of
our reeds, a finger in length, ten or twelve of them together on a string,
which they wear about their necks: their collars Collars.
they wear about their bodies like bandelieres a handful broad, all hollow
pieces, like the other, but somewhat shorter, four hundred pieces in a collar,
very fine and euenly set together. Besides these, they have large drinking cups
Drinking cups of Copper.
made like sculles, and other thin plates of copper, made much like our
boare-speare blades, all which they so little esteem, as they offered their
fairest collars or chains, for a knife or such like trifle, but we seemed
little to regard it; yet I was desirous to understand where they had such store
of this metal, and made signs to one of them (with whom I was very familiar)
who taking a piece of Copper Mines of Copper.
in his hand, made a hole with his finger in the ground, and withal pointed to
the maine from whence they came. They strike fire in this manner; every one
carries about him in a purse of tewd leather, a Mineral stone Mineral stones.
(which I take to be their Copper) and with a flat Emerie stone Emerie stones.
(wherewith Glasiers cut glass, and Cutlers glase blades) tied fast to the end
of a little stick, gently he strikes upon the Mineral stone, and within a
stroke or two, a spark falls upon a piece of Touchwood (much like our Sponge
in England) and with the least spark he makes a fire presently. We had also
of their Flax, Flax.
wherewith they make many strings and cords, but it is not so bright of color
as ours in England: I am persuaded they have great store growing upon the
maine, as also Mines and many other rich commodities, which we, wanting both
time and means, could not possibly discover. Thus they continued with us three
days, every night retiring them selves to the furthermost part of our Island
two or three miles from our fort: but the fourth day they returned to the
maine, pointing five or six times to the Sun, and once to the maine, which we
understood, that within five or six days they would come from the maine to us
again: but being in their canowes a little from the shore, they made huge
cries and shouts of joy unto us; and we with our trumpet and cornet, and
casting up our cappes into the air, made them the best farewell we could:
Indians apt for service.
yet six or seven of them remained with us behind, bearing us company every
day into the woods, and helped us to cut and carry our Sassafras, Sassafras.
and some of them lay aboard our ship. These people, as they are exceeding
courteous, A goodly people, and of good conditions.
gentle of disposition, and well conditioned, excelling all others that we have
seen; so for shape of body and lovely favor, I think they excel all the
people of America; of stature much higher than we; of complexion or color,
much like a dark Olive; their eie-browes and hair black, which they wear
long, tied up behind in knots, whereon they prick feathers of fowls, in
fashion of a crownet: some of them are black thin bearded; they make beards of
the hair of beasts: and one of them offered a beard of their making to one of
our sailers, for his that grew on his face, which because it was of a red
color, they judged to be none of his own. They are quick eied, and steadfast
in their looks, fearelesse of others harms, as intending none themselves; some
of the meaner sort given to filching, which the very name of Saluages (not
weighing their ignorance in good or evil) may easily excuse: their garments
are of Dear skins, and some of them wear Furs round and close about their
necks. Their apparel.
They pronounce our language with great facility; for one of them one day
sitting by me, upon occasion I spoke smiling to him these words: How now
(sirrah) are you so saucie with my Tobacco? which words (without any further
repetition) he suddenly spoke so plain and distinctly, as if he had been a
long scholar in the language. Many other such trials we had, which are here
needless to repeat. Their women Their women.
(such as we saw) which were but three in all, were but low of stature, their
eie-browes, hair, apparel, and manner of wearing, like to the men, fat, and
very well favored, and much delighted in our company; the men are very
dutiful toward them. And truly, the holsomnesse and temperature of this
Climat, does not only argue this people to be answerable to this description,
but also of a perfect constitution of body, active, strong, healthful, and
very witty, as the sundry toies of theirs cunningly wrought, may easily
witness. For the agreeing of this Climat The goodness or the Climat.
with us (I speak of my self, and so I may justly do for the rest of our
company) that we found our health and strength all the while we remained there,
so to renew and increase, as notwithstanding our diet and lodging was none of
the best, yet not one of our company (God be thanked) felt the least grudging
or inclination to any disease or sickness, but were much fatter and in better
health than when we went out of England. But after our bark had taken in so
much Sassafras, Cedar, Furs, Skins, and other commodities, as were thought
convenient; some of our company that had promised captain Gosnold to stay,
having nothing but a saving voyage in their minds, made our company of
inhabitants (which was small enough before) much smaller; so as captain
Gosnold seeing his whole strength to consist but of twelve men, and they but
meanly provided, determined to return Their return.
for England, leaving this Island (which he called Elizabeth's Island) which as
many true sorrowful eyes, as were before desirous to see it. So the 18. of
June, being Friday, we weighed, and with indifferent fair wind and weather
came to anchor the 23 of July, being also Friday (in all, bare five weeks)
before Exmouth.

Your Lordships to command, Ihon Brereton.

A brief Note of such commodities as we saw in the country, notwithstanding
our small time of stay.
Trees.
SAssafras trees, the roots whereof at 3. s. the pound are 336. l. the tun.
Cedars tall and straight, in great abundance. Cypres trees. Oaks. Walnut trees
great store. Elmes. Beech. Hollie. Haslenut trees. Cherry trees. Cotton trees.
Other fruit trees to us unknown.
The finder of our Sassafras in these parts, was one Master Robert Meriton.

Fowls.
EAgles. Hernshawes. Cranes. Bitters. Mallards. Teales. Geese. Pengwins.
Ospreis and Hawks. Crows. Ravens. Mewes. Doves. Sea-pies. Blacke-birds with
carnation wings.
Beasts.
Dear in great store, very great and large. Bears. Luzernes. Black Foxes.
Beauers. Otters. Wilde-Cats, very large and great. Dogs like Foxes, black and
sharp nosed. Conies.
Fruits, Plants, and Herbs.
Tobacco, excellent sweet and strong. Vines in more plenty than in France.
Ground-nuts, good meat, and also medicinable. Strawberries. Raspeberries.
Gooseberries. Hurtleberries. Pease growing naturally. Flax. Iris Florentina,
whereof apothecaries make sweet balls. Sorrel, and many other herbs wherewith
they made sallets.
Fishes.
Whales. Tortoises, both on land and sea. Seals. Cods. Mackerell. Breames.
Herrings. Thornbacke. Hakes. Rockefish. Doggefish. Lobstars. Crabbes. Muscles.
Wilks. Cockles. Scallops. Oisters.
SNakes four foot in length, and six inches about, which the Indians eat for
dainty meat, the skins whereof they use for girdles.

Colors to die with, red, white, and black.

Metals and Stones.
COpper in great abundance. Emerie stones for Glasiers and Cutlers. Alabaster
very white. Stones glistering and shining like Mineral stones. Stones of a
blue mettalline color, which we take to be Steel oar. Stones of all sorts
for buildings. Clay, red and white, which may prove good Terra Sigillata.
A brief Note of the sending another bark this present year 1602. by the
honorable knight, Sir WALTE RALEGH, for the searching out of his Colonie in
Virginia.
SAmuel Mace of Weimouth, a very sufficent Mariner, an honest sober man, who
had been at Virginia twice before, was employed thither by Sir Walter Ralegh,
to find those people which were left there in the year 1587. To whose succor
he has sent five several times at his own charges. The parties by him set
forth, performed nothing; some of them following their own profit elsewhere;
others returning with frivolous allegations. At this last time, to avoid all
excuse, he bought a bark, and hired all the company for wages by the month:
who departing from Weimouth in March last 1062, fell forty leagues to the
Southwestward of Hatarask, in thirty four degrees or thereabout; and having
there spent a month; when they came along the coast to seek the people, they
did it not, pretending that the extremity of weather and loss of some
principal ground-tackle, forced and feared them from searching the port of
Hatarask, to which they were sent. From that place where they abode, they
brought Sassafras, Radix Chinae or the China root, Benjamin, Cassia, lignea,
and a rind of a tree more strong than any spice as yet known, with diverse
other commodities, which hereafter in a larger discourse may come to light.

A Treatise, containing important inducements for the planting in these parts,
and finding a passage that way to the South sea and China.
THe voyage which we intend, is to plant Christian people and religion upon the
Northwest countries of America, in places temperat Temperate Climats.
and well agreeing with our constitution, which though the same do lie
between 40. and 44. degrees of latitude, under the Paralels of Italy and
France, yet are not they so hot; by reason that the suns heat is qualified in
his course over the Ocean, before he arriueth upon the coasts of America,
attracting much vapor from the sea: which mitigation of his heat, we take for
a benefit to us that intend to inhabit there; because under the Climat of 40
degrees, the same would be too vehement else for our bodies to endure.

These lands were never yet actually possessed by any Christian prince or
people, Her Majesty's title.
yet often intended to be by the French nation, which long sithence had
inhabited there, if domestical wars had not withheld them: notwithstanding
the same are the rightful inheritance of her Majesty, being first discovered
by our nation in the time of King Henry the seventh, under the conduct of John
Cabot and his sons: by which title of first discovery, the kings of Portugal
and Spain do hold and enjoy their ample and rich kingdoms in their Indies
East and West; and also lately planted in part by the Colonies sent thither by
the honorable knight, Sir Walter Ralegh.

The course unto these countries, A commodious and safe course.
is through the Ocean, altogether free from all restraint by foreign princes to
be made; whereunto other our accustomed trades are subject; apt for most winds
that can blow, to be performed commonly in 30 or 35 days. The coast fair,
with safe roads and harbors for ships: Rivers.
Many rivers.

These lands be fair and pleasant, Fertile lands.
resembling France, intermedled with mountains, valleys, meadows, woodlands,
and champians. The soil is exceeding strong, by reason it was never manured;
and will be therefore most fit to bear at first, Rape-seeds, Hemp, Flax, and
whatsoever else requires such strong soil. Rape-oiles, Rape oiles.
and all sorts of oiles, will be very commodious for England, which spends
oiles abundantly about Clothing and Leather-dressing. In like sort, Hemp and
Flax are profitable, whether the same be sent into England, or wrought there by
our people; Oad also will grow there as well or better then in Tercera.

The Saluages wear fair colors in some of their atire, whereby we hope to
find rich dies Dies.
and colors for painting.

The trees are for the most part, Cedars, Pines, Spruse, Fur and Oaks to the
Northward. Of these trees will be drawn Tar and Pitch, Rosen, Turpentine,
and Soapeashes: They will make masts for the greatest ships of the world:
Excellent timbers of Cedar, and boords for curious building.

The cliffes upon the coasts and mountains every where show great likelihood
of Minerals. Minerals.
A very rich mine of Copper Copper.
is found, whereof I have seen proof; and the place described. Not far from
which there is great hope also of a Silver mine. There be fair quarries of
stone, of beautiful colors, for buildings.

The ground brings forth, without industry, Pease, Roses, Grapes, Grapes.
Hemp, besides other plants, fruits, herbs and flowers, whose pleasant view
and delectable smelles, do demonstrate sufficiently the fertility and
sweetness of that soil and air.

Beasts Beasts.
of many kinds; some of the bigness of an Ox, whose hides make good buffe:
Dear, both red and of other sorts in abundance: Luzerns, Marterns, Sables,
Beauers, Bears, Otters, Wolves, Foxes, and Squirrels, which to the Northward
are black, and accounted very rich furs.

Fowls Fowls.
both of the water and land, infinite store and variety; Hawks both short and
long winged, Partriges in abundance, which are very great, and easily taken.
Birds great and small, some like unto our Blacke-birds, others like
Canarie-birds: And many (as well birds as other creatures) strange and
differing from ours of Europe.

Fish, namely, Cods, which as we incline more unto the South, are more large
and vendible for England and France, then the Newland fish. Whales and Seals
in great abundances. Oiles of them are rich commodities for England, whereof we
now make Soape, besides many other uses. Item, Tunneys, Anchoues, Bonits,
Salmons, Lobsters, Oisters having Pearl, and infinite other sorts of fish,
which are more plentiful upon those Northwest coasts of America, than in any
parts of the known world. Salt is reported to be found there, which else may be
made there, to serve sufficiently for all fishing.

So as the commodities Commodities in general.
there to be raised both of the sea and land (after that we have planted our
people skillful and industrious) will be, Fish, Whale and Seal oiles, Soape
ashes and Soape, Tar and Pitch, Rosen and Turpentine, Masts, Timber and
boords of Cedars, Firres, and Pines, Hemp, Flax, Cables and Ropes,
Saile-clothes, Grapes, and Raisens and Wines, Corn, Rape-seeds and oiles,
Hides, Skins, Furs, Dies and Colors for painting, Pearl, Metals, and
other Minerals.

These commodities before rehearsed, Imploiment of our people, and repairing
decayed ports.
albeit for the most part they be gross, yet are the same profitable for the
State of England specially, as well in regard of the use of such commodities, as
for the imploiment also of our people and ships; the want whereof, does decay
our towns and ports of England, and causes the realm to swarm full with
poor and idle people.

These commodities in like sort, The trade to Newfound-land shall be removed to
us.
are of great use and estimation in all the South and Western countries of
Europe; namely, Italy, France and Spain: for the which all nations that have
been accustomed to repair unto the Newfound-land for the commodity of fish
and oiles alone, will henceforward forsake the Newfound-land, and trade with
us, when once we have planted people in those parts: by whose industry shall
be provided for all comers, both fish and oiles, and many commodities besides,
of good importance and value.

Then will the Spaniards and Portugals bring unto us in exchange of such
commodites before mentioned, Spanish commodities.
Wines, Sweet oiles, Fruits, Spices, Sugars, Silks, Gold and Silver, or
whatsoever that Europe yields, to supply our necessities, and to increase our
delights.

For which Spanish commodities and other sorts likewise, English commodities.
our merchants of England will bring unto us again, Cloth, Cattle, for our
store and breed, and every thing else that we shall need, or that England shall
happily exchange for such commodities.

By this intercourse, Uent of our Cloth.
our habitations will be made a Staple of all vendible commodities of the
world, and a means to vent a very great quantity of our English cloth into
all the cold regions of America extended very far.

This intercourse also will be soon drawn together by this reason:
Intercourse will soon be had with other nations.
That near adioining upon the same coasts of Newfound-land, is the greatest
fishing of the world; whether do yearly repair about 400 sails of ships,
for no other commodity than Fish and Whale-oiles. Then forasmuch as merchants
ar diligent inquisitours after gains, they will soon remove their trade from
Newfound-land unto us near at hand, for so great increase of gain as they
shall make by trading with us. In commodities in the Newland trade.
For whereas the voyage unto the Newfound-land is into a more cold and
intemperate place, not to be traded nor frequented at all times, nor fortified
for security of the ships and goods; often spoiled by pirates or men of war;
the charges great for salt; double manning and double victualling their ships,
in regard that the labor is great and the time long, before their lading can be
made ready: they carry outward no commodities for freight; and after six
months voyage, their return is made but of Fish and Oiles.

Contrariwise, Commodities by having trade with us.
by trading with us at our intended place, the course shall be in a manner as
short; into a more temperate and healthful climat; at all times of the year
to be traded; harbors fortified to secure ships and goods; charges abridged of
salt, victualling and manning ships double: because lading shall be provided
unto their hands at a more easy rate than themselves could make it. They shall
carry freight also outward, to make exchange with us; and so get profit both
ways: and then every four months they may make a voyage and return, of both
fish and oiles, and many other commodities of good worth.

These reasons advisedly waighed, Note.
shall make our enterprise appear easy, and the most profitable of the world,
for our nation to undertake. The reasons we chiefly rely upon are these,
namely.

1 Those lands which we intend to inhabit, shall minister unto our people, the
subject and matter of many notable commodities. 2 England shall afford us
people both men, women and children above 10000, which may very happily be
spared from hence to work those commodities there. 3 Newfound-land shall
minister shipping to carry away all our commodities, and to bring others unto
us again for our supply.
Now two of these reasons are already effected unto our hands: An easy
enterprise, and great reward.
that is to say: The place where we shall find rich commodities, and ships to
vent them. It remains only for our parts, to carry and transport people
with their provisions from England, where the misery and necessity of many
cry out for such help and relief.

This considered, The English nation most fit for discoueries.
no nation of Christendom is so fit for this action as England, by reason of
our superfluous people (as I may term them) and of our long domestical
peace. And after that we be once 200 men strong, victualled and fortified, we
can not be removed by as many thousands.

For besides that, we have seen both in France and the Low Countries, where
200 men well fortified and victualled, have kept out the forces both of the
French and Spanish kings, even within their own kingdoms: it shall be also a
matter of great difficulty, to transport an army over the Ocean with victuals
and munition, and afterward to abide long siege abroad, against us fortified
within, where the very elements and famine shall fight for us, though we should
lie still and defend only.

The Saluages neither in this attempt shall hurt us, they being simple, The
Saluages unable to defend or offend.
naked and unarmed, destitute of edge-tooles or weapons; whereby they are
unable either to defend themselves or to offend us: neither is it our intent to
provoke, but to cherrish and win them unto Christianity by fair means; yet
not to trust them too far, but to provide against all accidents.

Then to conclude, as we of all other nations are most fit for a discovery and
planting in remote places; even so, under the heavens there is no place to be
found so convenient for such a purpose; by reason of the temperature,
commodities, apt site for trade, and repair thither already of so many ships,
which in any other frequented country, can not be procured in a man's age, nor
with expense of half a million.

So as the only difficulty now, This action but set on foot, will go forward
of it self.
is in our first preparation to transport some few people at the beginning; the
charges whereof shall be defraied by our first return, of fish and some
commodities of Sassafras, Hides, Skins and Furs, which we shall also have
by trading with the Saluages. The proof of which commodities shall encourage
our merchants to venture largely in the next. The supply shall easily and
continually be sent by ships, which yearly go from hence unto the
Newfound-land and us; and the intercourse and exchange we shall have with all
nations repairing thither, shall store us with abundance of all things for our
necessities and delights. Oversight in choice of a new habitation.
Which reasons if they had been foreseen of them that planted in the South
part of Virginia (which is a place destitute of good harbors, and far from
all trade) no doubt but if they had settled nearer unto this frequented trade
in the Newfound-land, they had by this time been a flourishing State, and
plentiful in all things; who also might then have made way into the bowels of
that large continent, where assuredly we shall discover very goodly and rich
kingdoms and cities.

It may also seem a matter of great consequence for the good and security of
England; that out of these Northerly regions we shall be able to furnish this
realm of all manner of provisions for our nauies; namely, Pitch, Rosen, Cables,
A matter of importance for England.
Ropes, Masts, and such like; which shall be made within those her Majesty's
own dominions, by her own subjects, and brought hither through the Ocean, free
from restraint of any other prince; whereby the customs and charges bestowed
by our merchants (to the enriching of foreign Estates) shall be lessened, and
turned to the benefit of her Highness and her deputies in those parts: which
also shall deliver our merchants from many troubles and molestations which they
now unwillingly endure in our East trades; and shall make us the less to doubt
the malice of those States whom now we may not offend, lest we should be
intercepted of the same provisions, to the weakening of our navy, the most
royal defense of this noble realm.

Of a convenient passage and trade into the South Sea, under temperate regions
part by rivers, and some part over land, in the continent of America.
Neither upon the discoueries of Jacques Noel, who having passed beyond the
three Saults, where Jacques Carrier left to discover, finding the river of S.
Laurence passable on the other side or branch; and afterward, understood of
the inhabitants, that the same river did lead into a mighty lake, which at the
entrance was fresh, but beyond, was bitter or salt; the end whereof was
unknown.

Omitting therefore these hopes, I will ground my opinion upon reason and
nature, which will not fail.

For this we know already, that great rivers have been discovered a thousand
English miles into that continent of America; namely, that of S. Laurence or
Canada. But not regarding miles more or less, most assuredly, that and other
known rivers there do descend from the highest parts or mountains, or middle
of that continent, into our North sea. And like as those mountains do cast
from them, A large course of a river through a mighty continent, produces a
portable river.
streams into our North seas; even so the like they do into the South sea,
which is on the back of that continent.

For all mountains have their descents toward the seas about them, which are
the lowest places and proper mansions of water: and waters (which are contained
in the mountains, as it were in cisternes) descending naturally, do always
resort unto the seas inuironing those lands: for example; From the Alps
confining Germany, France, and Italy, the mighty river Danubie does take his
course East, and discharges into the Pontique sea: the Rhine, North, and
falls into the Germane sea: the Rhosne, West, and goes into the Mediterran
sea: the Po, South, is emptied into the Adriatic or gulf of Venice. other
instances may be produced to like effect in Africa; yea, at home amongst the
mountains in England.

Seeing then in nature this can not be denied, and by experience elsewhere is
found to be so, I will show how a trade may be disposed more commodiously into
the South sea through these temperate and habitable regions, than by the frozen
Zones in the supposed passages of Northwest or Northeast: where, if the very
moment be omitted of the time to pass, then are we like to be frozen in the
seas, or forced to Winter in extreme cold and darkness like unto hell: or in
the midst of Summer, we shall be in peril to have our ships overwhelmed or
crushed in pieces by hideous and fearful mountains of ice floting upon those
seas.

Therefore four Staple-places must be erected, when the most short and
passable way is found: that is to say, two upon the North side, at the head and
fall of the river; and two others on the South side, at the head and fall also
of that other river.

Provided, that ships may pass up those rivers unto the Staples, so far as
the same be nauigable into the land; and afterward, that boats with flat
bottomes may also pass so high and near the heads of the rivers unto the
Staples, as possibly they can, even with less than two foot water, which can
not then be far from the heads; as in the river of Chagre.

That neck or space of land between the two heads of the said rivers, if it
be 100 leagues (which is not like) the commodities from the North and from the
South sea brought thither, may well be carried over the same upon horses, mules
or beasts of that country apt to labor (as the elke or buffel) or by the aid
of many Saluages accustomed to burdens; who shall stead us greatly in these
affairs.

It is moreover to be considered, that all these countries do yield (so far
as is known) Cedars, Pines, Fur trees and Oaks, to build, mast, and yeard
ships; wherefore we may not doubt, but that ships may be builded on the South
sea.

Then as ships on the South side may go and return to and from Cathay, China,
and other most rich regions of the East world in five months or thereabouts;
even so the goods being carried over unto the North side, ships may come
thither from England to fetch the same goods, and return by a voyage of four
or five months usually.

So as in every four months may be returned into England the greatest riches
of Cathay, China, Iapan, and the rest which will be Spices, Drugges, Musk,
Pearl, Stones, Gold, Silver, Silks, Clothes of gold, and all manner of precious
things, which shall recompense the time and labor of their transportation and
carriage, if it were as far and dangerous as the Moors trade is from Fess
and Marocco (over the burning and moveable sands, in which they perish many
times, and suffer commonly great distresses) unto the river called Niger in
Africa, and from thence, up the said river many hundred miles; afterward
ouer-land again, unto the river Nilus; and so unto Cairo in Egypt, from whence
they return the way they came.

Or if it were a voyage so far as our merchants have made into Persia, even
to Ormus, by the way of the North, through Russia into the Caspian sea, and so
forth, with payment of many tolles. But this passage over and through the
continent of America, as the same shall be always under temperate and
habitable climats, and a pleasant passage after it has been a little
frequented: even so it must fall out much shorter than it seems, by false
description of that continent, which does not extend so far into the West, as
by later nauigations is found and described in more exquisit charts. Besides
that, the sea extends it self into the land very far in many places on the
South side; whereby our access unto the South ocean, shall be by so much the
shorter.

FINIS.
Inducements to the liking of the voyage intended toward Virginia in 40. and
42. degrees of latitude, written 1585. by M. Richard Hakluyt the elder,
sometime student of the Middle Temple.
THe glory of God by planting of religion among those infidels.

2 The increase of the force of the Christians.

3 The possibility of the enlarging of the dominions of the Queens most
excellent Majesty, and consequently of her honor, revenues, and of her power
by this enterprise.

4 An ample vent in time to come of the Woollen clothes of England, especially
those of the coursest sorts, to the maintenance of our poor, that else sterue
or become burdensome to the realm: and vent also of sundry our commodities
upon the tract of that firm land, and possibly in other regions from the
Northern side of that maine.

5 A great possibility of further discoueries of other regions from the North
part of the same land by sea, and of unspeakable honor and benefit that may
rise upon the same, by the trades to ensue in Iapan, China, and Cathay, etc.

6 By return thence, this realm shall receive (by reason of the situation of
the climate, and by reason of the excellent soil) Oade, Oil, Wines, Hops,
Salt, and most or all the commodities that we receive from the best parts of
Europe, and we shall receive the same better cheap, than now we receive them,
as we may use the matter.

7 Receiving the same thence, the navy, the humane strength of this realm,
our merchants and their goods shall not be subject to arrest of ancient enemies
and doubtful friends, as of late years they have been.

8 If our nation do not make any conquest there, but only use traffic and
change of commodities, yet by mean the country is not very mighty, but
divided into pety kingdoms, they shall not dare to offer us any great annoy,
but such as we may easily revenge with sufficient chastisement to the unarmed
people there.

9 Whatsoever commodities we receive by the Steelyard merchants, or by our own
merchants from Eastland, be it Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Masts, Clap-boord,
Wainscot, or such like; the like good may we receive from the North and
Northeast part of that country near unto Cape Briton, in return for our
course Woollen clothes, Flanels and Rugges fit for those colder regions.

10 The passage to and fro, is through the maine Ocean sea, so as we are not in
danger of any enemies coast.

11 In the voyage, we are not to cross the burnt Zone, nor to pass through
frozen seas encombred with ice and fogs, but in temperate climate at all times
of the year: and it requires not, as the East Indie voyage does, the taking
in of water in diverse places, by reason that it is to be sailed in five or six
weeks: and by the shortness, the merchant may yearly make two returns (a
factory once being erected there) a matter in trade of great moment.

12 In this trade by the way in our pass to and fro, we have in tempests and
other haps, all the ports of Ireland to our aid, and no near coast or any
enemy.

13 By this ordinary trade we may annoy the enemies to Ireland, and succor the
Queens Majesty's friends there, and in time we may from Virginia yield them
whatsoever commodity they now receive from the Spaniard; and so the Spaniards
shall want the ordinary victual that heertofore they received yearly from
thence, and so they shall not continue trade, nor fall so aptly in practice
against this government, as now by their trade thither they may.

14 We shall, as it is thought, enjoy in this voyage, either some small Islands
to settle on, or some one place or other on the firm land to fortify for the
saftie of our ships, our men, and our goods, the like whereof we have not in
any foreign place of our traffic, in which respect we may be in degree of more
safety, and more quiet.

15 The great plenty of Buffe hides, and of many other sundry kinds of hides
there now presently to be had, the trade of Whale and Seal fishing, and of
diverse other fishings in the great rivers, great bays, and seas there, shall
presently defray the charge in good part or in all of the first enterprise, and
so we shall be in better case than our men were in Russia, where many years
were spent, and great sums of money consumed, before gain was sound.

16 The great broad rivers of that maine that we are to enter into so many
leagues nauigable or portable into the maine land, lying so long a tract with
so excellent and so fertile a soil on both sides, do seem to promise all
things that the life of man does require, and whatsoever men may wish, that are
to plant upon the same, or to traffic in the same.

17 And whatsoever notable commodity the soil within or without does yield in
so long a tract that is to be carried out from thence to England, the same
rivers so great and deep, do yield no small benefit for the sure, safe, easy
and cheap carriage of the same to shipboord, be it of great bulk or of great
weight.

18 And in like sort whatsoever commodity of England the Inland people there
shall need, the same rivers do work the like effect in benefit for the
incariage of the same, aptly, easily, and cheaply.

19 If we find the country populous, and desirous to expel us, and
injuriously to offend us, that seek but just and lawful traffic, then by
reason that we are lords of navigations, and they not so, we are the better able
to defend our selves by reason of those great rivers, and to annoy them in many
places.

20 Where there be many petie kings or lords planted on the rivers sides, and
by all likelihood maintain the frontiers of their several territories by
wars, we may by the aid of this river join with this king here, or with
that king there, at our pleasure, and may so with a few men be revenged of any
wrong offered by any of them; or may, if we will proceed with extremity,
conquer, fortify, and plant in soiles most sweet, most pleasant, most strong,
and most fertile, and in the end bring them all in subjection and to civility.

21 The known abundance of Fresh fish in the rivers, and the known plenty of
Fish on the sea coast there, may assure us of sufficient victual in spite of
the people, if we will use salt and industry.

22 The known plenty and variety of Flesh, of diverse kinds of beasts at land
there, may seem to say to us, that we may cheaply victual our nauies to
England for our returns, which benefit every where is not found of merchants.

23 The practice of the people of the East Indies, when the Portugals came
thither first, was to cut from the Portugals their lading of Spice: and hereby
they thought to overthrow their purposed trade. If these people shall practice
the like, by not suffering us to have any commodity of theirs without
conquest, (which requires some time) yet may we maintain our first voyage
thither, till our purpose come to effect, by the sea-fishing on the coasts
there, and by dragging for pearls, which are said to be on those parts; and by
return of those commodities, the charges in part shall be defraied: which is a
matter of consideration in enterprises of charge.

24 If this realm shall abound too too much with youth, in the mines there of
Gold, (as that of Chisca and Saguenay) of Silver, Copper, Iron, etc. may be an
employment to the benefit of this realm; in tilling of the rich soil there
for grain, and in planting of Uines there for Wine; or dressing of those Uines
which grow there naturally in great abundance, Olives for Oil; Orange trees,
Limons, Figs and Almonds for fruit; Oad, Saffron, and Madder for Diers; Hoppes
for Brewers; Hemp, Flax; and in many such other things, by imploiment of the
soil, our people void of sufficient trades, may be honestly employed, that else
may become hurtful at home.

25 The nauigating of the seas in the voyage, and of the great rivers there,
will breed many Mariners for service, and maintain much navigations.

26 The number of raw Hides there of diverse kinds of beasts, if we shall
possess some Island there, or settle on the firm, may presently employ many
of our idle people in diverse several dressings of the same, and so we may
return them to the people that can not dress them so well; or into this
realm, where the same are good merchandise; or to Flanders, etc. which present
gain at the first, raises great encouragement presently to the enterprise.

27 Since great waste Woods be there, of Oak, Cedar, Pine, Wall-nuts, and
sundry other sorts, many of our waste people may be employed in making of
Ships, Hoies, Busses and Boats; and to making of Rozen, Pitch and Tar, the
trees natural for the same, being certainly known to be near Cape Briton and
the Bay of Menan, and in many other places there about.

28 If mines of white or gray marble, Iet, or other rich stone be found there,
our idle people may be employed in the mines of the same, and in preparing the
same to shape, and so shaped, they may be carried into this realm as good balast
for our ships, and after serve for noble buildings.

29 Sugarcanes may be planted as well as they are now in the South of Spain,
and besides the imploiment of our idle people, we may receive the commodity
cheaper, and not enrich infidels or our doubtful friends, of whom now we
receive that commodity.

30 The daily great increase of Woolles in Spain, and the like in the West
Indies, and the great imploiment of the same into Cloth in both places, may
move us to endeavor, for vent of our Cloth, new discoueries of peopled
regions, where hope of sale may arise; otherwise in short time many
inconveniences may possibly ensue.

31 This land that we purpose to direct our course to, lying in part in the 40
degree of latitude, being in like heat as Lisbone in Portugal does, and in the
more Southerly part as the most Southerly coast of Spain does, may by our
diligence yield unto us besides Wines and Oiles and Sugars, Orenges, Limons,
Figs, Resings, Almonds, Pomegranates, Rice, Raw-silks such as come from
Granada, and diverse commodities for Diers, as Anile and Cochenillio, and sundry
other colors and materials. Moreover, we shall not only receive many precious
commodities besides from thence, but also shall in time find ample vent of the
labor of our poor people at home, by sale of Hats, Bonets, Knives,
Fish-hooks, Copper kettles, Beads, Looking-glasses, Bugles, and a thousand
kinds of other wrought wares, that in short time may be brought in use among
the people of that country, to the great relief of the multitude of our poor
people, and to the wonderful enriching of this realm. And in time, such
league and intercourse may arise between our Stapling seats there, and other
ports of our Northern America, and of the Islands of the same, that incredible
things, and by few as yet dreamed of, may speedily follow, tending to the
impeachment of our mighty enemies, and to the common good of this noble
government.

The ends of this voyage are these: 1. To plant Christian religion. 2. To
traffic. 3. To conquer.
Or, to do all three.

TO plant Christian religion without conquest, will be hard. Traffic easily
follows conquest: conquest is not easy. Traffic without conquest seems
possible, and not uneasy. What is to be done, is the question.

If the people be content to live naked, and to content themselves with few
things of mere necessity, then traffic is not. So then in vain seems our
voyage, unless this nature may be altered, as by conquest and other good
means it may be, but not on a sudden. The like whereof appeared in the East
Indies, upon the Portugals seating there.

If the people in the Inland be clothed, and desire to live in the abundance of
all such things as Europe does, and have at home all the same in plenty, yet
we can not have traffic with them, by mean they want not any thing that we
can yield them.

Admit that they have desire to your commodities, and as yet have neither
Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, nor sufficient quantity of other present
commodity to maintain the yearly trade: What is then to be done?

The soil and climate first is to be considered, Means to breed a speedy
trade.
and you are with Argus eyes to see what commodity by industry of man you are
able to make it to yield, that England does want or does desire: as for the
purpose, if you can make it to yield good Wine, or good Oil, as it is like you
may by the climat, (where wild Uines of sundry sorts do naturally grow
already in great abundance) then your trade may be maintained. But admit the
soil were in our disposition (as yet it is not) in what time may this be
brought about?

For Wine this is to be affirmed, that first the soil lying in 36 or 37
degrees in the temperature of South Spain, in setting your Uine-plants this
year, you may have Wine within three years. And it may be that the wild
Uines growing there already, by orderly pruning and dressing at your first
arrival, may come to profit in shorter time.

And planting your Olive trees this year, you may have Oil within three
years.

And if the sea shores be flat, and fit for receipt of salt water, and for Salt
making, without any annoy of near freshes, then the trade of Salt only may
maintain a yearly navigations (as our men now trade to the isle of Maio, and
the Hollanders to Terra Firma near the West end of the isle of Margarita.)

But how the natural people of the country may be made skillful to plant
Uines, and to know the use, or to set Olive trees, and to know the making of
Oil, and withal to use both the trades, that is a matter of small
consideration: but to conquer a country or province in climate and soil of
Italy, Spain, or the Islands from whence we receive our Wines and Oiles, and
to man it, to plant it, and to keep it, and to continue the making of Wines
and Oiles able to serve England, were a matter of great importance both in
respect of the saving at home of our great treasure now yearly going away, and
in respect of the annoyance thereby growing to our enemies. The like
consideration would be had, touching a place for the making of Salt, of
temperature like those of France, not too too cold, as the Salts of the
Northern regions be; nor too too fiery, as those be that be made more Southerly
than France. In regard whereof, many circumstances are to be considered; and
principally, by what mean the people of those parties may be drawn by all
courtesy into love with our nation; that we become not hateful unto them, as
the Spaniard is in Italy and in the West Indies, and elsewhere, by their manner
of usage: for a gentle course without cruelty and tyranny best answers the
profession of a Christian, A gentle course best to be held.
best planteth Christian religion; makes our seating most void of blood, most
profitable in trade of merchandise, most firm and stable, and least subject to
remove by practice of enemies. But that we may in seating there, not be
subject wholly to the malice of enemies, and may be more able to preserve our
bodies, ships, and goods in more safety, and to be known to be more able to
scourge the people there, civil or savage, than willing to offer any violence.
And for the more quiet exercise of our manurance of the soiles where we shall
seat, and of our manual occupations, it is to be wished that some ancient
captains of mild disposition and great judgment be sent thither with men
most skillful in the art of fortification; and that direction be taken that
the mouths of great rivers, and the Islands in the same (as things of great
moment) be taken, manned, and fortified; and that havens be cut out for safety
of the Navy, that we may be lords of the gates and entries, to go out and
come in at pleasure, and to lie in safety, and be able to command and to
control all within, and to force all foreign navigations to lie out in open rode
subject to all weathers, to be dispersed by tempests and flawes, if the force
within be not able to give them the encounter abroad.

THe Red Muscadell grape, that bishop Grindall procured out of Germany; the
great White Muscadell; the Yellow grape: the cuts of these were wont yearly
to be set at Fulham; and after one years rooting to be given by the bishop,
and to be sold by his gardener. These presently provided, and placed in earth,
and many of these so rooted, with store of cuts vnrooted besides, placed in
tubbes of earth shipped at the next voyage, to be planted in Virginia, may
begin Uineyards, and bring Wines out of hand.

2 Provision great of wild Olive trees may be made out of this city so then
to be carried, to increase great store of stocks to graffe the best Olive on:
and Virginia standing in the same degree that The Shroffe the Olive place does
in Spain, we may win that merchandise, grassing the wild.

3 Sugarcanes, if you can not procure them from the Spanish Islands, yet may
you by our Barberie merchants procure them.

4 There is an herb in Persia, whereof Anile is made, and it is also in
Barbary: to procure that by seed or root, were of importance for a trade of
merchandise for our clothing country.

5 Oad by the seeds you may have; for you may have hundreds of bushels in
England, as it is multiplied: and having soil and labor in Virginia cheap,
and the Oad in great value, lying in small room, it will be a trade of great
gain to this clothing realm: and the thing can not be destroyed by Saluages.
The roots of this you may have in plenty and number coming in the trade: so
this may grow in trade within a year ready for the merchant.

6 Fig trees of many good kinds may be had hence in barrel, if now presently
they be provided; and they in that climat will yield noble fruit, and feed your
people presently, and will be brought in frailes home as merchandise, or in
barrel, as Resings also may be.

7 Sawed boords of Sassafras and Cedar, to be turned into small boxes for
ladies and gentlewomen, would become a present trade.

8 To the infinite natural increase of Hogs, to add a device how the same may
be fed by roots, acornes, etc. without spoiling your corn, would be of great
effect to feed the multitude continually employed in labor: and the same
cheaply bred and salted, and barrelled there and brought home, will be well
sold for a good merchandise; and the barrels after, will serve for our home
Herring-fishing; and so you sell you woods and the labor of your cooper.

9 Receiving the saluage women and their children of both sexes by courtesy
into your protection, and employing the English women and the others in making
of Linen, you shall raise a wonderful trade of benefit, both to carry into
England and also into the Islands, and into the maine of the West Indies,
victual and labor being so cheap there.

10 The trade of making cables and cordage there, will be of great importance,
in respect of a cheap maintenance of the Navy that shall pass to and fro;
and in respect of such Navy as may in those parties be used for the venting of
the commodities of England to be brought thither. And Powldauies, etc. made for
sails of the poor Saluages, yield to the Navy a great help, and a great
gain in the traffic.

But if seeking revenge on every injury of the Saluages we seek blood and
raise war, our Uines, our Olives, our Fig trees, our Sugarcanes, our Orenges
and Limons, Corn, Cattle, etc. will be destroyed, and trade of merchandise in
all things overthrown; and so the English nation there planted and to be
planted, shall be rooted out with sword and hunger.

Sorts of men which are to be passed in this voyage.
1 MEn skillful in all Mineral causes.

2 Men skillful in all kind of drugges.

3 Fishermen, to consider of the sea fishings there on the coasts, to be
reduced to trade hereafter: and others for the fresh water fishings.

4 Salt-makers, to view the coast, and to make trial how rich the seawater
there is, to advise for the trade.

5 Husbandmen, to view the soil, to resolve for tillage in all sorts.

6 Uineyard-men bred, to see how the soil may serve for the planting of Uines.

7 Men bred in the Shroffe in South Spain, for discerning how Olive trees may
be planted there.

8 Others, for planting of Orange trees, Fig trees, Limon trees, and Almond
trees; for judging how the soil may serve for the same.

9 Gardeners, to prove the several soiles of the Islands, and of our settling
places, to see how the same may serve for all herbs and roots for our
victualling; since by rough seas sometimes we may want fish, and since we may
want flesh to victual us, by the malice of the natural people there: and
gardeners for planting of our common trees of fruit, as Pears, Apples,
Plumines, Peaches, Medlers, Apricoes, Quinces for conserues, etc.

10 Lime-makers, to make lime for buildings.

11 Masons, Carpenters, etc. for buildings there.

12 Bricke-makers and Tile-makers.

13 Men cunning in the art of fortification, that may choose out places strong
by nature to be fortified, and that can plot out and direct workmen.

14 Choice Spade-men, to trench cunningly, and to raise bulwarks and rampires
of earth for defense and offense.

15 Spade-makers, that may, out of the Woods there, make spades like those of
Devonshire, and of other sorts, and shouels from time to time for common use.

16 Smithes, to forge the yrons of the shouels and spades, and to make black
bills and other weapons, and to mend many things.

17 Men that use to break Ash trees for pike-staues, to be employed in the
Woods there.

18 Others, that finish up the same so rough hewd, such as in London are to be
had.

19 Coopers, to make caske of all sorts.

20 Forgers of pikes heads and of arrow heads, with forges, with Spanish iron,
and with all manner of tools to be carried with them.

21 Fletchers, to renew arrows, since archerie prevails much against unarmed
people: and gunpowder may soon perish, by setting on fire.

22 Bowyers also, to make bows there for need.

23 Makers of oars, since for service upon those rivers it is to great
purpose, for the boats and barges they are to pass and enter with.

24 Shipwrights, to make barges and boats, and bigger vessels, if need be, to
run along the coast, and to pierce the great Bays and Inlets.

25 Turners, to turn targets of Elm and tough wood, for use against the darts
and arrows of Saluages.

26 Such also as have knowledge to make targets of horn.

27 Such also as can make armor of hides upon moulds, such as were wont to be
made in this realm about an hundred years since, and were called Scottish
iacks: such armor is light and defensive enough against the force of Saluages.

28 Tanners, to tanne hides of Buffes, Oxen, etc. in the Isles where you shall
plant.

29 White Tawyers of all other skins there.

30 Men skillful in burning of Soap ashes, and in making of Pitch, and Tar,
and Rozen, to be fetched out of Prussia and Poland, which are thence to be had
for small wages, being there in manner of slaves.

The several sorts of trees, as Pines, Firres, Spruses, Birch and others, are
to be boared with great augers a foot or half a yard above the ground, as they
use in Vesely toward Languedock and near Bayona in Gascoigne: and so you
shall easily and quickly see what Gummes, Rozen, Turpentine, Tar, or liquor
is in them, which will quickly distill out clearly without any filthy
mixture, and will show what commodity may be made of them: their goodness and
greatness for masts is also to be considered.

31 A skillful painter is also to be carried with you, which the Spaniards used
commonly in all their discoueries to bring the descriptions of all beasts,
birds, fishes, trees, towns, etc.

A brief note of the corn, fowls, fruits and beasts of the Inland of Florida
on the backeside of Virginia, taken out of the 44 chapter of the discovery of
the said country, begun by Fernando de Soto governor of Cuba, in the year of
our Lord 1539.
THe bread which they eat in all the land of Florida, is of Maiz, which is like
to course Millet. And in all the Islands and West Indies from the Antiles
forward there is this Maiz.

Likewise in Florida there be many Wallnuts, Plummes, Their fruits.
Mulberies, and Grapes. They sow their Maiz, and gather it, every man his own
croppe. The fruits are common to all men, because they grow abundantly in the
fields without planting or dressing. In the mountains there grow Chestnuts;
they are somewhat smaller than the Chestnuts of Spain, which are called
Collarinnas. From Rio Grande toward the West, the Walnuts are differing from
the other; for they are softer and round like bullets. And from Rio Grande
toward Puerto del Spirito Santo Eastward, for the most part they are harder.
And the Trees and Nuts are like in fashion unto those of Spain. There is in
all the country a fruit which grows upon an herb or plant like to the herb
called Dogs-tongue, which the Indians do sow. The fruit is like unto the
Peers Rial: it is of a very good relish, These may be the Tunas.
and of a pleasant taste. Another herb grows in the fields, which bears a
fruit near the ground like to a Strawberie, very pleasant in taste. The
Plummes are of two sorts, red and gray, in fashion and bigness of Walnuts, and
have three or four stones in them. These are better than any in Spain, and
they make better Prunes of them. The want of dressing is perceived only in the
Grapes: which although they be great, yet they have a great kernel. All the
rest of the fruits are very perfect, and less hurtful than those of Spain.

There are in Florida many Bears, The beasts of Florida.
Lions, Stags, Roebucks, Wild-cats, and Conies.

There be many Wild-hennes as big as Peacocks, small Partridges like those of
Africa, Cranes, Ducks, Rolas, Black-birds, and Sparrowes. There be certain
Black birds bigger than Sparrowes and lesser than Stares.

There be Sore-hauks, Faulcons, Gosse-hauks, and all fowls of pray that are in
Spain.

The Indians are well proportioned. Those of the plain countries are taller of
stature, and better proportioned than those of the mountains. Those of the
Inland are better furnished with corn and wealth of the country, than those
of the sea coast. The country on the sea coast toward the gulf of Mexico is
barren and poor, and the people more warrelike. The coast bears from Puerto
del Spirito Santo unto Apalache, and from Apalache to Rio de Palmas almost from
East to West; from Rio de Palmas unto Noua Hispania it runs from North to
South. It is a gentle coast, but it has many sholds and banks or shelues of
sand.

A Note of such commodities as are found in Florida next adioining unto the
South part of Virginia, taken out of the description of the said country,
written by Mounsieur Rene Laudonniere, who inhabited there two Summers and one
winter.
THe country of Florida is flat, and divided with diverse rivers, The trees of
Florida.
and therefore moist, and is sandy toward the seashore.

There grows in those parts great quantity of Pyne trees, which have no
kernels in the apples that they bear.

Their woods are full of Oaks, Walnut trees, black Cherrie trees, Mulberie
trees, Lentiskes which yield Masticke, and Chestnut trees, which are more wild
than those of France.

There is great store of Cedars, Cypresses, Baies, Palm trees, Good Grapes
Grapes: There is there a kind of Medlars, the fruit whereof is better then
that of France, and bigger. There are also Plumme trees, which bear very fair
fruit, but such as is not very good.

There are Raspesses, and a little bery which we call among us Blues, which are
very good to eat.

There grow in that country a kind of Roots, which they call in their
language Hazes, whereof in necessity they make bread.

There is also the tree called Esquine, (which I take to be the Sassafras)
which is very good against the pocks and other contagious diseases.

The Beasts best known in this country are Stagges, Roes, The Beasts of
Florida.
Dear, Goats, Leopards, Ownces, Lucernes, diverse sorts of Woolues, wild
Dogs, Hares, Connies, and a certain kind of beast that differs little
from the Lion of Afric.

The Fowls are Turkey Cocks, The Fowls of Florida.
Partridges, Perrots, Pigeons, Ringdoues, Turtles, Black birds, Crows,
Tarcels, Faulcons, Leonards, Herons, Cranes, Storkes, wild Geese, Mallards,
Cormorants, Herneshawes, white, red, black, and gray, and an infinite sort of
all wildfoule.

There is such abundance of Crocodiles, that oftentimes in swimming, men are
assailed by them: Of serpents there are many sorts.

There is found among the Savages good quantity of Gold and Silver, Gold and
Silver.
which is gotten out of the ships that are lost upon the coast: Nevertheless
they say; that in the mountains of Apalatcy, there are mines of Copper, which I
think to be Gold.

There is also in this country, Store of dies and colors.
great store of Grains and Herbs, whereof might be made excellent good dies
and paintings of all kind of colors.

They sow their Maiz or Corn twice a year, to wit, in March and in June: and
all in one and the same soil: The said Maiz from the time that it is sowed,
unto the time that it is gathered, is but three months in the ground. They
have also fair Pumpions and very good Beans: They have certain kinds of
oil, Oil in Florida,
wherewith they use to anoint themselves.

A brief extract of the merchantable commodities found in the South part of
Virginia, ann. 1585. and 1586. Gathered out of the learned work of master
Thomas Herriot, which was there remaining the space of eleven months.
Silk of Grass, or Grasse-silke, the like whereof grows in Persia, whereof
I have seen good Grograine made.

Worme-silke.

Flax and Hemp.

Aslom.

Wapeih a kind of earth so called by the natural inhabitants, very like to
Terra Sigillata, and by some of our Physicians found more effectual.

Pitch, Tar, Rozen, and Turpentine: there are those kinds of trees that yield
them abundantly and in great store.

Sassafras, called by the inhabitants Wynauk: of whose sovereign and manifold
virtues, read Monardes the Phisician of Siuile, in his book entitled in
English: The joyful news from the West Indies.

Cedar.

Uines of two sorts.

Oil: there are two sorts of Wall-nuts, both holding oil. Furthermore, there
are three several kinds of Berries, in the form of Oak Acornes, which also
by the experience and use of the inhabitants, we find to yield very good and
sweet Oil. There are also Bears, which are commonly very fat, and in some
places there are many, their fatness because it is so liquid, may well be
termed Oil, and has many special uses.

Furs.

Ottars, Marternes, and Lucernes.

Dear skins.

Ciuet Cattes.

Iron.

Copper. The foresaid Copper, we also found by trial to hold Silver.

Pearl. One of our company, a man of skill in such matters, had gathered
together from the Savages, above five thousand.

Sweet Gummes of diverse kinds, and many other Apothecary drugs.

Dies of diverse kinds.

There is Shoemake, well known and used in England for black; the seed of an
herb called Wasebur, little small roots called Chappacor, and the bark of a
tree called by the inhabitants, Tangomockonomindge, which Dies are for diverse
sorts of red.

Commodities in Virgina, known to yield victuals.
PAgatowr or Mays, which is their principal corn.

Okindgier, called by us Beans.

Wickonzour, called by us Pease.

Macocquer, called by us, Pompions, Mellons, and Gourds.

An herb which in Dutch is called Melden, being a kind of Orage, etc.

An herb in form of a Marigold, six foot in height, taken to be Planta Solis.

Vppowoc, or Tobacco, of great estimation among the Savages.

Roots.
OPenauck, a kind of Roots of round form, as big as Wall-nuts, some far
greater. Monardes calls them Beads, or Pater nostri of Sancta Helena, and
master Brereton Ground Nuts.

Okeepenank, are Roots of round shape found in dry grounds, the inhabitants
use to boil and eat many of them.

Tsinaw, a kind of Root much like unto that which in England is called the
China Root, brought from the East Indies.

Coscushaw, a Root taken to be that which the Spaniards in the West Indies,
do call Cassauy.

Habascon, a Root of hot taste, almost of the form and bigness of a Parsney.

Leekes differing little from ours in England.

Fruits.
CHestnuts there are in diverse places great store, used diverse ways for food.

Walnuts there are two kinds, and of them infinite store in many places, where
are very great woods for many miles together, the third part of the trees are
Walnut trees, they use them for meat, and make a milk of them of very
pleasant taste, and wholesome.

Medlers, a kind of very good fruit, they are as red as cherries, and very
lushous sweet.

Mutaquesunnauk, These plants are called Tunas also, whereof there be three
sorts: that which bears no fruit brings forth the Cochenile.
a kind of pleasant fruit, almost of the shape and bigness of English Pears,
but they are of a perfect red color, as well within as without, they grow on a
plant whose leaves are very thick and full of prickles, as sharp as needles:
some, which have been in Noua Hispania, where they have seen that kind of
red Die of exceeding great price, which is called Cochenile, to grow, do
describe his plant right like unto this of Mutaquesunnauk: howbeit the
Cochenile is not the fruit, but a grain found on the leaves of the plant, and
stricken off upon sheets, and dried in the sun.

Grapes there are of two sorts, which I mentioned in the merchantable
commodities.

Strawberies there are, as good and as great as in any English garden.

such as we have in England.
Mulberies, Apple-crabbes, Hurts, or Hurtleberies,
Sacquenummener a kind of berries almost like unto Capers but somewhat
greater, which grow together in clusters upon a plant or herb that is found
in shollow waters, being boiled eight or nine hours according to their kind,
are very good meat and wholesome, otherwise if they be eaten, they will make a
man for the time frantic or extremely sick.

A Reed which bears a seed almost like unto our Rye or Wheat and being boiled
is good meat.

In our trauells in some places, we found wild Pease like unto ours in
England, but that they were less, which are also good meat.

A kind of Berry like unto an Acorne, of five sorts, growing on several kinds
of trees: the one sort is called Sagatemener, the second, Osamener, the third
Pummuckoner. the inhabitants use to dry them upon hurdles like Malt in England.
when they use them, they first water them till they be soft, and then being
sod, they make loves of bread of them. of these three kinds also the
inhabitants do use to make sweet oil.

The fourth sort is called Sapummener, which being boiled or perched be like
unto roasted Chestnuts; of this sort they make bread also.

The fifth sort is called Mangummenauk, the very Acorne of their kind of Oak;
being dried as the rest, and after watered, they boil them, and their
servants, and sometimes the chief themselves eat them with their fish and
flesh.

Beasts.
Dear, up into the country very great, and in some places, great store.

Conies, of a gray color like unto hares: they make mantles of the furre or
flue of their skins.

Saquenuckot and Maquowoc, two kinds of small beasts greater then Conies,
which are very good meat.

Squirels, which are of a gray color, we have taken and eaten.

Bears, which are of black color. They are good meat. And being hunted they
climb up into trees and are killed by the Saluages with their arrows, and
sometimes by us with our Caliuers.

The Lion is sometimes killed by the Saluages and eaten. Woolues or Wooluish
dogs.

I have the names of eight and twenty sorts of beasts dispersed in the maine,
of which their are only twelve kinds by us as yet discovered.

Foul
Turkey cocks and Turkey hens, Stock-doues, and Partriges, Cranes, hernes,
and in Winter great store of Swannes, and Geese.

There are also Parrots, Falcons, and Marlin hawks.

Of all sorts of fowls I have the names in the country language of fowrescore
and six.

Fish.
STurgions, Herrings, Porpoises, Troutes, Rays, Old-wiues, Mullets, Plaice,
and very many other sorts of very excellent fish.

Seacrabs, Oisters, great, small, round, long: Muscles, Scalops, Periwincles,
and Creuises.

Seekanauk, a kind of crustie shellfish, which is good meat, about a foot in
breadth, having a crusty tail, many legs like a Crabbe, and her eyes in her
back. They are found in shallowes of water, and sometimes on the shore.

Tortoises both of land and sea kind; they are very good meats and their eggs
also:

Certain brief testimonies touching sundry rich mines of Gold, Silver, and
Copper, in part found and in part constantly heard of, in North Florida, and
the Inland of the Maine of Virginia, and other countries there unto on the
North part near adioining, gathered out of the works, all (one excepted)
extant in print, of such as were personal travelers in those countries
Jacques Cartier the 12 chapter he reports that he understood by Donnacona the
king of the country, I take these to be the people toward Cibola, clad in
mantels of cotton.
and others, that to the Southwest of Canada there are people clad with cloth,
as the French were, very honest, and many inhabited towns, and that they have
great store of Gold and red Copper, etc.

Florida far to the North begun by Fernando de Soto, governor of Cuba in the
year 1539. (and to be seen in print in the hands of Master Richard Hackluyt)
The Indians in many places far distant the one from the other gave them often
and certain advertisement, that beyond the mountains Northward there were
mines of Gold at a place called by them Chisca, and some showed the manner which
the Indians used in refining the same. This place in mine opinion cannot be
far from the great river that falls into the Southwest part of the Bay of
Chesepioc.

Rene Laudonniere in Florida, that there were mines of red metal, which they
call in their language Sieroa Pira, in the muuntaines of Apalatcy, which upon
trial made thereof by the French was found perfect Gold, as appears Pagina
352. In the third volume of the English voiages, and in the same relation there
is very often mention of Silver and excellent perfect and fair perles found by
the french in those parts.

In the late discovery of New Mexico made by Antonio de Espeio on the back
side of Virginia extant in Spanish and English in the third volume of the
English voyages paginis 303. etc. there is mention of rich Silver mines (and
sometimes of Gold in abundance) eleven or twelve times found as they traveled
Northward, by men very skillful in mineral matters, which went in the voyage
for that purpose. The large description and chart of which voyage containing
great numbers of towns and diverse great rivers discovered in that action made
in Mexico by Francisco Xamuscado 1585 being intercepted afterward by the
English at sea, we have in London to be showed to such as shall have occasion
to make use of the same.

The constant report of many of the Saluages to the worshipful Ralfe Lane then
governor of the English colonie in Virginia of the rich mine of Wassador or
Gold at a place by them named Channis Temoatam, twenty days journey ouerland
from the Mangoaks, set down by himself at large in the first part of his
relation of the said country of Virginia, extant in the third volume of the
English voyages pagina 258. is much to be regarded and considered by these that
intend to prosecute this new enterprise of planting nere unto those parts.

I could give large information of the rich copper mine in Menan within 30 or
40. leagues to the Southwest of Cape Breton, whereof I my self have seen
above an hundred pieces of the copper, and have showed some part thereof to
diverse knights of quality, as also of Salt as good as that of Buruage in
France, found near that Bay, and could make proof of the testimony of the
Saluages touching a Silver mine in another Bay within two or three leagues to
the west of the aforesaid Bay of Menan: But I reserve a further relation
hereof to a more convenient time and place.

If it please any man to read the Summarie of Gonsaluo de Ouiedo extant in part
in the English decads, of the voyage Sebastian Cabote along this coast of
Virginia and Norumbega: And the short relation of John de Verarsana, which
ranged the said coast long after him in the year 1524. which is also to be
seen in the third volume of the English voyages pagine 298. he shall find
often mention of rich Minerals and store of excellent copper, which so long
ago they saw among the Saluages, they being the first known Christians that
ever saw those coasts. So that it were more then wilful madness to doubt of
rich mines to be in the aforesaid countries.

FINIS.

