PASQVILS FOOLES-CAP SENT TO SVCH (TO keep their weak brains warm) as are
not able to conceive aright of his Mad-cap. With Pasquils PASSION for the
worlds waywardness. Begun by himself, and finished by his Friend MORPHORIVS.

Imprinted at LONDON, for Thomas Iohnes, dwelling near Holborne Conduit. 1600.

TO MY VERY GOOD friend, Master Edward Conquest, as much happiness from
Heaven, as his worthy heart can wish.
SIR, to forget your undeserved kindness, were a note out of my nature: and
yet how kindly to requite it, is many notes above my ability. But as a lame
man, that strives to go, shows he would run, if he had legs: so, in the
humor of my good will, imagine a Desire of a greater matter. But leaving these
complements, and to come to my purpose; as I have found you a kind Spectator
of my Labors, so let me entreat you, at my hands to accept this treatise,
with a foolish title. Where, if Wit have played the Wagge, let him not have his
name for nothing: and where you find a head fit for this Cappe, either bestow
it upon him in charity, or send him where he may have them for his money. I
know you are acquainted with many that well deserve it: whom, least they
should be mistaken for better men, I pray you give them the Cappe for their
Cognisaunce. And so, hoping that your discretion will bear with my
imperfection, to find no better work, to give notice of my good will; I rest,
with much thankfulness, in more Affection than Protestation.

Yours assured, to command, N. B.

To the Reader.
YOU that Read, to term you Gentle and he not, you would think I did mock
you: and therefore give me leave to think of you, as I find you. But to the
matter: Mad-cap has past one fit, and new is fallen into another: what it is,
you may partly guess by the Title. For, in a Fool, is hid a great deal of
vain matter: which you shall here find run over, in a few Verses; not the
best that ever you read, nor perhaps the worst that you may meet with. But to
be short, what Pasquill begun, Morphorius has ended: how well I say not: but
the better, if you like it: to whose kindness, in hope of patience, I commit
it; and so abruptly I leave it.

Your friend:

TO HIS HONEST friend Pasquill, in all haste.
Friend Pasquill, hearing of late of the pains that thou have taken in
reprehending of the wicked (among the spirits of best condition, not a little
co^me^ded) I have thought good (finding the corruption of this Age) to put a
Fool, to thy Knave. Among which weak witted brains, I have not let slip such
Beetle headed Asses, as taking upon the^ the work of thy Wit (in seeking to
rob thee of thy Worthiness) have showed the height of their Foolishness.
Who, among other such wise people, finding their names but in their Natures,
will (I hope) like good children, rather mend their faults, then be angry with
their masters: if not, let them sink in their own sorrow: give the Madman
his Mad-Cappe, and the Fool his Fooles-Cappe: thou and I be friends, and the
world fare as it list. And so farewell.

Thine, as his own, MORPHORIO.

Morphorius to the Reader, in the behalf of his friend Pasquill.
HE, that of late was in a Madding fit,
Does from a franzy to a folly fall:
And which is better, mad, or foolish wit?
I think as good, almost have none at all.
Well, Sugar sweet, or bitter as the gall,
It Is Pasquils humor, so I pray you take it:
And as you like it, choose it, or forsake it.
His meaning was, to please none but himself,
Nor to displease but those that well deserve it:
He does not care, though Envy play the elfe:
His dishe is dressed, and he will not Reserve it:
But to the world, for such poor diet serve it,
As are content with ordinary dishes,
While Nicer Gulles are choakt with Gugin fishes.
When he was Mad, he Raged against the knave:
Now idely fitted, falls upon the Fool,
In hope that Doctors better wisdom have,
Than Carpe at scholars that do go to school,
And wish a workman but to know his tool:
For Graues-end Barge can never passage have,
Till it be furnished with a Fool or Knave.
FINIS.
PASQVILS Fooles-Cap.
WHat means this world, that Muses can not rest,
But one or other will be working still?
It Is not time now to break too broad a jest;
Least, had I wist, repent a heedlesse will,
While ha^mering skonces have unhappy skill
Which in their Cradles, being borne accursed,
Will ever construe all things to the woorst.
But since the Wisdom of the world I find,
Before Heavens VVisdome, Foolishness indeed,
While such Illusions do the spirit blind,
As only grow upon ungracious seed:
Which wicked Humors in the heart do breed,
While truest Wisdom lives above the Sun:
Let me but play the Fool, and I have done.
But some, perhaps, in pieuish spite will say,
The field is large, wherein I am to walk:
Where I may wander many an idle way,
And make a deal of fiddle faddle talk:
But say, my Muse mistake green Cheese for Chalk,
This is the worst (to hide her idle brains)
She shall have but the Fooles-cappe for her pains.
But, let her wear it, since it is her due.
Who has no Wisdom, can not speak of Wit:
Who never came where Wit and Reason grue,
Must needs shoot wide, when that they aim at it.
For, while the Gander by the Goose does sit,
It Is ten to one, how ever prove the weather,
But that the birds will all be of a feather.
Then, good Wise Man, if such a one thou be,
That do these lines of little matter reed,
I pray thee be not in a chafe with me,
Although a lade be spurred till he bleed:
Keep thou thy Stable for a better Steed:
Who has been well brought up in Reasons School,
May have the patience to go by the Fool.
But, if it be, you can not go along,
But that you needs will stumble at a straw;
If that your self will do your self such wrong,
To let the Worm upon your Wits to gnawe,
Until a Crow be come to be a Dawe:
Then do but think how some this ^east will smother,
Why should one Fool be angry with another?
Then be not angry, let the Fool alone,
Except thou be a bird of his own brood:
For trust it true, it will be ten to one,
If once thy head be couerd with his Hoode,
It will so heat thy brains, and stain thy blood,
That thou will fall into such Ecstasies,
As while thou live, thou never wilt be wise.
Beware therefore in time of Had I wist,
Let not Impatience show thy pieuishnesse:
Keep thy Conceit within Discretions List:
Where thou may look upon that Idleness,
That fills the world too full of Foolishness:
Seek thou to know but where true wit does dwell,
And learn to laugh at Fools, and all is well.
And if thou chance to meet an idle Mate,
Whose tongue goes all too glibbe upon the ^eare,
And chief delight is so much in his prate,
As where he comes, will be chief Prater there:
In friendly kindness tell him in his ear,
That in the Rules of Wit and Reasons school,
He will be counted but a prating fool.
And if you hap to light upon a Gull,
That is conceipted of his Mother wit,
And does apply his beetle-headed scull
But to an humor of an idle fit;
In honest kindness let him hear of it,
That in the Rowles of Wisdoms Rules you reed,
Less hope of him, than of a Fool indeed.
And if you chance to see the Son of Pride
Look fifteen thousand mile above the Moon,
And lie abedde until his idle hide
Must make a Morning, of an afternoon;
For fear his Worship should be up too soon:
Least that the Air should hap to do him harm,
Lend him the Fooles-cappe for to keep him warm.
And if you chance to spy a Subtle Staue,
That has a world of Simple wits beguilde,
And, like a cunning, cogging coosening knave,
On others harms, his helps does only build,
Tell him that Satan is a subtle child:
That while the wicked gold for dross do sell,
Makes Fools seem wise, until they come in hell.
He that does murder twenty thousand men,
And sack their cities, and their towns deface:
And, with the dash but of a wicked Pen,
Bring a poor world into a pitious case,
To gain himself a kind of Monarchs grace:
Tell him what Angels read in Virtues school,
That bloody Pride does breed a hellish Fool.
He that does covet more then is his own,
And scrapes and scratcheth for a little dross:
And, all with ease is like a Bladder blown,
And never cares for any neighbors cross,
For his own gain, to give a thousand loss:
Tell him, when Wisdom beats the world about,
The Fool will quickly lay the Miser out,
The swaggring Huffecappe that will stare and swear,
That he will cut through the whole piece of cloth;
And face to face, will meet the old blind Bear,
And break the Can, that is filled up with froath,
And cares not how he throw away anoath:
Let him be sure when Virtues Honors fall,
In Wisdoms Court he has no place at all,
The sneaking Coward that does closely creep,
And fears every shadow where he goes:
And of himself both watch and ward does keep,
For fear his Friends should grow to be his Foes:
Does so much title of true Manhood lose,
That he may read what Truth in honor tries,
A Coward never can be truly wise.
The Idle Spendthrift that will sell his land,
To feed the humors of an addle head:
And sowes his seed upon the barren sand,
Till late Repentance live to beg his bread,
Let him believe what many a one has read:
How ever Fancy make excuse for it,
Such Had I wist had never happy wit.
He that does think that Wit is but in Wealth,
And plots to purch^se kingdoms with a Purse,
And never thinks of the Spirits health:
But does his heart with wicked humors nurse,
And for a blessing, falls upon a curse:
Let him confess, if in heavens blessings blot,
He find himself a wicked Fool, or not.
He that looks Babies in his Mistress eyes,
And beats his brains to tell an Idle tale:
And thinks himself, that he is wondrous wise,
That breaks a ^east, though it be nere so stale:
And for a Nut, crackes nothing but a Shale:
How ere he think of his own wit amiss,
Wisdom will tell him, what a Fool he is.
She that is neither Noble, fair, nor wise,
Nor scarce so rich as a new shorned Eawe;
And yet, conceited in her own foul eyes,
When she is dabbled three foot in the deawe,
That she may seem a pretty handsome shrewe:
Let her not think, but such a Shut the do^re
Is half a Fool; and if she be no more.
He that has neither Truth nor Honesty,
Good hand, good leg, good body, nor good face,
Nor any such exceeding quality
As may advance him unto Honors place:
Yet, thinks himself a man of special grace;
When madmen tread the Woodcockes Morris dau^ce,
Give him the Fooles-cappe for his Cognisaunce.
She that is fifteen mile about the waste,
And all with fat unable is to go,
Yet makes her face up in a piece of paste,
As though she were an Image of Rye Dowe;
Tell her but truth that Wit and Reason know,
That this is all, that Fame does her affoorde,
A filthy Owl is but a foolish Bird.
He that does hit upon a printed book,
And finds a name near fitting to his own,
And of his own poor wit has undertook
The ground of all has from his humor grown,
When every Bird is by her feather known,
Pasquill does tell him that poor Aesops Pie
Will show him how his Wit has gone awry.
He that does many, all for Wanton love,
And has no Reason for his fond affection:
But all too late does with Repentance prove
The woeful fruits of wretched wills direction,
While Want and Sorrow are the Souls correction:
Tell him, such babies may the dugge go suck;
While loving Fools have never better luck.
She, in a glass, that sees her Sorrel hair,
And straight will put it to the Painters die,
And then does think that she is wondrous fair;
When flatt^ry feeds her humor with a Lie,
Oh, let her not in such an error die;
But bid her kindly crack this friendly Nut,
So foul a Dowd' is but a foolish Slut.
He that delights to tell an idle tale,
Upon the prattle of a cogging Mate,
And carelessly his credit se^ to sale:
Which being noted for his foolish prate,
He shall be sure to find, although too late;
That Wisdom reads these Rounds in Reasons schools,
Newes-Carriers are next Neighbors unto Fools.
She that does file her tongue for Eloquence,
To entertain a world with Idle talk:
And thinks she has the very Quintescence
Of quick conceit, wherein her wits do walk,
Yet does not know a Buzzard from a Hawlke;
Let her believe, such giddie headed Tittes
Are not commended for the truest Wits.
He that does love to talk of Robin Hoode,
Yet never drew one Arrowe in his Bow:
And yet does think his skill is wondrous good,
That scarce the compass of a mark does know:
When such a Goose-cappe does a shooting go,
Tell him, that in the aim of Wisdoms eye,
Wide handed Wits will ever shoot awry.
He that does put his state upon his friends,
In hope of grace, when all his good is lost,
Shall find his Wit not worth two puddings ends,
When want of pence to reckon with the Host,
Does make the Beggar chalk upon the post:
Whose base condition does too plainly show,
He was not wise, that plaide the Woodcocke so.
She that does think, she has a rare conceit,
That gives the Cuckoe to her kindest friend;
And laughes to think upon that close deceit,
That does but breed Repentance in the end:
Tell her, if she the sooner not amend,
Wisdom sets down, that knows what Wit does mean^
A wicked Drabbe is but a foolish queen.
He that that is proud of his conceipted wit,
When he can cogge, and cozen, prate, and lie:
And place himself with better men to sit,
Then may beseem so base a Rascaldry,
As is too far from thought of Chyualry;
When every Ass his due reward shall have,
The Fooles-cappe is too good for such a Knave.
He that in heart does say there is no God,
And neither thinks of Heaven, nor yet of Hell:
Nor has a feeling of that heavenly Rod,
That makes the Soul, in Sorrows tears, to tell
How Mercy does within the Spirit dwell:
Within the book of Wisdoms blessed School,
The Lord of Heaven has set him down a Fool.
He that will lend more than he well may spare,
And he that spendes all that he has and more;
And only trusts unto Fortunes share,
And cares not how he run upon the score,
Until the Beggar meet him at his door:
Wisdom will tell him truly in the end,
He is a Fool that is not his own friend.
She that can look as mildely as a Lamb,
Yet is a Tigre inwardly in heart;
And cares not how, nor where she leave the Ram,
When she has gotten once the rutting part:
It is a Rule, in Wit and Reasons Art,
That she, that has no better natured Wit,
The Wise will term a dogged foolish Tit.
He that is brought up idly in his Youth,
And scorns to labor in his elder years,
And never thinks upon the day of Ruthe,
When want (entangled in the Beggars breers)
The heavy sound of helpelesse Sorrow hears:
Let him believe, that Truth does plainly wright;
The Fooles-cappe fits the Idle beggar right.
He that can plot a world of villainy,
And never cares what Virtues love deserves:
And sorts himself with wicked company,
That from the way of perfect Wisdom swarueth,
While Mercies hand the gracious heart preserves:
That sinful wretch will find in Satan's school,
A damned villain is a cursed Fool.
He that does fill his Cophers full of Goulde,
Yet will not wear good Clothes on his back:
But does a kind of Clownish humor houlde,
To have his Garment cut out, like a sack,
And thinks Read Herings have a dainty smacke:
Tell him in kindness (that he may not quarrel)
The Fooles-Cappe will be fit for his Apparel.
She that is given to Ease and Sluttishnesse,
And trifles out the time in Trompery:
And yet will think it is no pieuishnesse,
To feed her self with Idle Foppery;
May hap to find in Sorrows Misery,
That when the Grasshopper does leave to sing,
An idle Hielding is a foolish thing.
He that does study twenty things at once,
And has intent for to perform them all:
And yet his beetle addle-headed skonce,
In full conclusion can do none at all:
If that the Fooles-cappe to his fortune fall,
Let him not think but it will finely fit
The Idle head, that has no better Wit.
She that is given to Pride and Bravery,
And Ruffin-like, will swear, and swash it out;
And studies nothing else but Knavery,
To bring a wicked kind of world about;
And cares not whom she follows with a flout:
Such foolish Kittes of such a skittish kind,
In Bridewell book are every where to find.
He that is here to day, yonder to morrow,
And cares not how he raungeth here and there:
Not cares what he can or beg, or borowe,
To spend or spoil, he cares not how nor where:
Oh, tell that Idle Fellow in his ear,
If that he do not take the greater care,
The Fool will catch him, ere he be aware.
She that does love to gossippe, and to tattle,
And leaves her house to keep it self alone;
And cares not how she spend the time in prattle,
Till she have barred her Husband to the boane:
Let her not think but such an Idle Ioane
Must have this note set down upon ^er name;
A Tattling houswife is a foolish Dame.
He that can comb his head and curle his bearde,
And set his Ruffes, and wear his Cloak in print,
And by his side can finely wear his swearde,
And learn to fleere, and leere, and look a squint,
And keep his steps, within a measures stint:
Let him be sure to pass with this good flout;
He lackes the Fooles-Cappe yet to set him out.
He that is well in service entertainde,
And justly has the due of his desert;
And by his labor, finds that he has gainde
The careful comfort of an honest heart;
Yet fondly will with such a Master part:
Tell him, what Truth does by Experience know*
He is a Fool, leaves such a Master, so.
He that will let his Wit to run on Wheels,
And in proud terms will with his betters stand,
Until his Tongue be tempered by his heels,
Until his Brains have better manners scand:
And if the Fool do take him by the hand,
Bid him have Patience, to endure the sound;
That lack of Wit will lay a Fool a ground.
He that in Libels takes delight to write,
And cares not whom he wickedly defame;
But pieuishly will show a baggage Spite,
To touch the Honor of an Honest name:
What shall I say, that he is much to blame?
Yea, and so much, as for his idle veins,
He well deserves the Fooles-cappe for his pains.
He that has all his study in the Clouds,
And all misliketh every thing he reeds:
And what the Sun within her Circle shrowdes,
All in the height his haughty Humor feeds:
If he do chance to light on Herbs for Weeds,
He is but foolish; rise he nere so soon,
That runs in haste to overtake the Moon.
He that will Read, before he learn to Spell;
And write a Book, before he know a Blot;
And keep a Shop, before he learn to sell;
And fall to galloppe ere he learn to trot:
Whither such one think himself wise or not,
Let him be sure that better wits do reed,
Such Madhead fellows are but Fools indeed.
He that with pleasure follows Cards and Dice,
Drinking and wenching, and such Idle sportes:
Until too late Repentance know the price
Of Patience passage to Saint Sorrows ports;
Whereto the Beggar most of all resortes:
Oh let him know when he does comfort lack.
The Beggar Fool will have him by the back.
She that does find her Husband true and kind,
And for her wants to work both ^ight and day:
Yet like the Wethercocke, with every wind,
Will turn her Humor every idle way,
And cares not how he fall into decay,
So she be fed according to her fit;
She is a Baggage, and a foolish (...).
He that is married to an honest wife,
That, as her life, in love does hold him dear:
With whom his heart may have a quiet life,
And, in content, live many a merry year
Yet leaves a Do to take a Rascal Dear:
The fruits of Will do prove his Wit accursed,
That so will leave the best, to take the worst.
He that does envy every man's good hap,
And knows not how to get himself in grace:
And lays his Love but all in Fortunes lap,
Whose custom is her followers to deface:
When he is fallen into a pitious case,
Oh let him know, before he hang himself,
An envious fool is even such an Elfe.
She that does keep an Inn for every Guest,
And makes no care what wind blow up her skirt,
And ready is to break a Chaucers jest,
To make a Smock even measure with a Shirt:
If such a one be called a Foolish flirt,
It Was not for nothing that she had her name,
When all the world is witness to her shame,
He that does take the law, but as a Jest,
And will be hanged but for good fellowshippe,
And thinks it nothing to be halter blessed,
When from the Gallows it is but a skippe*
Oh, let him not in anger hang the lip,
If by desert this due reward he take;
He was a Fool, that hanged for fashion sake,
He that will weary out his friends with borrowing,
And be behoulding to an Enemy,
And kill himself with too much Sorrowing,
To think, the touch of Treasons villainy
Should make such work in wicked company:
Wisdom will tell him, what Experience tries,
That kind of Wit will never make him Wise.
He that importunes an approved friend,
And he that fears to speak where he may speed;
And in beginning, looks not to the end;
But loves to glory in a Wicked deed,
And will his heart with wicked humors feed:
These Wits do show (that are so fitly matched)
A Neast of Fools, that Wisdom never hatched.
He that does set his hand to every Bill,
And neither cares for Right nor Equity,
And only bends his unhappy skill,
But to the overthrow of Honesty:
Fools, that are so near in affinity,
When VVisdome makes a trial of true Wit,
Not one of these that has to do with it,
He that does build high Castles in the Air,
Until they headlong tumble on his neck:
And he that will not an old Ship repair,
Till it be too far tainted with a leake:
If that the Woodcocke give his Wits the peake:
Let him not chafe if that it be his chance,
To wear the Fooles-Cappe, in a Moris-daunce.
He that can play on Twenty hands at once,
And turns his humor unto every time:
And has his Spirit tempered for the nonce,
To set his flowers only in the prime:
If when he thinks most warily to clime,
By due desert a breakeneck-fall he have,
His craft does prove him but a Foolish knave
He that will talk of every thing he knows,
And credit give to every thing he hears:
And builds his knowledge only on suppose,
Yet understands not what too plain appears:
How young or old soever be his years,
Who of his poor Wit gives witness so;
Think him an arrant Fool, and let him go,
He that does wonder at a Weathercocke,
And plays with every feather in the wind,
And is in love with every Nannicocke;
Yet scarcely knows an Orange by the Rind:
When every Fool is found out in his Kind,
How is it possible but he should pass,
For a poor silly simple witted Ass?
He that does think it is no Wickedness,
To lead a young man into Wantonness.
But takes delight in all Ungodliness;
Until the Heart in Sorrows he auinesse,
Do show the fruits of Wills unhappiness;
Let that vile villain read in Virtues Schools,
Such wicked wretches are Ungracious Fools.
He that will change a Iennet for a Jade,
And put his Land into a little House:
And, in the way where Little Wit does wade,
Watch a great Mountain for a little Mowse,
And sits to feed a Monkey with a Lowse:
Where Will is so in folly ouergone,
Wisdom says plainly, his is small or none.
He that will put his state upon adventure,
And may be safe and if it please himself:
And he that binds his service by Indenture,
To baggage courses for a little pelf:
If that his Ship do run upon a Shelfe,
Let him not think, but that poor Wit of his,
From Wisdoms Course, was carried quite amiss.
He that will creep unto an old Ioyne-stoole,
And serve a Thatcher for a Bunch of straw,
And he that goes to work without his tool,
And loves to wrangle with a man of Law,
And thinks no Bird so pretty as the Dawe:
How ere such one be of his Wit conceived,
Wisdom will tell him he is much deceived.
He that will tread a Measure as he walks,
And connterfaite Maid Marians countenance:
And loves to fall into those whisper talks,
That bring poor Wit into a pitious trance:
If that the Fool do light on him by chance,
He must assume what Fates to him assign:
I can not help him, it is no fault of mine.
He that will Drink until his brains be merry,
And Eat until his stomach be too full,
And Lie a bed until his boanes be weary,
And Prate so long until he prove a Gull:
If that such brains be lined with Ganders wool,
When such Wise creatures put their Wits together,
To choose the wisest, who knows which is whether?
He that all day sits blowing at a cole,
And never leaves till he put out the fire:
And he that houlds his finger in a hole,
To please the humor of a fond desire:
And he that loves to trample in the mire:
When these wise men together make a play,
The Fool will run with all their Wits away.
He that will in an humor leave a friend,
And in a fury fall upon a foe:
While ill beginnings make as bad an end,
When poor Repentance does too late beshrowe
The heedelesse Will, that Wit does overthrow:
That Fool must needs be turned unto the List,
Among the number of the Had I wist.
He that will tell his secrets to a stranger,
And play the Coward with an enemy:
He that will put himself in needelesse danger,
To follow a mad headed company:
Let him take heed a sudden villainy
Make him not find in true Repentance School,
A backward Wit lackes little of A Fool.
He that will wear his wealth upon his back,
Yet in his purse does scarce his dinner carry:
And he that says to give his neck the crack,
Because he will not for his fortune tarry:
If such a Fool become a Buzzards quarry,
When Careless Will does show his Wit so small,
It Is not my fault, I cannot do withal.
He that does study out his brains in trifles,
And miss the humor of a better mark:
And cosens his conceit with Foolish nifles,
In taking of a Bunting for a Lark,
And every Pibble for a Diamond spark:
He that does so his Will to folly fit,
Does plainly show he has no perfect Wit.
He that can eat no other Meat but Milk,
And for his Horse, must have an Ambling Nagge:
And cannot wear a Shirt, but soft as Silk:
Nor keep his Coin, but in a Golden Bag,
And must be known his Mothers kindest VVagge:
Such smoothed Godsons show in Wisdoms school,
A Milk-soppe Babie is more half a Fool.
He that will be afraid of every dream,
And thinks every puddle is a poole:
And runs ten miles to eat a mess of Cream,
And can not sit but on a Cushin stool:
If such a Noddy be not thought a fool,
He has great favor in the Rule of Wit,
That sees his Weakness, and concealeth it.
He that does fill his head so full of humors,
He knows not where he may in quiet sit:
And he that loves to raise uncivil rumors,
Until that Justice do in Judgment sit,
Upon the works of such a wicked wit:
Such wicked Wits, for honest peoples health,
Might well be banished from a Common wealth.
He that all night does watch a Conny borough,
To catch a Ferret, that has broke his Muzzle:
And he that squats a Hare within a furrowe,
And sees how she within her Muce does Nuzzle;
And yet so long about the Bush does puzzle,
That she is gone ere he can well beset her,
Which, of these two good Fools, may be the better?
He that does put all to the latter day,
To reckon even with all the world at once:
And in the mean time is at such a stay,
He knows not how to use his addle Skonce:
If such an Ass be noddied for the nonce,
I say but this, to help his Idle fit;
Let him but thank himself for lack of Wit,
He that wilfully falls into offense,
And satisfaction never cares to make:
But carelessely stands in his own defense,
While that the Fool his Wits does overtake:
When late Repentance makes his heart to ache,
He scapeth well, if (for such idle veins)
Worse then the Fooles-cappe answer not his pains.
He that loves to be noted for strange fashions,
And for his locks, and for his kind of gate:
And in his Muses, and his Passions,
Will not be thought an ordinany mate:
If that his Wits come to themselves, too late,
I know not well how to be his Aduiser;
But even be sorry, that he was not wiser.
He that will hoorde up all for a dear year;
Yet in the mean time want necessities
He that will be unto himself so near,
As bring himself into extreamities,
By his own wilful caused calamities,
This is the end that will fall out of it;
Such Niggard Fools have never better Wit.
He that does put his wealth upon a Cock,
A Card, a Die, or such an Idle toy:
And has his humor so much on the Smock,
As if it were his Spirits only joy:
When Soorrowes sighs do show the hearts annoy,
Let him go back unto Repentance school,
And see how long his Wit has played the Fool.
He that will busy be with Every matter,
Yet scarce has power to bring one well to pass:
And never leaves to cosen, lie, and flatter,
Until he prove himself a Craftre Ass:
Let him but look in the Foles looking Glass,
And there his Woodcocke Wit shall plainly have
The true proportion of a Paltry Knave.
He that persuades himself, He is a King,
Yet all the world does for a Beggar know him:
And he that takes the VVinter for the Spring,
Because the Sun a little light does show him
If want of Wit do wholly overthrow him,
And that the Cocks comb to his cappe do fall,
It Is not my fault, I can not do withal.
He that puts fifteen else into a Ruff,
And seauenteene yards into a swagg'ring slappe:
And twenty thousand Crowns into a Muffe,
And half his land into a hunting Cappe:
If that the fool do catch him in his trappe,
There like a Woodcocke let him walk about:
When he is in, I cannot help him out.
He that in all his thoughts is so unholy,
He makes no care of any good conceight:
But gives himself so much to Idle folly,
That unto Hell he runs the high way straight:
If he be poisoned with the Devils baight,
I can not choose but tell him like a friend,
Such wicked Fools will have a woeful end.
He that will Brase his face at Lothebury,
Because he will not blush at Knavery:
And he that will refuse no Drudgery,
To gather Dross by any Slavery;
And yet will stand upon his Bravery:
He is no fool, whoeuer be an Ass,
Makes such a Cover for a looking glass.
He that repents him of no wickedness,
Nor takes delight in any godliness:
But in the way of all unthriftiness,
Does wast the time of Natures wretchedness;
Where helpless Sorrows, in unhappiness,
Do breed the Spirits endless heaviness:
That Fool is in the height of foolishness.
He that regardes not how he use his speech,
Nor cares how the world do go about,
Nor makes reckening who behold his breech,
Nor how he play the Logger headed lowte:
Where Wise Men live, if he be beaten out,
Let him be patient, if it come to pass
A beastly Fool be handled like an Ass.
He that does make his Tongue a two hand sword,
And only seeks his Honor all by stealth:
And cares not how he falsify his word,
Nor by how much disgrace to gather wealth:
How ever so his Carcass be in health,
Wisdom describes him, in true Honors school,
A Gull, a Knave, a Coward, and a Fool.
He that does gain more, then he well may spend,
And prattles more then Truth does understand:
And in his actions, always does intend
Upon the stay of wicked works to stand:
If that the Devil take him by the hand,
Let him believe what highest Truth does tell;
He is a Fool, that leaves Heaven for Hell.
He that does take a Shadow for a Substance;
And yet does think he has a perfect sight:
And he that takes an Humor for an Instance;
And yet believes his brains be in the right:
He that in darkness so does look for light
(How ever Will do take his VVittes to school)
Wisdom in deed will find him but a Fool.
He that has once a piece of work begun,
And knows not how nor when to make an end:
And he whose will his Wits does ouerrunne,
To make a Foe in wronging of a Friend:
He that does so amiss his Spirit spend,
(Howeuer so his own conceit do deem him)
Wisdom in deed will but a Fool esteem him.
He that is Esau for Unthriftiness,
And follows Caine in his ungodliness:
And loves Achit^phell for wickedness,
And is a Judas, in unfaithfulness,
Whateuer show he make of holiness:
That man I find in too much foolishness,
Has read the Scripture in unhappiness.
He that of Machauile does take instruction
To manage all the matters of his thought;
And treades the way but to his own destruction,
Till late Repentance be too dearly bought,
Shall find it true, that has been often taught:
As good be Idle as to go to school,
To come away with nothing but the Fool,
For fear whereof, least some of mine own sect
(That have but played the Fools, with lack of Wit)
Do kindly tell me of my Cares neglect,
In finding humors for the time more fit:
While wicked Spirits do their venom spit:
I will conclude (to prove worlds Wit an Ass)
Man's Wit is vain, shall be, and ever was.
Sapientia mundi, stultitia coram Deo.
Pasquils passion for the worlds waiwardnesse.
WIcked, ungracious, and ungodly Age,
Where hateful thoughts are gotten to their height,
How should my spirit in true passions rage?
Describe the courses of thy vile conceight,
That feed the world but with the devils baight:
While woeful hearts, with inward sorrows wounded,
Find Wit and Reason in their sense confounded.
No, no, the depth of thy unknown distress
(Wherein the heart is ouerwhelm'd with woes)
Exceedes the power of passion to express;
While so much grief within the Spirit grows,
As all the power of Patience overthrows:
While virtuous minds, within their sowles agrieued,
Must helpelesse die, and cannot be relieved.
The clearest eye must seem to have no seeing,
And Eloquence must be to silence bound,
And Honors essence seem to have no being,
Where wicked winds run Virtues ship a ground,
While healthful spirits fall into a swound;
That only Pride, that wears the golden horn,
May live at ease, and laugh the world to scorn.
If every right were rightly apprehended,
And best deseruings best might be regarded,
And Careful works were to their worth commended,
And Gracious spirits graciously rewarded,
And wicked craft from Conscience care discarded;
Then might the Angels sing in Heaeuen, to see
What blessed courses on the earth would be.
But oh, the world is at an other pass,
Fools have such Maskes, men can not see their faces:
There is such flattery in a looking Glass,
That winking eyes can not see their disgraces,
That are apparent in too open places:
But what auailes unto a wicked mind?
No eye so clowdy, as the wilful blind.
To see the sleight of subtle sneaking spirits
(That dare not see the Glass of their disgraces)
Thrive in the World, while better natured merits
Can not aspire unto those blessed places,
Where faithless hearts should never show there faces:
Would it not grieve an honest heart to know it?
Although the tongue be sworn it may not show it.
To see a horse of service in the field,
Hurt by a Jade, that can but kick and fling:
To see Ulysses wear Achilles shield,
While hissing Serpents have a Hellish sting:
To see the Knave of Clubbes take up the King,
Although he be a wicked help at Mawe,
It Was but a clown that yet devised the law.
To see a sight of Curres worry a Hound,
A flight of Buzzards fall upon a Hawk,
A Coward villain give a Knight a wound,
To hear a Rascal to a King to talk,
Or see a Peasant cross a Princes walk,
Would it not fret the heart that does behold it,
And yet in figures may not dare unfold it?
But what a kind of wretched world is this!
They that are honest, let them be so still.
Such as are settled in their course amiss,
Have much a do for to reform their will.
It is the wind that drives about the Mill,
That grindes the Corn that sometimes fills the Sack,
That laid awry may break the Loaders back.
What shall I say? that knows not what to say.
This worlds vile Grammar has a wicked speech:
Where Wealth and Will do carry such a sway,
That many a time the Goodwife wears the breech,
And the stowte Oak must yield unto the Beech.
Such vile conjunctions such constructions make,
That some are pois'ned with a Sugar Cake.
Terence his Plays are too much in request.
The Knave, the Fool, the Swagg'rer, and the Whore,
Thraso and Gnato, Lais and the rest
Of all the crew (that I dare say no more;
But ware the dogs that keep the Devils door)
So play their parts upon the worldly Stage,
That thieues are hanged before they come to age.
Oh, it is a word to hear a Gander keake,
And all the Geese to give a histe to beer:
To hear an Owl to teach a Parrat speak,
While Cuckoes notes make better Music dear;
Where nere a better singing bird is near,
Would it not grieve a good Musicians ear,
To be enforst to stand attentive there?
To see a Wise man handled like a Fool,
An Ass exalted like a proper man:
To see a Puddle honored like a Poole,
An old blind Goose swim wagers with a Swan,
Or Silver Cups disgraced by a Can:
Who would not grieve that so the world should go?
But who can help it, if it will be so?
No, no, alas it is in vain for me,
To help the eyes, that joy not in the light:
He that is sworn that he will never see,
Let him play Buzzard, with his blinded sight.
An Owl will never have an Eagles flight;
He, that is once conceited of his Wit,
Must die of folly: there is no help for it.
And yet good Fools, that can not do withal,
May well be borne with, for their simple Wits:
But Knauish Wits, that wicked Fools we call,
(Where hellish Satan with his Angels sits,
To work the feats of many a thousand fits)
Those foolish knaves, or knauish fools I mean,
I would to God, the world were rid of clean.
And yet it is in vain such world to wish:
There is no pack of Cards without a Knave:
Who loves to feed upon a Sallet dish,
Among his Herbs some wicked weed may have.
Some men must win, some lose, and some must save.
Fools will be Fools, do wise men what they can,
And many a Knave deceive an honest man.
A Curtall Jade will show his hackney tricks,
And Snarling Curres will bite a man behind:
The Black Thorn Shrubbe is best known by his Pricks:
A Kestrell can not choose but show her kind.
Wise men sometime must wait, till Fools have dined:
And yet, those Fools, in common Wits conceit;
Are Wise, when Wisdom on their wealth does wait.
And yet the wealthy Fool is but a Fool,
The Knave with all his wealth is but a Knave:
For truest VVisdome reads in Virtues school,
That there is no man happy till his grave.
The Hermit lives more quiet in his Cave,
Then many a King that long usurps a Crown;
That in the end comes head long tu^bling down.
Yet who so base, as would not be a King?
And who so fond as thinks not he is Wise?
Does not the Cuckoe think that she can sing,
As clearly as the Bird of Paradise?
The fowlest Dowd' is fair in her own eyes.
Conceit is strong, and has such kind of vain,
As works strange wonders in a Woodcocks brain.
But, what should Fancy dwell upon a Fable?
In some far Contries, Women ride a-stride:
The Fool that in the kind can use his babble,
Shall have Fat meat and somewhat else beside.
For Wit does wonders under folly hide:
Yet in true Wisdom, all are Fools approved,
They that love Fools, and Fools that are beloved.
But since it is best that all agree in one,
The proverb says, it is merry when friends meet.
It is a kind of death to live alone.
A loving humor is a pleasing sweet,
Let Wise men study on the Winding sheet,
And weaker Wits this poor contentment have,
It Is better be a Fool then be a Knave.
And so, good friend, if so thou be, farewell:
I must not stand upon the Fool too long;
Least that my spirits so with folly swell,
As do perhaps my better humors wrong*
And therefore thus in brief I end my song;
The wisest man has writ, that ever was,
Vanitas vanitatum, and omnia vanitas.
Vanity all, all is but vanity,
Nothing on earth but that will have an end:
Where he that trustes to bare Humanity,
Shall hardly live to find in Heaven a friend.
Take heed therefore the Highest to offend:
Either learn Wit, where truest Wisdom lies,
Or take my word, thou never wilt be Wise.
And therefore let the wise not be displeased,
If they be counted Fond as well as other:
For, it is a plague, that has the world diseased,
Sinch sin became unhappy Natures Mother:
And let me say but this, my gentle brother;
Since all is vain, that lives under the Sun,
Good wise man be are with Fools, and I have done.
FINIS.

