DIVINE CONSIDErations of the Soul, Concerning the excellency of God, and the
vileness of man. Very necessary and profitable for every true Christian
seriously to look into. By N. B. G.

LONDON Printed by E A. for John Tappe and are to be sold at his shop on the
Tower Hill, nere the Bulwark Gate. 1608

To the right worshipful and worthy Knight, Sir Thomas Lake, one of the
Clerks of his Maieiesties Signet: health, happiness and Heaven.
WOrthy KNIGHT The long affectionate duty, wherein I have followed your
undeserved favor, has made me study how to prove some part of my
protestation: but finding my spirit by the crosses of fortune, unable to be it
self, in the best nature of thankfulness, I have yet, by Gods great
blessing, labored in the vineyard of a virtuous love, where having gathered
those fruits, that are both pleasant and wholesome, bound up this little
handful, I present them to your patience, knowing that your love to learning,
your zeal in Religion, and your wisdom in judgment (being able in divine
Considerations, to find comfort above the world) will vouchafe to make that
good use of them, that may give me comfort in your regard of them: but least
tediousness may prove displeasing yea in matter of much worth, I will leave
my labor to your liking, and my service to your imploime^t, in which I humblye
rest in hearty prayer for your much happiness.

Yours devoted and obliged at command: NICH. BRETON.

To the Reader.
Many read they know not what, too many they care not what, but how
necessary is it for all men before they read, to consider what they read,
and to what end they bestow both time and labor in that exercise, I refer to
the judgment of their discretions, who are able to find the difference
betwixt good and evil: you then that read this little work to your great
good, if you well digest the considerations contained in the same, Let me
entreat you what you find for your good, to esteem of as you have cause, and
what may be to your dislike to correct in your kind patience; in a little room
is matter enough for the good consideration of a co^templatiue sperit, which
looking toward heaven, and longing to be there, shall find such comfort in
these considerations, as I hope shall give cause to gloriefie God the Author of
all good, and not think a miss of me, that by his goodness have set them down
for the good of all his Servants: of which number, not doubting you to be one,
I leave you in this and all your good labors, to his only gracious blessing.

Your well wishing friend, N. B

In praise of these Divine Considerations.
Go little Book, the Jewel of delight:
The heavenly organ, of true virtues glory:
Which like a crystal mirror sets in sight:
The truest tract of high Iehouahes story:
Which who so reads, shall find within the same
Gods powerful love, to those that fear his name,
I reading of it did much comfort find:
And so no doubt, may every Christian do:
That is to virtue any whit inclind:
Such right directions does it lead him to.
Read then (dear friend) for here I dare well say:
To know God truly is the ready way.
And more, within this lttle volume here
Who so does read with due consideration,
His own estate most vilely will appear:
If not reformed by heavenly meditation.
Consider then* and do aplaud his pain:
That thus directs. true knwledge to obtain.
And for my self, as having gained thereby:
These few lines of my love shall specify:
Pleasure attend the author that did write it:
Heavens happiness the heart that did indite it:
True comfort be to him, that loves to read it,
And joy betide his soul: that truly treads it
I. T.

A Divine Poem.
O Lord that knewst me ere that I was known,
And sawst the cloth before the thread was spunne
And framd'st the substance, ere the thought was grown
From which my being in this world begun:
Oh glorious God, that only of thy grace:
Did all and only to thy service make me:
and having given me here an earthly place:
Unto the Guard of thy fair grace did take me.
Of all pure bright, and euer-seeing eye:
That see the secret thoughts of every heart,
Before whose presence does apparantlie,
Heaven, earth, Sea, Hell, in all and every part.
In wisdom more O then wit can comprehend!
That make and iudgest, gouern'st every thing*
power of all powers, on whom all powers attend,
Spring of all grace from whence all glories spring
From that high, holy, heavenly throane of thine:
Where mercy lives to give thy glory grace.
Look down a little on this soul of mine,
That unto thee complains her heavy case.
Oh sweetest sweet of my souls purest sense,
That in thy mercy, madst me first a creature!
And in the truth of loves intelligence,
The nearest image to thy heavenly Nature.
And having framde me to thy favors eye,
Did with thy finger fairly write me out,
In holy writ of heavenly Mystery,
How I should bring a blessed life about.
Forbidding only what might be my harm,
Commanding only what might do me good:
preserving me by thy Almigtie arm
and feeding me with a celestial food.
Thou madst the air to feed the life of nature,
That I might see how weak a thing it is*
The earth, the labor of the sinful creature,
Which bears no fruit but only by thy bliss.
Thou madst the water but to cleanse or cool,
Or serve thy creatures in their sundry use:
That careful wit, might reason not befoole
In using nature to the souls abuse.
The fire thou madst to c^eere the chilling cold,
With a reviving heat of natures ne^de;
That reason might in natures ruin hold
How far that Force might stand the life instead.
Thus under heaven, thou madst these Elements
To maintain all those creatures thou have made,
But so, that nature with her ornaments
shall have a time to flourish, or to fade
But that same heavenly fire that does inflame
The heart and soul with a continual heat:
Whose love does live but in thy holy name,
Where faith does mercy but for grace entreat.
Where that did kindle, or that Cole to find,
Or smallest piece or sparckle of the same:
I found the eye of nature was too blind,
To find the sense, or whence thee secret came.
Till by the inspiration of that grace,
That to thy servants does thy goodness show:
I found thy love the ever living place,
From whence the substance of this sweet does flow
And when I saw within this soul of mine,
How far thy love exceedes the life of nature,
and natures life, but in that love of thine,
Which is the being of each blessed creature:
Then I beg^n to find the foil of sin,
And only longed to live in mercies grace,
and hate the world, that does their hell begin,
That do not long to see thy heavenly face.
And thus perplexed in that passions grief:
That has no ease but in thy mercies eye
To thee that art the faithful souls releife
have I laid open all my misery:
THE First part of consideration concerning God.
Consider:
THis word Consider, in a few letters contains a large volume, wherein the
eyes of judgment may read what is necessary for the understanding of human
reason: yea, and the best part part of the most perfect and divine
contemplation, of the most gracious and blessed spirits in the world: for if
it please the Almighty God of his infinite goodness, so far to inspire the
soul of man with the grace of his holy spirit, as that being by the heavenly
power thereof, Drawn from the world to behold the courses of higher
comforts, when leaving the delights of fading vanities, he shall be ravished
with the pleasures of eternal life.

Then may he say with the Prophet David (entering into the contemplative
consideration that may well be called the admiration of the greatness and
goodness of God) as it is written, in the 8. Psalm verse 3. Lord when I
consider the heavens, the Moon and the Stars that thou have made, what is
man (say I) that thou will look upon him? yea let me say unto thee (Oh man)
if thou could with an humble spirit look into the greatness of the goodness
of God in the power of his creation, in the wisdom of his workemanshippe, in
the preservation by his grace, and in the increase, by his blessing: if with
all this thou could note the difference of Heaven and earth, the brightness
of the heavens, and the darkness of the world: the pureness of the Sun and
Moon and Stars, and the dimnes of the obscured light of earthly natures: the
perfection of the Angels, and the corruption of man; the glory of the divine,
and the disgrace of our human nature: well might thou say to thy self, oh
what am I? a worm, dust and ashes, and a substance of all foul and filthy
corruption, that my GOD, the pure and bright, gracious, holy, good, and
glotious essence of the incomprehensible Deity, will vouchsafe to cast down
the least look of his mercy upon me?

Since therefore there is nothing that can be so truly pleasing to the spirit
of man, as knowledge, neither is there any thing well known but by the true
consideration of the substance, nature or quality thereof: let me begin to
enter into this necessary course of consideration, in which we shall find what
is most necessary, fit and convenient, for the use, profit, pleasure, and honor
of man; that the object of the eye, considered by the sense of the spirit, the
substance digested by the power of reason, nature may find most comfort in the
virtue of the application.

Touching Consideration in general.
FIrst, and above all things, we are to consider what is above all things to be
considered; then for the excellency of the goodness in it self; and last, for
the good that from it we receive: for in the instinct of nature we have
planted in ourselves an insatiable desire of knowledge, whereby we find in our
selves, somewhat more then our selves, leading us to a longing after somewhat
above our selves, which if by a light inlightning our minds we be led out of
the darkness of our blinded sense of nature, to the clear beholding of the
glorious brightness of Gods graces, we shall see that in him only and
altogether, is the infinite goodness and incomprehensible greatness of all
perfect knowledge, and knowledge of all perfection; and that so much nearer
comes our nature unto the divine: as by the light of grace we feel in our
selves, an apprehension or participation of those graces, that essentially do
only dwell, and are inheritant in the divine nature. To come to a plainer
explanatio^ of the first due point of consideration: every thing is to be
desired for some good that it does contain in it self, and may bring unto
other: the goodness therefore of every thing, must be considered before the
thing it self be effected. Then if good be for the goodness desired; the better
that the good is, the more it is to be desired, and so the best good for the
best goodness to be best and most desired.

Now who is so evil, that has the least sparkle of Gods grace, but by the
light of the same, does see in the wonder of his works, the glory of his
goodness? but leaving al doubts, there is no doubt to be made, that God is in
himself the essence of all goodness, the first moouer, the continual actor,
and the infinite furnisher of all good, in thought, word and deed; where, when,
and in whatsoever: this first position the^ granted that god is only good and
the only essence of al goodness, what objection can be made, why he should not
be above all things to be desired, humbly to be affected, faithfully to be
loved, lovingly to be served, duly to be obeyed, and infinitely to be
glorified? for the Athists, whom the Psalmist calls fools, Psalm, 53. verse
1. that said in their hearts there is no God, because they know no good, I
say nothing to them, but their souls shall find there 1 a Devil that taught
them, and will reward them for their euill^ but for them that know there is a
God, and have a feeling of his goodness, in the comfort of his grace: let me a
little speak unto them touching the points that I mean to speak of in the
considaration of the greatness of God above all things, and for which for all
things in all, and above all things he is to be admired, loved, and
honored: and first touching the greatness of God.

The first consideration touching the greatness of of God.
TO consider the greatness of God, at least that greatness in which himself
only knows himself is incomprehensible, and therefore above the power of
co^templation, meditation, and consideration of man or Angels whatsoever; for
in the majesty of his power, he is inco^prehensible in his wisdom;
unsearchable in his graces; incomparable, and in his glory infinite: in all
which he does so far exceed the compass of all consideration, as in the
humility of confession must be left only to admiration; But for so much as of
his mercy he has left to our contemplation, let us with such humility
consider thereof, as may be to his glory and our comfort. Touching therefore
his greatness, let us humbly lift up the eyes of our hearts to the beholding
of those things, that in the excellent great workmanship of the same, we may
find that there is a further greatness, then we can ever find again. Let us
consider in the Creation of al creatures, his admirable power, who but spak the
word and they were made; oh powerful word, by which all things were created;
and if his word was so powerful, how much more powerful is he that gave such
power unto his word? loath I am to enter into particularities, to set down the
greatenesse of his power, though the least of his works show not a little,
and the greatest of his works show but a little of that greatness which his
glory does contain; where such varieties as well of the forms, as natures of
creatures, as well in their differences as agreement, in number so innumerable,
as prove an infinitenes in the power of their creation, yet when the greatest
of all things under the heavens, yea the heavens themselves shall wax old as
does a garment, and (as a vesture) shall be changed, how great is his power, who
shall loose no part of his grace, but increase infinitely in his glory? Who
has spand the heavens but the finger of his hand? who has settled the earth
but the word of his mouth? who has dug the great deep, but the wisdom of
his will?

Look up the heavens, they are the works of his hands: look down to the
earth, it is the work of his word: behold the Seas how they are obedient to
his will: now to behold in the Sun the light of the day, the Moon and the
Stars; as it were the lamps of the night; yet these so keep their courses
in a continual order, that one is not hurtful to another, but all and every
one in their service to man, perform their duties to their Creator: Does not
the consideration of these obiectes to our eyes, strike an impression in our
hearts of an admirable power in the greatness of his workmanship? Again, to
behold the thick clouds, whereby the Sun is obscured, the boisterous and
tempestious winds, whereby the highest Caedars are shaken, and the terrible
lightning and thunders, that amaze the hearts of the beholders: are not these
great proofs of a great power? But let us look down a little lower upon the
earth, and consider how it is possible that so great and huge a Mass should be
carried in such a circu^ference; Again, the world of great and huge trees in
the woods, with great and strange wild beasts in the wilderness; the one to
bear fruit, the other to feed and breed, as it were to an infinite increase,
and yet place and food enough for all. Again, to behold the raging Seas how
they roar against the banks of the earth, to whose bounds they are limited:
and to consider of the great and huge fishes that make their walks in these
watery paths: are not all these, spectacles, great apara^t proofs, of a most
great and admirable power? Again, to note the great and stout Fowls, that with
the force of their wings make their passage through the air, and yet neither
the lights of the heavens, the creatures in the earth, nor seas, nor birds in
the air, shall longer retain their places, then stands with the pleasure of
the Almighty: Oh how admirable is that greatness to whom all things are in such
obedience, which in him only having their being, are only at his will in
their disposing?

But let me come a little lower to thee: Oh man, compounded of the worst
matter, the very slyme of the Earth, how great a power is in thy God that has
created thee, not by his word only (as he did all other creatures in the
Earth) but above them all in a Divine nature of grace; so near unto himself,
as that he would in the greatness of his love, call thee his Image, and to this
Image of himself, give so great a power over all his creatures, that both
Sun, Moon, and Stars in the heavens, the beasts in the field, the birds
in the air, the fishes in the Sea, the Trees in the woods, and the mineralles
in the earth, should all be subject to the disposing of thy discretion and
obedient to thy command. Has he not made the great horse to carry thee, the
great Lion to be led by thee, the Bear, the Wolf, the Tygre and the Dog,
yea withal other beasts, to stand afraid at the frown of thy countenance?
yea does he not coward their spirits to become serviceable to thy command?
does not the Faulcon stoop her pitch to come down to thy fist, and make her
fight at the Foul, to feed thy hunger or pleasure? does not the Dog leave his
kennell, and make his course at the Dear for thy food or thy sport? does not
the fish come out of the deep waters and hang upon thy bait, for thy profit
or thy pleasures? and what a greatness is this to have this command over so
many creatures? but again, consider withal how much greater is that infinite
greatness in thy Creator, that has given such greatness to his Creature.

Again, consider withal, the greatness of his glory, and glory of his
greatness, that his Angels tremble at his brightness: if he touch the
hills they shall smoke, and the Mountains shall melt at his presence, and no
man can see him and live: so great is his Brightness, as no eye can behold:
so pure his essence, as exceedes the sense of nature: so deep his wisdom, as
is unsearchable in reason: and so infinite his perfection, as surpasses the
power of consideration: and therefore let us consider, that in regard of that
Almighty power, in his greatness the greatest: yea, and all power without him
is so great a smalnesse as nothing can be less.

Again, let us in admiration of his greatness, and knowledge of his goodness,
consider whom we are to think on, how we are to think of him, what we are to
think of our selves without him, and what we are only in him: For the first,
who^ we are to think on, is the incomprehensible Majesty of all powers, the
biginner of all times, the Creator of all things, the Co^maunder of al
natures, the disposer of al properties, the life of all beings, and the endless
glory of al graces: absolute in his power, resolute in his will, incomparable
in his wisdom, and admirable in his work: thus I say, let us consider whom
we are to think of, not a Creature but a Creator: not a King, but a King of
Kings; not a power, but a power of powers; and not an Angel but GOD: now how
shall we think of him? with fear and trembling, and remember the sayings of
Matthew, Chapter 10. verse 28. Fear not him that can destroy the body, but
fear him that can destroy both body and soul.

And therefore when we fall into sin, let us fear the greatness of his
wrath, and the great power in his fury: for though he fed Elias in the
Wilderness by the Ravens, and preserved Daniel in the Den from the Lions, made
the Dogs lick the sores of Lazarus, and made the Sun to stay his course at
the prayer of Iosuah, yet, with the wicked he makes his Creature in the
vengeance of his wrath, took another course, for the Lions devoured the false
Prophets: The Bears came out of the wood to destroy the children that mocked
the Prophet: the dogs fed upon Iesabell, and the darkness blinded the
Sodomites, till fire came down from Heaven to consume them.

Consider therefore (I say) whom we are to think on? in one word which
concludes all that can be spoken, God and not man: for in God is all
greatness, without whom the greatest of all powers, is but the power of all
smallness: but since so great is his greatness every way, as is no way to be
comprehended, let us only know and acknowledge his infinitenes therein to be
such, as we must humbly leave to admiration, and say with the Prophet David,
Psalm. 1^6. verse. 26. Praise ye the God of heaven for his mercy endures for
ever.

Now let us see what we are without him; as bubbles of water that breaks in
an instant: or a blasted flower ere it be out of the bud: the shame of nature:
meat for Dogs: fuel for fire: out-lawes from Heaven, and Prisoners for
Hell. Oh fearful state of such as fear not God: fear therefore the greatness
of his wrath, least you be consumed in the greatness of his fury.

Now what are we to think of our selves in him, the chosen vessels of grace,
the comaunders of all earthly powers, the compagnions of his Saints* coheires
in the heavenly Kingdom, and brethren with his blessed Son and our Savior
Jesus Christ: thus great does his greatness make his, both in this world, and
in the world to come: and thus much for the first point of consideration of
the greatness of God.

Touching the goodness of God the second Consideration.
IT is a position infallible, that of goodness can come nothing but good: God
then being the only and ever true and pure essence of al goodness, of him what
can be spoken but all good? is it not written, that whatsoever he created, he
saw that it was good? and having made man to his own Image, the best good,
how did he show to him his exceeding goodness, in giving him dominion over al
his good creatures? only the Tree of life excepted, which though in it self
it was good, yet in that he knew it was not good for man to meddle with, he
forbad him to taste of the fruit thereof; and this good warning his good God
gave him, that there might nothing but good come to him: but we may well say
there is nothing good but God; it is the word of truth spoken by the Lord of
life. Our Savior Jesus Christ, when the Pharisees called him good Master, his
answer was, why call you me good? there is none good but God: And if the only
begotten Son of God would not be called good, how can this title of good, be
properly given to any of his creatures? though it pleased him to say that he
saw every thing was good that he created, yet it was good only respectively
as it came from his goodness, and only effectiuely as might serve to his glory:
for though the spirit of man by the grace of the holy Ghost do participate
with the great blessing of God, which from his goodness proceeding, cannot be
but good; yet only and altogether in God does abide and dwell that pure
essence and Eternal goodness, which may only make him be justly and properly
called good.

Now all goodness being in him and of him, and whatsoever is or may be in any
part thought, or called good, must be only in respect of God, the only giver
of the same: and whatsoever good we receive, is things good, and all the good
that he created for the good use of man, that good knowledge, knowledge of
goodness, and goodness of knowledge, the perfection whereof is only in himself,
and the participation whereof should be in none but the Image of himself: this
Image did he choose to make in man, and this good only to bestow upon man:
now howsoever the Devil by corruption of temptation, has drawn away the
hearts of those outward men which retain in their souls small or no part of
the Image of God, unto the delight of evil, yet those men that are touched
with the least part of Gods grace, have not only a hateful loathing of the
nature of evil, but a longing desire after good, and a delight in the good of
the desire of that good that they long after: Man being therefore by the
goodness of God elected for his best creature, his best servant and coheire with
his only beloved Son in his heavenly Kingdom: he has also elected him to
that knowledge of God, that by the good thereof, may breed in him the grief
of sin, unto which by corruption he is a subject, and a neuersatisfied desire
to enjoy the good that by faith he is assured to come unto: now as he has
elected man only, and above all his creatures to this knowledge of good, which
he did as it were choose out of all his blessings, to bestow only upon man, so
did he withal give him knowledge how to come to the possession of that good,
to which only he is elected: Oh how infinite a goodness is this in God toward
us, in this gracious benefit of our election! oh what heart can (without the
rauishing joy of the soul) think upon this goodness of God toward man, that
(as I aforesaid) having chosen him for his best creature, his best servant and
coheire, with his bestand only beloved Son, he did not only inspire his soul
with an especial knowledge above all other creatures, but with this knowledge
of good, a knowledge likewise of a direct way to come unto it; which way is
not to be sought in a strange country, nor among the Saints or Angels, but
even here at home, and in his holy word, and that way to be only found, by
the faith of that grace, that in the good creatures of God does only work to
his glory: in sum, when he himself is both the way to life, and the life
of the faithful. What an excellent comfort is this in one word, one truth,
and one Christ; to seek and find the way to our is from the abundance of
his mercy, and for the which we are bound in all humility to give him
glory: let us acknowledge all goodness to be only in him, and himself the
glorious Essence of the same: consider with thankefulness the good that
vnworthylye we receive from him.

First let us think on the goodness of God, in out election, that being the
worst matter to work upon, he would show the best of his working, in framing
a substance to the Image of himself: can there be any thing so good unto man
as to be made the Image of God? and when in the righteousness of the soul,
which is the best goodness in man, we be most like unto God? what glory are we
to give unto him, who ingrafteth in our hearts such a love unto righteousness,
and such a righteous love unto his grace, as that by the virtue thereof we
become as it were members of his sacred body, and branches of the Tree of life:
Consider I say thus, first the goodness of God in our election from the slime of
the earth, the worst matter in the world to work upon, to be the best and
fairest of his works in the world: and all earthly things to endure but their
time, in the course of their lives, man only in his grace to live for ever: in
himself, he is only all goodness, and from whom only being only good, we
receive this first good of our election: how great a proof of the glorious
essence of the goodness in God is this? that not by persuasion of Angels,
nor the merrite of any power of nature, this free election of man above all
creatures, and under him to be Lord over them, fell unto us by the only
gracious working of his holy will to his only infinite glory and our
unspeakable comfort: Now let us again consider a further goodness, that from
his grace we receive in our election, not only to be made the best best of his
creatures, but to serve him with such love that we maic live with him in
glory: he has not only chosen us for his best creatures, but also for his
best servants; yea his beloved sons, and not only sons, but coheires with
his blessed Son in the heavenly kingdom: he has chosen us before the
world, to preserve us in the world, and to take us out of the world to
eternal joys above the world: Oh what tongue can express the greatness of
this his goodness toward us, besides the infinite comforts, graces and
blessings, that ever in this life he bestows upon us? he created all things
could give him nothng to persuade or allure him to make us to his Image, being
created: we were so poor, that we had nothing but what he gave us, and
therefore could give him nothing for our creation: when he had given us
dominion over his creatures, what could we give him but what was his own, and
whereof he had no need, but might command at his will? naie more, what did
man give him but unthankfulness in being disobedient to his commandment? and
lastly being fallen through sin, so far from the state of grace that there
was no means but the death of his dearest Son and our Savior, for our
redemtion: what could we give him having nothing? and if we had had all the
world it was but his own, and as nothing to recompense this admirable point
of his goodness in our redemption: Consider then for our election we could give
him nothing, and therefore it was only of his grace: for our creation we had
nothing to give him, for we had nothing but what he gave us: for our redemtion
the least drop of the precious Blood of his dear beloved Son, was more worth
then the whole world: Oh then think we could give him nothing worthy of so
great a love as to dye for us: with the grace of his holy spirit he does
sanctify us, and who can think or dare presume to buy that glorious blessing
of him, shall with Simon Magus perish in the horror of such a sin, the least
spark of his grace, being more worth then the whole world; and the world all
his, and man but a creature in the world. Again, for our justification, his
only righteousness in his life and death, his patience, and his Passion, is
the only substance of our justification: for as we are justified by faith in
his Blood, an effect of grace in the inspiration of his holy spirit: so is
that precious Blood of his, the glorious ground of our belief, whereby only
we are justified: our election then from grace, our creation in grace, our
redemption by grace, out sanctification by grace, our justification by grace,
and our glorification by grace: what has the world, or man, if he had the
whole world to purchase the least part of the glory that the only goodness
of God has in his mercy ordained and reserved for the good of man?

Let then no man be so blind or blinded with the mist of arrogancy, as to
run into merit in himself, or to mingle our salvation? Oh let us a little
consider, how many are the sundry, yea and infinite varieties of God, that by
the goodness of our election we receive from the mercy of the Almighty: first
to be created to his own Image, to be inspired with a Divine knowledge above
all his creatures, to have dominion over so many creatures, to be feareles of
damnation by the assurance of our election to salvation, to use the things of
the world, as if we had them not, to account the world with all the pomp and
pride thereof, but as vanity, to have a loathing of sin, and a love to
virtue, to be furnished of what is necessary to be deffended from evil,
preserved from hurt, to dread no danger, to be weary of the world, and long
to be with Christ: To speak of the goodness of his bounty daily bestowed upon
his creatures, as beauty to some, strength to other, to other wealth, to other
wisdom, to other honor, to other divine inspirations; these I say are no
small causes to make us consider of his goodness toward us: but above all, to
give us himself, in his love to be with us, with his grace to guide us, with
his power to defend us, with his word to instruct us, and with his holy spirit
to inspite us: to find the way made for us to our eternal joys that none
shall take from us, to which before the worlds and world without end, he has
only elected us: oh man how can thou think humbly enough, thankfully
enough, and joyfully enough of the goodness of thy God, in this good of thy
election? in sum what goodness can be greater unto us, then to know yt God to
his dearest love through his beloved only dearly Son Jesus Christ, has elected
us, and as it were chosen his love above al his creatures, in his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord and Savior, to be bestowed upon us; i^ that love to live with
us, and that everliving love never to leave us here on earth; with his
infinite blessings in his gracious goodness to comfort us, and in heaven to
reserve a Crown of glory for us, to create us when we were not, to redeem us
being lost, to preserve us from destruction, to give his dearest Son to death
for our sins, to assure us of salvation, and to receive us to glory.

All this did he, and all good that ever was, is, or ever will or can be, for
us, to show and make us consider of his goodness toward us: for let us in
brief a littltle consider how freely, and only of his grace he has thus
made manifest his vnspe^kable goodness in this our election, when we were not:
we (...) gle his corrupt actions with the pure merit of Christ Jesus for his
salvation; but say with Job all our righteousness is as a filthy cloth, and
with the Prophet David, Psalm 116. verses 11. 12. meditating upon the
greatness of his goodness toward him, what shall I give the Lord for all that
he has done unto me? I will take the Cup of Salvation, and be thankful to
the Lord: see here all that we are, and all that we can give him for all the
good that we receive from him, bare thanks: and yet as much as he requires,
and more then from a great many (the more their shame) he receives.

But let those that feel these great effects of grace in the goodness of the
living God, say with the holy Prophet, Psalm 136. verse 1. be thankful to the
Lord, and speak good of his name, for his mercy endures for ever: but since
so infinite is his goodness in all things and to al things, and specially to man
above all things, let me only wish al men for their own good, to acknowledge
all goodness only to be in the Lord, the only Author and substance thereof;
and whatsoever is good in heaven or earth, is only a free guifte of his grace,
that must only work to his glory; the election of man to be an effect of love
in the grace of his goodness, and not to dream of merit, but to give glory
unto mercy, for the benefit of such a blessing, as being freely given to man,
through our Lord Jesus Christ by his merit, is only confirmed to the
eternity of his glory: and thus much touching the goodness of God.

Touching the wisdom of God the third Consideration.
TO speak of the wisdom of God, is so far above the capacity of man, that
it is rather with all humble reverence to be honored and admired, then either
to be spoken of or considered: yet for so much as the creature does give glory
to his Creator, in praising and with admiration beholding the excellent
workmanshippe in the variety of his works, and finding it so far above the
reach of reason, as must noedes proceed from a virtue of divine grace, he
does in contemplation acknowledge a wisdom of that excellency, that makes
him say with the Prophet David, in the 104. Psalm 24. verse, Oh how
wonderful are thy works? in wisdom have thou made them: but though the
wisdom of God as it is in it self, is an other himself, and not to be
comprehended of any but himself, yet the effects thereof in all things, do
give him so great a praise, as make him above all things, to receive the
highest of all glory: for to enter into particulers, let us begin to look
into his creation, in the power whereof he shows no small part of wisdom:
as in the brightness of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and the cleernesse of the
sky, the courses of the Planets, and the motions of the Celestial powers: in
the opperations of the elements, in the perfection of proportio^s, in the
diversity of creatures, in the wonder of art, and quickness in working: what
excellent art has he taught nature, in painting all the Trees, fruits, and
flowers of the earth? yea and all the hairs, skins, feathers, and scales of
beasts, fowls, and fishes? the eeuennes and pureness of every one, of whom
being truly considered, will startle the best wits in the due consideration of
that only point of wisdom.

Again, what a further secret cunning has he taught nature, in perfuming so
many Trees, herbs, and flowers, all growing out of this dark and dusky earth:
by what wisdom he does unite the people, and having divided the languages, how
he gives the means of understanding: how he makes the fishes paths, and the
ships passages through the seas, the birds walks through the air, and the
Salamanders dwelling in the fire, and the worms howses in the earth: how
admirable is this wisdom that so works all things by it self? To speak of
the excellency of Arts, in the secrecy of their working, what can it finally
approve but an admiration of knowledge in the master of them? But having with
Solomon found by the light of grace, and experience of labor, that al things
are vanity, except only the virtue of that grace, that enricheth the soul
with inestimable treasure: what a point in wisdom is this, not only to
instruct the soul of man in knowledge of natures, with their qualities and
effects, but through the power of it self to breed a kind of spiritual
knowledge in the apprehension of Faith, that in contemplation of heavenly
treasure, makes trash of the whole world.

Oh superexellent exllencie in wisdom, that frames the heart unto the soul,
to seek out the way of life, and in the prison of the flesh, preserues it
from the peril of infection; that man being created the Image of perfection,
can never be destroyed by the venom of corruption, but in the days of
iniquity, being guided by grace, escaping the snares of hell, shall fly to the
joys of heaven.

Consider that if man by the wisdom of God attain to this excellent
knowledge, how to walk through the passages of nature, to make use of them for
his service, to withstand the temptation of sin, to receive the instructions
of grace, to despise the delights of the world, to bridle the affections of
the flesh, and ouercomming the power of death, to find the path unto life; if
this I say, and more then can be said, by the instruction of the divine
wisdom, man has power to attain unto, think how infinite is that wisdom
from whom only comes the essence of this, and all knowledge: in whom it
only lives, and without only whom all is but mere ignorance: And since it
is written, that the beginning of wisdom, is the fear of God; learn only
that lesson, and fear to be otherwise learned: Paul thought he knew enough in
Christ, and him crucified: and enough wise shall thou be, if thou can apply
his knowledge to thy comfort.

But to return breifely to speak of the wisdom of God, it is in the heavens
so high, in the earth so large, in the water so deep, in the aier so secret,
and in the fire so powerful; in all things so exquisite, and in perfectio^s so
infinite, that I will only in the admiration thereof, give glory to the same,
and say with the Apostle 1. Corin. chapter 3. verse 19. The wisdom of the
world is foolishness before God; And again, with the Prophet David, Psalm
104. verse 24 Oh Lord how excellent are thy works in wisdom have thou made
them all. Psalm 139. verse 6. Such knowledge is too excellent for me. O all
ye works of the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever: but since so many
and so infinite are the praises that may worthyly be given unto it: I cannot
so leave off, but I must speak a little more of the consideration of it, for
the power of it: It makes all things for the knowledge of it, it knows all
things for the direction of it, it orders all things for the goodness of
it, it is good in, and to all things, for the greatness of it, it
comprehends all things for the grace of it, it is gracious in all good
things, and for the majesty of it, it is glorious above all things: for in the
power of it is the life of virtue; in the life of it is the mercy of love; in
the love of it is the blessing of grace; and in the grace of it, is the
eternity of Glory: who seeks it shall find it, who finds it shall love
it, who loves it, shall live in it, who lives in it, shall joy in it, and who
so ioyeth in it, shall be blessed by it. It is brighter then the Sun, purer
then Gold, sweeter then the honey and the honey comb, and for the worth of
it, it is more worth then the whole world: it beautifies nature, it rectifieth
reason, it magnifies grace, and glorifieth love: it loves humility, it
aduanc^th virtue, it enricheth knowledge, and maintains honor: it labors
in heaven for such as from heaven are preserved for heaven, to bring them to
heaven: in sum, it is where it is the bliss of nature, the honor of reason,
the light of life, and the joy of love.

The elect love her, the Saints honor her, and God only has her: in sum,
so much may be said of her, and so much more good the^ can be said or thought
is in her, that fearing with the divine light of my praise, to obscure the
glory of her worthynesse, I will only wish the world to seek her, the godly
to find her, the gracious to love her, the virtuous to serve her, the
faithful to honor her, and all the creatures in heaven and earth to praise
her: and so much, touching the consideration of the wisdom of God.

The fourth Consideration touching the love of God.
OH: who could with the eyes of wisdom, in the humility of the heart, look
into the virtue of that grace that lives in the love of the Almighty, should
find that sense of sweetness, that should ravish the soul of understanding:
but though it be in it self so gracious, and in grace so glorious as
exceeds the exceeding o^ all praise, yet as a Molehill t^ a mountain, a
Fly to an Eagle or an Ante to an Elephant, le^ me with the poor widow put in
my myte into the treasury, in humility of my hear^ to speak of the life of
my soul, which being only in the love of the living God, let me speak a
little in the consideration of the same, that the ungrateful world seeing
their lack of grace, may blush at their blindness, and be joyful of a better
light, where beholding the beauty that rauisheth the souls of the beloved,
they shall find the love that is the joy of the blessed: touching the which,
let me by degrees speak of such points as I find most necessary in this
consideration: ^et us first I say consider this first ^oint of the love of God,
that before we were created for his ^eruice, we were elected in his ^oue, then
to make an Image to it self, yea and as it were another it self, for the
first, Romans 8. Jacob have I loved, even before he had done good or evil;
There is election proved in love.

When the Angel saluted Elizabeth, with the message of her conception, was it
not of John the baptist, who was sent to pronounce the word of the Lord, to
make straight his way before him? and what greater proof of love, then to
elect him to such a message? again, does not Christ the Son of God pray to
his Father, that as he is one with his Father, so his may be one with him? Oh
how can there be so great a proof of the election of love in Christ, as by
his love to be made one with him: Look I say into the excellency of this
incomparable love in God toward man: first to make him to his Image, and not
only by his word (as by which he made all other creatures) but as it were by
a consent, or consultation of the Trinity about an especial work, to the
pleasing of the Deity, as it is written: Let us make man in our own Image
according to our likeness.

But well may it be said that Nullum simile est ide^, for though he were
perfect in respect of our corruption, yet by his fall, it appears that the
creature was far short of the perfection of the Creator: but being fallen
from that perfection, by the venom of temptation, into the state of damnation,
how great was the love of God, to effect again by himself the blessed work
of his salvation? for as it is written:

GOD so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son to death, that
all that believe in him shall be saved: again, look into the admirable love of
Christ to his beloved, to come from the bosom of his Father in heaven, to his
grave in the earth: to leave the service of Angels, to be skoffed of devilish
creatures; to leave the joys of Paradise for the sorrows of the world; to
leave his Throane in heaven, for a maunger on the earth; to leave his seat of
judgment, to suffer death upon the cross: well might he say as in respect
of his sorrows for the sins of the world, with the punishment that he was
to endure for the sins of others, himself without sin, when he felt the
extremity of those pains that in the sweat of Blood and water, proved the
passion of true patience, and the life of true love.

Vt, non est dolor sicut meus, sic non est amor sicut meus; for indeed he
knows not, nor can he judge, what love is that in his heart cannot say in
honor of his love, never such love: the freinde to die for his enemies; the
master to die for his servants; the King to die for beggars; the Son of God,
to dye for the son of man: well may it be said never such love: to leave
all pleasures to bring thee to all pleasures; to endure all crosses to work
thee all comforts; to leave Heaven for a time to bring thee to Heaven for ever.

What art thou that in the thought of such love, can not say in thy heart,
in the joy of thy soul, as Nullus dolor sicut eius, sic Nullus amor
sicuteius: as no sorrow is like to his, so no love is like to his: does not
he truly say that can say nothing but truth? love one another as I have
loved you: greater love then this cannot be, for a man to lay down life for
his beloved: Oh let us a little meditate upon this excellent comfort that is
unspeakable in God toward man, through his love was man created the goodlest
creature: and where al other creatures have their eyes bent downward (to the
earth, where they seek their food) man has a face, looking upwards toward
heaven, where the soul seeks food above the flesh: Again, through the love
of God was man made the wisest creature, to know the varieties of natures, to
give names unto creatures, to note the courses of the heavens, to till the
earth, and make his paths through the seas, to divide the times, to
distinguish of doubts, to search into knowledge, and to know the giver and
glory thereof: Again, through the love of God, man was made commander of all
creatures under the Sun, Lord of all the earth, foreseer of aftertimes,
messenger of the word of God, student of Divine mysteries, chief servant to
the Lord of Lords, freinde to the King of Kings, and coheire in the heavenly
kingdom, through the love of God; he was made a seruante, but as a friend, a
brother and a coheire: now he that thinks on these points of love, is worthy
of no love if he cannot say in his heart there was never such love: he loved
man in himself, when there was none to persuade him to love him but himself;
he loved man as himself, that he would have him one with himself; yea he loved
man more if more could be then himself, that for man to death would give
himself: he made man lovingly, he blessed man lovingly, he came to man
lovingly, and dyed for man most lovingly: in the beginning he showed his love
without beginning, and in the end will show his love without ending, he made
him better then his creatures, for he made him Lord over them: he made them
better then his Angels, for he made them to serve him alittle lower then
himself. Psalm 8. verse 5. that himself might chiefly love him: see further
his love unto man as it is written, I say 49. 15: Can a Mother forget her
children, yet will I never forget thee. Se here love more tender then of a
mother, and more careful then of any other Father: O love of loves, what love
is like to this love? a kingly love, which defends his subjects; a lordly
love, which rewards his servants; a friendly love, that is kind to his
friends; a brotherly love yt is kind to his brothers; a motherly love, that is
tender to her children; a fatherly love, that is careful of his Sons; and a
Godly love, that is gracious to his creatures; a faithful love that never
faints; a bountiful love that ever gives; a merciful love that never
grudgeth, a pitiful love that ever releiueth; a mindful love, that never
forgets; a graceful love that ever loves.

Now who can enter into the true and due consideration of love, worthy loving,
and in the thought of this love, will not ever confess there was never such
love? which regards nothing but love: oh how did God love Abraham for showing
his love in Isaac? where God regarding more his will then his work, would not
suffer the sacrifice of his Son, but so loved him, as besides many other great
favors that he did him, could say within himself (when he had determined a
destruction of his enemies) shall I hide from my servant Abraham what I will
do? as though he would keep nothing from his beloved that he knew fit for his
knowledge: Again, how loved he Eliah that he would never let him see death? how
loved he his servant David that he made him to his own heart? how loved he the
blessed Virgin to make her the mother of his blesssed Son? how loved he
John the Euangeliste, to let him lean in is bosom? how loved he Paul to
bring him from idolatry? and how loved he Peter to forgive him when he had
denied him? how loved he Lazarus when he wept over him, how loved he Mary
Magdalen when he disposs est her of foul spirits, and at his Resurrection let
her behold him? and how loved he the Theife when he carried him into heaven
with him?

To recite all the points of his particular love to a world of unworthy
persons, were more then a world could set down but for so much as I have
said, and more then may be said of his love, I am persuaded, that if we
consider the power, the grace, the wisdom, the bounty, the pity, the
majesty, the mercy, the patience, the passion, the sorrow, the labor, the
life, and the torments of his love, for our love; he has no feeling of love,
or is worthy of no love, that will not in the joy of his souls love, give
all glory to this love, and say with the Prophet David. Psalm 31. verse 23.
Love him all ye his Saints, praise him and magnify him for ever. For as there
was never such a sorrow as he has endured for us, so is there no such love as
he has to us, and in his mercy does ever show us. When he came first into
the world, he came as an infant, to show us the mildenes of his love in
further years: he came as a doctor in the wisdom of his love, to teach us the
way unto eternal life, in the virtue of his love: he came as a Physician to
cure us of all diseases: in the power of his love, he came like himself as a
God to drive out the Devils from us: and in the meekenes of his love, came as a
Lamb to be sacrifised for us: and in the care of his love, at the right hand
of his father, is now a Mediator for us, and in the glory of his love, into
the possession of our inheritance, that he has purchased for us: will receive
us: oh mild! oh wise! oh virtuous! oh powerful! oh meek! oh careful! oh
glorious love! who can think of this love, and in the true glory of true
love, cannot most truly say, there was never such love! no, as Non est dolor
sicut eius, so Non est Amor sicut eius. And thus much touching the
consideration of the love God.

The fifth consideration of the mercy of God.
IN this admirable virtue of the love of God, I find the great and gracious
work of his mercy toward man, which Considering the wickedness of our
nature, and the woefulness of our estate, is necessary to be considered: for so
far had the temtation of the Diuill poisoned the heart of man, as through the
sin of pride, sought not only to drive him out of Paradise, but (in as much
as he might) to throw him down into hell, when the Angel of his wrath was
sent to give him punishment, yet wrought his mercy so with his Justice, as
saved him from perdition: yea, though he cursed the earth for the sins of his
creature, yet he blessed his labor with the fruit of his patience, and
reserved for his belief a joy in his mercy: Look through the whole course of
the Scripture, how his mercy ever wrought with his Justice, yea, and as it
were had oftentimes the upper hand of it: as in the time of Noah, when sin
had made as it were the whole world hateful in his sight, that he said within
himself he repented that he had made man, yet in his mercy he made an Arc
to save Noah and his Children, yea, and of all living creatures, reserved some
for generation: in Sodom and Gomora he saved Lot and his Daughters: and yet
Adam deserved nothing but destruction for his disobedience. Noah deserved no
grace for his drunkenness, not Lot any favor for his Incest, and yet mercy so
wrought with justice, that God not only for gave their sins, but blessed their
repentance: such has enerbene, is, and ever will be the mercy of God unto
man, as so far does mit^igate the fury of his justice, as reserueth comfort
for the penitent. Oh how sweet are the reports and proofs of the mercy of
god unto man in all the world! For is it not written by the Prophet David, Psa.
145. verse. 9. His mercy is over al his works? And again, speaking of his mercy,
Ps. 103. 13 As a father pittieth his own Children, so is the Lord merciful
unto all that fear him, and in Psa. 103. verse 12. As far as the East is from
the west, so far has he set our sins from us: and in the 136. Psalm, through
every verse, speaking to all his works, both in heaven and earth, he uses
these words. Bless him and praise him, for his mercy endures for ever. In
mercy he turned his wrath from ye Israelits when Moses stood in the gap: in
mercy he saved Moses floating in the reeds: in mercy he preserved the
children in the surnace of fire: in mercy he preserved the the Israelites
from the host of Pharaoh: in mercy he preserved David, and delivered him from
all his troubles: in mercy he delivered Joseph from the pit and the prison: in
mercy he sent* his Prophets to warn the world of their wickedness, and to
pronounce comfort to the penitent: in mercy he sent John Baptist, to deliver
the tidings of salvation: and in mercy he sent his only Son Jesus Christ
to be a Savior of all his people: Oh infinite mercy, worthy of infinite
glory! Consider again how powerful is his mercy in all his works, to feed
five thousand people with a few Loaves and Fishes, and with the fragments to
fill more baskets then the Loaves when they were whole: to heal the disseased
that touch ed but the hem of his garment: to give sight to the blind,
knowledge to the simple, health to the sick, soundness to the lame, comfort
to the penitent: to drive the Devils from the possessed: to give life to the
dead, and joy to the faithful.

These words of glorious mercy, does the most gracious and glorious word of
truth plainly and truly lay before us, to make us with the holy Prophets
justly say: Oh the infinite light and bottomless depth of the mercies of our
God! Glory be to the Lord, for his mercy indureth for ever.

Again, how absolute he is in his mercy, where he says, I will have mercy,
where I will have mercy, and therefore be free both in his power and will,
has mercy for all that will humblye and faithfullye call upon him: and
again, all are under sin, that all may come to mercy: Oh how all glorious
is that mercy which is extended over all!

Let us therefore look a little into the blindness of man, in the
immagination of his own merit, of the mercy of the living God, which is
only a fruit or effect of grace, or free gift of his only glorious love.
How did Adam merit mercy, when he fled from his presence? What merited Moses
when he angered the Lord? What merrited Noah when he was drunkens? What
merrited Lot when he committed Incest? What merited the Israelites with their
goulden Call? What merited David when he committed murder and adultery?

Again, what merited Mary Magdalen that had seven Devils within her? what
merited Paul that persecuted Christ in his people? what merited Peter that
denied his master? and what merited the world to work ye death of the Son of
God? all and every one (in the judgment of Justice) nothing but damnation.
Look the^ into the inexplicable glory of ye mercy of God, which not only
forgave all these, but saved all, and blessed all, and so will ever, al those
whom and whersoeuer, that ashamed are of their sins, and confessing their
merit of nothing but wrath and destruction, in the humble faith of repentance,
fly only to the mercy of God in the merit of Christ Jesus for their
salvation. Oh the powerful mercy in the love of God, that will not suffer his
Justice to execute his wrath upon sin! and though such be the pure and
glorious brightness of his grace, as cannot endure the foul and filthy object
of sin, yet does his mercy so rule the power of his wrath, as will not let
him destroy the sinner with his sin: many are the afflictions that he
lays upon his belooued: many are the corrections that he uses to his
Children: many are the sorrows that he inflicteth upon his Elect, but all
is for sin) in the love of a Father, in the care of a Master, and mercy of a
God) as only means to purge them of those evils that are hinder ances to
their good; and being healed of their corruption, to bring them to their first,
and a far better perfection. For in the correction of mercy, is the sinner
saved from destruction; and by the regeneration of grace, brought to eternal
salvation: Oh the virtuous, gracious, and glorious nature of mercy, which has
such power with God in the preservation of his people! It keekeepeth the fire
that it fall not from heaven to consume us: it keeps the water that it rises
not to drown us: it keeps the air that it does not infect us: and keeps ye
earth that it does not swallow us: it keeps us in peace that discention do
not spoil us: it keeps us in plenty that want do not pinch us: it keeps
us in love that malice cannot hurt us: and keeps us to God that the Devil
cannot confound us.

In sum, it is a gift of grace, a work of glory, a bounty in God, and a
blessing to man, to speak of these days wherein we live, and of the late times
which we cannot forget: Let us a little consider the mercies of God toward us,
how often were we preserved from foreign enemies by Sea, and civil or uncivil
enemies at home; when not the policy of man, but the only mercy of god did
break the forces of the one, and reveal the devises of the other? And while
our Neighbor Countries by continual wars have shed a world of blood, we have
been preserved in increase of people: and while they have bin mourning in the
punnishme^t of sin, we have been singing in the joy of grace: oh how are
we bound to give glory unto God for the abundance of his mercy, and say
with the Prophet David, Psalm. 136. verse. 26, Great is the God of Heaven, for
his mercy endures for ever. But as I said of love, the life of mercy; so of
mercy the glory of love: since it is so infinite in goodness, as exceeds in
worthiness the height of all praise that the heart of man can think, or the
tongue of man can express, I will only say with the Prophet, Psalm. 106.
verse. 1. to all powers whatsoever. Bless ye the Lord and praise him, for his
mercy endures for ever.

And thus much touching the consideration of the mercy of God.

The sixth consideration of the grace of God.
IN the mercy of God, finding so great a measure of his grace as in the bounty
of his goodness deserves no little glory, I cannot but with admiration speak
of that grace, that through his love made him have such a favor unto man, as
to elect him to his love, to frame him to his image, to inspire him with his
spirit, to instruct him in his word, to defend him with his power, to preserve
him in his mercy: to dye for him in his love, and to receive him to glory:
all these and what ever other good we receive, either through the love or
mercy of God, are free gifts of his grace, and not for any merit in man, How
can this beam of glorious brightness be beheld with the cies of humility, but
that the soul would be ravished with the contemplation thereof? and say with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 103. verse. 8. Gracious is the Lord, and merciful, long
suffering, and of great goodness. Furthermore, of so great effect in the
working of comfort in the hearts of the faithful, is this virtue of grace in
God, that we find the writings of the Apostles in their Epistles, commonly
to begin with this word Grace: Grace, mercy and peace from our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ: As if from grace came mercy, and from mercy peace. Oh
consider the works of grace, our election out of a special favor: our
creation out of a gracious wisdom: our vocation out of a gracious kindenes:
our sanctification out of a gracious holiness: our justification out of a
gracious merit: our redemption out of a gracious love, and our glorification
out of a gracious mercy. So that still we see that grace works in all things
to the only glory of God, in whom it works to the good of man. Oh how
sweet a salutation was delivered to the blessed Virgin Mary by the Angel
Gabriell, Hail Mary full of grace, God is with thee. So that if God be with
any soul, it is full of grace, and where the fulness of grace is, there is
surely God: but as it is written of Christ Jesus, Psalm. 45. verse. 7. That he
was anointed with the Oil of Grace above his fellows, So may we well say of
the Grace of God, it is so excellent in working to the Glory of God, that as
it is infinite in goodness, so must it have the same measure in glory, I say,
to be glorified above all things. Note a little the varieties of the guiftes of
this grace of God unto his servants: Moses he made a leader of his people,
and gave him the tables of the law: to Abraham he gave the blessing that should
follow in his seed: in Isaac shall the seed be called: at the prayer of
Eliah, he sent rain after a long drought: to David he gave a kingdom, and a
treasure more worth then many kingdoms, the enlightening knowledge of his holy
love, the spirit of prophecy, the confession of sin, the repentance of
offense, the passion of true patience, the constancy of faith, and the
humility of love. To Solomon he gave especial wisdom to sit in the Throane of
judgment with the greatest majesty and wealth of any earthlye creature in the
world, To the blessed Virgin Marie he gave the fullness of grace, in the
conception of his only Son; but to him he gave that grace that filled heaven
and earth with his glory.

Let us then consider not only the virtue, goodness and glory of grace, but
with all, the height and glory thereof; which being only in Jesus Christ our
only Lord and Savior, let us in him only behold the sum and substance,
the beauty and brightness, the goodness and glory thereof, and forsaking
our selves in the shame of our sins, only fly to his mercy for the comfort
of those blessings, that receiving only from him, may make us give all honor
and glory to him.

And so much for consideration upon the grace of God.

The seventh consideration of the glory of God.
Having thus considered of the greatness, the goodness, the wisdom, the love, the
mercy and grace of God toward man, I cannot but find in this good God, an
admirable glory, who containing all these excellencies in himself, and being
indeed the very essence of the same, does in the virtue of his bounty,
appear so gracious unto this people: But since to speak or think of the
glory of God, or the least part thereof, is ^o far above the reach of the
power of reason, as in all confession must be only left to admiration: Let me
only say with the Apostle, Glory only belongs unto the Lord, in his presence
so glorious is his brightness as nothing can see him and live: and therefore
in a bush of fire he spoke, but not apeared unto Moses: upon the mount in a
cloud and a pillar went before his people in the wilderness: was as it were
enclosed in the Arc; in an Angel did appear unto his Prophets, and in his
Son Jesus Christ, so far as he would and might be seen to his Apostles and
Disciples, but for his glory, his divine essence cannot be seen of any but
himself, verified by his own word, John 1. chap. verse 18. No man has seen
the Father but he that came from the Father, even the Son of man that has
revealed him: and again, verse 28 I came from the Father, and I go to the
Father, for the Father and I am one, with his glory he fills both heaven and
earth, as it is written, Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty of thy glory:
and again, in the Psalm 19. verse 1. The heavens declare the glory of God,
and the firmament shows his handy work, his works speak of his glory, his
Saints write of his glory, his Angels sing of his glory, and all powers
do acknowledge his glory.

It is higher then the Heavens, larger then the Earth, deeper then the Sea,
purer then the fire, cleerer then the sky, brighter then the Sun: The power
of strength, the life of Love, the virtue of mercy, the beauty of grace, the
honor of Wisdom, and the Essence of Majesty: The Angels tremble before it,
the Saints fall at the feet of it, the Prophets behold it a far off, and
the souls of the elected do adore it: and being then so far above the power
of man, to come nearer the thought of it: How can the heart of man but in
admiration speak of it? it lives in the wisdom of the wise, in the virtue of
the valyant, in the liberality of the Charitable, in the patience of the
Temperate, in the virginity of the chaste, in the constancye of the faithful,
in the humilitye of the loving, and in the truth of the Religious: it dyrects
the will of the Trinity in the unity of the Deity: it commaundes the service
of the Angels, it blesses the prayers of the Saints, it pardons the sins
of the repentant, it prospers the labors of the virtuous, and loves the
souls of the righteous: in sum, it is the Majesty of Majesty's, the power
of powers, the virtue of virtues, the grace of graces, the honor of honors,
the Treasure of treasures, the Blessing of blessings, and the being of beings:
and in all effects so near unto God himself, that as he is in his glory
incomprehensible, so is the same for the infinite perfection of all worthiness
inexplicable; it drove out of Paradise the disobediente to the comaund of it;
it made the earth swallowe the murmurers against the will of it; it sent fire
from heaven, to consume the Captains that came against the servant of it; it
divided the Sea to make a walk for the chosen of it; it made the same Sea to
drown the host of the enemies of it; it sent destruction upon the Cities that
wrought abomination in the sight of it; it drowned the world for sinning
against it; and has cursed the Jews for the death of the beloved of it: in
sum, it is in all so far beyond all that can be said or thought of it, in
the infinitenes of excelle^ce, that in humility of adoration I will leave it
to the service of the wise, the love of the virtuous, the honor of the
blessed, and the admiration of all.

And thus much for consideration of the glory of God.

The second part of consideration concerning man: and first touching the
weakness or smallness of man.
Having now set down a few notes touching the necessary consideration of the
greatness, goodness, wisdom, love, mercy, grace and glory of God, Let me a
little speak of the contrarieties in man, in mine opinion not unnecessary to
be considered: and first, of the weakness or smallness of man: First of his
smallenesse touching the substance of his creation, it was of the slime of the
earth, then what could be less, or of less force, quantitye or esteem? Next
for the substance of generation, what was man before the meeting of his
Parents? not so much as a thought, then which nothing could be less, then by
the effect of consent, What was his substance? as in his creation a matter of
like moment, the quantity not great, and the force little, contained in a
little room: bred up in darkness with pain and sorrow, fed by the nauil^
without use of sense or member. Then come into the world, is in quantity
little, in strength mere weakness, naked and feeble like anowne adjective that
cannot stand alone, cries for it knows not what, either pain that it cannot
express, or for want of that it cannot ask for: Now continuing long time in
this weakness, being come to further years, what does it find but it own
imbecillitie, desiring that it cannot have, beholding that it cannot compre
hend, and enduring that it cannot help.

Subject to sin, by the corruption of nature, by temptation of the flesh, by
the enchantment of the world, and the iclousnesse of the Devil: subject to
the burning of the fire, to the drowning of the water, to the infection of the
air, to the swallowing of the earth: subject to sickness, subject to care, to
sorrow, to want, to wrong, to oppression, to penurye, to ignorance, to
presumption, to tyranye, to death: so unable to defend himself, that a flea
will byte him, a fly will blind him, a worm will wound him, and a gnat will
choke him.

And for his senses, his hearing may grieve him, his sight may annoye him, his
speech may hurt him, his feeling may distemper him, his smelling may infect
him, and his tasting may kill him: in sum, poor thing proud of nothing, come
of little better then nothing, and shall return to (almost) as little a^
nothing: must hunger, must thirst, must labor, must sleep, must loose the
use of his senses, and commit himself to trust: must wax old, must die,
cannot choose, has no power to withstand any of these: and though he have the
command of creatures, is but himself a creature, and can no longer live then
to the will of the Creator: sees the Sun, cannot behold the brightness:
hears the winds, knows not whence they blow: feels the air, knows not
how to lay hold of it: sees the fire, dares not touch it: sees a world of
earth, but possesses little of it, perhaps none of it: looks at Heaven, but
cannot come at it: and in sum, as a substance of nothing, or if any thing,
like a Clock, that no longer moves then by the will of the Clockemaker: So
no longer man then in the will of his maker: what shall this little, weak,
small creature think, when he shall in the glass of true sense behold the
object of himself, and then think upon the greatness of his God, in whom not
only himself but all creatures in heaven and earth have their being, and
without him have no being? in how little a compass himself, withal his is
contained, while such is the greatness of his God, as fills heaven and earth
with his glory; who comprehends all things, not comprehended in any, nor all;
but above all in himself, in the infinitenes of himself. Oh poor man what
can thou do, but with Job lay thy finger on thy mouth, and say: I have
spoken once and twice, but I will speak no more: I thought I was something,
but I see I am nothing, at least so little a thing, as in it self is nothing:
My righteousness is as a filthy cloth, my strength is Weakness, my days as a
shaddowe, my life but a spanne, and my substance so small, as but in thee my God
is as nothing or worse then nothing at al: thus I say will thou say when
beholding the least of gods creatures, thou shall consider thine own
smalnesse; and looking on the one and the other with the Prophet David, say in
the admiration of his glorious goodness, Psalm 8. verse. 4. O God what is man
that thou do vouchsafe to look upon him?

And thus much touching the smalnesse or weakness of man.

The second Consideration, touching the vileness or wickedness of man.
NOw I have a little spoken of this smalnesse or small strength of man, a thing
doubtless most necessary for every man to think upon, least finding his
greatness in command over the creatures of the earth, he forget the Creator
both of heaven and earth, and al things in the same: so let me tell him, that
finding his smalnes to be so great, and his greatness to be so small, as makes
him nothing more then in the will of the Almighty, he must withal look into
the vileness of his nature, in ye wilful offending of his most good and
glorious God* for in his first offense, how much did he show the vile wickedness
or wicked vileness of his condition, in forgeting the goodness of his God, in
framing him of so vile a matter as ye slime of the earth, a living creture to
his own glorious image? then to pla^t him in Paradise, a place of so much
pleasure, to give him so large a possession, as of al his ground, his fruit,
yea and command of al his creatures upon the earth: thus not like a Lord, but
like himself Lord of Lords, to give him a world of earth, and there only to
except one Tree, with a sharp warning of death, in the touching of the same,
when neither his love in his creation, his bounty in his possession, nor his
care in his command regarded, but either carelessly forgotten, or wilfully
disobeyed: Oh what greater vileness could be showed then in such unthankfulness?
and what greater greater wickedness, then to shake hands with the Devil, to
offend the God of so much goodness? but more to make him blush at his own
shame, in beholding the foulness of his abominable filthynesse, let man in
the glass of truth see the leprosy of his soul, by the infection of sin.

Pride has defiled humility, covetousness charity, lechery chastity,
wrath patience, sloth labor, envy love, and murder pity: so that whereas
man was before in these virtues a creature of Gods love, and in whose presence
he took pleasure, now through these vices is he become a most vglye and
hateful creature in the sight of the Creator: what Peacock more proud of his
tail then man is of his trumpery? what Tiger is more cruel to any beast,
then one man to another? what Goat more lecherous then the licentious
Libertins? what Dog more covetous in hiding of meat, then the dogged miser
in hoording up of money? what Snake more venomous then the tongue of the
envious? and what Dormouse so sleepie as the slothful Epicure?

Consider then if there be a vile nature in any of these, how much more vile
is man, that has the condition of all these?

Oh should a man have his Image or proportion drawn according to his
condition, how monstrous would he find himself? with a Tigers head, a Goats
bearde, a Snakes tongue, a hogs belly, a Dormouse cie, and a Bears hand: But let
the Image go, and look into the vileness of man, and see if it be not such as
passes the power of description: when God is forgotten, the Devil shall be
remembered; when grace is forsaken, sin shall be entertained; and when Christ
shall be crucified, Judas shall be monyed.

A Dog will fawn on his master, Oh how much worse then a Dog was man that
was the death of his master? an Elephant is a monstrous beast, and yet is
pitiful to man, and will lead him out of the wilderness: but man more monstrous
then any beast, will lead man into wickedness: the Goat has his time, wherein
to show the heat of his nature, but man spares no time to follow the
filthiness of his lust: the Dog will be satisfied with a little that he
has hidden, but the usurer is never satisfied till he be choked with his
Gold: the Lion will not pray upon the blood of a Lamb, when the murderer
will not spare the blood of the infant: the Ante will work for provision for
his food, while the Epicure will burst in the bed of his ease.

See then (oh man) the vile substance of thy condition, whereby, of the best
creature in thy creation thou art become the worst in thy corruption: and
therefore looking on the goodness of thy God, and the vileness of thy self,
Thou may well say with Peter: Luke chap. 5. verse 8. Lord come not near
me, for I am a poluted creature, and with the Prophet David, Psa 44. ver. 16.
Shame has covered my face, yea and beholding the leprosy of thy soul by the
spots of thy sin, stand without the gates of grace, that the Angels may
not abhor thee, nor the Saints be infected by thee, till thy heavenly
Physician with the Blood of the Lamb have cured thee of thy corruption: Look
I say (oh vile man) upon the wickedness of thy will, to offend thy good God,
to be a servant to sin, the ruin of thy self, and the plague of thy
posterity.

In thy riches see the rust of coueteousnesse; in thy pride see the fall of
Lucifer; in thy lechery see the fire of lust; in thy wrath see the blood of
murder; in thy sloth see the filth of dross: and thus beholding thy
besmeered soul, see if thou can see so vile a creature, vile in
unthankfulness, vile in haughtines, vile in coueteousnes, vile in sloathfulnes,
vile in furiousnes, vile in filthiness, and so vile, in all vileness.

Thus I say look into thy self, and see what thou art, and if such thou be
not, think of the greatness of the goodness in thy God, that by the virtue of his
power in the mercy of his love, has healed thee of thy sin, and made thee
fit for his service, which till thou find in thy self, think there is not
so vile a creature as thy self.

And thus much touching the vileness or wickedness of man.

The third Consideration, touching the folly or Ignorance of man.
THe smalnesse and vileness of man thus considered, we are now to look a little
upon the folly or ignorance of man, not a little needful with the precede^ts
and what shall follow to be considered: First, to the first point of folly;
could there be a greater folly thought upon, then to lose the benefit of
Paradise, for the bit of an Apple, for touching one tree to loose all, to loose
the pleasure of ease, to labor for food, to forget god, to liste^ to women, to
distrust God and to believe the Devil; to loose the beauty of perfection, for
the foulness of corruption; and as much as in him lay, to leave heaven for
hell: are not these (without comparison) so high points in ignorance, as make
a full point in folly? But leaving the first folly of the first offender, Oh
what a swarm of follyes has this ignorance begotten in the world? which like
Snakes in a Bee-hiue, sting the takers of misstaken honey? what a folly is it in
man to worship a golden calfe, which at the hour of his death, can give his
body no breath, but in the time of his life, may hasten his soul into hell?
For example read, the history of Dives, and see the fruit of such a folly.

Again, what a follye is it for man to make an Idol of his fancy, when
Sampson with his Dalila may show the fruit of wantonness? Again, what a
folly it is to execute the vengeance of wrath, Let the murder of Cain speak
in the blood of his brother Abell: what a folly is envy, let the swallowing of
Coran, Datha^ and Abiram speak in their murmering against Moses: what a folly
is pride, look in the fall of Lucifer: But as there are many great follyes in
the world, so there are many and great fools; but above all, one most great
fool which we may justly call fool by the word of God, Psalm 53. verse 1.
The fool has said in his heart, there is no God: This fool do I hold the
fool of al fools, who has been so long with the Devil that he has forgotten
God, for he is more fool then the Devil, who will acknowledge God, tremble at
his Majesty, and be obedient to his command; and therefore I may well say,
that he is not only a deuilish fool, but worse then a Devil fool, and so the
fool of al fools: Now to speak of follyes in particular, nor of a number of
Idle fools, such as when they are gay, think they are rich, or when they can
prate they are wise, or when they are proud they are noble, or when they are
prodigal they are liberal, or when they are miserable they are thriftie, or
when they can swagger they are valiant, and when they are rich they are honest:

These and a world of such idle fools, least I should be thought too much a
fool, for standing too much upon the fool, I leave further to talk of, and
hoping that the wise will confess, that all the wisdom of the world is
foolishness before God; and therefore man finding in himself so little touch
of true wisdom, as may make him then confess all the wit he has to be but
mere foolishness without the grace of God, in the direction thereof. I will
leave what I have written unjustly to the correction of the wise, and for the
unwise, to the amendment of their indiscretion: and thus much touching the
consideration of the folly of man.

The fourth Consideration, touching malice or hate in man.
NOw having spoken mine oppinion, touching the foolishnes of man, I find that
follye or ignorance of better judgment, to have begotten in him a kind of
malice or hate, as it were opposite or contrary to the love of God, or at the
least contrary to that love which God commands to be in man, where he
says: John chap. 13. verse 34. Love one another as I have loved you: for in
some wicked people it is too apparent, which I may rather term Devils then
men, those Atheistical villains, that if they have not their wills will not
only murmr against God, but with Jobs wife seem to curse God; and with the
Devil blaspheme God: may not these justly be called the reprobate, that but
looking toward heaven, dare stir up athought against the glory thereof: and
being themselves but earth, dare move against the Great or of heaven and earth.

Oh how has the Devil had power with man, so to poison his soul with the
venom of temptation, as by the power of the corruption, to bring him to
etrrnall confusion? but as the Devil through his malice at the greatness of
God, was cast down from Heaven, so has he ever since and during his time
will, by the same poison, in as much as he can, keep man from Heaven: but
leaving to speak of the ungracious, ungrateful and malicious nature in some
man toward God, most grievous to be spoken of: let me come to ye malice or
hate of man to man, when there were but two brethren in the world Cain and
Abel, one so maliced another, that he sought his death, and not for the hurt he
did him, but for that God was pleased in his brother, and not in him: Oh
pestiferous poison, to wound the soul unto eternal death! Genesis chap. 4. ver.
8. what need I to allege examples, either in the book of God, or words of
books in the world, touching that vile and hellish nature or humor of malice
in the corrupted nature of man, when it is daily seen eue^ almost in all
kingdo^es, Countries, Cities, and Towns, to be an occasion of civil discord,
yea and sometime of great and long wars, to the utter spoil of many a
common wealth: do not we see even sometime before our eyes, how many are
hated even for the good that is in them? and for the good that they intend to
them that hate them? when a wise man reprooueth a fool of his folly, will not
the fool hate him for being wiser then himself, or for telling him of his
folly? yea, will he not carry it in mind many a day, and work him a mischief
if he can, for his good, and as the Jews did with Christ, put him to death
for teaching them the way of life, hate him for his love, and kill him for his
comfort? Oh malicious nature in the heart of man! if the law give land to
the right heir, will not the wrong possessor hate both the heir for his
right, and the law for giving it him, though himself would be glad if the
case were his own to have it so? if two freindes be suitors for one fortune,
if the one carry it, is it not often seen, that the other will hate him for
it? yea, of a friend become a foe, for enioyning that he should ever have had
if the other had missed it? is it not often seen that upon a humor of ielouzie
a man will hate his wife, and the wife her husband, the son the father, and
the mother the daughter, brother and sister, neighbor and neighbor, and al one
another sometimes for a tryfle, and that with such a fire of malice, as is
almost unquenchable. Oh how too full are the Chronicles of the world, of the
horrible and miserable Tragedies, that have proceeded out of that hellish
spirit of malice, that has spit her poison through the hearts of a great part
of the whole world, to the destruction of a world of the inhabitans therein?

Let me a little speak of this wicked spirit, and how it wrought the fall of
Lucifer from Heaven (through his malice) at the Majesty of the Almighty:
again, being fallen from Heaven, how it wrought in him the fall of Adam,
envying his blessed happiness in Paradise, and therefore by temptation, sought
in as much as he could, his destruction: In Cain it wrought an unnatural
hatred to the death of Abell: in Esawe it wrought an unbrotherly hatred to the
great fear of Jacob: in Pharaoh it wrought an unkindly hatred to the poor
Isralites, because they throue by their labors under him and increased in his
kingdom: it wrough a hate in the children of Jacob to their brother Joseph,
because their father loved him in breife, you shall find in the whole
Scripture the hate of the wicked unto the godly, because God blesses them: and
as in the divine writ, even in these our days, do we not see the good ha ted
of the evil? which being the spirit of so much wickedness, as works so
much mischief, what does it differ from the Devil? Truly I think I may well
say, that as it is written, God is charity and he that dwells in charity
dwells in God, and God in him: so contrarily the Devil is malice and he
taht dwells in malice dwells in the Devil, and the Diuill in hlm: But
where God enters with his grace, the Devil has no power with his malice,
and though he drove Adam out of Paradise, yet he could not keep him out of
Heaven: and therefore of greater power is the mercy of God, then the malice of
the Devil: but seeing such is the vile nature of malice, as does figure
nothing more truly then the Devil, let no man that can truly judge of it, but
hate it as the Devil, which makes a man, in whom it is hateful unto God,
wicked unto man, thrown down out of Heaven, and cast into hell, from which
God of his mercy bless all his servants for evermore: and thus much touching
the consideration of the hate or malice in man.

The fifth Consideration of the cruelty in man.
NOw as it is evident by too many proofs, that one evil begets another, so
in this it appears that from the hate or malice of man, proceeds the
cruelty or tyranny executed upon man: for what beast in the world was ever
found so tyrannous unto another, as one man has been to another? yea such a
power has tyranny in the hearts of some men, as has been the spoil and
death of many a thousand: what tyranny did the Jews show in the crucifiing
of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, which did proceed, not out of any desert
in him (who deserved all love and honor of all people) but out of a malicious
humor yfused into their souls by the power of the wicked find? examples of
this vile and pestilent humor, not only the books of God, as well in the old
as the new Testament, as in many lamentable histories extant to the whole
world, is too full of the persecution of the Prophets and the chosen people of
God, by the wicked and unbelieving Princes, and people of the world; some
their eyes put out, other their tongues cut out, some broyled upon hott Iron,
other boiled in skalding lead: some torn in pieces with horses, some flead
quick, some starued to death, other tortured with unspeakable torments, in
some for the displeasure conceived of some one, how many thousands have
suffered either death, or undoing, or both: when whole howses, whole Cities,
yea and almost whole Kingdoms, by the bloody execution of tyrany, have been
brought almost to utter confusion: a Lion when he has licked his lips after
warm blood, returns to his den and takes his rest: the Dog if he fight with
his match, if he run away from him, and cry, he seldom pursues him, and if
he kill him, he leaves him, and as it were mourning goes from him, that he
has been the death of him: and so of many other beasts, Wolves, Tygres, and
such like death, or flight satisfies their cruelty: But man more feirce then
the Lyo^, more bloody then the Wolf, more tyranous then the Tygre, and more
dogged then the Dog, will never be satisfied, till he see the death and seek
the ruin of the father, child, wife, and servant, kindred and generation, and
never takes rest through fear of revenge, so that he is not only tyranous
unto other, but through the vexatio^ of his spirit, is become even a torment
unto himself, while fear and wrath keep him in continual perplexities: Oh
how vnaturall, how monstrous in this horrible disposition have many been in the
world, some murdering their own children, yea in the time of their infancy,
some their parents, some their brethren, some their Princes, some their
Prophets, some their masters, some their servants? what cruelty, yea more
then in any beast, will many such a one show to another in pride, malice,
orrevenge? the examples whereof the world is every day too full of: what Butcher
can more cruelly tear in pieces the limbs of a beast, then one man in his
malice will the very heart of another? what scourges, what terrors, what
tortures and what vnhumaine kind of mortal punishments, has man devised for
man no less intolerable then inexplicable? in some the cries, the blood, the
sorrows, the miseries of the murdered, the imprisoned, the afflicted, and the
distressed, through the oppression of pride, and the tyranny of wrath, may
very well even from Abell to Christ, and from him to the worlds end,
sufficiently conclude the condemnation of man, for the greatest tyrant in the
world.

And thus much touching the consideration of the cruelty or tyranny in man.

The sixth Consideration of the baseness of man.
Having now spoken of the smalnesse, the vileness, the foolishness, the hate,
and the cruelty in man, let me a little show him the baseness of his
condition, in going from that nature of grace wherein he was created, unto that
horror of sin by which he is confounded-God in his gracious nature made him
like unto himself in holiness, pureness, and righteousness, and through
these graces, amiable in his sight, sociable for his Angels, and coheire with
his blessed Son in the paradise of the soul: what greater title of honor,
then to wear a Crown? what Crown so rich as of grace? what grace so high as
in Heaven? and what glory so great as to be gracious in the sight of God: all
which was man? (through grace) assured of, and through the lack, carlesse,
whereof, has not only lost all, but through sin is become ugly in the sight
of God, banished the court of Heaven, and through the drossy love of the
world become a slave to the Devil in hell. What baseness can be more then
man by sin has thus drawn upon himself? who while he should look toward
Heaven, is digging in the earth, while he should think upon Heaven is puzzled
in the world, and while he should be soaring toward Heaven, is sinking into
hell: Oh base wretch, that seeing the shameful nature of sin, will yet so be
meire his soul with the filth thereof, that of the best and noblest creature,
he becomes the worst and most base of all other. Will the Spaniels leave
their master to carry the tinkers budget? will the horse leave the warlike
rider to draw in a carte? and will man leave the King of Heaven to serve a
slave in hell?

Oh baseness of all baseness! in Heaven is man a companion for the Saints, the
virgins, the martyrs and the Angels: In hell for the fiends, ougly spirits,
and horrible Devils.

And is not he of a base spirit, that will leave the heavenly for the hellish
company? fie upon the baseness of man, that by sin will be brought unto so
base a nature: there is no place so base as hell, which is called the
bottomless pit, the receptacle of all filthiness, the cave of the accursed,
the den of the desperate, the habitation of the reprobate, the horror of
nature, the terror of reason, the torment of sin, the misery of time, the
night of darkness, and the endless torture, where Serpents, Dragons,
Night-rauens, and Shrichowles, make the best music in the ears of the
damned; where all objects are so ougly, all substances so filthy, all voices so
frightfull, all torments so continual, all pains so pitiles, all care so
comfortles, and all hurt so helpless, that if a man through sin were not
worse then a beast, he would not show more baseness then in the most beastly
nature of the most beastly creature: what shall I say? such is the baseness of
sin in the imbasing of our spirits, and so base are our spirits in the
yielding to the baseness of sin, that I must conclude with the Prophet David
(thinking of the glory of God, and the baseness of man) Oh what is man that
thou O God wilt vouchsafe to look upon him? And so much in breife touching the
consideration of the baseness of man.

The seventh Consideration touching the ignominy or defame of man.
IT is an old proverb (and too often true) that he who has an evil name is
half hanged: and surely that man that delights in sin, by the name of a
reprobate, is more then half damned before he come in hell, to be called a
villain is a name of great infamy, and does not sin make a man a villain to
God? to be called a Dog is most hateful to man, and is not man called a
hellhound by the hate of his sin? would not man be loath to be termed a
Serpent, and has not sin made man become of a Serpent like nature?

Oh the filth of sin, how has it fouled, and defiled the nature of man? the
utter infamy of his name, the election of love, the Image of God? the Lord of
the best of creatures, to become the hated of grace, the substance of dross,
the worste of creatures, and the slave of hell? what a shame is this to man (by
sin) to fall into so foul an infamy?

Is it not a name of great disgrace to be called a disobedient Son or a
faithless feruant? a rebellious subject, or unthankful freinde? an unkind
brother, and an unnatural child? and is not man by sin become all this unto
God? to be stubborn to so loving a Father, false to so good a master,
rebellious to so gracious a King, unkind to so kind a brother, and
unthankful to so bountiful a Lord? it is a shame to live to bear the just
blotts of such blames: one of these faults were enough, but altogether, are too
too much.

The Dog will follow his master, the Horse will carry his master, and will
man run from his master? the Ox knows his stall, and the Ass his cribbe,
and shall not man know his place of rest after his labors? then more vile then
the Dog, more unkind then the Horse, more foolish then either Ox or Ass.

Fie what an infamy is this unto man? a servant to entertain his master
unkindly, to use him villanously, and to kill him shamefully, were not this a
horrible infamy, and did not the Jews so with Christ? to forget a kindness,
to distruste a truth, and to abuse a blessing? is not he infamous that does so,
and what sinner but does so? so that still I see infamy upon infamy* one
follows another by the venom of sin to the shame of man: to leave robes of
silk for rotten rags, sweet wine for puddle water, and a pleasant walk for
a filthy hole: what fool would do this, and does not sinful man do this?
leave the rich graces (the comely vestures of the soul) for the poor fading
pleasures of the flesh? the sweet water of life for the puddle watter of
death? the filthy pleasures of this world, and the comfortable way to Heaven,
for the miserable way to hell?

Oh wretched, blinded, senseless, and bewitched fool, that do suffer sin
so much to be-foole thy understanding!

Look I say what a name thou justly gettest, by yielding thy service unto
sin: a slave, a fool, a beast, a serpent, a monster, and of the best, the
worste creature in the world.

Loose the beauty wherein thou werte created, the honor wherewith thou werte
entitled, the riches whereof thou werte possessed, the liberty that thou
enioyedst, the love wherein thou liuedst, and the life wherein thou reioycedst;
to put on deformity in nature, baseness in civility, beggary in want of
grace, bondage in slavery, hate hate wherein thou die, and death wherein thou
art ever accursed; and all this through sin: who now could in the glass of
truth, behold this vglye obiecte of sin, and would gain himself so foul
an infamy, as to be called an object? through the love thereof, has not Cain
from the beginning, been justly called a murderer? Laban a cozener, Sampson a
fool, Achitophel a knave, Solomon an Idolator, Simon magus a sorcerer, Dives
an Epicure, and Judas a traitor, and the Devil a liar? and will thou (Oh man)
that read and beleeuest all this, be infected, nay delighted in all these
sins? to receive the name of a murderer, acozener, a fool, a knave, an
Idolator, a a sorcerer, a traitor, and a liar? Oh most hellish titles to set
out the flagge of infamye! which to avoid, seeing thy vildenes, and knowing
thy weakness, pray to thy God, the God of goodness, to draw thee from the
delight of wickedness, unto that delight of goodness, that may recover thy
credit lost, blot out the spots of thy shame in thy sin, and through the
dropps of the precious Blood of his dear beloved Son Jesus* to wash thee
clean from thyn^ iniquities, make thee capabl^ of his graces, thankful for
his blessings, and joyful in receiving the gracious name of his faithful
servant: And so much touching the consideration of the infamye orignominy of
man.

FINIS.
Conclusio.
TO conclude as a Chirurgian, that has received a wou^d, has many medicines
and salues, which well applied might give him ease, and restore him to health
(though he have knowledge how to make use of them) yet if he put not his
knowledge in practice, shall either languish or perish through want of help,
So in this woun^ of the soul made by sin whereas every man must* b^ under
God, his own Chirurgian and helper, Though he hear, read, believe, and
feel the goodness of God many ways, in his power, wisdom, love, grace, and
glorious mercy toward him, yet if he do not meditate upon the same
thankfully, consider and truly confess his unworthiness of the least part
thereof, he may either languish or pertish in the consuming pain of sin, or
despair of grace or mercy: Look then upon the greatness of God and the
smalnesse of man; the goodness of God, and the vileness of man; the wisdom of
God, and the folly of man; the love of God, and the hate of man; the grace of
God, and the disgrace of man; the mercy of God, and the tyranny of man; and the
glory of God, and the infamy of man: and fixing the eye of the heart upon the
one and the other, how can thou but to the glory of God, and shame of thy
self, with ablushing face, and tre^bling spirit, falling prostrate at the
feet of his mercy, in admiration of the greatness, kindness, and goodness, that
the Lord in his mercy has extended unto thee, but cry with the Prophet David,
Oh Lord what is man that thou do visit him?

Which comfortable visitation, when thou find in thy soul, acknowledge in
the greatness of his goodness, the wisdom of his love, and glory of his
mercy, that of so small, so vile, so foolish, so hateful, so tyranous, so
disgraceful, so infamous a creature, by the infection of sin, his glorious
majesty out of his mere mercy, will vouchsafe in the precious Blood of his
dear and only beloved Son Jesus Christ, to wash thee clean from thy
filthiness, admit thee into his prefence, take thee into his service, love
thee as his Son, and make thee coheire in that Heavenly inheritance, which no
power shall take from thee: but in joys everlasting with his Saints and
Angels, thou shall continually sing the true and due Halleluiah, to his holy
Majesty.

Thus I say, apply these spiritual considerations, to thy spiritual comforts,
that God may the better bless thee, thy reading well considered may the better
profit thee, and my labor may be the better bestowed upon thee: which with
prayer for thy good, leaving to thy best consideration wishing the
acknowledging the goodness of God in all things, above all things to give him
all glory, I end with the Prophet David* O al ye works of the Lord, bless ye
the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever.

Finis.
A Prayer.
O Most gracious, almighty, most merciful and holy, glorious and ever loving
GOD, who from the highest Throne of thy heavenly mercy, do vouchsafe to
behold the meanest creature on the earth! and above all, with a comfortable
eye of a fatherly kindness, do behold man as the chief matter of thy
workmanship! and considering since his first fall by temptation, his weakness in
resisting the like assault, do by the light of thy grace, make him see the
difference betwixt good and evil, and by the inspiration of thy holy spirit,
do lead him from the train of sin, the true way to eternal happiness:
glorious God, that know whereof we are made, that our days are but as a
shadow, and we are as nothing without thee, who has revealed to the simple,
and hid from the wise the secret wisdom of thy will, and to me thy most
unworthy servant have so often showed those fruits of thy love, that makes me
ashamed to think of my unthankfulness to thy holy Majesty, my forgetfulness
of thy grace, and unworthiness of thy mercy: Oh my Lord, when I consider these
things, with all other the manifold blessings that from time to time I have
received from the only bounty of thy blessed hand, what can I do but in
admiration of thy greatness and contemplation of thy goodness, give glory to
thy holy Majesty, and with thy chosen servant David in the grief and shame of
my sin, and only hope of thy mercy, in true contrition of heart, fall
prostrate at thy feet, and fly only to thy mercy for my comfort: beseeching
thee so to direct me in the ways of thy holy will, that seeing thy greatness in
thy good nes, and thy wisdom in thy love, thy grace in thy mercy, and thy
glory in thy grace; and confessing my weakness, vileness, folly, malice,
sloth, and baseness, attend the work of thy will, in working me to thy holy
will: give me power to consider, that although I read never so much, believe
all I read, and remember all I believe, yet without one drop of the deawe of
thy grace it will take no root in my heart: but good Lord consider the
corruption of nature through the infection of sin, in which I accuse, not
excuse my self unto thee: make me to know thy will, let me rather cry before
thee Hosanna, with the little Babes, then with the Pharisees make boast of my
righteousness, and as it has pleased thy holy Majesty to make me consider
of thy mercies, so let these considerations (by taking root in my heart) be so
comfortable to my soul, that loathing the world with all the vanities thereof, I
may in the tears of true penitence, show the sorrow of my sin, and in the joy
of thy mercy, I may sing to thy glory. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
First Consideration, Page 4 line 3 for look up the heavens, read look up to
the heavens.

The second Consideration page. 12. line 4. for God read good.

The last page of the third consideration, the tenth line, for divine read
dim.


