MARIE Magdalens Love.

AVT NVNC AVT NVNQVAM
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by John Danter: and are to be sold in Gracious street nere
Leaden Hall Gate.

Mary Magdalens Love. Upon the twenty Chapter of John, from the first verse to
the eighteenth.
Upon the first verse as fo^^oweth.
The Text.
Now the first day of the week came Mary Magdalen, early when it was yet dark
unto the Sepulcher, and saw the stone rolled away from the Tomb. Dearly
beloved in our Savior Christ: In this first verse I find four chief note^ to
be well marked, and kept in memory: First the person named, who it was, and
of what condition: Secondly, the time, Thirdly the place, and fourthly what
was there seen and done. The person was Marie a woman, and one that had bin a
great sinner, the time that she came, was the first day of the week in the
morning early, even when it was yet darcke: the place she went un o, was the
sepulcher, and the thin^ that she saw there was the stone rolled away from
the Tomb: now touching Marie let us note two especial causes of her coming,
love and sorrow, love that she bare him, and sorrow that she had for him. I
mean to live without him: who of many thousands are ignorant, that the
mistaken love indeed, which the wantons, and wretches of this world are to
much troubled with; will keep their wits waking, watching and continually
woorking for the accomplishment of a most wilful or rather woeful desire:
and if then the devil, by the permission of God, have such power to blind the
eyes, and charm the senses of humane creatures, with that lewd humor of
mistearmed love, how much more wary, effectual, and continual careful watch
does the love of God keep in the souls of his servants, longi^^ and looking,
both day and nig^^, and thinking no time too early or long, be it never so
long, so that at last they may come to the enjoying of their souls comfort: Let
us therefore consider a little what may be spoken of Mary's love: First that
she loved we cannot doubt, for it was spoken by the mouth of Christ himself
unto Simon. Luke, Chapter 7. Verse. 45. Many sins are forgiven her, for she
loved much* But mark now the nature of this good love what it wroght in her*
three excellent blessings, Constancy, Modesty, and Humility: Constancy in the
heart, Modesty in the mind, and Humility in the soul: but of these we will
speak more hereafter in their due places, and therefore touching the first
words from whence I gather my first notes, mark here what is said by the
^olye Evangelist, whom (...) ^ameth: Marie Magdalen, a vv^^^n, and one that had
been a great sinner: out of whom were cast out seven devils, but when the
foul spirits were gone, there came to her that good spirit, that in true
penitence found especial grace with her living Lord, not that she was then no
longer a sinner, but being a penitent sinner, she had obtained mercy.

Now you see, how Marie had been a great sinner, and received a great
forgiveness, which begat in her faith so great a Love, as brought forth great
fruits of repentance, and made of her as it were a new woman, turning her from
a sinful servant to the world, to a loving servant to Christ: as in these
words following shall appear.

Now early in the Morning the first day of the Week, came Mary Magdalen, he
says not the Disciples, but Mary Mag^^len: See here you blessed and
well-beloved of God, both men and women: What a sweet example of care she has
left for your comfort that will follow her, it is said here, she came the
first day of the week: An excellent note for good husbands and huswiues to
observe, not to ouerslippe their time, till the latter end of the Week, and
then perhaps also be either idle, or worse exercised, as I fear too many are
in these days: then another note of wisdom in the choosing of her work to
seek Christ: for begin the Week with him and thy work will thrive the
better, and continue the Week with him and thy wages will be the greater, and
never work but with him, and thou shall find thy labor will be the easier
by the unspeakable ^^mfort of thy reward. Many are (...) early, and down
late, as the ^^^fe about his robery, the covetous about his misery, the
adulterer about his villainy, and the Traitor about his ^reason, but alas Mary
had none of these thoughts in her head, she rose early to seek Christ, she
came early while it was yet dark: for as David the Psalmist says in his
hundred and thirty Psalm, and sixth verse. My soul waits on the Lord, more
than the Morning watch watches for the Morning: who then wilcome to Christ
must wait for him as David did; and seek for him as Marie did. Early in the
morning and the first day in the week and though it be dark, yet we must
watch till it be day, and then by Gods help we shall see that we look for:
Now let us speak a little more of Mary, she found her self a sinn^r, and
therefore unworthy to see her Savior any more, but yet her sins were
forgiven her and she desired to sin no more, and now did grace so woork in
her love, that feign she would see her Lord a little more: but alas her Lord
was dead, to other perhaps, but not to her, and see how faith wrought in her
affection, her heart had light before her eyes, she went through the dark and
came to the place ere it was day.

The devil watches in the light to lead his followers into darkness and shall
not we watch thorough darkness to seek Christ in the light? Judas watch all
day to betraye his Master in the night, but Mary watches all night to come to
her Master in the day: Oh sweet blessing of God where faith wrought love and
love duty, and all came together to bring Mary to Christ: and except with
these we follow her, we shall never come to him: but Mary was a woman, and
shall men follow women? why her happiness came from God, and shall not we follow
her to her happiness? but Mary was a sinner, and what flesh is righteous? and
Mary was repentant, and what more proof of election? and Mary loved Christ,
and what more joy in a Christian? now not offending men; let me thus far
speak in the commendation of godly women: if the first spoken off in the
scripture offended God; the last spoken off, looued Christ: If Heuah was an
accursed wife, Mary was a blessed virgin: If she were full of sin; Marie
was full of grace: If Eve was tempted by the devil, Mary was saluted by the
Angel: And if Eve bare a wicked Son Cain, Mary brought a blessed Son Christ:
now though this was not that Mary that bare Christ, yet this was she that
loved Christ, and for a world of such godly women as are lest examples to
their posterities and sex in all Ages: I would be loath to spend time in
recounting their names, which truly set down, might make a Cathalogue of
worthy memory: but I speak to all beloved men and women, think it no scorn
to follow Marie in her early rising to seek Christ: for to rise early is
wholesome for the body, and to walk to Christ is comfortable to the soul,
such exercise is better than any physic, and such a trauail brings the best
rest.

Now Mary came early in the morning while it was yet dark: surely, sin does
much darken our eyes, that we cannot see the way to Christ yet repentance
gave Mary such a light that she found the way to his sepulcher, and surely
we must have our lamps fed with the oyl^ of her Lords grace, or we shall
never find the way to her souls comfort: when Peeter and James were taken up
into the heavens and saw Christ in his glory, standing betwixt Moses and Eliah
he could say, Here is good being Lord, but after he was crucified, who sought
him at his sepulcher? Mary: Many would perhaps be glad to rise early to go up
to heaven to him, but who will go thorough the dark to seek him at his
grave? Mary did, and such as Mary will: Oh blessed Mary, so may I well term
thee, for as the Psalmist says in his Psalm. Blessed are they that seek him
with their whole heart: and in that was she surely blessed, for she sought him
with her whole heart, by the light of her souls love, orels being in the dark
she would have hardlye hitte the way: but now, where sought she him? at his
sepulcher where he was buried: see here the ^trong effects of love, living or
dead, she could not forget her Lord: dead she saw him, buried she knew he
was; and why did she then seek for him? love could not forget him, and
sorrowing to live without him, alive or dead she would be glad to se him: Now
still note the force of love in the elect. A woman in nature fearful was now
valiant, the darkness uncomfortable, she through the dark sought her comfort,
and amongst the graves of the dead sought the comfort of her life: here was
love void of fear, and faith void of doubt, brought a spiritful of sorrow to
seek her light in the dark, and Mary full of grief to seek her Lord in his
grave. Now Mary came early while it was dark, the first day of the week unto
the Sepulcher. Many will rise early to look to their Chickens, their Geese,
their Duckes, their Swine, or such other things, but al things must be looked
over, ere Christ be thought upon, and perhaps not then neither: But as it is
written in Luke, Chap. 10, verse. 41.42. Martha was troubled much about her
work, but Mary took the good part: so many take early iournies, but Mary
here made the good walk: Now though she came to seek him where he was
buried, yet in her heart she beheld him crucified; for who sees not his death in
the sorrow of his heart, I am persuaded shall never find him living in the joy
of his soul: But he was crucified for Mary's and our redemption, and shall not
we with Mary mourn for his Passion? Yes let us with Mary's love look into
his Mercy, and following her sorrow, we shall find her comfort; and though
not at the first as we wish, yet at the last as she did: For if we watch the
dark night of sin that we sleep not in sensuality, but rise early to
repentance, and walk with a true faith to the finding of our souls felicity,
when we have gone thorough the dark, and attended the day, we shall see the
stone rolled away, and somewhat lest for our comfort, when the hardness is
rolled from our hearts, we shall enjoy the blessing of our souls: Which that
we may the better attain unto, let us watch with Mary, walk with Mary, and
weep with Mary, rise early, go thorough the dark, and come to the Sepulcher
to seek Christ in his grave, ere we look for him in his glory: and though
it be long ere we see his Person, yet shall we quickly be partakers of her
comfort: For she, as you shall herea^^^r hear (Godwilling) saw him, bu^
knew him not; so shall we be sure of his Mercy though we see him not: Will
you then come to Christ? Learn to imitate Mary in her course: Who has many
sins, and finds much remission, let his love be great, and his sorrow not
little, to lack the comfort of his love: Christ is offended, Christ must
forgive; Christ must be loved, Christ must be sought, and that early, for fear
we come too late, and since we cannot behold him with our eyes of corruption,
let us hold him in the heart of our regeneration; let the first day of the
week be the first beginning of our youth lest when we grow old either our
spirits be so dull, or our eyes so dim, that we shall not be able to rise,
or at least to walk to seek Christ: Christ dwells a great way from the world,
and ^ee that is ouerladen with sin, must shake off his burden, or he will
never come at heaven; and he or she that will not in the sorrow of their
sins rise up to repentance, and in Christ his Passion learn the power of
Mortification, they may perhaps hear much of him, and pray much to him, but I
doubt whether they shall ever come near him.

Learn then of Mary whom to love, Christ: Why? for his goodness in forgiveness
of her sins, and the feeling of his Mercy; then loving Christ, learn her
sorrow to be without him; with her sorrow* her labor to rise early to seek
him; the place where to find him, at his Sepulcher: I mean in the
Mortification of the flesh, that you may glorify him in the spirit; who in
forgiveness of sins, and redemption of sinners; in comforting the penitent,
and blessing the faithful in the perfection of love, deserves all honor, to
whom sweet Jesus, the blessed son of the everliving God, with our heavenly
father and the holy Ghost, be all Glory, Honor and Praise, both now and ever,
Amen.

Mary Magdalens Love. Upon the second verse, which is as follows.
The Text.
Then she ran, and came to Simon Peter, and to the other Disciple whom Jesus
loved, and said unto them, they have taken away my Lord out of the Sepulcher,
and we know not where they have laid him. IN this Verse I take four especial
notes: First, her running; then to whom she ran; then how she spoke; and
last what she said.

In the former verse it is said, she came to the Sepulcher, now in this verse
it is said, she ran from the Sepulcher. She came thorough the dark to
seek Christ in his dead Tomb; but now it is day, she begins to run to
his Disciples, to tell what she had seen, hoping perhaps of them to hear
somewhat of ^im: Se^ here a notable token of true Constancy in her l^^e,
through the dark she walke^ ^o seek him at his grave; now in the light she
runs to his Disciples to enquire of him: So surely ought we to do, if in our
own cogitations we find him not as we desire, let us run to the Disciples
to instruct our desires how to seek him: Search the Scriptures says Christ,
and there you shall read of me.

So, the Scriptures we must search, if we hope to find Christ, but if we be
so ignorant that we cannot read them, let us then run to his Ministers,
that can and will deliver his Word unto us, that by them we may be instructed
to find the best way unto him.

Then she ran and told Simon Peter, and the other Disciple whom Jesus loved.
In this word Then, is a notable sense to be observed: First she came to the
Sepulcher, and saw the stone rolled away from the Tomb, and then she ran
and told the Disciples; so we must first look into Christ's burial, by his
burial, I mean his whole Passion; and then if we find not his Resurrection,
we must run unto his Ministers for our instruction.

Again I note here an excellent token of Modesty in Mary to be observed of
all Godly creatures, as well men as women; it is not said here, that so soon
as she came to the Sepulcher, she went in, or looked into the Sepulcher, but
she saw the stone rolled away from the Tomb, and then she ran and told
the Disciples: By a little she gathered more, the stone was rolled away, the
grave ^as open, and him she saw not, and therefore either he was gone, or else
finding her unworthiness to come so near as his Tomb, she would not look in,
but she would first tell his Disciple: what she had seen, to hear what
they would say to her.

How excellent a note is this of Modesty, for all Godly women and men that are
zealously given, to run to Gods Ministers to enquire of Christ, and to be
instructed in his will, ere they diue too deep into the secrets of his holy
Scriptures.

Then she ran, and came to Simon Peter, and the other Disciple whom Jesus
loved, and said unto them: Here are you to note an excellent point of Modesty
in Mary, to be carefully observed though she ran from the Sepulcher, yet she
came to the Disciples: Though she ran while she was out of sight, yet she
came when she was in sight of the Disciples: she ran not her self out of
breath, to tell her tale out of order; but after that she had run the time
of her love, she came in good time for her comfort; as (Godwilling) you shall
hear hereafter.

Now it is not said, she cried, or sighed, or sobbed, and could not speak a
word, or as a body half destraught, laid hold on the Disciples, to hale
them to the place where she had been, but when she came to them she said;
which word said, encludeth a kind of discreet delivery of speech: As we
commonly say in our Courts, when a speech is well delivered, if upon any
occasion of the hearers consideration the speaker be interrupted, when the
cause is thought upon he is bidden say on: In speaking often we hear added
unto this word speak, either loud or softly, distinctly or plainly; but to
saying I find none of these: but I find written the sayings of the wise. Yea,
Christ himself, in heaven and earth, the glory of all wisdom, uses that
word in many places, as Verelie, verelie, I say unto you, etc. Many places
could I set down where this word is used to beautefie the speech, with
the Modesty in the delivery. But I will leave them to the Readers leisure, and
I would wish that all men and women would learn to imitate Mary in this
manner of her speaking, to talk as she did of Christ and to his Ministers, to
learn their instruction for their knowledge of him: Then would there not be
so many wicked men and women, Witches and Sorcerers, Glutto^s, Drunkards,
Adulterers, Thieues, Traitors, and Murderers, besides other vain and idle
headed people, and blasphemers of GODS most holy name, so daily and howerlie
exercised as they commonly are, in most vile and filthy talk, too intolerable
to be heard of any Christian, leaving to think either of Christ his word or
his Disciples, and wilfully run headlong to the devil and his followers, and
will rather laugh at Mary, and run to the devil, than weep with Mary to come
to Christ: But God for his mercies sake, turn their hearts, and with them
give us all grace to go with Mary to Christ's Tomb, to run with Mary to his
Disciples, and to return with Mary to our comfort: But of that we will (by
Gods grace) speak more hereafter.

Now she ^ame to the Disciples and said, they have taken away my Lord, and
I know not where they have laid him: Note here now the cause, that led Mary to
the Disciples: Her Lord she mist, and feign she would see him, but knowing not
where to seek him, she thought it her best way to go to his Disciples to
enquire of him: To seek in the Heavens, alas she was too great a sinner to
look so high for him; in the earth to seek him were in vain, for the stone
was rolled away from the Toombe, and therefore he was surely stolen away; and
in the world to seek him, alas it is too base a place for so Royal a
Presence, having before his death so ungratefully entertained him. Now neither
in the Heavens, the Earth, nor the World; alas, where s^oulde she enquire
after him? Is not of any of his Disciples: And therefore to them she ran,
and to them she said, They have taken away my Lord and I know not where they
have laid him. For many causes does the Lord absent himself from us, that
we may consider how we have lost him, and seek how to find him: If we
loose him by sin, we must seek him by repentance, and we shall find him by
faith; but we must seek him as Mary did, run to his Disciples to enquire of
him, and so shall we the better come to him.

Now touching the Disciples she came unto; one thing I especially note in the
naming of them: Simon Peeter and the Disciple whom Jesus loved. Though all the
Disciples were called by the especial grace and power of the holy Ghost, to
the true service of GOD, in the administration of his holy word, yet here I
note them two especially named: For to which of his Disciples did he say as
he said to Peter? when he confessed him to be the son of the living God?
as it is written in the sixteenth Chapter of the Gospel of Saint Matthew, and
sixteenth verse: Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, thou shall
be called Cephas, which is by interpretation a stone. And upon this Rock will
I build my Church: Not upon Peter, but Peter's confession. And again, to which
of them did he say as he said to Peter three times; Do thou love me Peter?
Feed my flock. Do thou love me Peter? Feed my Lambs, etc. Who though he
answered him to both his questions, with Lord thou know I love thee; yet
he treabled his question again, asking him, Do thou love me Peter? And
when he had received his answer, that Lord thou know all things, and
thou know I love thee: He gave him this commandment, Feed my Lambs now,
if we be Lambs of Christ's flock, where shall we look for the milk of
his mercy, but out of the book of his most holy and sacred Scriptures, and
who can interpret them unto us? But his learned and holy Ministers, and such
as will show Christ their love in instructing his flock. Such a Disciple was
Peter, and such a Lamb was Mary: God send us many such Lambs as Mary, to run
to such Disciples as Peter, to talk of nothing but Christ.

Now the other was he whom my Text says Jesus loved: and Christ be^^ng her
love, of whom should she^ better enquire after him, than o^ his beloved? See
then, what is the cause that first leads us unto Christ? Love: How shall we
seek him? but go to his Ministers for our instruction; who by the true
administration of his holy Word, do manifest themselves to be the beloved of
his Mercy.

Learn then of Mary when to seek Christ, the first day of the week, in the
beginning of our days, then thorough the darkness of sin, to break out into
the day light of Grace; then where to seek him, in his Tomb; if there you
find him not, run to his Disciples to enquire for him; and to which of them?
those that by the discharge of their duties, are most likely to be his
beloved: and thus if you will be guided by the line of her love, I do not
doubt, but you shall come to her comsort; which as hirs was, let ours be, in
the only sight of our most blessed Savior, sweet Jesus Christ, the light
that will lead us through the dark, the life that will raise us up from
death, and the love that will give us life for ever: to whom in his Redeemer,
in his holy spirit our comforter, and all in one, our Lord, King, and
everliving, almighty GOD, be ascribed and given all Honor, Praise, Dominion,
and Glory, both now and for ever, Amen.

Mary Magdalens Love. Upon the four, five, six, seven and eighth verses,
which are as follows.
The Text.
Peter therefore went forth and the other Disciple, and they came unto the
Sepulcher: So they ran both, but the other Disciple did outr^nne Peter, and
came first to the Sepulcher.

And he stooped down, but went not in; then came Simon Peter following him,
and saw the linen clothes lie, and the kerchiefe that was upon his head,
etc. Then went in also the other Disciple which came first, and saw and
bel^eued.

IN these verses I note four chief points to be considered; the cause of
their going forth, the cause of their running, why the other Disciple outranne
Peter, and the cause why coming first to the Sepulcher, he stooped down, but
went not in.

Peter therefore went forth and the other Disciple, and came to the Sepulcher:
When Mari^ had told them what she had seen; it is not said, they presently
believed; but they went forth: For though she told a truth, yet they would
see, and the^ believe: for it is said they went forth and came to the
sepulcher: It should seem, and very likelye that they had some remembrance of
Christ's words, spoken before unto them touching his passion, and
resurrection, the third day, and therefore conferring their memories with her
words, they were the readier to go forth to try the truth of her report: Now
Mary being a woman, and so great a sinner as she had bin, it was likely she
should not obtain any great credit with the Disciples of Christ: But, Truth
in whose mouth soever it be, deserves well to be entertained: and now the
Disciples not having any knowledge to the contrary, would not stick at a
little travail to try the truth of her speech: and therefore it is said they
went forth: You see here she was not blamed for her report, nor do we find
as yet she was believed, but only approved: so that hereby we are to learn
what to report, and always to tell truth, and to try out a truth, ere we give
credit to a report: but if the talk be of Christ and the report from the
faithful, and that conferring it with the Scriptures, we find any likelihood
of truth, we must not regard who it be, man or woman, but go with them for
their comfort to the trial of their cause: It should seem now they heard it
of none, but of Mary, for as it is said of none but of Marie that came early
to the Sepulcher, and from thence ran to the Disciples and told them what she
had seen; so it is not like that she had told any but the Disciples, for if
she had, some or other would have been with the Disciples before her: or else
have been at the Sepulcher, before she had re^ained with the^; ^ut the
Disciples not hearing of it, by any other, (as I said before) calling to
memory, some of Christ's speeches delivered unto them before, to try out the
truth, they went forth, and came to the Sepulcher: Now here is neither a
belief, nor distrust, a reprehension nor commendation, but a proof: and of
whom? a woman, and in what? of a truth, touching the resurrection, or at least
as she thought of the remoouing of Christ: But of that I mean (God-willing,
to entreat more hereafter: but to my Text: Peter therefore went forth, and the
other Disciples, and came to the Sepulcher. What an encounter argument may this
be to all men and women to tell truth, when the Disciples of Christ upon the
report of Mary, would go forth with her, and not return till they came to the
sepulcher: we read that Ananias and his wife were both stricken dead for denying
of their and lying to the Disciples of Christ: yet here we see Mary for telling
of a truth accompanied with the Disciples unto the grave of Christ: learn
therefore how dangerous a thing it is to lie unto the Disciples of Christ,
especially in naming of Christ, the God of all truth, and how gracious a thing
it is in man or woman to come to the Disciples with a truth, or to enquire of
any truth touching Christ: and thus much touching the cause of the Disciples
goin^ forth, and coming to the Sepulcher: Now is it said here, they ran both,
but the other Disciple out ran Peter: a light belief will make many men and
women to run them selves out of breath to see a May game, a Beare-bayting, or
a bauble not worth the lo^king after, but here was no such report, and
therefore could be no such belief: and therefore would to God the idle
heads of the world would turn their minds to better matters and leave such
toys, as are b^t snares of the devil, and harken unto the truth that may
bring the^ to Christ: and rather be delighted to talk with the Ministers of
Gods holy word, of the passion of Christ, and to seek him in his word; than
to run with wicked people to see a fool in a play: but learn of Marie, what
to say, whither to go, and what to do? Seek Christ, be instructed by his
Disciples, and go with them to his Sepulcher: First learn to be mortified, or
else never look to be glorified: Now it is said that the other Disciple whom
Jesus loved out ran the other: so that the very love in the spirit, that he
had unto the Lord, was it that carried him to the Sepulcher to see what he had
hard, or might become of his Master: and surely, the greater measure of love,
that God infuseth into the soul of man, by the inspiration of his holy spirit,
the greater shall be his, or her desire, and the swifter to come to him, his
Sepulcher, or his holy word: the true testimony of his eternal mercy. First
it is said, they went forth, now they ran, so we see hereby, that once entered
into the way to Christ, we will even run to get to him, at least if we be
lead by the ^ame spirit that Marie and the Disciples were: otherwise if once in
the way we look back, we shall ever be unworthy to find the path again to
our comfort: but to the former words, So they ran both, but the other Disciple
outranne Peter: Of all contentions, I find it the best, to contend for the
souls comfort; and of al races, the best running to Christ: many run after
their dogs, hurrting all day for a hare, and perhaps go without her at night;
other run their horses for the ^ell, and tire them, or kill them ere night;
many run for a wager, that break their heart in the course, that they are never
able to go again: too many run from their Countries, that sield or never
return good Christians; but too few run to the Disciples of Christ, or with
his Disciples to his Sepulcher: but as I said before, Marie did, and such as
Marie will: she ran to them to tell of Christ, and she came with them to
hear of Christ, would to God we could and would so run, and so talk as Mary
did, that Christ might be the delight of our talk and the end of our
travail: Alas poor wretches that we are, how vile and corrupt is this nature
of ours? that we are so blind that we cannot, or so blinded that we will not
see the way that leads us to Christ, and if God of his mercy have opened our
eyes, so that we see the way, yet we are so lazily lame, as that we had
rather sleep out the day in idleness, or loose the whole year in wantonness, or
in all wicked and filthy beastlines, spend the whole time of our years, rather
than travail one mile, nay step one foot, or stay on^ minute, either to talk
of Christ, or come to his Disciples: we will run to a play, where perhaps
we may have our purses picked, or to football, where we may have our shinnes
broken, or to a fray where we may have our heads broken, or a worse matter:
but to come to Christ our spiritual Treasure, our Creator, Redeemer, our
peace, health, and souls Chirurgen, who will run, or is almos^ willing to
stir a foot? But here it is said his Disciples ran, and surely who will be
his Disciple must run, or else it is so far a walk, that they will hardly ever
come to him: Now as it is thought, Peter was the elder, and not so light of
the body, yet such was his love, that it is said, they ran both: so that old
and young must run: now mark further, what I gather in these two running
together: Peter was old and faithful, the other in his love either bashful or
fearful: for it is said when he came to the Sepulcher, he stooped down and
saw the linen clothes lying, but went not in: See here the excellent care of
this Disciple: either bashfulnes, that being the younger, he should presume to
go in before the elder, or to avoid a vain glory of boldness without
advise, or fearing to offend to go in without counsel: It is said he
stooped down and saw the linen clothes, but went not in: Note here an
excellent warning for young heads that are either zealous in Religion, or
learned in the holy Scriptures, to learn by this Disciple how to run to
Christ; let them take their elders with them, and do nothing without them or
their advise: and if they come to any perfection, yet let them give place to
their elders, in any thing that may bring them to Christ: for so did the
beloved of God, the Disciple here spoken of: Again here we may note an
excellent agreement between them, though John outranne Peter, yet he stayed
for him at the sepulcher: and seemd not angry ^or said any thing to him for
his sow coming, nor laughed at him for his stiff running, but that he stayed
and went not in, neither do I find that Peter was angry with his outrunning
of him, nor smild at his fear (as it should seem) of his stay, that he durst
not go in till he came; for being led both by the power of one spirit, they
gest thus far each of others mind: Love was of most force to bring him to
the Sepulcher, but says made Peter more valiant to go in into the Sepulcher:
yet no doubt but they both had faith, and both had love: or else Mary's report
had not made them run so fast thither: For the commendation of the one, what
can be said more of faith, then that which Christ himself said unto Peter,
upon his confession of him, to be the son of the living God, upon that rock
he would build his Church: and for the other, what more proof of his love?
unto any creature living, than in the Revelation of his Divine will? as in the
holy word you may read most sweetly expressed. Learn then I say to run with
the love of Ioh. but venture not in without the faith of Pet. John perhaps might
doubt many things, that the gra^e might be closed when he were in, for his
presumption, in going in without authority, and yet not being forbidden at
least to his own remembrance, he might be the less afraid what would
follow of his adventure: b^t while love pricked him forward, and fear pulled him
back, comes Peter to the place, and goes into the Sepulcher: Here is the old
saying disannulled, first come, first served; no, for here you see Peter came
last, but he first went in; and saw the kerchiefe, and the linen clothes lie,
and the kerchiefe that was wrapped together by it self: then went in the other
Disciple, which came first to the sepulcher: and he saw it, and believed. In
these last words, you may see the cause, why he went not in: not that he
believed not at all, but that his faith was not yet of that force, that Peter's
was: For Peter knowing the Sea would not swallowe him, when he threw himself
into it to come to Christ living; had now no fear that the earth would shut her
mouth upon him, for going in where he had been buried: And therefore boldly he
went in, and then went in also the other Disciple, who saw it and believed:
Here will I only trouble you with one note more touching faith, you see how
love brought Mary early in the morning while it was yet dark to the Sepulcher,
made her run to the Disciples to tell what she had seen, made the Disciples
to run to make trial of the truth, and last made John to outrunne Peter, in
the race to the Sepulcher, but where all this while was faith? weak in Mary by
reason of her sins, weak in John by reason of his youth, but strong in Peter
by reason of his comfort; so are there no doubt now a days, many that are
forward and zealous in Religion, that yet do lack that strength of faith that
Peter had: for though a number perhaps would run with Mary to his Sepulcher,
and to his Disciples to talk of him, yet who will venture to go into his grave?
or will throw himself into the Sea? in Love to come to him as Peter did? Now
it follows they saw and believed; and why now more than before is it said
they saw and believed? because as yet they knew not the Scriptures, that he
must rise again from the dead: Lo, here is a good excuse for the weakness of
their faith; but what excuse can be laid down for us? nay what shame is it
for us, that having the testimonye of their truth; seen by them, and written
by them to us, and for us, that we will not read the holy Scriptures, or
reading, so little believe them, or believing, so little regard them, that we
may justly be said to be without either faith, or love, either to seek or
find Christ, or almost to hear or think of him, either in his word, his
Sepulcher or his mercy? but God for his mercy sake, turn our hearts, and
inspire our souls, with the gracious power of his glorious holy spirit, that
running from the sincke of sin, we may come to the sepulcher of Christ, and
that with Mary's sorrow, John's love, and Peter's faith, we may rise early, in
the prime of our years and through the dark of sin break out into the day
light of grace, that may bring us to the fight of our souls comfort in the
resurrection of our blessed Savior, to whom now sitting at the right hand of
God, in all absolute power, wisdom, peace, grace, and mercy, truth, bounty,
love, life, and glory, with our heavenly Father and his holy spirit one
Almighty and everliving God; be ascribed, and given all due honor, praise
dominion, and glory: both now, and for ever: Amen.

The Text.
And the Disciples went again to their own home: but Mary stood without at
the sepulcher weeping, and as she wept, she bowed herself into the Sepulcher,
and saw two Angels sitting one at the head and the other at the feet, where
the body of Jesus had lain: and they said unto her, woman, why weepest thou?
She said unto them, they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they
have laid him: when she had thus said, she turned her self back, and saw
Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus: Jesus says unto her, woman,
why weepest thou? whom seek thou? She supposing it had bin the gardner said
unto him. If thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I
will take him away,

Jesus says unto her, Mary; she turned her self, and says unto him Rabony:
which is to say Master.

Dearly beloved in our Savior Christ, ye have heard before of the
Disciples coming to the Sepulcher, with Mary, ye have heard of John's
outrunning of Peter, and of Peter's first going in into the Sepulcher; ye have
I hope, noted the fruits of faith, and love in the elect children of God, in
brief to seek Christ, either alive, or dead; that learning to die with him,
we may be assured to live with him: Now ye see what is here said, The
Disciples went home again: when they had tried the truth of her report, and
that their eyes were witness of more, than Mary had yet in her words deliuerd,
(for that she had not yet presumed either to go in, or so much, as to look in
into the Sepulcher:) they returned home without having further conference with
her, rather willing to leave her mourning for her love, than to fill her head
full of doubts, what might become of her Lord: and therefore it is said, they
returned to their own home, neither commending her for her truth, nor giving
her thanks for her report she had made, nor aduising her to seek further
after him, nor counsayling her to stay there longer for him: but, being them
selves ignorant where to seek him, they left her to Gods pleasure, to dispose
either of her stay there, or her departure from thence: by this I gather, that
if we shall enquire of the ministers of Gods holy word, touching any such
point, as in the holy Scriptures is not laid down, we must not take it
amiss, if we be left unto the mercy of Gods holy spirit, for the revelation
of his holy will, rather than to ^^ll our heads with such cogitations, as
neither the scriptures do warrant, may perhaps please God, nor fall out to
our comfort: but yet, let us with Mary go to the Disciples of Christ, to
enquire and learn of them, what we may for our comfort, but if we can not be
resolved, then let us run to Christ with incessant prayer, that we may ask
and receive at the hands of his mercy, that he shall in his sacred wisdom
find to be most to his glory and our comfort: And thus much of the Disciples
returning again to their own home: now it follows, but Marie stood without at
the sepulcher weeping, and as she wept, she bowed her self into the sepulcher:
See here, as I have said before three excellent notes to be observed, in the
love of Mary to her Lord Christ: Constancy, Modesty, and Humil^^ie:
Constancy, in that, though the Disciples returned home, she stayed still;
Modesty, in that she stood, (as it is said) without at the Sepulcher;
Humility, that she bowed her self to look in; but would not presume to go
in, though the Disciples had been there before her: how little is this first
part of commendation, in Mary's love at these days followed; Let them to whom
God has given Grace to find it in them selves, in sorrowful sighs consesse
it to his mercy, and with tears of true repentance; amend it to his Glory:
Oh Constancy the true Testimony of the hearts love, and the suerest token of
the souls comfort, to love Christ is a blessed gift of the holy Ghost, but to
continue Constant to the end is an espeaciall fruit of Gods favor.

Oh Constant love of Mary, that having once washed his feet, would now fill his
Tomb with her tears: Oh rare Modesty, that in his life would but lie at his
feet under the Table, and now was so bashful, as to stand without at the
sepulcher: And, Oh most excellent Humillitie, that would presume no further,
but to look in: See here the heavenly love of this blessed woman, how much it
differs from the vile nature of our worldlings love.

We daily see before our eyes, that the wisest Prince; the most Godly
preacher; the most loving parents; the most bountiful Master; the most kind
kinsman; and the most faithful friend; If they dye, how soon are they
forgotten? if they be of any account, I mean according to the worlds
estimation; that their ^eires may be the better for them, then perhaps they
will take this order, and be at this charge for them: the Lawyer shall make
his Will, the Sexton his grave, the Preacher shall make a Sermon for him, the
parish shall have a Feast for him, the Minister shall be paid for burial of
him, and a few wear Black weeds for him, and so there is no more ado for
him: But where are the tears of Love all this while: alas there is no such
cause, there is more gotten by his death, than by his life: rather weep that
he lived so long, than that he died so soon: is it not too true that in many
places, it is daily seen, the child is sick of the Mother, and wishes his
Father in his grave, ere he can learn to be a son, or leave to be a Child?
are not many Subjects unkind, that will rathe^ seek the death of a Prince,
than w^epe for his want: are not those kin too strange in nature, that are not
only continually in law, but seek one another life for their lands? are not
those servant most wicked, that had rather wish for a mourning coat for a
dead Master, than a cognizaunce for the living, and will rather betray him to
his death, than weep for him when he is gone? And are not those friends
most faithless, that will rather give a Judas kiss, than shed Joseph's
tears? I would there were no such people, but if there be, God of his goodness
give them grace, with Mary to repent them of their wickedness, and with Mary to
shed the tears of love, that may be witness of her faith: and continuing in
her Constancy, with fear of presumption, they may make proof of such
Humility as was her commendation, and may be their comfort. How much this
virtue of Constancy is commended in diverse places of the holy Scriptures, ye
may read, as in Genesis the fifth Chap. and fourteentl^ verse. Henosh, for his
long walking with God, was taken up in the heavens: Eliah for his constant
faithfulness was taken up into the heavens. Genesis, the two and twenty
Chapter and seventeenth verse. Abraham for his constant love was called the
Father of the faithful, and had the promise of the Almighty, that of his
blessed seed should come the blessed Messiah. Noah, Genesis, Chapter seven, and
thirteenth verse, for his Constancy was saved with all his Family, when all
the world was drowned, that were not in the Arc: David for his Constancy was
left unto us a figure of Christ: the three Children in the furnace, for their
Co^^^ancie, were preserved in the fire. Ier. the eight and thirtieth Chapter
and tenth verse, Jeremy, for his Constancy, was delivered from the Dungeon;
Job. the one and fortieth Chapter, and twelfth verse, for his Constancy, was
restored to his health, and made more happy than ever he was, Paul, for his
Constancy, was rapt into the heavens, where he saw Christ in his glory:
Steven the holy Martyr of God, did shine like an Angel at the time of
Martyrdom: and Mary here for her Constancy, comes to the sight of her
Savior: but of this I will (God willing) speak more fitly anon: Now for
Modesty, tedious it were to trouble you with many places of commendation, laid
down in (...) lie Scriptures touching that (...) though some of them I think
it not good to omit: Sara was commended for her Modesty, in calling her
husband sir: Rebeccha for covering her face, when she saw Isaach: Hester, for
her modesty was said to have her face shine, whose bashful fear so pleased
the King Assuerus, that he laid his scepter on her neck, and kissed her, and
held her in his arms till her trance was over: And here you see her Modesty
so pleased God, that he sent his Angels to comfort her: for you see what
follows. And she bowed her self down and saw two Angels, the one sitting
at the head, and the other at the feet; O would to God that all women would
learn this Modesty of Mary! then wo^d they not so often fall into such
p^^^^^ption, as is many times, a (...) of their confusion, and in steed of
laughing with Michol to see David dance before the Ark of God, they ^^uld
weep with Mary at the Sepulcher of Christ: Modesty would teach them to come to
the Church with more devotion, and to hear the word with more reverence, than
I fear too many do now a days: how uncomely a thing it is in a maiden, to
be giggling and laughing, and how ungracious a thing it is for a woman, to be
tighing and babbling, in the Temple of God, at the time of the reading, or
preaching of his holy Gospel: Alas what will they be thought on among the
wise? the one but an idle gossip, and the other a foolish girl: but here you
see Mary did none of these, and as I said before, such as Mary will do none of
these: Learn then of Mary to love Christ, to be Constant in loving Christ,
and to use Mod^sty in your love to Christ: so shall you surely please Christ,
and I am fully persuaded, be most comm^nded of Christians: Now for Humility,
what is more commended in the holy Scriptures? Abells sacrifice was best
accepted for his Humility, Moses beloved for his Humility, Abraham's faith best
regarded in his Humility, David's patience best considered in his Humility,
Salomons request granted for his Humility, Nabuchadnezer restored to Babell for
his Humility, Job best tried, beloved, and made happy in his Humility, Mary
the virgin, received the salvation of the Angel, and the abundance of Grace in
her blessed womb for her Humility, and Christ himself for his Humilite to
his Father, is glorified with his father: many places I omit, that shininglie
set out the brightness of this virtue, but indeed so many are the rare and
excellent properties of this most excellent virtue, as I think it past the
capacity of man, to give it half sufficient comm^^dation; yet thus much given
^aue to speak mine opinion of it: It pleases God above all things, it
pleases man in many things, and displeases the Godly in nothing; at lest
wherein it ought to be showen: It graceth the Prince to be humble toward God,
it aduaunceth the Subject in service to the Prince, it draws love from the
parents, in the Childrens obedience, it makes the wife alone with her husband,
it binds friends in Amity, and persuades enemies to peace, it wins Christ
unto his Church, and here you see, it brings the Angels to Mary: before she
ran to the Disciples, and talked with them of Christ, telling them what she had
seen, now when they had seen what she had reported, and were said to believe,
yet they left her, and ^ent home again: but what followed of her stay? Now the
Disciples had left her, the Angels came to her: was not here a special
blessing of God? unto so great a sinner, tha^ ^od regarding her sorrow, sent
his Angels for her comfort: Now let me a little touch one point that I have
ouerslipt, touching Mary's weeping, for it is said: But Marie staid weeping at
the Sepulcher: and she bowed her self; now in weeping I note five sundry
kinds of tears: of anger, of subtilty, of sorrow, of joy, and of love: some
are said to weep for cursed heart, I fear too many know the nature of those
tears, but such are said to cry, not to weep; for tears coming from the
heart, do so distill from the eyes, that they make no sound on the tongue;
Now Marie it is said, stood weeping not crying: now there are tears of
subtilty, called crocodi^es tears, which are said to mourn and weep, till
they can bring their prayer within the compass of their calls, and then they
overthrow them, sting them to death and then feed upon them: so may I say, are
the te^^^s of a harlot, who in her poverty will seem to weep for affection,
far enough from her heart, til she has caught a sole in her snare, and then
she will feed upon him at her pleasure: thus did not Mary, for the body was
dead as she thought, that she wept for, the earth had no eyes to behold her
tears, nor did she see any man, that she could think to deceive with her
weeping: no, no, her heart was too full of sorrow for the dead, to think to
deceive any living: Now there are tears of sorrow, as when Peter had denied
Christ, it was said he wept bitterly, for sorrow that he had denied the
knowledge of so good and dear beloved a Master: So it is said Jesus wept over
Jerusalem, to think on the destruction of the City that should after ensue:
many are the causes of sorrow, tha^ may bring tears out of the eyes of the
most wise and valiant that ever were; but the greatest cause that should melt
the heart of a Christian, should be the sorrow of the soul for the denying of
Christ: now there are tears of Joy, as were those of Joseph, when he saw his
Father and his Brethren: But so it should not seem were Marie^, who looked for
none but her Master that she could not see: Now there are tears of Love, and
those proceed of the kind nature of the heart, as Christ wept when he saw
Lazarus dead, whom he loved, and now Mary wept when she saw her Lord dead, or
at least, could not see him dead, or alive when she lived: Mary was said to
wash his feet with her tears, and wipe them with her hair when she was
living: an excellent note of true love, she borrowed no water but her own
tears, nor any Towell but her own hairs: Now look again on her Humility,
she used no towell I say but her hair and went no higher than his feet: and
for her Humility and Love, see what befell her: (...) she bowed herself into
the Sepulcher, and saw two Angels sitting one at the head, and an other at
the feet where the body of Jesus had layne: Now mark the degrees of
comfort, that came unto this humble loving Mary, She came f^^st to the
Sepulcher to the Disciple^, from the Disciples to the Angels: and except
Christ she could go no higher: Now a word or two of the Angels: and they
said unto her, woman, why weepest thou? and she said unto them, They have
taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him: Now some perhaps
will have a Ierk at this piece of Scripture, to pray to the Saints ere they
come to Christ: because she talked with the Angels ere she came to Christ
himself; but let those ouerseene wits look a little better into the matter:
First the Angels came but to the grave, and seeing her there weeping, they
asked her but a question in these word^^, woman? Why weepest thou? she said
they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him: Here
is no prayer made unto them, though they were Angels, but she only answered
their question, and so ended their talk; so if the Saints will come and speak
to them; let them answer their questions and have no more to do with them:
for surely God will better appear unto them in his mercy, then answer them
by his Saints, if they could deliver him any message; but let these blinded
people take heed that these mistaken Saints prove not Devils that by illusions
lead them not from God, and his mercy, to their utter confusion both of body
and soul; but let me come again to my text: And she bowed her self, and
saw two Angels sitting, one at the head, and an other at the feet: where the
body of Jesus had la^ne, and the^ (...) unto her woman, why weepest thou*
(...) she said they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have
laid him: See n^w how much did her comfort exceed the Disciples, they saw but
the li^nen clothes, and departed home again; but she staid and was spoken to
by the Angels: but mark withal the care of her speech, and substance of her
talk, she continues one tale, she has no mind but of one matter, no thought
but of her love, nor any love but of her Lord: no joy but in him, no talk but
of him, nor sorrow but to be without him: go to whom she would, come to her
who would, Disciples or Angels, al was one for her speech, they could get
nothing of her, but they have taken away my Lord, and I know no^ where they
have laid him: See here now what a property, the faithful claim in Christ,
that they call him their Lord, as one would say, my Father, my son, m^
^^^ends, my house or my lands, so ^ere says Mary my Lord: who was more dear
to her, than either Father, Mother, Sister, Brother, kin, or friend, or all the
houses and lands of the world, and therefore with tears she continues her
sorrow with these words: They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where
they have laid him. But now see I pray you, what presently follows.
Immediately in a moment she turns her self back, and saw Jesus, but knew
not that it was Jesus: Now mark I say the glorious reward of her Humility,
from the Disciples to the Angels, from the Angels to Christ him self; Now it
is said she turned back, as though she was afraid, that she had presumed
too far, either in looking into the Sepulcher, or at lest in talking to the
Aung^ls: Oh Lord, how few will learn! I would many would follow this virtue
of Humility in Mary; not to (...) too far, nor to speak till they be ^^^ken
to, and then to be afraid to speak too much: yea though it be the best
thing they can speak off, I mean their true love to Christ: but to draw
toward an end; mark what follows: Now she comes near her comfort; she sees
her Savior, and knows him not: for when he said unto her, Woman why weepest
thou? whom seek thou? she supposing it had bin the gardner, said, Sir if
thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will take
him away: Thus in one word she answers to both his questions, why she wept
and what she sought: she sought her Lord, in sorrow she could not find him:
Jesus said unto her, Mary, she turned her self and said unto him Rabboni:
which is to say, Master. Now when Christ made him self known unto her, see
what words she uses: but only one, to express as much as she was able to
speak, Master: For a faithful seruan that loves his Master, if after a long
mi^^e of him, he come to the sight of him again, can he forbear tears of
love to show his duty? and say with Mary, Master; confess all ye that love
your Masters, for the rest God amend ye: Now was there ever so good a Master,
as for only loving him, nay rather of his own mere love gives us life
everlasting; forgiues us all our offenses, pays us our wages in his mercies,
and our debts for us in the blood of his own heart; when by reason of sin,
we be long absent from this so good a Master, if ever his Grace bring us
again to his mercy, with the tears of sorrow shall we not weep, to have
been so long from him, and so rejoice in his sight? that we shall be able with
Mary to say no more but Master: which one word so spoken, may make more pr^^^^
(...) our ^^ue, than a longer tale of our ser^^^^ for he knows our hearts,
loue^^ ^^r Humility, and so regards our love, that though we fee him not as
Marie did, yet we shall enjoy such part of her comfort, as if we but think
upon his mercy, we shall say in heart Master, when the friends of our joy
will not suffer us to say any more: but it is enough and so much enough, as I
beseech God to grant us all Crace, so to sorrow for our sins, and to long
for his coming, that seeking him as Mary did with tears, we way see him with
joy, and say with Mary, Master: which Master, Lord, King and God, be loved
served, honored praised and glorified, of all his servant here present, and
all his faithful wheresoever: Amen.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Danter, and are to be sold by William Barley, at
his s(...) in Gracious street n(...) ^^aden Hall. 1595.

A Solemn Passion of the Souls Love.

Printed at London by John Danter, and are to be sold by William Barley, at his
shop in Gracious street. 1595.

A Solemn Passion of the Souls Love.
AWake my soul out of the sleep of sin,
And shake off sloth the subject of thy shame,
Search out the way how best thou may begin,
To holy work thine humble will to frame:
Then prove not weary of a little pain,
When fleshes grief will breed the spirits gain,
Confess thy self unworthy of the sense,
To learn the least of the supernall will,
Beseech the heavens in strength of their defense,
To save and keep thee from infernal ill.
Then fall to work that all the world may see,
The joyful love betwixt thy God and thee.
Tell of his goodness how he did create thee,
And in his justice, how he does correct thee,
And in his love, how he will never hate thee,
And that his mercy never will re^^ect thee:
And how he helped thee when the world distressed thee,
And with his graces how he sweetly blessed thee.
S^y I was sick and he did send me health,
I was in prison and he set me free.
And I wa^ poor and he did send me wealth,
And I wa^ blind, and he did mak^ me see:
I was perplexed and ^e did heal my pain,
And being dead, he gave me life ^gaine.
When I was lame he did my ^i^mes restore,
When I was deaf he made me hear his voice,
When I was wounded, he did heal my sore,
When I was sad he made my soul rejoice:
When I had find he would not yet forsake me,
When I was lost he did to mercy take me.
To say yet more, what he has done for me,
I needs must say his goodness has no end,
Who, when on earth he saw no friend to me,
Did make me fee^e I had a heavenly friend:
A heavenly friend whose help does fail me never,
But is my comfort, and my King for ever.
This is my Lord, my life, and all my love,
My living love, and loving life in^eed,
This is the blessing ^f my best behoue,
The sacred fruit whereon I sweetly feed:
This is the ^oy that ma^es my heart to sing,
Honor and glory to my heavenly king.
Oh King more glorious (...) the world can know thee
From whom the day, eu^^ (...) on high does spring,
Where glorious works unto the world does show thee
Of gl^rious love the ever living King:
The King of life, in whom the soul does prove,
The highest glory of the heavenly love.
By whose high hands were all things made at first,
By whose deep wisdom they are gouernd still,
By whom alone, are blessed or accursed,
That love his word, or disobay his will:
By whose sweet breath they live that do attend him,
And by whose wrath they dye that do offend him.
For who can bide the furye of his ire?
Or half conceive the comfort of his love?
Who plagues his foes with an infernal fire,
And plants his servants in the heavens above:
Who shakes the heavens and makes the mountains bow
If he but once begin to knit the browe.
And where he loves, what will ^e leave to do?
To make the soul acquainted ^ith his kindness,
And with what joy will he the spirit woo?
To shun the woes that grow of wordly blindness.
What pain, or grief, or death did he refuse?
To save their lives that he did sweetly choose.
Now for the greatness of his glorious power,
He is almighty and all glory his,
He made the year, the month, day, night and hour,
The heavens, earth, sea, and what in them there i^:
In him alone does all their being stand,
And live or dye in his almighty hand.
He spoke the word, and by his word they were,
And all was good his secret wisdom did,
His will did work his favor without fear,
And not a thought is from his knowledge hyd:
He knows the hearts, and searches through the raines,
And sees the roots even of the smallest veins.
He decked the Skyewith sun and moon and stars,
And made the seas to flow upon the sand,
Upon whose shore his hand did set the bars,
They shall not pass to ouerflowe (...) Land.
Amid the air he has dispearst the Clouds,
And only Man within his mercy shrowds.
Within the depth, the fish their holes do keep,
And in the Rocks the Conny makes his house,
Into the earth the crawling worms do creep,
And hollow rocks are harbors for the mouse:
The Lion keeps his d^n, the bird hi^ nest,
And man alone does but in mercy rest.
Yet these and all are guided by his power,
An^ may not pass the passage he has given them,
The Sun his course, the A^oone must know her hour
An^ clouds must wander but where winds have driven them:
Beasts know their times, fi^nes know their tides,
And man alone in only mercy bides.
To tell of woonders by his wisdom wrought,
E^^n from the greatest to the v^^ie least,
Which time declare^ ^^y true experience taught,
In f^h, and towle, in ^^rd, in man and beast:
Ma^e but the power that does in each abide,
And how it wea^^^ ^^ their highest pride.
The Lion first is fearful of the Be,
The Elephant does dread the little mouse,
A crowing Cock the Dragon may ^o^ see,
The stowtest Eagle subject to the lowse:
The greatest Ox a little taint worm kills,
And many a man a little Canker spilleth.
Yet is the Lion feared for his forc^.
The Elephant a huge and mighty beast,
The fiery Dragon killes without remorse,
And Eagles carry Lambs unto their nest:
The Ox the taint worm under foot does tread,
And man sometimes does kill the cankers head.
But when that power (...) together pride,
Then see the strength of (...) ^ghti^ hand,
By whose high help the (...) things are tried,
To spoil the strength wherein the ^^^^ongest stand:
That they may know there is a power on hie,
In whom they live, and at his pleasure die.
To snew examples of the heavenly might,
Against the pride of the inferior power,
The word of truth does give a glorious light,
Where may be seen in minute of an hour:
How greatest stays that on their strengths were grounded,
With headlong falls were utterly confounded.
How Pharaoh first, the proud Egyptian King,
That would not suffer Israel to pass,
What plagues and griefs did the almighty bring
Upon the house eu^n where his lodging was?
Frogs, flies, and lyce did freely make their way
Even to the chamber where proud Pharaoh lay.
A number plagues the Lord did further threaten,
His Land was stricken with a darkesome fear,
His grass and corn by Grasshoppers were eaten,
The plague destroyed his people every where:
And la^t himself, amidst his army crowned,
Was in a moment in the red Sea drowned.
Yet through these seas his hand did make the way,
Where all his servants went and wet no foot,
Which proves his love was his elected stay,
While rebel hearts were torn up by the root:
Which true example to the world may prove,
The glorious greatness of his power and love.
Goliath boasted greatly of his strength,
Yet little David killed him with a stone,
The Madian Host was strong but yet at length,
By Gideons hand the Kings were overthrown:
By change of tongues fell Babylons high tower,
And Christ his word did break the ciuels power.
Yet in it self what wea^er is than water,
Which drowned proud Pharaoh with his mighty host?
A lowse or fly is of a little matter,
Yet with such worms are men tormented most:
What strength a las is in a little stone?
Yet so we read Goliath overthrown.
Know then from whence this wonder power grows,
But from the force of the almighty hand,
Which to the world his glorious power shows,
When with the weak the strongest cannot stand:
King David wrote and it is truly known,
That power belongs unto God alone.
To prove the prowesle of the heavenly power,
How many more examples may be shown:
There is no year, no day, no night nor hour,
But some such action to the world is known*
That truth may well unto his glory speak.
God is of power and all the world is weak.
But since the world cannot the books contain,
Wherein his works of wonder may be writ,
To admiration let his power remain,
And say all powers are subject unto it:
And let me of his love and mercy write,
Which is the substance of the souls delight.
This powerful love the glory of all grace,
When he had wrought the world unto his will,
And planted each thing in his proper place,
And in the course that they continue still:
Of all the works that he in wonder wrought,
Made only man the dearest of his thought.
For what he made he made but man to serve,
And man to seru^^ ^onely sacred love,
And in his love (...) so man's life preserve,
As may the comf^^^ of his care approve:
And so approve as (...) this sentence give,
His only love (...) the soul to live.
He loud (...) earth (...) give it life,
He lou^d (...) ^ife when (...) ^is ^^age gave it,
He loved the flesh that made the bone a wife,
He loved the soul when he from death did save it:
He loud him ever yet he loud him most,
To fetch him home when he him self had lost.
Come Poets ye that fill the world with fancies,
Whose savning Muses show but madding sits,
Which all too soon do fall into those ^ranzies,
That are begotten by mistaking wits:
Lay down your lives, compare your love with mine
And say whose virtue is the true divine.
For further trial let me give you leave,
To add a truth unto your idle sto^^^^,
Wherewith so often you do the wo^l^ deceive,
And gain your selves but ill conc^^^ed gloryes:
Yet when you see where sweetes^ ^^^hts are shown,
Look on my love, and blush to see (...) own.
With funny beautyes let your l^ues be bles^,
The sun does fetch his light but from my love,
You have your wonders from the Phoenix nest,
Mine honor lives but in the heavens above:
Your Muses do your Ladies praises sing,
The Angels sing in glory of my King.
The earth alas, from whence your loves receive,
Their flowers and sweets, their Pearses and precious stones,
To deck themselves, with which they do deceive,
The blinded spirits of the simple ones:
This earth from whence their outward graces spring,
Is but the footstool of my heavenly King.
And if he so has decked the earth below,
Imagine then the glory of his seat,
Which may persuade where Angels tremble so,
For humane eyes the glory is too great:
For where the sun, the moon, and stars have light,
For natures eyes the beauty is too bright.
And who does live that ever ye did love,
But that ye could their fairest fair unfold,
And my fair love, let fairest truth approve,
No eye can live in glory to behold:
Your clearest beauty is with age declining,
My loves bright glory is for ever shining.
If you be wise, think where true wisdom lives,
And then allow the honor to my love:
If yours be ki^^ ^^^nk^ who the comfort gives,
And know the turkey from the turtle dove:
If constant yours, that truth let my love try,
Who lost his life, to save his love thereby.
And let me see how lives all your love,
But on desert the stay of all your s^^te,
And in my love a further life app^^^e,
Who loud indeed when he ha^ c^^se to hate:
Your fancies often for lack of favor starve,
But my love does both mine and yours presarue.
Then truly say whom chi^^e your loves does choose,
To cast the coun^^n^^ce of their favors on,
Then who ^ again they wholly do refu^e,
In liking thought as most to look upon:
Then do but look upon my love his choice,
And whose heart most he makes to rejoice.
The wealthy, mighty, wise and well at ease,
Do fit the fancies of your Ladies best:
But poor, and weak, and simple souls best please
My heavenly love, to harbor in his breast:
And who the world does utterly refuse,
Those does my love unto his favor choose.
And see what power is in your loving natures,
To take or give what ye may gain or lose,
And ye shall see they are bu^ my loves creatures,
Whose lives are at his pleasure to disposet
And while your favors all do fade away,
My sweet loves blessings never will decay.
Could ye conceive the smallest of the sweet,
That does descend from my souls dearest love,
Upon the faith that falls at his feet,
That does in prayer but his mercy prove:
And you will blot out every idle line,
And yield your souls unto this love of mine,
Compare a weed unto a wholesome flower,
A cloudie evening to a sunnie day,
A foggie miste unto an April shower,
November blaste unto a bloome of May:
And you shall easily see the difference plain.
Betwixt my sun shine and your showers of rain,
Compare mere folly to the finest wit,
The cou^lest copper with the purest gold,
The healthful body with an ague fit:
And set the youthful age against the old,
The Ravens foul note to Philomelaes voice.
And quickly say, which is the better choice*
Compare foul pride to fair humility,
A kind discretion to a dogged nature,
The clownish race, to true gentilitie,
A blessed Angel to a cursed creature,
Favors to frowns, and smilings unto scowle^,
And say the Phoenix makes all birds but owls.
Compare the earth unto the heaven on hie,
The spirits treasures unto fleshly toves,
The p^bble stone unto the Azurde Sky,
The Woes of men unto the Angels ioyc^:
The lowest weakness unto the highest powers,
Then (...) the difference twixt my love and yours.
And when you see how all sweet blessings grow,
But from the ground of my loves living grace,
And do again the imperfection know,
Wherein you do your fond affection place:
Then all your titles to this truth resign,
There is no life but in this love of mine.
And give me leave to praise my Princely love,
Although my wits are short of such a worth,
And let my spirit in my passions prove,
What his high hand in mercy will bring forth:
And write but truth that may be truly proved,
My only love, all only to be loved.
Before all times, all thoughts, all things he was
And ^^er is, and will be aye the ^^me,
That does i^ wonder wonders wonder pass,
In truths high triumph of eternal fame:
Where life, and love, in grace and glory crow^d,
Do sway the Scepter of the heavens renownd.
Now what he was cannot be comprehended,
Who in himself does all things compr^hend,
And when that all things shall be wholly ended,
Himself, his word, his will shall never end:
Whose gracious life, all glorious love b^ginning,
Does a^d^ all grace, and endless glory winning.
And o^ his Essence, this is all we find,
A spirit fully incomprehensible,
A loving God unto his servants kind,
And in his humane nature sensible:
In wisdoms wonder knowledge quintescence,
And in that ^s^^nce highest excellence.
The high Creator of all creatures living,
The sweet Redeemer of his s^ruants lost,
The glorious grace, all grace, and glory giving,
The joy of joys, that glads the spirit most:
The love of life, and li^e of love indeed,
Against death and hell, that stands the soul in s^eede.
His seat is heaven, the earth his footstool is,
His chiefest dwelling with his souls elected,
His joy to love and to be lord of his,
His favor, life, unto his loves affected:
His word is truth, which does the spirit try,
Where fruitful faith shall live and never dye.
His blessing is the peace of conscience,
His comfort mercies contemplation,
His precious gift, the spirits patience,
His mercy, virtues meditation:
His grace the oil, that kills the spirits evil,
His death the life that did subdue the devil.
His garments are the sundry sort^s of graces,
His tribute is but sinners s^cr^fice,
His work, the planting virtues in their places,
His gain the love of humble spirits seruic^:
His music Psalms that angels never cease,
To sing in glory of the King of peace,
This King of peace, this God of life and l^ue,
Who in him self does all ^^d only ^old,
The highest blessings of the h^arts behoue,
That faithful truth has to the spirit t^ld:
This is the substance of my souls d^li^ht,
Unworthy subject of his worth to write.
Yet as his mercy will ^ou (...) n^e grace,
With int^rces^ion of his ^i^h ^ssi^^ance,
Against the power that would my thoughts deface,
And pro^^dly make ag^i^^^ the soul re^i^^a^ce:
I will a little give his love a ^uch,
Whose smallest praise is for my pen too ^uch.
What love was that which made him like man best,
Of all the work that ever he created,
What love again did in that li^ing rest,
To love him so he never can be hated:
What love was more to give the man a wife,
What love was most to die to give him life.
The earth within with silver gems and gold,
Without with trees and herbs, and fruits and flowers,
The waters deep where fishes keeps their ^old,
The ^lements with all their inward power^:
These has my love all made for man to choose,
And to his pleasure in his service use.
The fire was made to kill the chilling cold,
The water made to slack the burning heat,
The subtle air a secret b^eath to hold,
The earth too dry when moisture is too great:
Th^s^ cross in natures yet do meet in one,
Only to serve the use o^ man alone.
^a^h byrd, each beast, each foul, and every fish,
The flesh of man mu^t serve to cloth and feed,
What eye can see, or heart of man can wish,
But some way serves to stand poor men in steed:
And for that cause their being first began,
From m^r^ies love, to serve the life of man.
The light was ma^e to glad the lightsome eye,
The sound to please the pure attentive ear,
The air to draw a living breath thereby,
The earth the body, an^ the limbs to bear:
The clowd^, the stairs, the sun, the moon, the S^ye,
Were made for man, to make him look on high.
All these were made out of the mould of love,
Was never lou^ came ever nee^e to this,
Which does ^ wonder in affection pr^u^,
Even when we lea^ d^s^rude that l^u^ of his:
For when our souls did most offenses do him,
He came himself in love to ca^l us to him.
To make, redeem, preseru^, defend, and cheri^h,
His faithful ^ou^es, and so in love to nourish,
(...) in his love, their liue^ shall n^u^r p^ri^h,
But like the Lilly live and ever flouri^^:
Are these not points sufficient to approve,
The true perfection of a piereles lou^?
Yet more to say, that truly may be said,
In humble honor of th^s h^auenly love
In mercies sweet to m^ke the soul di^mayde,
To see the blessing of thi^ God above:
The loving spirit lively to refresh,
He let his servants see him in the flesh.
To see him so, as might not hurt their sight,
For none mig^t see his high supernall power,
But in his love t^ see that glorious light,
That gains that sweet that cuts off eu^ry sower:
The second person of himself, his son,
In whom are all things to his glory done.
And see the c^use why so he came unto v^,
^is only love the only cause we live,
And when we came, what comfort did he do us,
To save our lives his love his life did give:
And so to s^ue us from the fire of hell,
That with his love we might for ever dwell.
What love was this, to leave his heavenly seat,
Among his ange^s, all in glory served,
To come to m^n who di^ too ill entreat,
The sacred love, that has his life pre^^ru^d,
From being honourde praisde and glori^ide,
To be disgraced, whipte, and crucifide.
In love ^e l^st ^is high^st heavenly pleasures,
Above his angels in their ^eap^ of ioy^s,
To live on earth in so^rowes ^ut of m^a^ures,
With change of nothing but the worlds annoyes:
In toil and trauail^, long in love he s^ught us,
And with his death at last full dearly b^ught us.
Oh woeful travail that he undertook,
To bring our lives unto his sacred love,
Which pain, nor cross, nor death it self forsook,
That to our faith might his affection prove:
Which l^f^ the spirit of his love be^inde him,
To show the love that seeks him how to find him.
In love h^ came, that he might comfort do us
In love went from us, to provide our places,
In love he sent his comforter unto us,
In love he guides us with his holy graces:
In love he made, bought, keeps and guides us thus,
And shall not we love him that ^o loud us.
Yes my dear Lord, be thou my dearest love,
For Christ his sake, let my soul never le^ue thee,
Who in thy love thy living truth does prove,
That m^kes me find the world does all dec^iue me:
and were there truth on earth as there is none,
Yet were thy love the joy of life alone.
And let these t^ares be witness of my love,
Which first do beg remission of my sin,
and in r^pentance do but mercy move,
To open the gates of grace and let me in:
Where humble faith but at thy feet may fall,
With my souls service, love and life and all.
F^rget O Lord my works of wickedness,
Whereby my soul with sorrow is oppressed,
And with the finger of thy holine^,
In mercy touch my spirit so distressed:
And save my life that draws nigh to hell,
Love me a little and I shall be w^ll.
Love? no sweet Lord* mercy I crave no more*
My sins are such, I dare not speak of love,
But in thy merry to thy love restore,
My h^mble faith, that may but mercy prove:
And (...) ^pp^^ue that all the world may see,
The (...) love betwi^t my God and me.
Oh call me home, and make me hear thy call,
And hear thee so, that I may run unto thee,
And hold me fast that I may never fall,
But that my soul may ever ^^ruice do thee:
Show some good token, that the world may know,
My soul is blessed, whom thou have loved so.
And while I live here in this wretched vale,
Of fearful danger of in^ernall death,
Where earthly pleasures take those souls to sale,
Which have their bargai^e in the h^ll beneath,
Let my souls love, and lif^, and labor be,
To seek my joy, my love and life in thee.
Make me not rich lest I forget to think.
From whence I have the comfort of my heart,
Nor in such want, let thy poor servant sink,
That I be driven to crave the needy part:
Give me but means the needy to relieve,
To feed thy flock, and not the Wolf to grieve.
Let me not listen to the sinners songs,
^ut to the Psalms thy holy saints do sing,
Nor let me follow tyrants in their wrongs,
But kiss the rock, where righteousness does spring:
Let not mine eye affect the outward part,
But let me love the virtue of the heart.
And let my life be to behold thy love,
And let my love be but to live in thee,
And so to live that all the world may pr^ue,
The grati^us good my God has done for me,
To call my soul out of this world of woe,
In faithful love to serve my Savior so.
And when they see the blot of all their blame,
To love the world but all in wretched toys,
And do confess with inward blushing shame,
They are but sorrows unto heavenly joys:
They may with me forsake all wordly pleasure,
And make thy love an everlasting treasure.
For Lord by thee we are, in thee we live,
And in thy love the living cannot die,
And since thy death, did our lives wholly give,
For thy loves sake shall we affection ^lie:
No my dear Lord, let life be death to me,
So I may die to live in love with thee.
A joyful life were such a death indeed,
From earthly pain to pass to heavenly pleasure,
A joyful line for loving hearts to read,
To leave the flesh to take the spirits treasure:
Whose glorious sense unto the sun does fall,
That all is nothing to that all in all.
And I (alas) of many thousand souls*
Unworthy most of his high worth to write,
Who in his mercies true record inrowles,
The loving substance of the souls delight:
Must mercy cry, for scare my loves presuming,
Of too high sense may be my souls consuming.
And with the tears of true repentant love,
Looking upon the wonders of that wonder,
That (...) p^^fection may app^oue,
The (...) ^ised^ me of the world put under:
(...) wit as short to p^n^e his praise,
As (...) n^ghts in light of clearest days.
And say but this in grace and glories height,
Whe^^ virtue love does live f^r ^uer crowned,
And all the Hoa^^ of heaven and heavens await,
Upon the highe^ (...) the heau^^s r^nowned:
Whom Sai^ts and Angel^ t^e^bl^ng do adore,
To him alone be all praise c^e^more.
All honor p^aise and glory ever be,
Unto my ^ouing euerl^uing King,
This king of life, who ^o has l^ued me,
To give my soul thi^ gratiou^ power to sing:
In heart and mind, in man and ^ngels love,
All glo^ious glory be to God above.
FINIS.
Nicholas Britten.


