A TREASVRIE OF CATECHISM, OR CHRISTIAN INSTRVCTION.

The first part, which is concerning the moral Law or ten Commandments of
Almighty God: with certain Questions and Aunswers preparatory to the same.

I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy commandment is exceeding
large. PSALM 119.96.

Every Scribe which is taught unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto an
householder, which brings forth out of his treasure, things both new and old.
MATTHEW. 13.52.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Thomas Man. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL MY SINGVLAR GOOD PATRON Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight.
AND TO THE LADY ANNE BACON HIS VERY WORTHY and virtuous wife: in all humble
and hearty desire of continual increase of every heavenly and spiritual gift
and grace, from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
RIGHT Worshipful, right dearly beloved and reverenced in the Lord: the
regard of my bounden duty first, and then that persuasion which I have of your
favorable good will and liking toward me, as also of the ioynt-willingnesse of
ye both, to yield the credit of your names both in and for the profession and
furtherance of Gods holy Religion and worship, by every good and Christian
means in the sight of all men; and finding herewithall, that God of his rich
mercy has by means of your encouragement blessed my poor endeavors, that you
might (as I trust) enjoy some fruit of them: these considerations have both
incited and also emboldened and confirmed me (though the unworthiest of all the
Ministers of Gods word, whose wise, faithful, and learned labors are
honorable and precious in the Churches and assemblies of Christ Jesus among us)
to make no doubt of dedicating this book unto you, and of publishing it under
the credit and as it were the protection of your names. Desiring hereby to
testify my special thankfulness to ye both, and to help both you and yours,
and as many others as I might in the right way of the kingdom of heaven.

How worthy a testimony of such my special thankfulness to you my so right
worshipful and beneficial good Patrons, as I have found ye to be unto me; and
consequently how worthy your credit and protection, and how profitable a help
to further either your selves or any other in the way of Gods kingdom: and
chiefly how this book may be to the glory of God, which above all things ought
to be most respected in every enterprise we take in hand, I leave it to be
determined by that gracious blessing which God himself of his infinite
goodness and mercy, according to his own divine counsel and wisdom, shall
vouchsafe to give unto it.

Nevertheless seeing I do present to you an interpretation of that part of the
most excellent Law of the Lord our God, which contains the fundamental rule
and ground of all true wisdom, righteousness and holiness before him; and
therewith also a manifold collection of diverse necessary and profitable
discourses incident to the same, from the rest of the holy Scripturs of God:
such as are the equity of the same most holy and righteous Law; the curses
threatened against the trangressions thereof; the blessings promised to all
perfect obedience, not only in general, but also concerning every particular
commandment of the Law; with a declaration likewise of the only perfect
obedience of our Savior Christ to all and every commandment; and of our own
perfect disobedience, as well in corruption of nature, as in error and
transgression of life, until we be ingrafted into Christ, and sanctified by the
holy Ghost: as also after we are so ingrafted, sanctified and renewed unto God,
that our obedience at the best, is only (as we may say) inchoate and but
begun, always in this life remaining still imperfect; so that it is of grace
only through our Lord Jesus Christ, and not by worth and merit, that either it
or our selves are accepted with God. Finally, seeing the excellent uses of the
Law of God in all these respects, are here presented unto you, and that in such
sort, as all these points have not been so fully gathered together, as it were
many labors into one, as, by the grace of God, ye shall find them here
gathered and sorted to your hands, all tending to instruct us to true
humiliation in our selves, that we might most happily rejoice and glory in the
Lord, and be partakers of his glory in the end. I have now good hope upon the
premises, that with your favorable construction of al things, and without just
offense to any other, I may in such modesty as may well beseem an humble
servant of God, desire ye to esteem this book, as worthy for the Lords
cause, not only that countenance and safeguard which your worthy names and
credit may procure it, but also your very diligent and careful reading,
perusing and pondering of it; as that treasure which God would have in special
manner weighed out, tendered, and appropriated to you.

I beseech ye therefore, right Worshipful in the Lord, receive ye this
writing, not so much from me unworthy poor wretch, as from the gracious good
hand of God, who has (as I trust) prepared and furnished it from the treasury
of his riches, for the spiritual enriching of your souls to his heavenly
kingdom; as a fruit and blessing upon you, for your special favor to me,
and other his servants for his sake; how frail and earthen soever the
instrument is, which it has pleased him to use in this ministry and service
toward you. And for the same cause also do I humbly beseech ye, to make the
best spiritual gain of it, to the uttermost of that, whereunto it may possibly
be improued by you.

To this end, as I began, so do I still, and by Gods grace shall so long as I
live, as humbly and instantly as I shall be able, beseech God our heavenly
father, who only has the full treasury of spiritual riches, fully
sufficient for all that be his; that it may please him of his bounteous mercy,
more and more to replenish you and yours, with all heavenly graces, blessings
and comforts, until ye may together with the rest of his Saints, attain to
his everlasting kingdom of glory, even for his most dear son our Lord
Jesus Christ his sake, of whose fullness only we must all receive, even grace
after grace, whatsoever we receive.

To him therefore together with the Father and the holy Ghost, one only true
God, almighty and most wise, most righteous, and most merciful ^^^nall,
infinite, and incomprehensible, be all ble^^^ng and thanks, all praise, honor
and glory both now and for evermore. Amen.

Your worships in the Lord most bounden: ROBERT ALLEN.

TO THE REVEREND AND LEARNED EXAMINERS and Readers, humble and hearty
salutation in Christ.
IT may well be (Reverend fathers and loving brethren in the Lord) that your
grave and godly minds being justly setteled in prejudice against all
vainglorious or unadvised and needless atte^pts to write and publish books
(as against that wherein the vain and curious mind of man will always be
restless, and so without restraint would put the Reader to much causlesse and
frutelesse weariness) ye will at the first view require a reason, both of
this book, and also of the title of it. Of the book, why it should be
published after so many excellent books already set forth of the same
argument, whereby it may seem to be a superfluous attempt. Of the title, how it
may beseem the modesty of him who offers it to examination, seeing albeit he
cannot but confess of him self, that he is in truth a very poor man, yet
may be suspected to make boast of great wealth, and thereby to fall under the
rebuke of that holy Proverb which says: There is that makes himself rich,
and has nothing. Which surely were a foul fault, specially in the Church of
Christ, and concerning the holy matters of God; and the same also in a time of
great learning, and in the clear light of the Gospel, wherein vain boasting
and beggary cannot possibly be concealed and hid.

To either of these demands, or secret and sudden conceits of the mind
(seeing by the Law of God concerning the ordinary gift of prophecy and
interpretation of the Scriptures, The spirits of the Prophets are subject to
the Prophets) I think it my duty to bewray and utter unto you the secrets of
my thoughts, so far as your wisdoms, and the cause it self may seem to
require at my hands; that so the honor of the judgment, may in a lawful
course of proceeding, be committed unto you.

Touching the first therefore, what may better beseem me for answer, then
(that being my self entreated, first by some such, whose request could not but
thus far prevail with me) that I should humbly refer the present book to
the examination of you, who beside the gift of spiritual discerning, have a
special power and authority, to determine whether it befit that it should be
published or no. To you therefore I refer it, not desiring the publishing of
it, unless it may be found meet to have entertainment and allowance among the
books of the same argument: as that, which having received great help from
the former, may yield at the least some little help, to such as (answerable to
the greater measure of their gifts) shall write yet more exactly of the same
most excellent points at any time hereafter. As touching my self it shall
suffice me, that I have offered it to your godly considerations, tendering
herein the best duty I could both to you and those that so desired and
encouraged me, in the behalf of Gods glory, and the benefit of his Church, as
they were in their own hearts persuaded.

And now concerning the title, although peradventure it may seem to be prefixed
with a mind, to make some vain boast of an imagined excellency to be in this
book above others: I do likewise humbly desire that it may not so be
misconstrued; but first according to that common use of titles, whereby each
book is distinguished from others, and specially from those of the same
argument; and then in respect of the doctrine it self, rather then of the
manner and form of the delivery, and contriuing or digesting of it; according
to that which the Spirit of God says of the most excellent Law of God, and
doctrine thereof, that it is more to be desired then gold: yea, then much fine
gold, and more earnestly to be sought and searched after, then any other jewel
or treasure whatsoever beside.

In hope therefore that it shall be so interpreted of you, and nothing doubting
of your ingenuous and incorrupt judgment of the whole book, I do willingly
offer it to be read, tried, and examined of you: heartily praying God by you,
to give that judgment and success, which he himself in his most excellent
wisdom shall best approve of. To whose most gracious direction and blessing
in all things, I do both heartily and dutifully commend you.

Yours in the Lord unfeignedly desirous to learn of all, that so happily he
might be fit to teach some: ROBERT ALLEN a Minister of the word of God.

A TREASVRIE OF CATECHISM. The first part.
WHat is Catechism, I mean as touching the Christian exercise and practice
thereof?

The Christian exercise of Catechism is a familiar, plain and orderly
teaching of the grounds and principles of Christian religion by word of mouth
from the holy Scriptures of God, with requiring an account of that which has
been taught, by questioning and conferring with the hearers from point to
point.

To Catechize is, according to the signification of the Greek word Catechaeoo,
to teach by sound of voice. (...).
Of the later part of the which Greek word comes the word echo, familiar in
our English tongue, which signifies a resou^ding of the voice.

This word of Catechizing is used generally for all kind of information by
hearsay, as we use to speak. Act. 21.21.24.

It is used for preaching of the word, whether by continued oration, or by this
breaking off or division of speech, by question and answer. Gal. 6.6. Let him
(says the holy Apostle) who is taught in the word, make him that has taught
him partaker of all his goods. The Greek word there used is this of
Catechizing, as though we should read it thus: Let him that is Catechized, etc.

So likewise Act. 18.25. and Romans 2.18. and 1. Cor. 14.19. I had rather speak
five words that I might be understood and instruct (or as the Greek word is)
catechize others, then ten thousand words in a strange tongue. Read also Luke
1.4. For as much as many have taken in hand, etc. It seemed good also to me
(most noble Theophilus etc.) to write unto thee thereof from point to point,
What Catechism is,
That thou might acknowledge the certainty of those things whereof thou
have been instructed. The Greek word is here also Catechized. Answerable to
this is the Hebrew word chanac, (...)
which notes the teaching of the principles of religion, according to that we
read Pro. 26.6. Teach a child in the trade of his way, etc. And hereof did
Henoch bear his name, (...) Chanoc.
as one taught from his youth, or dedicated unto God. Genesis 5.18.

Such an order and form of doctrine by preaching and Catechizing which we
speak of, is pointed at by the Apostle Paul, (...) a form of doctrine.
Romans 6.17. expressed by a word borrowed from the making of an impression by a
stamp or seal. And chap. 2.20. by other words, signifying an information, or
method and way of informing the mind with knowledge, (...). an information of
knowledge. (...), a preparation of wholesome words or doctrine.
by representing as it were the form and fashion of it in a clear glass. And
2. Tim. 1.13. he compares it to a pattern, the work of a skillful and expert
painter or drawer, which sets out that which he intends, by a full and
lively pourtraiture.

It is compared also to feeding with milk, and not with strong meat, Heb.
5.12.13.14. and to the laying of the foundation of a building, as it follows
in the next chapter of the same Epistle, verses 1.2. Of this building Christ
only is the foundation; yea the whole building arises to perfection in him 1.
Cor. 3.11. and Ephesians. 4.11.12.13. And therefore also all the instruction of
Christian catechizing is to be fetched from the holy Scriptures, seeing they
alone as Christ him self says of them, do truly testify of him. Ioh. 5.39.

The practice or exercise of Catechism is either in a more large or shorter
manner: but the largest Catechism must be an abridging as it were and
contracting of the whole Scriptures of God, for the more easy and ready help
of the learner.

Conference by wise and discreet questioning and answering about any one point
is very profitable; for it discovers the secret error and ignorance of a
man's judgment, it lays open the evil lust and affection of the heart, yea
through the blessing of God it enformeth the judgment, it reformeth and
bettereth the affection, it quickens both judgment and affection to the
actions and duties of a godly life, according to the particulars which are
conferred upon. The reasons of this exercise.
How much more profitable then must not a more general and orderly conference
prove in process of time? And thus we see what Catechizing is: and that there
is great profit in the exercise of it.

But show you more fully as you have been further taught what the reasons are
why this exercise of Catechizing should be in use among the people of God.

The first reason may justly be the commandment of God, who requires it as a
special fruit of that pure, fervent and constant love, which we do most
boundenly owe unto them.

Secondly, the love which all Christians ought to bear to their children,
even for the Lords sake; to the end they may be his instruments to deliver
them from their natural ignorance and profaneness, to preserve them from
errors and heresies, yea from the everlasting destruction of their souls,
specially in these last and most dangerous days, wherein all iniquity both
of doctrine and life does exceedingly abound.

Thirdly, the care which all ought to have for the propagation of the truth of
holy doctrine, and of the practice of Gods pure worship to posterity.

Fourthly, the example of the true Churches of God, both former and latter, in
the most pure times of the worship of God.

Finally, the blessing of God, which always accompanies this holy care of
planting, cherishing and propagating the same true knowledge and worship of
God: (...), to whet or sharpen as me^ do their arrow heads or other weapons and
instruments, that they may more easily pierce and enter: as Deuteronomy. 32.41. And
thereof comes Scheminah for a common speech or talk: as Deuteronomy. 28.37. and 1.
King. 9.7. and 2. Chron. 7.20. joined with Maschal a proverb as Synonyma.
as on the contrary his heavy curse and vengeance, which falls upon all
corrupters or despisers thereof.

For the commandment of God, read Deuteronomy. chapter 6. verses. 4.5.6.7.8. and chap.
11.18.19.20.21. In the former of the which places ver. 7. the Hebrew word
Schanan Englished to rehearse, signifies properly to whet, noting and
implying thereby such a rehearsing of the commandments of God unto children,
as by the often applying of them to their capacity they may most commodiouslie
enter and take place in their hearts. The which can no way better be done then
by an orderly and familiar questioning with them upon the same. Read also Psalm.
78.1.2.3. and Ezekiel. 16.20.21. where the Lord vehemently reproves Parents for
their unfaithfulness to him in the wicked and ungodly education of their
children.

Touching the love which all Christian Parents ought to express toward their
children, this way above all other; read Ephesians. 6.4. And for a lively pattern
of this love behold dilige^tlie how the practice of it is represented in the
whole book of the holy Proverbs of king Solomon. The necessity whereof is
also in that book notably declared in many places; because foolishness is
naturally bound in the heart of every child, and because they are in further
danger to be hardened and made more bold unto sin by the example and
encouragement of ill company, such as seek to corrupt youth, etc. Neither
does the Lord ordinarily save any that come to years of discretion but by
means of Catechizing and instruction, whereby they come to that knowledge
which is unto salvation. John. 17.3.

Now for the care of propagating the true Religion of God to posterity, that
it ought to be in all Parents and progenitors, read Genes. 18. verses. 18.19.
where we have the very memorable example of Abraham the father of all the
faithful. Read also Deuteronomy. 4.9.10. the commandment of God. Symphorissa with her
7. children in the 3. persecution. Likewise Sophia with her three children.
Felicitas with her 7. children in the 4. persecution. A woman of Siria with her
two daughters in the 10. persecution. A woman of Antioch with her little child,
who answered the tyrant, that he had learned religion from his mothers breasts.
Athanasia with her 3. daughters, etc. Read in M. Fox Acts and Monuments.
And Psalm 78.5.6.7. In which place even from the beginning of the Psalm, we
have a further testimony of that example wherein the ancient Church of God
among the Jews has gone before us.

And for later times, read. 2. Tim. 1.5. and chapter 3.15. and Heb. chapter 5.12.13.14.
and chapter 6.1.2. Neither after this, could the Martyrs even holy women in time
of persecution have prepared and animated their children, yea even their tender
daughters to suffer with them very cruel torments, had they not been
dilligent, even from the breasts as it were, to have Catechized and instructed
them in the knowledge and faith of the truth of God. And now last of all, since
the breaking forth of the light of the Gospel from under the black cloud of
Popish ignorance, all Churches reformed are in this point notable examples for
their mutual comfort, and so shall remain to provoke all Gods children to the
end of the world, to be worthy Imitators and followers of them. In which
respect Calvin that worthy instrument of God in his Commentary upon the 22.
Psalm. upon these words verse. 30.31. The seed (both of high and low) shall
serve the Lord: it shall be counted (unto him) for a generation. They shall
come and shall declare his righteousness unto a people that shall be borne,
because he has done it: he gathers this excellent doctrine, that the care
and endeavor of propagating true doctrine is enjoined unto us, Cura and studium
propagandae verae doctrine nobis iniungitur, quo post mortem nostra^ superstes
maneat. Nam quu^ hoc pijs omnibus commune tribuat officium spiritus sanctus
operam dare instituendis liberis, vt noua soboles ad Deum colendum sisccedat;
summae turpitudinis damnatur eorum ignauia, quibus Dei memoriam aeterno
silentio obruere nulla religio est: vt per eos non stet quo minus intercidat.
Promiscue monentur omnes operam hanc gratissimam esse Deo, si nomen eius
transmittere studeant ad aetates futuras.
to the end it may continue and (as it were) survive us, after that we be dead.
For (as he says further) in so much as the holy Ghost lays this as a common
charge upon all that are godly minded, that they be dilligent in teaching their
children, to the end a new offspring may succeed in the practice of Gods
worship: most shameful is their lubberishnesse, who are so profane, that they
care not though the memorial of God be for ever suppressed, and that for any
thing they will do, it should be so far from continuance, that it should
utterly fall away.

And Psalm. 78. upon the 5. and 6. verses: he does likewise very worthily
observe, that from these words of the Psalm, (God has commanded that fathers
should teach their children: That the posterity might know his Law, and the
children which should be borne should stand up and declare it to their children
etc.) All (says he) are generally advertised, that they perform a duty most
acceptable to God, whosoever do carefully endeavor to set over his name, (that
is to make him truly known) to the ages to come.

Finally, as touching the last point of the answer, that is, concerning the
blessing of God following this careful endeavor: read Deuteronomy. 28.1. etc. 14.
Read also Psalm. 67. and John. 9.31.1. Tim. 4.8. There are many such like
testimonies. And on the contrary for Gods curse upon the neglect hereof: read
again Deuteronomy. 28. verses. 15.16. etc. and Psalm. 78. from the 8. ver. There are
likewise many other such like places of holy Scripture. Yea examples also of
Gods fearful judgments. 2. King. chap. 2.23.24. and chap. 17. of the same
book. And Psalm. 106.37.38. etc. But these for the present shall suffice. Let
us now proceed.

Which are the parts or most general heads and grounds of Christian Catechism?

They are these two: the moral Law or ten Commandments of almighty God, and
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

It is true: for the moral Law or ten Commandments, they are a brief sum of
the old Testament, in so much as the ceremonial and judicial laws of God are
but as it were appendices or appurtenances to those which are moral. The parts.


And the Gospel, that is to say, the glad tidings of salvation, containing the
Articles of our Christian faith, it is as one may say an abridgement of the New
Testament. Whereunto belongs the doctrine of the Sacraments, which are as
signs and seals annexed to the Gospel, etc.

We begin with the Law of God, not that we hold it the only right and
necessary course of Catechizing. For God as it pleases him does sometime
enlighten, call and renew those that be his, not by humbling or casting them
down at the first, as he did Saul, and as we read of Martin Luther etc. by the
terrors of the law in the sight of their sins, and of that horrible damnation
and vengeance due to the same; but by giving them (notwithstanding they are
grievous sinners) a comfortable sight and sweet taste and feeling in the
apprehension of his rich and tender mercies, touching forgiveness of sins
through Jesus Christ. And accordingly is the doctrine diversely fitted and
disposed in the holy Scriptures themselves. For sometime the instruction
proceeds from the discovery of sin and of the corruption of nature, as God
deals with Ada^ in the beginning, and our Savior Christ with Nicodemus in
the Gospel, and Paul in his Epistle to the Romans: sometime from the
blessings, as God with Abraham, and Paul to the Ephesians, sometime from the
curse, as Jacob with his sons at his death: sometime from both jointly and
expressly, as Leuit. chap. 26. and Deuteronomy. chap. 27, and chap. 28. or at the least
inclusiuely, as John the Baptist and our Savior Christ: Repent and amend, for
the kingdom of God is at hand.

Nevertheless, let us wisely mark, and we shall see that which way soever God
gives an entrance into his kingdom, either by terror or by comfort, yet he
does afterward school and nourture them both ways; he sometime laying to
their consciences the greatness of their sins and just deserved misery by
the rebukes of the Law, and so drives them to Christ and the comfortes of the
Gospel; and then again from Christ in whom their souls are refreshed, to
more care and conscience of better duty then before, in obedience to Gods Law,
least comfort should hide it self, and trouble and discomfort should return
more uncomfortably then before. So that we our selves shall find by experience
that there is a continual and necessary use successively both of the law and
also of the Gospel, Questions preparatorie to the Law.
partly because of the dullness and hardness of our hearts, least we should
wax wanton against the Lord and profane his mercies; and partly because of the
weakness of our faith and failings in repentance: least we should be driven
to despair of Gods mercy, beholding the strictness and perfection of his
glorious justice.

And yet, seeing humiliation by the Law is for the ordinary course more fit
for us, howsoever the joy of the Gospel is more agreeable to the bounty of
Gods grace and mercy: and seeing Christ came not to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance, and therefore says, Come unto me all ye that are weary
and laden: therefore let us hold our purpose to make our entrance into the
doctrine of Catechism from the law. The reason whereof shall yet further
appear hereafter; yet so, as by the grace of God we will never be contentious
herein.

In the mean while let us consider of the answers to certain questions
profitable to prepare the way thereunto, as also to the whole doctrine of
Catechism.

I demand therefore first, what every one of us ought both first of all in
order of time as most necessary, and chiefly also as being most worthy above
all other things, to seek and labor after all the days of this short and
transitory life of ours?

Rightly to know, believe, love, fear, serve and worship God in Christ Jesus,
to the glorifying of his name in this present evil world, that we may be
glorified of him and with him for ever in his heavenly kingdom in the world to
come. Mat. 6.33.
For so is the commandment of our Savior Christ: John. 17.3.
First seek ye the kingdom of God and his righteousness. And again, This is
life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and him whom thou have sent
Jesus Christ.

Have we such knowledge and good disposition as you speak of by our own
natural inclination?

No: for it is written, The natural man perceives not the things of the
spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him: 1. Cor. 21.14.
neither can he know them, because they are spirituallie discerned. And again:
2. Cor. 3.5.
We are not sufficient to think any thing (pertaining to the kingdom of God)
as of our selves.

The Greek word (icanoi) may well be Englished, (...).
and that also more significantly to the purpose of the Apostle: Natural
knowledge insufficient.
We are not fit, nor have no aptness, etc.

But can we not by the light of our natural understanding know God, by looking
as it were in a glass, upon that wisdom and power of his, which shines in
his creatures: nor be sufficiently provoked by his accustomed goodness powered
forth upon us in them, to know and believe in him, to love, fear, worship, and
serve him, to his honor and glory, and to our own salvation?

No neither: but we are so much the rather left without excuse before God:
because we, through the dimnesse of our natural sight, knowing him but weakly
and imperfectly by his creatures, cannot, neither are desirous to bend our
hearts and minds worthily to glorify him as God.

It is true: for so the Apostle Paul teaches, Romans 1.20.21. and 1. Cor. 1.21.

I ask therefore, where that knowledge and faith which is sufficient for
salvation, and to the perfect guiding of us in the right way of glorifying God
here in this life, is to be found?

Deuteronomy. 4.2. Pro. 30.6. Psalm. 105. 2. Tim. 3.15.
Only in the holy Scriptures and written word of God: whereof it is said: Thy
word is a Lantern to my feet and a light to my steps. And again, the holy
Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation, through the faith which is
in Christ Jesus.

Which are those holy Scriptures you speak of?

The books of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms, in the old Testament, and
the writings of the Evangelists, and Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ in the
New.

So indeed does our Savior Christ divide the holy Scriptures of the old
Testament, Luke 24.44. How many are the books of Moses?

They are five.

Which are they?

The first is called Genesis.

The second Exodus.

The third Leuiticus.

The fourth Nombers.

The fifth Deuteronomy.

Which are the books of the holy Prophets?

First there are four more larger then the rest. Isaiah. The holy Scriptures
the only ground of Catechism, and which they be.
Jeremy. Ezechiel. Daniel.
And then there be other twelve, which are called the lesser. Hosea, Joel,
Amos, Obadiah, Iona, Micah, Nahum, Habbakuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah,
Malachi.

Malachie being the last of the Prophets ends his Prophecy with foretelling
the coming of John Baptist, wherewith the Evangelists do begin the writings
of the new Testament. And thereby it appears, that both the Old Testament and
the New, are one entire Scripture, given by the same Spirit. But we must needs
understand more under the name of the Prophets then these 16. which you have
already rehearsed, or else the division of our Savior Christ should not
comprehend all. Show therefore furthermore how many be remaining of them, and
which they be?

There are also 16. books of them, that is to say, One of Joshua. One of
Judges. One of Ruth. Two of Samuel. Two of the Kings. Two of the Chronicles.
One called Esra. Another Nehemia. The book of Esther. The book of Job. The
Proverbs of King Solomon. Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher. And the Song of Songs.


Of the Old Testament the book of the Psalms only remains, the which in
the Hebrew is divided into five parts: How many are of them in all?

The whole number of them is one hundredth and fifty.

These are the holy Scriptures of the Old Testament: show likewise which be the
books of the New Testament; and first how many are the writings of the
Evangelists? Which be the holy Scriptures.


They are four, which be called after the names of those that wrote the most
joyful History of the Gospel of our Savior Christ.

Who are they?

Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John.

Of these holy Evangelists, Luke wrote also the book following next after
them, called the Acts of the holy Apostles: and John the last book of the New
Testament called the Apocalypse or Revelation of John the divine.

But beside these writings of the New Testament, there are one and twenty
several Epistles or letters contained in the same, which partly the same
Apostle John, and beside him, some other of the Apostles and holy ministers of
the Gospel wrote, entitled either to whole Christian Churches, or to certain
particular Christians, of special calling and note in the Church of God. Show
which those Epistles or holy letters are?

Of the Apostle Paul, who wrote specially to the Churches of the Gentiles, We
have one written to the Romans. Two to the Corinthians. One to the Churches of
Galatia. One to the Ephesians. One to the Philippians. One to the Colossians.
Two to the Thessalonians. Two to Timothy. One to Titus. One to Philemon.


Next unto these is one written more specially to the Christians of the Jews,
called the Epistle to the Hebrews, without any name of the writer of it.

And some other of the Apostles, who wrote indeed for general instruction both
of Jews and Gentiles, in which respect their Epistles are called general: we
have One of James. Two of Peter. Three of John. And one of Jude.
Nevertheless James and Peter write with special direction to the Christian
Jews.

This well agrees to Peter, who was the Apostle of the Circumcision, that he
should write to the Jews, as it does unto Paul to write specially to the
Gentiles, seeing that he was the Apostle of the uncircumcision. And thus we see
which are those holy Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament, which above
all other writings have this chief and most honorable prerogative ascribed
unto them (according to that which was answered) that they only are able to
make us wise unto salvation, and to guide us perfectly in the right way of the
holy worship and service of God, to the glorifying of his name here in this
present world.

What is the reason hereof?

Because these holy Scriptures only, are in most singular manner, and more
immediately then any other writings, given by God himself, either by the
ministry of Angels from heaven, in the hand of a Mediator which is Christ
Jesus the eternal son of God; or by the same Mediator himself, manifested
to the world in the nature of man, or else by divine inspiration in the
ministry of men like to our selves, though specially chosen and sanctified of
God to be his most holy Scribes and Secretaries to the same end.

What proof have you for these things?

In the 19. verse of the 3. chapter to the Galatians, and in the 2. verse of
the 2. chapter to the Hebrews: also in the beginning of the same Epistle in
the 1. verse: and in the 2. Epistle to Timothy the 3. chapter, 16. and 17.
verses: and in the 2. Epist. of Peter, the 1. Chap. from the 16. verse, and so
forth to the end of the chapter.

Let us peruse these places, turning to them in our Bibles. But that we may go
forward: How are the holy Scriptures to be used of us, that we may have the
knowledge and faith of them, to the end that we may give glory to God, and
obtain salvation by the direction and comfort of them?

We are most reverently and religiously to acquaint our selves with the often
reading of them, and hearing them read, and calling upon God by earnest prayer,
that he would give us the right understanding of them.

Yea this is to be done both publickely and privately.

What are we principally to observe in reading of them?

How the holy Scriptures are to be read and marked.
The orderly course of the holy Story, how one thing follows another in
order of time, and therein chiefly how both the Law of Moses, and also all the
rest of the Prophets, do give one concordable and consonant witness unto Jesus
Christ: concerning his nature, his tribe, his person, his office, by doctrine,
types, figures, and prophesies. And again, how all things, written, taught,
prefigured, and foretold in the whole Scriptures, have had their full
accomplishment and blessed effect from time to time in their proper seasons.

But have we nothing else to observe in the reading of the holy Scriptures?

Yes: for beside the doctrine of faith, and the undoubted confirmation thereof,
we are with like diligence and reverend regard to mark all holy instructions
for good life, with the promises of all kinds of blessings belonging
thereunto: and likewise all warnings against sin and the threatenings thereof:
and therewithal also the good examples of the godly, and their blessed ends,
for our encouragement, to live as they have lived: and the evil examples of
the wicked, and their cursed ends, that we may avoid their ways.

These things indeed are very good and necessary to be observed in the
reading of the holy Scriptures: but here a scruple or doubt arises: If the
holy Scriptures only be able to make us wise unto salvation, and to guide us
in the right way of glorifying God: what is to be thought of other good books
and godly writings, whether we enquire of those which be called Apochripha
usually bound in our Bibles, or any other written by godly and learned men
heretofore, or now last of all in these our days?

They may be greatly profitable, as helps for our weakness, if good
discretion be used in reading of them: that is, if too much time be not spent
that way from the reading of the holy Scriptures themselves; and if we try all
other vvritings by the holy Scriptures, which alone in matters of salvation
have authority and credit of themselves, and no other further then they do
agree with them, and so have allowance from them. For the ground and perfection
of the knowledge of God and our own salvation, is only to be found in them.

To this purpose that is worthy to be diligently noted, How the holy
Scriptures are to be preached and heard.
which King Solomon says of the reading of all writings besides the holy
Scriptures, and those that are most agreeable to them; that it is an
unprofitable weariness to the flesh, and a burthensom vexation to the frail
mind of man, Eccles. chap. 1.18. and chapter 12.12. This observed, let us go
another step forward: Is it sufficient for the understanding of the Scriptures,
and for the obtaining of faith, etc. that we do only read them?

No, but as the Lord at the first, and so from time to time, chose and
sanctified some special men, whom it pleased him to use as his holy
instruments to write down his Scriptures once for ever: so it is and
alvvayes has been his pleasure to call and furnish many other with
understanding, and with the gift of teaching and exhorting above the rest, to
minister a more clear and full light of his heavenly knowledge unto his
people, and to stir up and awake their consciences to a more effectual
embracing of the same, then they could by their own reading attain unto.

This is manifestly to be seen every where in the Scripture.

The Lord by his holy Prophets calls for hearing, as the most effectual
means of knowledge, faith, and obedience.

So does King Solomon throughout the book of the holy Proverbs. So does our
Savior Christ in the Gospel, Matthew. 13.9.16.17.18. and in the Revelation,
Chap. 2. chap. and 3.

It follows therefore that with like reverence, and that also of special
necessity, that we acquaint our selves with diligent hearing of the
Scriptures, preached and taught in the ministry thereof.

Further, it is necessary that they be carefully meditated upon in every of
our hearts, apart by our selves, and also conferred of one with another both
publicly and privately.

At whose mouth especially ought the knowledge and doctrine of the holy
Scriptures to be heard and learned of us?

1. Cor. 14.34 35. 1. Tim. 2.12. etc.
Privately, vviues of their Christian husbands: Likewise Genesis 18.17.18.19.
Exodus 12.26. and chapter 13.14.15 Deuteronomy. 4 9.10. and chap. 6.6.7. and chapter 11.18. Ps.
78.1.5.6.7. Pro. 4.3.4. etc. and chap. 22.6. Ephesians. 6.4.
children and servants of their godly parents and masters, and Deuteronomy. 33.10.
Mal. 2.7. Luke 12.41.42. 1. Cor. 3.1.2. Heb. 5.12.13.14. and chapter 6.1. and
13.17.22 James 1.19. Gal. 6.6.
parents, Masters, servants, children, and all, both privately and publicly,
of their faithful Pastors and Teachers.

Seeing the principal means of knowledge, and faith, and of all grace with
the blessed and prosperous growth and increases thereof, is the hearing of the
word publicly preached and taught: it shall be good for us before we proceed
any further, to stay a while upon this matter.

What is required to the profitable hearing of it so preached and taught
amongst us?

To the profitable hearing of the word preached and taught, three things are
necessary:

The first, is Eccles. 4.17. Act. 10.33.
preparation before we come to hear.

The second, is Matthew. 13 9. Act. 16.14.15.
attention in hearing.

The third, is James 1.22.23.24.25.
care to make good use and practice of that which we have heard.

To each of these points many things are necessary, as you have been
instructed: show therefore first of all, what is requisite to due preparation?

That we may come rightly prepared to hear the word of God as we ought,
these five things are necessary.

First a Matthew. 28.19.20. 2. Cor. 4 6. Romans 10.14. Act. 3.31.
persuasion in our hearts, that it is the holy ordinance and commandment of
God, that we should hear, and also that it is most necessary and profitable
for us so to do.

Secondly, Psalm. 119.18 Ephesians. 6.18.
that we make our prayers to God, that he would prepare us, as being of our
selves altogether unfit to hear.

Thirdly, Ephesians. 5.13.14. and chapter 6.12. etc 2. Cor. 11.2.3. etc. 1. Pet. 5.8.
Matthew. 13. ver. 14.15.19. Luke 8.12.
that we come with a mind to fight, not only against our own drowsinesse
and manifold indisposition to hear, but also against the Devil, whom we
shall alvvaies have our mighty and most malicious and subtle adversary, to
hinder us in this duty especially.

Nevertheless, for a Isai. chapter 2.3. and chapter 55.10.11 12.13. James 4.7.
fourth grace necessary to preparation, we must come willingly and
chearefully in certain and sure hope of a blessing from God against all lets
and impediments, if we shall in godly manner strive heartily against the same.

Finally, Matthew. 5.13 1. Cor. 4.1.2. Ier. 26.12.13.14.20.
it is necessary that we have not only a reverend estimation of those
Ministers which preach it truly and faithfully, but also that we nourish so
good and charitable a persvvasion of them, that we be ready to interpret and
take in the best part, those speeches which may seem to us, to be at any time
most harshly uttered and spoken of them from the word, to the reproof of our
sin.

Hitherto for preparation: attention follows; what is needful hereunto?

To attention in hearing the word of God, beside the continued silence of the
hearer (Act. 13.16. and chap. 12.17. and chap. 15.12. and chap. 16.14.) these
six things are necessary.

First an 1. These. 1.5. and chap. 2.13. and 1. Pet. 1.25.
assured knowledge and persuasion, that it is the word of God which is
preached to us.

Secondly, Romans 1.16. Gal. 3.2. Colos. 4.1.6. 1. Pet. 1.22. etc. James. 1.18.
Act. 2.37. etc. and chap. 10.44. and 13.48. and 26.18. Heb. 4.12. 2. Cor.
10.4.5.6.
that the same word of God shall (through his blessing be effectual, to all
those most excellent uses and ends, whereunto he has in his wisdom and
mercy appointed it.

Thirdly, Matthew. 18.3. Isai. 11.6. etc. Prou. 3.5.6. 1. Cor. 13.9.
it is necessary to attention, that we retain an humble and teachable mind,
vvilling not only to learn that whereof we be at the first altogether
ignorant, but also continually to learn that better which we have often
learned before.

Fourthly, James 1.19.20. 2. Sam. 12. Psalm. 141.5. Prou. 27.5.6.
a meek and patient spirit is necessary to attention, that we may willingly
admit the sharp rebukes and corrections of the word of God against all our
sins, as well those that be secret in the corruption of nature, as those that
be more open in the disorder of life and conversation.

Fifthly, Philip. 3.1. 2. Pet. 1.12.13. Heb. 23.22.
we must hold it necessary to be more and more stirred up and provoked by
exhortation, to use more and more diligence, both in the shunning of all evil,
and in the following of every thing that is good; though for the present (it
may be) we shall think that we are careful and diligent enough, and that we
stand in no need of so earnest provocation.

Finally, Heb. 4.12.
all our hearing must be mixed with faith, concerning every precept and
doctrine, promise and threatening out of the word of God.

The last point touching the right manner of hearing the word preached is yet
behind: What therefore is further to be done of us, that we be not unprofitable
hearers?

That we be not unfruitful hearers of the word, after that we have prepared
our selves, and yielded our attention, these five things following are
necessary after that we have heard the same.

First, Matthew. 13.51. and chap. 16.9.10.11.12. 2. Tim. 2.7. Psalm. 1.2. and
119.11. 1. These. 5.19.20.21. Act. 17.11.
an earnest calling to mind and weying of that doctrine which we have heard by
meditating of it in our own hearts, and by our examining of our selves whether
we do understand it, and then by examining the doctrine by the word it self,
whether it be agreeable to the Scriptures or no. How the holy Scriptures are to
be heard.


Secondly, Ephesians. 4.11.12.13. Rom 1.17. and chap. 13.10.11. Heb. 5.12. Philip.
1.11. 2. Pet. 1.5. etc. Ephesians. 5.15.16. etc. 1. Tim. 4.15. 1. Cor. 10.17. 1.
These. 3.10.12. and cha. 4.1.
a diligent and impartial examination of our selves, how we profit in the
light of knowledge, and in the comfort of faith by our hearing; and how we grow
more willing and ready to every good work thereby, and to take all occasions
and oportunities thereunto, with greater delight then before, Psalm. 19.11. and
119.11. 2. Cor. 2.11.
as also how we wax more circumspect and watchful against sin, and the
occasions thereof from day to day.

Thirdly, 1. These. 3.9.10.11.12. and 2. These. 1.3. and 2.13. Psalm. 119.162.
Nehem. 8.12.
thankfulness to God, if upon the examination we we find any the least
spiritual gain and increase: if otherwise, that then we better our
preparation and attention, and that we pray more earnestly to God for his
blessing then we have done.

Fourthly, Josh. 1.8. Psalm. 37.30 31. Pro. 10.11.31. and. 16.23. Luke.
24.13.14.15. Jude verse 20. Mal. 3.16. Matthew. 13.36. and. 17.10.11.12.13. and.
18.21. etc. Mark. 10.10. etc. and 12.34. Luke. 1.34. Act. 2.37. and 8.34. Romans
1.11.12.
sober and modest conferring one with another, and with the Preacher himself,
for our mutual help concerning the things we have heard.

Finally Pro. 2.2. and 8.32.33.34.35. Act. 2.42.46. 1. Pet. 2.1.2.3. Matthew.
13.20.21. and. 24.13. verse 28. John. 10.27. Colos. 1.23 and. 2.6.7. etc.
continuance in hearing, if possibly the means may be enjoyed, without the
which care and constancy all former profiting will soon vanish away.

All these things, and if there by any other like to these, they are all
comprehended in that admonition, which our Savior Christ gives, Luke 8.18.
Take heed how you hear, etc. whereby also it appears how great and manifold
cause there is, why the same our Savior should call upon us in special manor,
to labor after the spiritual food of the word, which endures to everlasting
life, above all bodily food, which perishes, John 6.27. And seeing so many
graces are necessary to hearing, hence also may all ministers of the word
justly admonish themselves, with how great knowledge, wisdom, and discretion,
with how diligent study and meditation, with how often and earnest prayers,
with how sincere faithfulness and integrity, with how pure and fervent zeal
of Gods glory, with what tender love and pity over the souls of the people:
and finally, with how longing a desire after their profiting in the precious
knowledge and faith of their salvation, they stand bound constantly to preach
the word: yea, only the word of God, in season and out of season, etc. Why may
we the^ look for no Revelations now, without or moreover and beside the holy
Scriptures, as in the former times the servants of God have done, while yet no
part, How the holy Scriptures are to be preached and heard.
or not the whole body of the Scriptures were written, as they are at this
present, and long since: and may we receive no unwritten verities as they are
called, though differing from the written word of God, upon the credit of
tradition, from the pretended testimonies and warrant of ancient times, from
many former generations and ages, as some would make us to believe?

No, in no case: for seeing the Prophet Isaiah said in his time, as we do
read Chapter 8. verse 20. To the Law and to the Testimony, and if they speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Much
rather are we to say so now, seeing we have not only the writings of all the
holy Prophets, beside the Law and testimony thereof, but the addition of the
New Testament also, wherein is the witness of our Savior Christ, and of all
his holy Evangelists and Apostles, as we have seen before.

It is very true: neither was there any time since that any part of the holy
Scriptures were written, wherein all the servants of God have not had a most
religious respect unto them: the Prophets to the Law, Christ to the Prophets,
the Apostles to Christ, and all the faithful Pastors and Doctors of the
Christian Churches, to the Apostles and to Christ, and to the Prophets, and to
the Law of God given by Moses, and to all the rest of Moses writings, read
Luke 16.29.30.31. and Colos. 2.18, etc. and 1. Tim. 4.7. All antiquity not
agreeing with the word of God, is to be accounted no better then an old wives
fable. Finally read Gal. 1.8.9: Though that we or an Angel from heaven, etc.
But after that we have read the holy Scriptures, meditated and conferred of
them: yea, after that we have heard them plainly opened and interpreted by the
faithful Ministers and Preachers thereof: can we then by the light and
sharpness of our own natural and mother wit (as we call it) sufficiently
understand the Scriptures, to the glorifying of God, and obtaining of our
salvation?

We cannot, unless it please God, together with his holy Scriptures or written
word, and the outward exercises thereof, to give us also his holy Spirit;
whereby they may be inwardly written in our hearts, as it were by the finger
thereof. For so our Savior Christ earnestly affirms, in the third Chapter of
John, Reading and hearing of the Scriptures insufficient without the Spirit.
speaking thus to Nicodemus: Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be
borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. And again, Verily, verily, I
say unto thee, except a man be borne again of water and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

The same may be confirmed by many other authorities of holy Scripture.

But let us proceed: After that we are enlightened by the Spirit of God,
through the reading and hearing of the Scriptures preached unto us, so that we
do in some measure know the right way to salvation, and how God is to be
glorified: have we thenceforth any power, good will, and affection of our
selves, to lay hold thereon, to our own comfort, and to provoke our selves to
walk dutifully in the constant obedience of the same, to the honor and praise
of God?

No neither: unless it please the Lord unto the enlightening of our minds, to
add a second grace of the same his holy Spirit, which is the renewing of the
heart, for as the Apostle Paul says in the 2. Chapter to the Philippians: It
is God which works in us both the will and the deed, even of his good
pleasure.

Tell me now; Are we in any danger so long as we remain in the ignorance of
the holy Scriptures of God, albeit according to our own opinion, we have a
good meaning, and do zealously serve God, after our own blind devotion?

There is no doubt but we are in very great and certain danger of the wrath of
God, so long time as we so abide: specially if we despise wisdom and
instruction, as we read in the first Chapter of the Proverbs of King Solomon,
verse 22. etc. And in the first Chapter of the 2. Epistle to the Thessalonians,
from the 6. verse.

I pray you let us turn to these places, and let us consider of them.

Now for so much as it shall go so fearfully with those that be ignorant, and
for want of knowledge do not obey the Gospel: What shall we say of those who
having great knowledge, so as they can discourse readily upon all points of the
Religion of God, yet have (for all that) no care nor conscience to obey his
will, but follow their own wicked lusts: Ignorance of the Scriptures
damnable, so is knowledge without obedience.
are not all such in a most fearful estate?

Our Savior Christ says, that he that knows his masters will, and
prepares not himself, neither does according to his will, shall be beaten
with many stripes: Luke Chapter 12. the 47. verse.

No excellency of knowledge is of any reckning before the Lord, if obedience go
not withal, read Matthew. 7.21. etc. and 1. Cor. 13.1. etc. Yet one thing more:
Did God create mankind thus ignorant and sinful, and miserable also through
sin in the beginning of the creation?

No, nothing so: but wise, righteous, holy, and happy, in a measure of
perfection convenient and meet for them, as it is declared at large in the
first and second Chapters of Genesis.

It is true: for in that it is written that God made mankind according to his
similitude and likeness, all which you have answered is comprehended, as we
may further perceive by that we read Ephesians 4.23.24. and Coloss. 3.10. How
then came all vanity and sin with so great and lamentable confusion and
misery, as it is now come into the world, and is most woefully fallen upon
mankind above all earthly creatures here below?

It is fallen upon us all thorough the willing apostasy and falling away of our
first parents Adam and Eve, from that holy knowledge, faith, fear, love,
odedience, and happiness, wherein the Lord of his infinite goodness had set
and placed them, they harkening to that lying enticement, and most malicious
and crafty temptation of the Devil.

Who is this Devil you speak of?

A wicked spirit, who being created of God, a good, holy, and blessed Angel,
did not keep that his first estate, and the glorious place of his abode, but
of his own accord corrupted himself through sin, and many thousands of the
Angels together with himself, and so became an enemy to Gods glory, and a
most wretched deceiuer and murderer of mankind.

What ground of these things have ye in the holy Scriptures?

They are set forth and declared at large in the whole third Chapter of
Genesis. Man's creation by God, his fall of himself by the Devil.


How should there be any proof of these things, specially touching that which
ye answer concerning the Devil in that Chapter: seeing, though you read it
throughout, you shall find there no express mention at all made of the Devil?

That which is written of the Serpent is to be understood of the Devil,
whose instrument only the Serpent was.

You answer truly, as may evidently appear by conference of other places of
the holy Scriptures with this third of Genesis: as 2. Cor. 11.3.14. and Reuela.
12.3.4 7.8.9.10.11. and Romans 16.20. read also John 8.44. and 1. Epistle
3.8.10.12. Act. 26.18. 2. Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2.3. and Chap. 6.12. and 2. Tim.
2.26. and. 1. Pet. 5.8. and finally 2. Pet. 2.4. etc. And in the Epistle of
Jude the 6. verse. But though Adam and Eve the first man and woman fell away
from the Lord, and lost their first estate, and pulled misery upon themselves;
what proof have you that it is so likewise with all their posterity?

In the fifth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, verses 12.13.14. in these
words:

Wherefore (says the Apostle) as by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin, and so death went over all men, for as much as all have sinned.

For unto the time of the Law, was sin in the world. though sin is not
imputed (or rather not regarded) where there is no Law.

Also death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that sinned not after
the like manner of the transgression of Adam, who was a figure of him that
was to come.

This place does plainly confirm it indeed. And it is just with the Lord that
it should be so, no less then the attainder of the children of a traitor is
accounted just with men, until the Prince of his clemency and mercy shall
pardon and restore them.

The issue therefore of all is this, that we have very just and also exceeding
great cause, in godly sorrow to lament and bewail our sin, and to turn to
the Lord by true repentance, utterly denying our own wisdom, which is
nothing but folly, and our own righteousness, which is mere injustice, etc.
if happily we might find favor with God, etc.

But have we of our selves due conscience and remorse of sin so to do? Man's
recovery, not of himself.


We have it not: neither can we possibly attain unto it, unless God of his
free grace and mercy vouchsafe to give it: that is, unless he do by his word
and Spirit mightily quicken and awaken our dead and drousie consciences, and
also mollify our hard and stony hearts. Nay rather, we bless and think our
selves happy, in putting far away the consideration of these things from us,
every one excusing and justifying himself against God, though we go on in
never so wicked and godless a course.

Show some proof of this that you say?

In the 17. Chapt. of Jeremy the 9. verse: The heart is deciptfull and wicked
above all things, who can know it? I the Lord search the heart. And again
Proverbs 16.2. All the vvayes of a man are clean in his own eyes, but the
Lord pondereth the Spirits.

Thus therefore it is plain and manifest every way, that naturally we neither
know God nor our selves aright: and that our corruption, vanity, sin, and
misery, is above all that we can conceive: so that infinite cause have we to
renounce our selves, and all opinion of our own wisdom and goodness, and so
submit our selves to seek our wisdom from the instruction of the word of God,
and that our hearts may be renewed by the grace of his holy Spirit, and that we
should pray unto him earnestly and continually, and use all good and holy
means appointed of God himself to the same end, that so happily we may be
blessed of him.

And so come we now after all former questions premised to the parts of
Christian Catechism and instruction, mentioned in the beginning of this our
exercise, whereunto (as was said) all that has hitherto been discoursed, has
as it were paued the way. Rehearse the Law or ten Commandments of Almighty
God.

God spoke all these words and said, I am the Lord thy God, etc.

We begin with the Law, that is, with the ten Commandments of Almighty God,
because they are that portion of Scripture, which God has specially sanctified
to discover unto us, The Law of God detecteth sin, etc.
and to cause us in and by his wisdom to see our own folly; by his holiness
our profaneness, by his righteousness our sin, and by our sin, our own
most justly deserved death and damnation: but not that we should peremptorily
and without all bail and maineprise (as we may say) be condemned, but rather
that we might be led to Christ Jesus thereby, and so in him find wisdom,
holiness, righteousness, redemption, repentance, and godliness of life here
in this world, and life everlasting, with all glory and happiness hereafter in
the kingdom of heaven.

To the which end and purpose, let us now in the fear of God, trusting in his
grace, and in the blessed direction and comfort of his holy Spirit, enter upon
the interpretation of the same, the most wise, holy, and righteous Law of the
Lord our God.

And yet because these words Law, sin, curse, repentance, virtue, or
righteousness, and blessing will be of often and necessary use in this part of
our exercise, and therefore also necessary to be well understood of all: it
shall be good for us in few words, to set down the meaning of them before we
come to the particular interpretation of the Commandments.

I ask therefore what this word Law means?

The Law of God is a divine rule or doctrine, which teaches and commands
the perfect righteousness of works.

That it is so, we may perceive by that we read Leuit. 18.5. and Romans 10.5.

What is sin?

It is the transgression of the Law, either in deed, word, or thought, never
so little swaruing from it.

So does Saint John define sin, 1. Epistle chap. 3. verse. 4. And Romans 7.7. Lust
is sin. And Mark 7.21. our Savior Christ tells us that wicked thoughts
defile a man.

What is the curse of the Law, which is the reward of sin?

It contains all the heavy and woeful effects of Gods wrath, that is to say,
all the plagues and punishments both of soul and body in this life, and the
everlasting torment of hell fire in the world to come.

This is plainly laid forth Leuit. 26. from the 14. verse, and Deuteronomy. 28. from
the 15. verse, What sin, curse, blessing, etc. do mean.
etc. And Chap. 29.18.19 etc. and chap. 32.22.23.24.25. and Isaiah 30.33. and
Matthew. 25.41.

What is repentance, whereby (if it be of faith) the curse may be avoided?

It is an utter forsaking of all sin, proceeding of hearty sorrovv for it,
with unfeigned hatred and strife against it: and a zealous following of all
true godliness and virtue, with constant joy and delight therein.

That this is the nature of repentance, read Isaiah 1.16.17. Amos 5.15. Romans
12.9. 2. Cor. 7.1.10.11. and Proverbs chap. 21.15. It is joy to the just to do
judgment.

What is virtue or righteousness, which is the chief fruit or part of
repentance?

It is perfect obedience to the Law of God, or any part or point thereof.

It is true; for the virtues of the heathen so called, and of mere civil me^,
they are not true virtues, not only because the actions thereof proceed not
from a mind regenerate and renewed by the Spirit of God, but also because they
are done without conscience of the commandment of God. And therefore the
Apostle Paul making mention of virtue, Philip. 4.8. he does in the next verse,
show that the same is learned and received from the word, and truly exemplified
in those only that have been instructed and taught from it, and from the holy
Spirit of God. Read also a lively description of a right virtuous woman in the
last chap. of the Proverbs, in her life answerable to the doctrine of Gods Law.
Now what are we to understand by this word blessing, which is the reward of
true virtue and obedience?

It comprehends every comfortable fruit and effect of Gods divine love and
favor, either for soul or body, for this life present or to be hoped for in
the life to come.

For the proof of this, read Leuit. 26. from the 3. verse to the 14. and
Deuteronomy. 28. from the beginning of the chap. to the 15. verse. And Matthew. 35.34.
etc.

Now let us go forward: How does the Law of God, I mean, what course does it
take to make known our sin, and that misery which in the justice of God is
due to the same?

After what manner the Law of God detecteth sin, etc.
It does it first by a most imperious and strict forbidding of us every work,
yea, every word, yea even every inward motion and thought of the heart or
mind, which is in the very least degree contrary to it, yea, which is not
fully agreeable to the holiness and righteousness which it commands: and
by a most severe and fearful threatening of the horrible curse of God, against
the least transgression of the same, how pleasant and delightful soever sin
is to our wicked nature.

Secondly, the Law of God makes known our sin, and the woeful misery
thereof, by an exact commanding and urging of perfect obedience to every
Commandment, both in thought, word, and deed, how contrary and unwelcome
soever that be to our own corrupt will and liking. And therewithal by a most
precise restrayning of all divine favor and blessing, to such only as shall
perfectly obey the same, howsoever every one in the pride of his heart
presumes, that he is worthy above other to be blessed and happy, how
negligent soever he be in the duties thereof.

That the Law does in this wise make known our sin and misery, we may
understand sufficiently by that one place before alleged out of the seventh
Chapter to the Romans, where there is a large discourse to this purpose: we
may perceive it also by calling to mind diverse other places, such as we read
in the same Epistle, Chapter 2.11.12. Deuteronomy. 27.15. etc. Gal. 3.10.11.12. Math.
5.19. etc. to the end of the Chapter, Mark 9.42. etc. to the end of the
Chapter, Heb. 2.2. and James 2.10.11. etc. Hence therefore (that is to say)
from this exact severity of the Law, arises a marvelous combat and rebellious
co^tradiction against the Law of God, from that contrary law which is in our
members, as the Apostle Paul teaches. Nay, say we, if the matter be so strict,
we will none of it, etc.

Nevertheless the Law by Gods own ordinance must thus severely be preached
still, according to that first authority, wherewith the Lord himself has once
for ever authorized and armed it: according to that which we read Isaiah.
58.1. Cry aloud, spare not: lift up thy voice like a trumpet, show my people
their transgressions, etc. And Psalm. 50.21.22. and Ier. 7.19.20. But let us now
go on: How many several commandments are there in the Law of God?

Ten. Tables of the Law and sum thereof.


So we read Deu. 4.13. and cha. 10.4. Are they al of one sort?

No: and therefore they were written and engraven by God himself in two
tables.

Thus we read Exodus 32.15.16. and Deuteronomy. cha. 5.22. and cha. 10.1.2. etc.

How many Commandments are contained in the first table?

The first four.

How many in the second?

The latter six.

So indeed does the Apostle Paul show them to be distinguished in the 6. cha.
to the Ephesians. verse. 2. where he reckeneth the fifth Commandment for the first of
the second table: and it is even of it self plain, because of the distinct
argument and contents of either of them. Show therefore what is the sum of
the first table?

The perfect love of God, with all duties of his most holy and divine worship,
as fruits and testimonies of the same.

What is the sum of the second table?

The perfect love of our neighbor, and all good fruits thereof, toward his
honor, life, and person, and toward his honesty, goods, and good name.

That this is so, we have warrant from the answer of our Savior Christ to a
certain Pharisey, Math. 22.35. etc. and Mark 12.29.30.31. In the which answer
our Savior Christ does both distinguish the tables as we have done before, and
also shows the distinct argument and contents of either of them.

Here notwithstanding it might be thought we should come forthwith to the
particular interpretation of the several commandments of either table;
nevertheless to the end we may prepare and make the way yet more plain and
easy, to a more through understanding of the Law of God, I would gladly have
you show the fruit of so good diligence, as to repeat what you have been
taught to be yet further generally required thereunto.

To the more full and through understanding of the Law of God, we have been
taught to observe these rules following.

First, that it is a spiritual Law, most perfectly wise, holy, just and
equal, General rules for the understanding of the Law of God.
most strictly binding the consciences of all, and every one of all sorts and
degrees of people, to entire, whole and perfect obedience.

Secondly, that the moral duties of the first table which more directly
concern the glory of God, are in their own nature and kind more excellent
then the duties of the second table, which belong to men (they being as the
foundation and squire, yea, even the very life of these, as these again are
as it were the touchstone and trial of the truth of those.) And therefore
also that the duties of the first table are both in zeal of heart, and in
diligence of practice, to be preferred before the duties of the second, when
both sorts may be performed; or if the case stand so, that either the one or
the other must of necessity be neglected. Provided notwithstanding that there
be an equal proportion observed, that is, one thought compared with another,
speech with speech, deed with deed, circumstance with circumstance in the
like degree. On the contrary it is to be observed, Read 1. Sam. 2.25. and
Isai. 7.13.
that in the like proportion the transgressio^ of the first table is greater
and more heinous the^ of the second. And further also it is to be observed for
the making up of this second rule, that there are diverse degrees of good
duties commanded in either table, Mat. 12.31. and 1. Tim. 1.13.
and that there is an inequality of the sins which are forbidden, the one
being unequally and with the disadvantage compared and weighed with the
other, and accordingly a diverse degree or measure of the curse and
punishments, either in this life or in the world to come.

Thirdly, to the more thorough understanding of the Law of God, we are to
observe, that what evil or sin soever is forbidden in any Commandment,
there the contrary good thing or virtue is commanded: and on the other side,
what good thing soever is commanded, there the contrary evil thing is
forbidden.

Fourthly, that under one thing expressly either commanded or forbidden, all
of the same kind, and what soever causes or any way helps and furthereth
the same, they are likewise either commanded or forbidden as coadiutors and
accessaries thereunto, or as having a mutual relation the one to the other.

Fifthly, that albeit for order of doctrine there is a most perfect distinction
of every Commandment from other, yet as touching practice, they are so nearly
knit together, that no one can be perfectly obeyed, unless all be obeyed, and
one being tra^sgressed al are transgressed. And for the same cause also there
are some kind of duties, and the contrary transgressions either commanded or
forbidden in many: yea, sundry times in all the Commandments, according to the
diverse or contrary ends and purposes whereunto they do serve, and according
as they are either diversely or contrarily applied.

Sixthly, that the curse of eternal death and of all the evils and miseries of
this life, is due to the least transgression of any part or branch of the Law,
and much rather the general transgression and contempt of it; but that the
blessing of everlasting life is not due as a deserved reward or det, unless
the whole Law be fully and perfectly obeyed, as was answered before.

Seventhly, that our Savior Christ only of all men has perfectly fulfilled and
obeyed the Law; but that all other are transgressors, and therefore justly
under the curse and condemnation which it awardeth.

Finally, that without faith in the same our Savior Christ, none can be freed
from the curse threatened by the Law, much less partaker of any blessing
promised in any of the Commandments, and least of all a partaker of
everlasting happiness. And yet touching those that do truly believe in Jesus
Christ, and earnestly repent of all their sins, that their sincere though
imperfect obedience is accepted with God, and shall of his free and undeserved
grace on our parts only, for Christ's sake be perfectly rewarded, partly here in
this world, but fully after this life in the kingdom of heaven, according to
the diverse degrees and measure of every man's faith and obedience.

All these things are necessary to be observed indeed: the proofs whereof are
for the most part clear in themselves; the which yet I will briefly repeat,
that ye may the better understand them, and that they may be more firmly fixed
in your minds.

First because God is a Spirit, most wise, holy, and righteous, therefore must
his Law be answerable to himself, etc. Read Deuteronomy. 4.5. etc. Psalm. 19.7. etc.
Romans 7.12.14.

The second, third, and fourth, may easily be confirmed by considering them in
their instances: for the exemplifying of the^ is the proving of them. And
touching the diverse degrees of curse or punishment, Particular rules for the
interpretation of every Commandment.
read Math. 11.20. etc. and chap. 12.45. and Luke 10.12. and chap. 12.47. Romans
1.27. etc. and chap. 2.1. etc. 2. These 2.11.12. and 2. Tim. 4.14. etc. and 2.
Peter 2.20.21. Numb. 15.26. etc. compared with verses 30. etc.

For the fifth and sixth, read again Deuteronomy. 27. the last verse, and Gal. 3.10.
Romans 3.19.20. and James 2.10.11. For the proof of the seventh, read Romans
8.3.4. and chap. 10.3. and 2. Cor. 5.21. 1. Pet. 2.22. and 3.18. and 1. John
3.5. Isaiah 53.5. etc. And Ier. 23.6. The Lord our righteousness. And the places
before alleged Romans 3.21.22. and Gal. 3.12.13.14. and verses 21.22.

For the last point, read also Romans 8.1. etc. 1. Tim. 1.9. Acts 10.34.35.
Psalm. 19.11. and 91.14.15.16. Mat. 10.42. and chap. 25.34. etc. 2. Cor. 5.10.
2. Tim. 4.8. Math. 5.12. Hebr. 11.6. Gal. 6.7. and 2. Cor. 9.6.

And now these things observed more generally, we may perceive the more easily
what is to be considered in the particular handling of every commandment, the
which things also have been declared. I would gladly hear them likewise
rehearsed of you, they being well near the same with the other. Show therefore
which they be?

They are these which follow.

First, the sense and meaning of the Commandment, and that also first
negatiuely what is forbidden, and then affirmatively what is commanded, in
the 1. 2. 3. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. But in the 4. and 5. commandments, first
affirmatively what is commanded, and after negatiuely what is forbidden.

Secondly, the particular equity of it.

Thirdly, the particular blessing promised to the perfect obedience of it.

Fourthly, the particular curses or punishments threatened against al such as
either make show of obedience only in hypocrisy and dissimulatio^, or do never
so little tra^sgresse against any duty required.

Fifthly, the particular application of the curses due to every one, in respect
of the same particular mutterings and secret rebellions, as they are in any,
more or less.

Finally, a particular declaration, how our Savior Christ only has perfectly
obeyed the Commandment which we have in hand, and what manner of obedience to
the same, that is, which God accepts at the hands of the faithful, Preface
or general reason for the authorizing of Gods Law.
for Christ Jesus his sake, though it be vveake and imperfect.

These things thus observed: let us come to the first Commandment: which is
that?

Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

Or thus. Thou shall have, or let there be no strange God to thee before my
face, for such are the words of the original text, though in the same sense
and meaning, with our usual and accustomed translation. But in the 20. Chapter
of Exodus where the Law of God is set down, there are other words before these
(which as ye may remember) have been interpreted unto you: Which are those?

The^ God spoke al these words, saying: I am the Lord thy God which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

In the holy language we read, out of the house of servants, but in the same
sense, because the Israelites were there in servitude and bondage, read Leu.
26.13. Deuteronomy. 4.20. and 1. King. 8.51. and Deu. 5.15. But what were you taught
to observe in the words of Moses writing thus: Then God spoke all these words?

Beside that the divine authority and perfection of the whole Law, and of every
part and branch thereof is thence to be noted, in so much as all was published
and pronounced from heaven by the Lord himself, we were further taught to
mark the circumstance of time, in two respects.

First, that God gives his Law to his people shortly after he had delivered
them out of Egypt.

Secondly, that before he published and pronounced the same, he did both
solemnly prepare and assemble them together to hear it, and also set before
their eyes diverse fearful and glorious signs of his divine presence.

Why did the Lord publish his Law so shortly after he had delivered his people
out of bondage?

To let them understand that the end of their deliverance was, not that they
should follow their own wicked lusts, but to serve him in righteousness and
holiness all the days of their lives.

This indeed is the very true end of all Gods merciful deliverances and
blessings; and this use stand we bound to make of them all, The authorizing of
the Law of God.
but chiefly of those that are the greatest, as it is expressly noted in the
Gospel concerning the end of our redemption by Christ, whereof this
deliverance of Israel out of Egypt was to them a figure and pledge.

And that the end of this their deliverance was, that they might the more
freely serve God; read Exodus 4.22.23. and chap. 5.1. and chap. 7.16. and chap.
8.1.20. and chap. 9.1.13. and chap. 10.3. Read also Deuteronomy. 5.15.

But why did the Lord so solemnly prepare and assemble his people together,
before he did publish his Law unto them?

That they might with one mind, as members of the same body politic or common
wealth, reverently hear it, with full purpose of heart to obey it.

It is most meet that it should so be heard, not only of them, but of us also,
if we mind to reap any good fruit and been- by it. For if we hear it not
with a purpose and endeavor to obey it, we shall never have experience of our
own weakness, nor of the power of Gods grace, nor of the benefit of a
savior, for the which cause it is that he speaks jointly unto all, as if he
should speak apart to every one.

And why did he show forth so fearful signs of his divine presence at the
publishing of his Law?

To awaken their consciences to the sight of their former sins, and of their
present frailty and corruption, and that his fear might be in the^, as a
bridle to hold the^ back from sin, for the time to come.

This course was indeed most fit to procure and work those effects and uses
for the which the Law serves, even according to that which was answered
before, read Exodus 20 20 whereof we shall have occasion to speak more when we
come to these words of Moses.

In the mean while, let us come to the words of God himself, which he uttered
by his own most glorious voice from heaven: saying, I am the Lord thy God,
which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage: How
have you learned to understand these words?

They may be understood both as a particular reason and ground of the first
Commandment, and also as a general reason and ground in way of a preface to
the whole Law.

Why is that?

Because they contain such a description of this heavenly Lawgiver, as
shows that he has most sovereign right to command all, and that he alone is
most worthy above all to be in all things obeyed above all.

Read Leuit. chap. 19. verse. 3.4. etc.

Which are the parts of this description?

First it shows what manner of one our heavenly Lawgiver is in his own
divine nature and being: and secondly what his gracious good will and pleasure
is toward his people, upon condition they will submit themselves to be
obedient unto him.

In which words of the description does he show, what his divine nature and
being is?

In that he proclaims himself to be the Lord God.

What means this word Lord?

That he only is eternal, of most high and excellent Majesty, without
beginning and without end, the cause of the being of all things, in so much as
he has created them of nothing, and much rather the cause why any creature
shall have any everlasting continuance and abiding.

This is the natural interpretation and meaning of the word Iehoua, for the
which we use to say Lord, following herein the Greek translation of the Bible,
after the example of the Evangelists and Apostles in the New Testament. Not
that we think it unlawful to speak the name Iehoua, as some of the Jews
have superstitiously imagined, but because use has thus prevailed. Only it is
necessary that we understand this title Lord, in the signification of Iehoua.
For the which read Exodus 3.14. and chapter 6.3. and Psalm 90.1.2.3.4. Now
what is the meaning of the other word, God?

That the same Lord, who is the only eternal, and the cause of the being of
all things, is also all-sufficient and almighty, both to support and maintain
all things which he has created, and also to rule, govern, and order them
all, according to the gracious good pleasure of his divine providence and will.

Such is the signification of the title Elohim, noting the manifold virtue and
power of the Godhead, yea and even the distinct persons of the Godhead also in
the most perfect unity of the divine nature. Of the which more is to be said
upon the Articles of our belief: Now, what is the gracious good pleasure and
will of God toward his people: in which words of the description is it
expressed?

First in the word, Thy, in that he says, I am the Lord thy God, which is a
word of covenant and promise: and then in those which follovv, which are a
confirmation, and as it were a pavvne and pledge of the covenant, in that he
did most mightily, and most mercifully deliver his people out of the bondage of
Egypt.

The condition of the covenant of the Law being such, as no man can perform
it, (seeing it promises not life to any, unless it be fulfilled) how should it
contain any declaration and testimony of Gods love to his people?

It is of Gods gracious goodness and mercy, that he promises life upon that
condition, in so much as therein he requires no more then he had created and
fitted mankind unto in the beginning of the creation: but the special
declaration and confirmation of Gods love in this his covenant, consists in
that it has a respect to Christ, by whom it is fulfilled for us as well as for
the Jews, and for whose sake God is minded to forgive the sins of all that
shall truly believe in him, and also to write his Law in their hearts by his
holy Spirit, even to the end of the world.

It is true: for notwithstanding this covenant thus respecting Christ, was
first entered with the Israelites, yet it is now extended to us, God professing
himself to be not only the God of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles. Romans
3.29.30.31. according to the former prophesies of the calling of the gentiles,
Read Psalm 87. and Hos. chap. 1.10. and 2.23. and Joel 2.32. Amos 19.11.12.
Mal. 1.11. Neither was Israel so the only people of God at any time, but that
always it pleased him to aceept of the Gentiles, such as would join them
selves to his people in the true worship of him. And although we for our parts
have not been delivered out of the bondage of Egypt, yet the Lord has
delivered us with a more gracious deliverance out of the bondage of sin and the
Devil, and from the tyranny of death, and from the torment of hell, whereof
also that deliverance of theirs was a figure and pledge unto them. Let us now
come to the first Commandment.

What does the Lord forbid in it? Sins forbidden. See more after


To have any strange God.

What is this to have any strange God?

To have a strange God, is either to acknovvledge with the heart, or to fancy
and conceive in the mind, any other to be God, either beside (as altogether
excluding the only true God) or jointly, yea or if it be in any inferior
degree together with him, who has made himself so evidently known by his
word and works, as that which he has manifested of himself, cannot
possibly agree to any other.

But then especially is a strange God taken and acknowledged for God, when
any spiritual and divine worship is yielded thereunto; that is to say, when
any faith and trust, any fear, love, prayer, praise, thanks, or any other
like duty is yielded upon the same false conceit and acknowledgement.

This indeed is principally that which the Lord forbids in this
Commandment: according to that which we read in the 8. and 9. verses of the
81. Psalm.

As touching the rest of the transgressions of it (which are very many) we
shall have a fit occasion to note them, and that also by a more plain and
easy direction, after we have seen what be the good duties or spiritual
graces commanded in the same. In the mean season, let us well observe
concerning the present answer: that the Lord does not only forbid his people
the utter excluding of him, that they might altogether embrace false Gods, but
also the joining of any with him, whether as copartner, or though it be but in
an inferior degree of minority as it were: for so does the Lord interpret his
own meaning in the 23. verse of this 20. chapter of Exodus, and Deuteronomy
32. verse 39. Read also 1. Kings 18.21. and 2. Kings 17.33. and John 4.22.
Read also Judges, chapter 2.11. etc. to the end, and chapter 3.7. and Psalm
81.11. and Psalm 106.37.

All the Gods of the heathen are mere vanity: Leuiticus, chapter 19 4.
Deuteronomie, 32.21. and 1. Samuel 12.21. and 1. Kings 16.13.26. and 1.
Corinthians 8.4.5.6. whence the house of the strange God is called Bethanuen,
the house of vanity, Hosh. 4.15.

Duties commanded.
Yea 2. Kings 17.12. strange Gods are in singular contempt and abomination,
called dirtie or dungish Gods; and therefore in no wise to be joined with the
true God of all Majesty and glory. Read also Iud. chapter 6. verse 8.9.10.
and 1. Kings 17.35.36. and Psalm 115. and Exodus, 23.13. and Psalm 16. No
trust, no love, no prayer, no praise, etc. belongs to them, The Lord will not
give his glory to any other. Isai. 44.6.7.8. No god beside the Lord, chapter
45. four times repeated in that one chapter, and chapter 48.11. Surely, I will
not give my glory to another, says the Lord. Wherefore right worthy is that
excellent profession of the Prophet to be imitated of all the servants of God,
Psalm 73.25. where he says unto God: Whom have I in heaven but thee? and I
have desired none in the earth with thee.

Finally let us diligently note, that the Lord forbids these sins, and all
of this kind, as being before his face, he giving therein to understand, that
none of these sins can be committed, but they are known to him, and that he
takes them as done to his exceeding great dishonor, etc. Read Psalm 44.
verse. 20.21.

Now on the other side, let us see what good spiritual duties the Lord
requires and commands in this first commandment: What have ye learned to be
the will of God herein?

That we do both rightly know and discern, even in the spirit of our mind,
and also that we do joyfully acknovvledge with our whole soul, that God to be
our only Lord, eternal and almighty, most wise, most holy, most righteous,
most gracious, and merciful, most faithful and true, even the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, the Creator, governor, and preserver of all things,
the Supreme and Sovereign judge of all the world, one God to be blessed for
ever, who has manifestly revealed himself first to his people Israel in
special manner above any other people, and now more clearly to all
believing Gentiles through the whole world, both by his divine word, and also
by his most gracious and vvonderfull works: and that we do acknovvledge the
same his works, and all other from the greatest to the least of them, to be
done and ordered in all perfection of wisdom, goodness, righteousness,
faithfulness and truth, in most excellent manner above all that we can
conceive.

God requires also in this first commandment, that as a necessary fruit of
this true knowledge and hearty acknowledgement of him, and of the most
perfect wisdom and excellency of all his works, we do vvisely, entirely,
zealously and constantly yield him alone as most vvorthie, all true, divine,
and spiritual service and worship, and no part thereof to any other, as has
been ansvvered before.

This verily is the end, wherefore the Lord has manifested and revealed
himself, namely, that he might be known and acknowledged of his people. Read
Deuteronomy. 4.32. etc. to the 40. verse, and Isaiah. 43.10.11.12.

This also was necessary. For else how should he be rightly worshipped and
served here in this world? According to thy name, so is thy praise unto the
worlds end (that is, over all the earth) thy right hand is full of
righteousness: Ps. 48.10. And that this our God is most worthy of all divine
worship and service, his very nature which is most excellent shows it. Read
also 1. Chronicles 29.10. etc. And Nehem. 9.5. Psalm. 89.6.7.8. etc. and Micah.
7.18. etc. and Deuteronomy. 32.31. Their God is not as our God, even our enemies being
judges.

Worthy therefore in this place is the admonition of the Prophet Jeremy,
which he gives in the name of the Lord, chap. 9.23.24. Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, etc. but in this, that he understands and knows the
Lord, etc.

To conclude the proof of this answer, that God is to be acknowledged wholly
and in all his essential and divine properties, most wise, most just, etc.
Read Exodus 34.6.7. and Deuteronomy. 32.3.4. Now I would know of you wherein the
spiritual worship and service of this only true God, the eternal and
almighty Lord of heaven and earth does stand?

It stands in the holy meditation of God, his word and works, both of
Creation and government, specially concerning his Church: it stands in
faith, or trust, and belief, in hope, in love, in zeal, in fear, or
reverence, in humbleness and sobriety of mind, rightly to use all good gifts
and blessings of God, in patience and meekness of spirit to endure all wants
and afflictions, howsoever it shall please God to exercise and try our faith;
it stands in prayer joined with thanksgiving in all things: finally, it
stands in the dedicating of our selves, souls and bodies, and all that we
have, and whatsoever God shall bless us vvithall, to the honor and praise of
his name, and that in a most sacred and secret covenant, oath, and vow betwixt
him alone and our own consciences, in stead of a thousand vvitnesses.

Here we may not unfitly call to mind, that the beginning of our Catechism is
confirmed by the Lord himself in the beginning of his most wise, holy, and
righteous Law; he setting that in the first place, which is principally most
worthy, and most necessary above all the rest.

And for the same cause, this commandment is most diligently to be considered
and weighed of us, because it is as the foundation, light, and life of all the
rest of the commandments, not only of the second Table, but also even of the
first.

Let us therefore, I pray you in the name of God, without all prejudicial
conceit of unnecessary tediousness, continue still in a further inquiry and
more large ha^dling of this commandment.

And first of all, What is that meditation of God and of his word and works
which you speak of?

It is a staying of the mind in the serious thought and consideration of them,
with a holy delight and admiration at that most perfect and divine
excellency, which shines in them, and which casts forth the comfortable
beams thereof, upon the soul of him that so thinks upon them.

Read Ps. 1.2. and Ps. 8. and Ps. 104. and Micah 7.18.19.20.

Now, what is faith and trust, or belief in God?

It is an assured and comfortable persuasion of Gods love, favor, and blessing
in all things, and specially, concerning the everlasting happiness and
salvation of our souls, vvhile^ we walk in his vvayes, and stay our selves
upon the gracious promises of his word.

Read Psalm 27.13. and Psalm 116.10. and the same again, 2. Corinthians.
4.13.14. Read also Psalm. 56.3.4. and verses 10.11. and Ps.. 46. and Ps. 125.
Read also Romans 8.31. to the (...) of the Chapter. Thus faith has joy and
comfort in the pe^s^^sion of Gods favor, etc. yet upon condition, that we
w^^^^^ his ways: for so soon as we decline from the Lord, we ^^^^ken our
faith, and going on in such a course, it should be presumption and not faith,
to encourage our selves to think that God would bless us: we should therein
tempt God, etc. read Psalm 30.6.7. What is hope in God?

It is as the anchor of faith, or as a proppe to vndershore and uphold it,
quietly expecting and waiting for the performance of salvation, and all other
blessings from the bountiful hand of God in due season, whatsoever faith for
the present assures.

Read Lament. chapter. 3.24. etc. The Lord is my portion says my soul,
therefore I will hope him, etc. Read also Romans 5.5. and chapter 8.24. and
chap. 15.4. and verse 13.

Note also that many times God is called our hope. Psalm. 62.8. and 65.5. and
Jeremy 14.8. and chap. 17.13. and Act. 24.14.15. and chapter 26.6.7. Read
also 1. Thessal. 5.8. and Ephesians. 6.17. and Hebr. 6.19.

Christ also is called our hope, because by him our hope is established in God:
1. Tim. 1.1. and Coloss. 1.27. the hope of glory.

Finally, it is the note of an heathen and unbeliever, to be without hope. 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. For hope comfort and establishes the heart, against all
present cause of sorrow and grief. Psalm 27.14. What is the love of God?

It is a most precious and honorable esteeming and affecting of him, with a
chief delight in him above all things besides.

Read Deuteronomy. 6 5. and Matthew. 10.37. yea Luke. chap. 14.26.

Zeal follows, what is that?

It is a special fruit of love, or the earnestnes of love, longing after the
glory of God, which utters it self in a wise, discreet and holy co^te^ding
for the aduanceme^t of it infinitely above al things else.

Read Ps. 69.9. read also 2. Sam. 6.16.21.22. The nature of that zeal which is
in love, is notably described, Cant. chap. 8.6.7.

What is the fear or reverence of God?

It is a holy and childlike avvfulnesse, whereby the faithful and zealous
servants of God are made loath to displease and offend him, considering his
fatherly love, vvherby he is loath to plague and punish them. Hereby also, they
are made very careful and desirous to please God in all things.

By this that you say it appears, that the fear of God is in the hearts of
his children, both as a bridle to restrain the^ from sin, and also as a spur
in their sides to prick them forward to good duties. And that it is so, Read
Prou. 3.7. and chapter 8.13. and chapter 1.14.16. and verse 27. and chap. 16.6.
and Nehem. 5.9. and verse 15. and 2. Cor. 7.1. and 1. Pet. 1.17. Read also
Psalm. 2.10.11. and Psalm. 4.4.

The want of this fear, is as the breaking open of the door to all
wickedness, Romans 3.18. and Genesis 20.11.

Now what is humbleness of mind?

It is an utter denying and abasing of our selves in the sight of God, through
conscience of our own vnvvorthinesse of the least of his mercies, yea with
acknowledgement that we have most justly deserved, and do daily deserve his
greatest plagues and punishments, if he should enter into judgment with us.

Read Genesis 32.10. and 2. Sam. 6.21.22. and chap. 7.18. and Psalm 8. What
is man that thou should be mindful of him, etc. and 1. Tim. 1.15. and
Isaiah 6.5. and Dan. 9.7. etc. Read also Micah. 6.8. It is a duty very
acceptable to God. When do we soberly use the good gifts and blessings of God?

When we are in the enjoying and use of them, careful to procure his glory,
and not our own praise: and when we seek therein spiritually to please
him, and not carnally and voluptuously or couetously to delight, pleasure, or
profit our selves.

Read Romans 12.3. and 1. Cor. 4.6.7. and Tit. 2.11.12. and the Apostle John 1.
Epistle, chap. 2.15.16.17. and Peter 1. Epist. 4.7. and chap. 5.8. and our
Savior Christ, Luke 21. ver. 34. etc. contrary to the disposition of ungodly
men, who seek praise one of another, and make their belly their God, loving
pleasures more then God, etc. Read John 5.44. and chap. 12.43. Philip. 3.19.
and 2. Tim. 3.4.

What is patience and meekness of spirit?

It is a fruit or companion of true humility, whereby we meekly submit our
selves under the correcting hand of God, quietly passing through all adversity
and afflictions of this life, as being the way to everlasting rest and
happiness in the kingdom of heaven.

Read Romans 12. verse 12. and chapter 5.4. a grace of excellent use. It is also
a necessary grace, Hebr. 10.36. It differs from insensible blockishnesse: we
must run with patience, Hebr. 12.1. It is also a companion with hope, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. and a cherisher of hope, Romans 15.4.

Let us go forward, What is prayer?

It is a reverent, earnest, and faithful beseeching and requesting of God for
all good things whereof we stand in need, specially for those that be most for
his glory, and the salvation of our souls.

Read Ephesians. 6.16. Pray always with all manner of prayer continually. And
Philip. 4.5.6. and James 5.16.

What is thanksgiving to God?

It is an hearty and joyful acknowledging of every good gift and blessing,
specially of those that be chief above the rest, to the honor and praise of
God, the author and giver of them.

Read 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. In all things give thanks. Read also Psalm. 33.1. and
Psalm. 15.23. etc. and Psame 118. verse 15. See the practice, 1. Chron. 29.9.

Finally, touching the vowing and dedicating of our selves wholly to God, read
1. Corinthians. 6.20. and Psalm 119.106. I have sworn and will perform it, that
I will keep thy righteous judgments. and Psalm. 76.11. Read also Proverbs
3.9. A solemn profession of this among the Israelites, was the offering of
their first borne, and of their first fruits unto God.

These are the spiritual graces and duties of Gods divine service and worship,
concerning the which, we have in this place two things to call to mind, worthy
our further consideration.

First, that they are all of them derived from the true knowledge and
acknowledgement of God, in such manner as he has described himself.

Secondly, which are the manifold sins, whereby this holy Law of God is
broken both on the right hand and on the left, both in excess after a sort in
passing the bounds of due moderation, and also in the defect and failing, or
coming too short in the performance of good duty. Whether we call them sins
directly contrary, or in a certain disparagement, disagreeing to true virtue,
and one of them to another. For this point was promised to be opened more
particularly in this place.

Touching the first of these points therefore we may understand, that the soul
of man cannot truly know and acknowledge God to be eternal and almighty,
most wise, merciful, just, faithful, and true, but it must needs (through
the grace of God) be drawn and encouraged, to place faith, trust, and hope in
him, as Psalm 9.10. They that know thy name will trust in thee: and Psalm
62.8.11.12.

How love arises from the experience of Gods power and mercy in deliverance
and defense, read Ps. 18.1. etc. and Ps. 116. etc. and Ps. 5.11. love is
reckened for a companion with trust.

For fear, read Mat. 10.28. Fear him, who is able to destroy both body and
soul in hell. Read also Ier. 10.6.7. and 5.22. and Reu. 15.3.4. and 1. Sam.
12.24. Read also Eccles. 12. v. 13.14.

For humility, read 1. Peter. 5.6. Humble your selves under the mighty hand
of God, that he may exalt you in due time. For patience, read Job 1.21. the
Lord has given, the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. Read
also Ierem. 14.22.

How prayer grows from the consideration of Gods mercy and power, read
Deuteronomy. 4.29.30.31. etc. and Ps. 32.5.6. and Ps. 65.2.

For praise and thanks with vowing our selves to God, read Psalm 75.1. and
Psalm. 76.1.11. and Psalm. 56.9. etc. to the end.

Who duly considering, that God is infinitely wise, will not submit himself
to be taught wisdom of him, and to be ordered in all things by him? etc.

Thus we may perceive as it were by a sample and taste, how all spiritual
graces and duties of Gods worship, do spring from the true knowledge and
acknowledgement of God, in such manner as he has described his own most
excellent majesty in his word, and made himself known by his most wonderful
and glorious works.

Now concerning the second point, that is, which are the sins both on the right
hand and on the left, we may by a more easy and plain direction (as was said
before) well consider of them in the order of these graces now rehearsed.

First of all, against the knowledge and acknowledgement of God on the left
hand and in the defect, is ignorance of God, or no acknowledgement; also
erroneous opinions of his nature, or will, or works; contempt of his true
knowledge, acknowledgement of false Gods, etc. and on the other hand, Sins
forbidden
curious searching into the secrets of God.

Against faith, on the one hand is incredulity, doubting, distrust, etc. and
on the other hand, carnal security, and presumption, without warrant of Gods
word.

Against hope, in the defect, no hope, no rejoicing in hope, utter despair: in
excess, hope without true faith, etc.

Against love, either no love, or self-loue, and love of the creature more then
of the Creator, etc. or superstitious love in a blind zeal. etc.

Against true zele, in defect, lukewarmnes, etc. in excess, zele without
knowledge and discretion, superstitious and Idolatrous.

Against the true fear and reverence of God, in defect, no fear of God, no
boldness or courage in the way of his service, fear of creatures more then of
God, or as much as of God: specially the fear of the Devil and his chief
instruments of mischief, as though God were not able to defend: In excess,
servile fear or terror, as if God were a tyrant, and no mercy to be found
with him: superstitious fear in such matters, as there is no just cause to
fear.

Against humbleness of mind in defect, pride, which has many evil
properties: in excess, counterfeit modesty.

Against sobriety of mind touching the right use of prosperity: wantonness
against God, contempt of God, delight in the creature more then in God the
giver: in which respect, many are said to make their belly their God, etc. and
to commit a spiritual fornication with the creatures.

Against patience or meekness of spirit in defect, and as it were on the left
hand, impatience, frowardness, cursing and blaspheming: in excess, Stoicall
sottishness, Popish and voluntary whipping of men, their own selves.

Against prayer in defect, no prayer to God, cold and seldom prayer, prayer
without knowledge, faith, repentance, etc. In excess, much babbling, prayer of
superstitious and blind devotion, prayers to Saints or Angels, joined with the
invocation of the name of God.

Against thankfulness to God: in defect, no thanks, seldom thanks, cold
thanks from the teeth outward, as we say, lessening of benefits,
thankfulness to the instruments of blessing more then to God himself the
fountain of them, thanks for earthly blessings more then for spiritual and
heavenly gifts or graces. In excess, religious thankfulness to false Gods,
thanks to the true God for success in all matters, etc.

Against spiritual dedicating, vowing, or swearing, our souls and bodies, and
all that we have, to the honor and service of God; in defect, is no vowing or
regard of that military oath and souldier-fare, which we have taken at our
Baptism, etc. In excess, the wicked vowing or swearing of any, to associate
themselves with the maintainers of Idolatrous religion, and the false and
superstitious worship thereof: as Papists in the Council of Trent, etc.

Here also may it not be amiss, to note that which should have been remembered
before, as a sin on the left hand, contrary to faith or trust in God: that
is to say, concerning covetousness, which of the Apostle Paul is called
Idolatry, that is, the worshipping of an Idol or false God, in stead of the
only true God, in so much as the heart of a covetous man is reposed in the
desire and hope of that which he coueteth. Oh thinks he, if I could once get
thus much money before hand; if I could purchase such a purchase; If I could
make my twenty pounds forty, or my hundredth pounds two hundredth, or as
another longs to make his five hundredth, a thousand, etc. then I should
think my self happy, I should be able to defend the world, etc. Alas say
they, what is a man without money? These and the like are speeches, thoughts
and meditations of distrust in God, and trust in riches, whereby we deny God,
Job chapter 31.24. and 28.

And wherewith we commit a spiritual Idolatry, and a spiritual adultery
with riches, Read James chapter 4.4. and 1. Timothy 5.11.12. Read also John
1. Epistle 3.15.16.17.

Let us now proceed to the other things which are remaining: What is the
particular equity of this commandment?

Seeing the knowledge and acknowledgement of God, is the most excellent and
profitable knowledge of all other, as that wherein stands eternal life, we
ought to take special delight in it.

Seeing the Lord is not only most able, but also most vvilling, The Equity.
faithfully to perform what soever he has promised, and has also confirmed
the same by his divine oath, we may boldly put our trust in him.

Seeing he is most loving and kind to us first, yea though we are by natural
corruption his enemies, and most unworthy of his love, it is most meet that
we should the rather love him again with like love, that is, with a most
pure, earnest and constant love.

Seeing he is most righteous, judging without respect of persons, it is good
reason we should reverence and fear him above all.

Seeing he is most wise, and knows better then our selves, what is best for
us, we ought patiently and meekely to submit our selves to his corrections,
and to the whole course of his government.

Seeing he has promised to hear us, it is good reason we should make our
prayers to him.

Seeing we receive all things from his bountiful hands, it is our bounden
duty to be thankful to him.

Finally, seeing we have our being and whole maintenance in and from the Lord,
according as it is said: In him we live and move, and have our being: and
seeing he has both couenanted, and promised, and sworn himself to be our God
for ever: it must needs be acknowledged to stand with all reason and most
bounden duty, that we should for our parts covenant, vow and swear perpetual
allegiance and obedience unto him.

All is most equal and meet.

But let us come to consider, what is the particular blessing of the obedience
of this commandment, whereby also the particular equity of it will further
be confirmed.

And first, what is the particular blessing of the true knowledge of God?

In the 3. chapter of the Proverbs, verses 13.14. Blessed is the man that
finds wisdom, and the man that gets understanding. For the merchandise
thereof, is better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof is
better then gold. And verse 18. Blessed is he that retains her. And verse 35.
The wise shall inherit glory.

Read also chap. 8.33. etc. Blessed is the man that hears me, The Blessings.
etc. says Wisdom. This then is the blessing of wisdom, that is to say, of
the true knowledge of God: It is of it self a singular blessing to all that
enjoy it.

What is the blessing of the true acknowledgement of God?

In the 6. verse of the same 3. chapter of the Proverbs King Solomon says: In
all thy ways acknowledge the Lord, and he will direct thy ways.

What is the blessing of faith or trust joined with hope in God?

Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. For
he shall be like a tree planted by the water, which spreads out her roots by
the river, and shall not feel when the heat comes, but her leaf shall be
green and shall not care for the year of drought, neither shall it cease from
yielding fruit, Jeremy 17.7.8.

Read also Psalm. 27.14. and Psalm. 31.14. and 34.8. and 84.5.12. and 125.1. See
an example, Ier. 39.18.

What is the blessing of God upon those that love him?

Because he has loved me (says the Lord) therefore I will deliver him, I will
exalt him, because he has known my name. He shall call upon me, and I will
hear him, I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him and glorify him,
with long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation, Psalm.
91.14.15.16.

It is the usual course of Gods dealing, to bless those that love his name,
Psalm. 119.132. and Psalm. 69.35.36.

What blessing belongs to the zeal of Gods glory?

Phineas stood up and executed judgment, and the plague was stayed. And it was
imputed to him for righteousness from generation to generation, Psalm.
106.30.32.

Read Numbers 25.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.

What is the blessing of the fear and reverence of God?

Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, and delights greatly in his
commandments, his seed shall be mighty upon earth, Psalm 112.1. etc.

Read the Psalm. And Psalm 31.19. and 34.9.10

Nothing wants to those that fear him. And Psalm. 128.1. and Proverbs 28.14.
Blessed is the man that fears always. Read also Ecclesiast. 8.12.13. And in
many other places of the holy Scriptures.

What is the blessing of humbleness of mind?

God gives grace to the humble. And he that humbles himself shall be
exalted, Proverbs 3.34. Luke 14.10.

The same again, Luke 18.14. and 1. Peter 5.5. Read also a notable place of
Isaiah 57.15. and Matthew. 5.3.4. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven.

What is the blessing of patience and meekness of spirit?

Blessed are the meek (says our Savior Christ) for they shall inherit the
earth, Matthew. 5.5.

The same is in the 37. Psalm, verse 11. after an exhortation to trust in the
Lord, and to have patience, with promises of sundry blessings: Read from the
beginning of the Psalm, it is notable to this purpose: Fret not thy self, etc.
Read also James 1.12. and chapter 5.7.8.9.10.11. and Hebrews
12.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.

What is the blessing of prayer?

Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, Joel 2.32.

The same again. Act. 2.21. and Romans 10.13. read also Ioh. 9.31.

What is the blessing of thankfulness to God?

Thankfulness has part in all the former blessings, in so much as all duties
of obedience are fruits of true thankfulness. And Psalm 89.15.16.17.18.
Blessed is the people that can rejoice in thee, they shall walk in the light
of thy countenance: O Lord they shall rejoice continually in thy name, etc.

This is according to that in the end of the 50. Psalm, where God himself
says thus: He that offers praise glorifieth me, and to him that disposes
his way aright (which is added for a further explication of thankfulness) I
will show the salvation of God. And Psalm 33.1. Rejoice in the Lord ye
righteous, for it becomes upright men to be thankful. And verse. 12. Blessed
is the nation whose God is the Lord, etc.

The Scriptures are a plentiful storehouse of blessings upon these duties of
Gods spiritual worship: but these only shall suffice for a taste to stir up
our diligence to a more plentiful observation of them as we shall meet with
them from time to time.

The Curses.
Now let us likewise see on the contrary, some of the particular curses of the
transgression of this commandment. Not of all (for that were over long for us
at this time) but of some of the chief of them.

And first, what is the curse of this Law against those that regard not the
knowledge of God?

They that say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of
thy vvayes: who is the Almighty that we should serve him, and what profit
should we have, if we should pray unto him? These shall be as stubble before
the vvind, and as chafe that the storm caryeth away. God will lay up the
sorrow of the father for his children: when he revvardeth him he shall know
it: his eyes shall see his destruction, as we read in the 21. chap. of Job,
beginning at the 14. verse.

Read also Isaiah chapter 27.11. and Zephaniah 1.6. and Psalm 73.27. Call to
mind also 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.8. etc.

What is the curse upon faith or trust in creatures, and of unbelief toward
God?

Thus says the Lord: cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh
his arm, and vvithdravveth his heart from the Lord. For he shall be like the
tree of the heath in the wilderness, and shall not see when any good
comes, but shall inhabit the parched places in the vvidernesse, in a salt
land and not inhabited, Jeremy 17.5.6. And Isaiah chapter 7. verse 9. If ye
believe not, surely ye shall not be established.

Read chapter 30.1.2.3.4. and James chapter 1.6.7.8. See the punishment of
infidelity, Numbers 14.21.22.23. and Psalm. 78.21.22. and 2. Kings 7. verses.
1.2.13.18 19.20. Trust in false Gods punished, 2. Kings 1.3.4. The fearful
and unbelievers, and sorcerers, shall have their parts in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Revelation 2.8.

For the civil punishment of sorcerers appointed by God, read Leuiticus
20.27. Exodus 22.18. The punishment of God upon Saul for seeking to the sorcerers
1. Chron. chapter 10.13.14.

What is the curse of this law against those that presume to hope without
faith, and repentance, and without care of seeking to God by prayer, and
walking in his ways?

The hope of the wicked shall perish, Proverbs 10.28.

What is the curse of God against those that do not fear the Lord, but
contrariwise are bold and presumptuous in sin?

If thou vvilt not fear this glorious and fearful name, the Lord thy God:
then (says Moses) the Lord will make thy plagues vvonderfull, and the plagues
of thy seed, even great plagues and of long continuance, and sore diseases, and
of long durance, Deuteronomie 28.58.59.

See also the punishment of presumption, Numbers. 15.13. vain fears also are
a punishment upon the want of the true fear of God, Psalm. 53.5. and Leuit.
26.36.37. What is the curse against those that love not the Lord, etc.

If any love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be had in execration: yea,
excommunicated to death, 1. Cor. 16.22.

The chief reason of this is, because Christ is God to be blessed for ever,
and because God has loved us only in him and for his sake. Neither would the
Apostle have written thus, if he had not known that such are accursed before
God.

What is the curse of luke-warmenesse, and want of zeal toward the glory of
God?

Because thou art lukewarm (says the Lord) and neither cold nor hot, it
will come to pass that I shall spew thee out of my mouth, Revel. 3.16.

What is the curse of pride?

The Lord resists the proud, and whosoever exalts himself shall be brought
low, Luke 18.14. 1. Pet. 5.5.6.

See a fearful example of Gods punishment upon Herod for his pride, Act.
12.23. and upon Nebucadnetzer, Daniel 4.26.34. and upon Pharaoh, etc.

What is the curse against impatience, murmuring and fretting against the Lord?

The Lord will come to give judgment against murmurers and complainers, as we
read in the Epistle of Jude, verses. 15.16.

What is the curse against those that neglect prayer to God?

When they cry in their misery they shall not be heard, Proverbs 1.28.

Every man is a damnable transgressor.
This also is made a note of heathenish people to whom the wrath of God
belongs, Psalm 79.6. and Jeremy 10.25. and Psalm 14.4. and again. 53.4.

What is the curse against unthankfulness to God for his benefits and
blessings?

Because when the Gentiles knevv God, they glorified him not as God, neither
were thankful, etc. God gave them up to their hearts lusts, Romans 1.21.

Thus we see in some part the particular blessings of this Commandment upon
the obedience of it, and on the contrary, the particular curses against the
transgressions. Now therefore, that we may come to the use of it: Have you
perfectly obeyed this Law, that you may from hence challenge the blessings
promised, and escape the curses threatened?

No, but contrariwise I must needs confess that I have grievously broken it,
and that I do still daily break it. For even from my youth, there is in my
sinful nature a contrary rebellion, whereby I am held captive in ignorance
and profaneness, in infidelity and self love, in love of idle, vain and
vvanton pastimes and delights, more then in the love of God and of the holy
instructions of his word: I am negligent in prayer, full of fretting and
impatience, and of unthankfulness to God: yea, infinite are my sins and
failings against the righteousness of this holy Commandment above that I am
able to understand.

This verily is the natural disposition and estate of us all, even from the
womb, as may appear not only by particular testimonies of the holy
Scriprures, but also by many reasons drawn from the same, and from common
experience also: so that when it is truly said in respect of all the
Commandments, we may well understand it spoken chiefly in regard of this: Who
knows the errors of this life? cleanse me from secret faults. Keep thy
servant also from presumptuous sins, let them not reign over me, etc. Psalm.
19.12.13. And Ier. 17.9. Yea besides our errors, infinite are our natural
rebellions, and the suggestions of the devil, to hinder the obedience of this
Commandment. If we be pressed very hard with conscience of our duty, we are
ready without the grace of God, to cast of the yoke, Perfect obedience for us.
and to say, who is the Lord? To walk by faith, is in our judgment folly, and
the next way to beggary. The fear of God breeds melancholy. And may we not
love God and the world too? what need we pray? God knows what we need before
we ask: and Gods will shall take place whether we pray or no. But who can
reckon all the replyings and mutterings of our corrupt and profane hearts this
way?

Seeing then neither your self nor any other of us have obeyed and kept this
Law, neither do nor can keep it as we ought, it follows that you together
with us all have deserved the curses threatened in it.

Have you not?

I must needs acknowledge that I have.

We all must needs acknowledge it, not mutually among our selves one to
another, but chiefly to God, with godly sorrow and lamentation in our souls
for the same, if happily we will not deceive our selves.

But is there no means to avoid the curses?

Yes: by faith in Jesus Christ, who has perfectly fulfilled it for us, and
given himself to the death for our sins, we shall not only escape every
curse, but also be partaker of all the contrary blessings.

For this cause indeed was Christ made accursed for us, that we might be made
the heirs of blessing through him, Galathians 3.13.14.

Seeing therefore our deliverance and comfort stands in the obedience of our
Savior Christ, me think it should be to good purpose for us to consider of
some testimonies of holy Scriptures, which show that he has obeyed this Law
for us.

What proof can you allege for it?

In the 11. chapter of Isaiah, from the beginning of the chapter to the 6.
verse, we have one very special proof.

Rehearse that Scripture.

But there shall come a rod forth of the rock of Ishai, and a graffe shall grow
out of his roots. And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him: the spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of
knowledge and of the fear of the Lord. And it shall make mim prudent in the
fear of the Lord. Our justification only by Christ.


The same is evident also in many other places of the Scriptures. Read Isaiah
53.9.10.11.12. Luke 2.49.52. and chap. 3.21. with Math. 3.15. and Luke again
chap. 4.4.8.12. and verse 16. etc. and chap. 6.12. and chap. 22.42. John 2.17.
and chap. 4.34. and chap. 6.38. and chap. 11.42. and Math. 11.25. etc. Heb.
12.2.3. etc. 1. Peter 2.21.22.23. and Isa. 53.7.

But are you now discharged from obedience to this Commandment, because Christ
has obeyed it for you?

I am only discharged of the guiltiness of my sin, and of the curse due to
the same: but as touching obedience, I stand bound for my redemption sake, to
know and acknowledge the Lord to be my God and Savior in Christ, and
therefore also that I do more steadfastly believe in him, more heartily love
him, more dutifully serve him, and finally, that I be every way more
abundantly thankful and obedient unto him.

It is very true, and stands with all good reason. Here therefore, upon so
just an occasion, let us diligently observe, that howsoever there is an
infinite difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel in respect of us, and as
they are for the same cause opposed the one to the other, specially in the
point of justification and salvation (the same Law being the ministry of the
curse of death and damnation, through the discovery and conviction of our
sin, as has been showed before: the Gospel on the other side being the
ministry of grace and blessing, of life and salvation) yet in Christ Jesus the
Law and the Gospel are reconciled, and the righteousness of the one is the
righteousness of the other, and the duties of this are the duties of that, and
the blessing of either is in substance and effect one and the same blessing.
But yet seeing you cannot attain to the perfect obedience of it; to what
purpose is it that you should take any great care or endeavor with any great
labor to increase in the obedience of it?

Our imperfect obedience is for Christ's sake accepted of God.
God in Christ Jesus, and for his sake, forgiving my sins, and renewing me
unto himself by his holy Spirit, has of his most free and bounteous grace
promised to accept of my vveake faith and imperfect obedience, yea, and to
bless me for it more and more, so long as I acknowledging him, loving,
fearing, and serving him in any measure of truth, Sins forbidden.
am heartily sorry that I can perform these spiritual duties no better, and do
labor unfeignedly by prayer, and by using all other holy means to increase
more and more therein.

You are in a very good way, and your persuasion has sure ground: for the Lord
will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, Isaia. 42.3. so
long as we can say in truth, Lord I believe, help my unbelief: and Lord thou
know that I love thee, etc. And the desire of our soul is to thy name,
Isaiah, 26.8. The Lord will not cast us away, John 6.37. The sacrifices of the
Lord are a contrite spirit, a contrite and a broken heart the Lord will not
despise, Psalm. 51.17. Read Isa. 66.2. I will look to him that is poor and of
a contrite spirit, and which trembles at my words. And Song of songs, chapter.
4.9. and Math. 5.3. and chap. 13.12.

Now blessed be the Lord our God, who has thus prepared us so blessed a
remedy, and for that he has given us his holy Spirit, and for that he has
made us partakers of the beginnings of so unspeakable consolation and comfort
in Christ Jesus, etc. For he might justly have left us to the common Atheism
and profanesse of our nature after the course of this wicked world, etc.

Hitherto of the first Commandment, and therein of that spiritual worship
which the Lord requires: which is such a kind of worship and service as has
his most proper seat in the inmost closet of the heart and reins, and in the
very spirit of the mind, which the Lord only and our own consciences is privy
unto.

The second Commandment follows to be considered of us, which concerns the
right manner of the external and bodily profession and practice of this inward
worship of the soul and spirit, from the former ground of the true knowledge
and acknowledgement of the only true God, and as a fruit of his true faith,
fear and love: Rehearse therefore the second Commandment of Almighty God.

Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, The Hebrew word is, serve.
Thabhandem. (...)
nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, nor in the earth
beneath, nor in the water under the earth. Thou shall not bovv down to them,
nor worship them: for I am the Lord thy God, a jealous God, etc.

Is there nothing contained in all these words but the Commandment it self?

There is beside the Commandment a reason annexed to it.

Ye say well: the Commandment is this: Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image, etc. The reason follows: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous
God, etc. And let us observe it well: for this Commandment, in stead of all
the rest, is set down in the full strength and beauty, and as it were in
co^plet armor, being furnished both with the threatening of the curse against
the transgressors, and also with the promise of blessing, and holding forth the
garland of glory to all that shall obey it.

Why is that?

God would in this one let us see expressly, how every Commandment is to be
understood, as carrying the curse and blessing, death and life, as it were in
the bosom of it.

But more specially, because the embracing of idolatry, whereby the heart is
drawn away from the true spiritual worship of God, is as it were the
dissoluing of that mariage-couenant which God has vouchsafed to enter with his
people and their posterity, even as on the other side faithful continuance in
the duties of his true outward worship, is unto all true spiritual worshippers
of him, as the perpetual sealing and confirmation of the same for ever.

Of these things we shall understand more hereafter: only as touching the
nature of the Law, containing both the curse and death against the
transgressors, and also the blessing and life to those that shall obey it,
read Deuteronomy. 30.15.16.17.18.19.20. and chapter 11.26.27.28.

Now first of all, what does the Lord forbid in this second Commandment?

First of all, in this second Commandment the Lord forbids not only the
making, dedicating, or consecrating and setting up of any kind of Image and
liknesse of any creature, thereby to represent to our selves, either his divine
Majesty, or any strange God, but also he forbids that we should once fancy
or contain in our minds any bodily likeness or shape of the divine nature.

Secondly, he forbids us to bovv down the body, or to yield any other
external service and worship, to the honor either of the Image so fancied,
made, dedicated and set up, or of God himself, or any strange God in or by the
Image, either in private closet, oratory, or Chapel, or in any public high
way, market place, Church or Temple.

Thirdly, he forbids all will worship, that is to say, every form and
practice of divine worship and service, either in the whole or in any part, and
all the superstitious rights and ceremonies thereof, though it be without idols
and images, besides that outward form only, with those holy rights and
ceremonies which he himself has for the time being, commanded to be used and
practiced according to the prescript rule of his word; either heretofore under
the Law among the Jews, or now ever since under the Gospel, among all
Christian nations to the end of the world.

Fourthly, the Lord forbids us to rest in any or all the outward duties of
that worship which he himself has commanded, as though he were pleased with
the work wrought (as they say) unless they be done in faith and repentance.

Fifthly, he forbids all true worshippers of him, to enterprise any near
society and familiarity with idolaters, either by marriage, or by bodily
presence at their idol service, or any of their idolatrous and festival
assemblies.

Finally, he forbids all desire and lingering affection of heart toward
idolatry or any other false, erroneous and heretical practice of religious
worship.

For the first of these points, read Isaiah. 40.15.16.17.18. and verses 22.
etc. and Acts 17.29.

For the second the express words of the Commandment are clear. The true
worshippers of God bow not the knee to Baal. 1. Kings 19.18. Of more secret and
private, or household idolatry, read Judges chap. 17. and Genesis 31.19.30.32.34.
and chapter 35.1.2.3.4. Deuteronomy. 27.15.

And note, that the word of serving the Image or idol is more general then
that other of bowing down. For it comprehends all idolatrous and
superstitious rights and ceremonies, and all outward actions, gestures and
significations of zeal, reverence, or allowance of this kind of worship. Such
are the dedicating of places for such kind of worship, the erecting of altars,
burning of incense, lifting up of the eyes to the Image, holding up of the
hands, uncovering the head before them, kissing of them, speaking honorably of
them, swearing by them, keeping holy days and feasts unto them, consecrating
of Priests for them, etc.

Read against these and the like, Leuit. 18.1.2.3.4. and chap. 19.27.28. and
chap. 26.1. Deuteronomy. 12.29.30.31. and chap. 14.1.2. and chap. 16.21.22. Josh 23.7.
and 1. Kings chapter 12.31.32.33. and chap. 18.28. and chap. 19.18. and 2.
Kings 16.10.11. etc. and 2. Chron. 28.22.23. Exodus 23.13. and chap. 32.5.
Psalm 16.4. Hosh. 2.16.17. Psalm 106.39. Read also Isaiah chap. 19.19. Isaiah
44.17. and chap. 57.5. etc. Ier. 7.9. and chap. 11. verses 12.13. and chap.
12.16. Ezekiel. chapter 18.6.12.15. Amos. 8.14. Zeph. 1.5. Read also Judges.
8.27. Touching the third point read Collossians 2. verses 18.19.20.21.22.23.

Read also Micah. 6. verse. 6.7. and Isai. 29.13. Math. 15.9. and Mark chap.
7.5. etc. Not only the Popish Portesse and Mass book, and the Idolatrous
worship thereof, but also the Turkish worship according to their Alcoran, and
the Jewish worship, ever since their obstinate denial of Christ, though it be
without Images: yea, and whatsoever is in any divine service book (as we call
them) contrary or not soundly agreeing to the prescript rule of Gods word, all
is condemned in this second Commandment.

As touching the Jews, there was indeed a form of worship prescribed by God,
which was allowed of him, standing in many godly rights and ceremonies, as the
books of Moses do plentifully declare. But now unto Christians, all those
rights and ceremonies which were peculiarly commanded to the Jews until the
coming of Christ, they are ceased. Only that which was moral to the Jews,
is remaining to the use of Christians, with such change of Sacraments as God
himself has expressly commanded: Of which things we are to enquire anon.

Concerning the fourth point, read Psalm 50.7. etc. and Psalm 4.4.5. and
Isaiah. 1.10.11. etc. and again Chapter 29. 13.14. Math. 15.7.8.9. Revel. 3.1.
etc. and verse 14. etc.

Concerning the fifth point read Exodus 23.32.33. and chap. 34.12. etc. and
Deuteronomy. 7.3.4. and chap. 12.30. and chap. 13.6. etc. Psa. 106.28. Numb. 25.1.2.3.
1. Cor. 5.9.10.11. and chap. 7.15. and chap. 8. and chap. 10.21. etc. and 2.
Epistle 6.14. etc. Reave. 17.4. etc. Read also Nehem. chap. 13.26. and 1. King.
11.4. etc.

Concerning the last point, read Deuteronomy. 12.30. Ezekiel. 14 3.4.5. and chap.
20.16.32. etc. 37.

Now let us go forward: Why does the Lord in the forbidding of idolatry and
false worship, reckon up so full and perfect a distribution of the images and
likenesses of all kind of creatures, saying: Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven image, nor the liknesse of things which are in heaven above, or on
the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth?

First, because all idolatrous nations, and namely the Egyptians, from whom the
Lord had so lately delivered the Israelites, and the Cananites with the rest of
the seven nations, where he minded to give them their dwelling place and to
root those people out, had every such way corrupted and defiled, yea, utterly
perverted the worship of God.

Secondly, because the Lord knows the nature of all men to be exceedingly
inclinable and ready to all kind of superstition and idolatry, in stead of
yielding true worship to the only true God.

Read Isa. 19.1. and Acts 17.22.23. etc. 29. and Romans 1.21.22.23. read also
Deuteronomy. 6.14.

And that all men are exceedingly prove to idolatry, Israel it self (who was
most wisely taught and instructed, and most earnestly warned against it) may be
one example in stead of all, seeing they did notwithstanding by and by, after
their deliverance out of Egypt, yea and afterward from time to time, fall most
grossly into it. Read Exodus 32.1. etc. 8.9. and Ps. 106.19.20.21. and ver.
28.29. Read also Judge. 2.11.12.13. and chap. 3.5.6.7.12. and chap. 4.1. Read
1. King. 12.28. etc. and Ier. chap. 2.5.6. etc. and chap. 3.1. etc. and verses
6.7.8.9. etc.

Israel would not take example from the judgments of God upon other nations,
and namely upon those that were cast out before them. Neither would the people
of Judah take warning by the wrath of God, which fell upon Israel. Read Ier.
11. ver. 12.13. read Ezekiel. chap. 16. and chap. 23. and Isa. 2.8. and chapter
57.

Hence it is that the Lord has in other places of the Law, by express mention
forbidden the religious making of all images in any kind of creature, either of
wood carved: Isa. 44. or of silver and gold, molten and cast in a mold, as
Exodus 20.23. or of any other metal, Leuit. 19.4. or of stone, whether
artificially fashioned or otherwise, Ier. 2.27. Isa. 57.6. And not only the
caruing, grauing, and melting of images for divine worship, but also all
painting of them either in glass, or on walls, and the expressing of them by
needle work, or any other way.

Thus therefore we may see plainly the idolatries of the heathen, all and all
sorts of them, with every superstitious appurtenance thereof, to be universally
condemned by the Lord, in this second Commandment.

But does the same condemnation belong to all the Popish and superstitious
idolatries of those, which do in words profess themselves to be the only true
Christian and Catholic worshippers of the true God, albeit they boast that
they know and worship God in Christ, and not any strange God, neither are so
foolish (as they say) to think that the image is God, or to worship the cross
but in respect of Christ, who was crucified upon it, nor the bread in their
Sacrament of the Altar, but because (as they say, and would seem to believe)
that it is then transubstantiate into the very body of Christ.

And albeit they do not yield their inferior religious worship to false
Saints, but to true Saints and their relics and monuments or rather to the
Saints themselves, and most of all to God in and for them, etc. and albeit they
have their many cunning and subtle excuses and distinctions, whereby they
would maintain and uphold their wicked practice, etc.

Are they (I say) nevertheless (for all that they can say) condemned by this
Law of God?

There is no doubt to be made, but they are all at once, and as it were by one
breath of the most holy Spirit of God, utterly condemned, yea, so much the
rather these then they, because (as these acknowledge) they have the knowledge
of the true God from the light of his word, which the other had not: For hereby
their sin is made the greater, and they are left the more without excuse
before the Lord.

And as touching all the reasons whereby the idols of the heathen and their
idol worship, is condemned in the holy Scriptures, they are as mighty and
pressing to weigh down and overthrow all the images and image worship of our
Popish Catholics.

It is very true. For God retains the same nature and the same divine
properties still, the which can no more be purtrayed out now then they might
then.

He is a Spirit, as infinite and incomprehensible as ever he was. And as
touching Popish images, they are as unable to do good or evil as the
heathenish were.

And they are as lying teachers, and the doctrine thereof as lying as the
doctrine of the idol has at any time been. Howsoever they are called Laymens
books, yet surely they teach nothing but ignorance, the mother of blind
devotion. And for no other cause do the Popish teachers commend them to those
from whom they have of purpose taken away the holy Scriptures, but that they
might nourish in them an utter neglect of reading the Scriptures in their
known language, least they should come to any true knowledge by the^.
Wherefore justly are Christians forwarned not only to withdraw themselves from
all idols and idolatries of the heathen in their more blind manner, and
according to their grosser ignorances, but also from following of the example
of the Israelites, which were more worthy to be condemned because of their
knowledge. Read 1. Cor. 10.7. Yea the Spirit of God gives a more general
warning, as 1. John 5.21. Babes keep your selves from idols, Amen: They be the
last words of his Epistle, he having in the beginning warned them against
Antichristian doctrine; such as our Papists thrust upon the Churches of Christ.
All which their false doctrine, and false worship, and that Antichristian power
whereby it is exacted, is condemned under the title of the name, image and
mark of the Beast of Rome, which all true Christians are to avoid, Reave.
chap. 13.11.

Yea this kind of idolatry is so much the rather to be taken heed against, and
the more severely also to condemned, by how much it is more dangerous to
bewitch and deceive poor ignorant souls, and has more show of carnal
reason, whereby subtle heads may more plausibly contend for the maintenance of
the same, according as the Apostle reasons against the false Apostles, which
made show as if they had been faithful Ministers of the Gospel, where
notwithstanding they subtly labored to bring in the ceremonies of the Law,
and the worshipping of Angels, and a Philosophical kind of preaching etc. into
the faith and worship of the Gospel, 2. Cor. chap. 11.1. etc. Col. chap. 2.
and in the Epistle to the Galathians: But more to this purpose, read Reave.
chap. 17.

Wherefore, that which is truly said of the Popish artolatrie or worship of the
bread in their Sacrament of the Altar, that it is the most abominable idolatry
of all other, because it does most nearly overthrow the truth of Religion, and
the purity of the worship which God in it requires, under the greatest
pretense of Religion that may be: so may it be said of the rest of the Popish
idolatry, being compared with the idolatries of the heathen, which were more
gross and further removed from the appearance of true worship, which Popish
worship seems to have.

And what though it pleased the Lord sometime to manifest himself and his holy
Angels by outward similitudes and likeness of things, as of men, etc. to
Abraham, to Moses, to Isaiah, to Ezekiel, to Daniel? Yet seeing Israel was
forbidden to make any such representations to themselves by the art of caruing,
casting in the mould, grauing, painting, needle work, or any other way: it
follows by like strength of good reason, that howsoever since that time the
holy Ghost by the appearance of cloven tongues, and Christ being glorified
after his ascension showed himself to Paul and John, and though before that,
at the transfiguration of our Savior Christ, Moses and Elias appeared in vision
to Peter Ieames and John; it follows, I say, by like strength of good reason,
that they are not to be artificially pictured and resembled to any religious
use and worship among Christians, no more then the other were among the Jews.

Nay, seeing Christ himself while he was upon the earth was not worshipped
with religious worship, but only then, when he gave some token of his divine
power and glory: And Paul and Barnabas vehemently forbad all that divine
worship, which the heathen idolaters would have honored them withal: and
Peter forbids Cornelius, exceeding measure in his bowing to him: and the
Angel forbids John to worship him, though he appeared in great glory before
him; much less are their images (though they were never so lively and
gorgeously pictured, set forth and advanced) to be worshipped with any
religious worship, either higher or lower, with Doulia or Latria, etc.

The only pictures which the Lord allows, as serving to teach and instruct
in the right way of his worship, are his own works, according to that in the
19. Psalm. 1. etc. and Ioh. 5.17.36. and the preaching of the Gospel, Romans
10.18. by an allusion to the former Scripture in the Psalm. and Gal. 3.1. Yet
so, as the Lord will not have the works of his own hands worshipped, but
himself only who created and made them, according to the example of Abraham,
Genesis 14.22. Read also Deuteronomy. 4.19. Acts 17.24. and Ier. 8.1.2. and Zeph. 1.5.

Finally, if we will please God in representing his divine Majesty by any
image, we our selves must be the image of him, walking in true righteousness
and holiness, according to his most righteous and holy laws and
commandments, which is our only true wisdom, whereby we are renewed
according to the image of God, and shall shine as lights in the midst of a
wicked generation.

Hitherto therefore of the evil things forbidden in the second Commandment:

Now on the contrary I would gladly hear of you which are the good duties
commanded?

First, the Lord commands that we willingly admit and embrace his own word
and works, for our only rule of all our knowledge of God, and to direct us how
he will be worshipped and served, not only inwardly with spiritual worship,
whereof we have answered before, but also in the outward declaration and
exercises thereof.

Secondly, that from a wise, faithful, loving, zealous, reverend and dutiful
heart, we do both privately and publicly profess, practice, and as much as
lies in us, every one in his calling and place, both Christian Prince and
Magistrate, Minister of the word, and every other governor and master of
family, Duties commanded.
both jointly as it were with one shoulder, and apart by every man's particular
endeavor and constancy in labor, to promote, further and advance the same the
divine service and worship of God, according to the prescript rule of his word.
And that all of us be careful to profit our selves and help forward one
another, in knowledge, faith, and repentance, and in all other spiritual
graces, by the external actions and exercises thereof.

Thirdly, God commands that we do very carefully shun, avoid and watch
against all means and occasions, whatsoever would endanger us to idolatry or
any false superstitious worship.

Fourthly, that to the same end we hold our most near friendship and
familiarity, and our only religious Communion and society, with those that
profess and declare themselves to be the true worshippers of God: we
altogether constantly frequenting the places appointed for the holy assemblies
and meetings of the people of God.

Fifthly, that every of us and all with one consent, chiefly the civil
Magistrates and Ministers of the Gospel, show and approve our selves wisely
and discretely zealous against all idolatry, and every point of false and
superstitious worship, to the quite abolishing and rooting of it out from among
his people, to the uttermost of our power.

Finally, that as touching indifferent things (as they are called) that is to
say, such things as be not of idolatrous and superstitious institution and
invention, but yet have in their kind been superstitiously and idolatrously
abused, and be not of necessary use for the worship of God: that the Christian
Magistrate in commanding or not commanding, and the stronger Christian, whether
Minister of the word, or any other in the using or not using of them, be
charitably wise and careful, that thereby he give no offense or cause of
stumbling to the weak, and that they prejudice not the Christian liberty,
wherewith Christ has set us free. And that the weaker and more tender
conscienced Christians, labor after that soundness of knowledge and
persuasion in such cases and actions as may well be construed, that they
stumble at no causlesse offense, whereby their comfortable and zealous
proceeding in the ways of the Lords pure worship and service should be slacked
or hindered.

That according to the first part of this answer, the word of God, and his
works both of creation and government in the world, and also of regeneration
and sanctification in his Church, according to the instructions of the word,
must be the rule of our knowledge, it may plainly be gathered from these
Scriptures following; in the which these things are opposed to all idols, and
to every carnal invention and doctrine of man. Ezod. 23.13. Deuteronomy. 4.14.15.16.
etc. Isa. 40.21. etc. 31. and chap. 44.1.2.3.4.5.6.7. etc. and Ier.
10.6.7.10.11.12.13.16. Zach. 13.1.2.3.4.5.6. Hosh. 14.8.9. Ephraim what have I
to do with idols, says the Lord, etc. Read also Acts 17.23.24. etc. Here call
to mind again, Isa. 29.13. Math. 15.9 Mar. 7.5. etc. And verily no wise man
can think but Gods own creatures and the works which he has wrought in the
nature of al things, are more lively representatio^s of his eternal Godhead,
and of his divine power, wisdom, justice, mercy, etc. then the work of any
artificial workma^, whose work is but a weak and imperfect imitatio^ of
nature: neither can he make so much as a shadow of the soul and life and
vital power or motion of any creature, etc. The more also the senses are
carried after dumb pictures and dead images, the less grows the care of
reading and hearing of the lively Scriptures themselves: according as we see
plainly in the Church of Rome, that by this means the devil prevailed both to
suppress the holy Scriptures of God, and to bring in their own lying Legends,
to confirm their own false worship, and all their lying doctrines.

Touching the second part of this answer, read Math. 4.10. and Psalm 95.6.

What our mutual care ought to be herein, read Psalm. 122.6.7.8.9. Isa. 2.3.
Micah. 4.1. Zeph. 3.9.10.

What the care of the Prince and civil Magistrate ought to be, consider from
the example of Josh. chapter 24. and from the example of the godly Kings of
Judah, read Deuteronomy. 17. verse 18. etc.

What the care of the master of the family ought to be; consider from the
example of Abraham, Genesis 18. verse 19. and of Iaacob Genesis 35.1. etc.

Concerning the public place of Gods worship, read Leuit. 19.30. and chap.
26.2. and Deuteronomy. 12.4.5.6. etc.

The like is to be considered, concerning every place of Gods worship,
appointed for the assembling of Gods people.

It is necessary also to this end, that the Ministers of the word should have
meet maintenance, and that there should be schools of learning appointed for
the trayning up of scholars in good learning, for the preparing of meet men
for the holy Ministry of the word, in so much as God does not ordinarily give
his gifts but by ordinary means, Read Deuteronomy. 12.17.18.19. and 2. Chron.
31.2.3.4. etc. Nehem. 13.10.11.12.13. and 1. Cor. 9.7.8.9. etc. Gal.
6.6.7.8.9.10. Read also 2. Kings. 2.3. and verses 15.16. and 1. Tim. 3.15.

For the third part of the answer, read Deuteronomy. 4.15. and verse 23. and chap.
7.3.4. and verse 25. and chap. 11.16. and chap. 12. verse 13. and verse 30. and
chap. 13.6.7.8.

For the proof of the fourth part, read Pro. 2.20. and chapter 13.20. The
danger of fellowship with idolaters David well saw, when he complains, as we
read 1. Sam. 26.19. And thereupon also it is, that on the other side he makes
so precious reckening of the fellowship and communion of the godly, Psa.
16.2.3.4.5. etc. and of the place and exercises of Gods pure worship, Psa.
26.4.5.6. etc. and Psalm. 27.4 and 42.1. etc. and Psalm. 84. and 122.1.2. Read
also Psa. 73.27.28. and Psa. 119. verse 79. Acts. 2.46.47. Hebr. 10.23.24.25.

For the fifth part, read Exodus chap. 23, verse 24. Deuteronomy. 7.25.26. and cha.
12.1.2.3. Herein those noble Kings of Judah, Hezekiah and Josiah, they are right
Princely patterns to all Christian Kings and Princes. And for the zeal of the
Ministers of the Gospel, how great it ought to be against idolatry and false
worship: whom may we rather take for examples, then the holy Prophets of God,
and Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ?

For the last part, read Romans 14. and chap. 15.1.2. and 1. Cor. 6.12.13. and
chap. 8. and chap. 10.23. etc. Read also Gal. 5.1. etc. By the which
Scriptures we may evidently perceive, that their speech is over loose and
shallow, who make humane laws to ouerrule the conscience, and to dissolve and
take away the consideration of those circumstances which the word of God in
such cases requires to be religiously respected.

But which are the duties of Gods true outward worship, whereby his spiritual
service and worship is to be manifested and declared in the open profession and
practice of it, such as God requires to be in perpetual use amongst
Christians?

They are the public preaching and administration, reading, hearing, and
receiving of the word and Sacraments, joined with confession of sins, prayer,
thanksgiving, singing of Psalms, and execution of the just censures of the
Church discipline as the occasion requires, in that holy and christian
communion of Saints, whereunto God has called hoth the Ministers of his word,
and also the rest of his people in their several congregations: and the
private prayers and thankesgiuings, with reading of the holy Scriptures,
conferences, Catechisings, and singing of Psalms in every Christian family,
by the governors thereof, their children and servants, according to the course
of their private government: and the prayers and thankesgiuings of every
member of the family apart by himself, according to their particular occasions
and oportunities, both when he sits down, and when he rises up from meat,
when he lies down and rises from his bed, when he iournieth abroad, and when
he returns home, when he falls sick, and when he recouereth his health.

These are the essential duties of Gods outward worship, both public and
private, whereunto we are to add their accidents or adioyntes.

Which are they?

Reverend and religious outward behavior in all these holy actions, and namely
in the confession of sins and prayer, the uncovering of the head, the bowing
of the knees, or rising up, if a man be set down, holding up the hands,
lifting up the eyes to heaven, with holy and reverent boldness of our faith in
the mercies of God: or on the contrary, looking down to the earth, or
covering the face, or striking on the breast, or some other way in seemly
manner, even with tears sometimes, as the case may require, declaring thereby
our godly sorrovv and anger against our selves for our sins, as also fasting,
joined with extraordinary humiliation by special confession of sins and
prayer, and fasting joined with special thanksgiving, according to the
examples and practice of the servants of God, yea even of whole Churches and
congregations of his people, laid before us in the holy Scriptures to the same
end.

It is so: for these (as one may term them) are a kind of moral ceremonies,
common and perpetual both to the Jews and Gentiles, and to all zealous and
reverend worshippers of God from the beginning of the world, and so shall be to
the end of the same: if there be no such necessary impediment or let, which in
good discretion may hinder that particular practice for a season, or because of
some infirmity or bodily weakness or defect in some particular persons, who
cannot do as otherwise gladly they would.

But that we may speak something in order to both these answers so nearely
lincked together, we are to understand that we have both the institution and
also the practice of them confirmed by the undoubted testimony of the word of
God, and by the practice of his faithful servants the true worshippers of him:
Of the which let us in a few words briefly consider. For as touching the more
full declaration of the chief of these things we have partly seen before, and
namely, concerning the preaching of the word what belongs thereunto, and
touching the rest, that is, the Sacraments, prayer and thanksgiving, with
their extraordinary fasting or feasting, according to the several occasions
thereof, we shall have just cause to treat more fully afterward by the grace of
God.

Briefly therefore touching the ground and institution of the public preaching
and administration of the Sacraments, we see how after the institution thereof
in the Law, Deuteronomy 5.27.28. and chapter 10.15.16.17. Genesis 17. and
Exodus 12. the charge of preaching the word, together with the change and new
institution of the Sacraments of the new Testament, is renewed to the Gentiles
by our Savior Christ, Matthew. 3. and chapter 26. and chapter 28. and 1.
Corinthians 1.21. and of prayer both private and public, Matthew. chap. 6. and
Luke 11. And thanksgiving, 1. Thessal. 5.18.

And for the practice of preaching, prayer, Sacraments, etc. we may see it in
our Savior Christ himself and his Apostles, Luke 3.21. and chap. 4.15. and
chap. 6.12. Read also in the Acts of the Apostles every where, and namely
chapter 2.42. and chapter 20.17. etc. and verse 28. etc. And for singing of
Psalms, read Mat. 26.30. Act. 2.47. Act. 16.25. Read also 1. Cor. 14.26.
Ephesians. 5.19.20. and Coloss. 3.16. Revel. 15.4.

Likewise as touching the adioynts of the external worship of God, see the
practice of kneeling at prayer, Luke 22.41. Matthew. 26.39. where our Savior
Christ kneeleth down, yea prostrateth himself on the ground. And John 17.1.
he lifts up his eyes to heaven. So did Paul and the Christians with him when
they prayed, Act. 20.36. and again chapter 21.5. Read also 1. Corinthians. 14.25.

For the uncovering of the head, read 1. Cor. 11.4.

For the holding up of the hands in prayer, read 1. Tim. 2.8. Exodus 17.11.
Lament. 3.41.

For fasting joined with prayer both private and public, read Mat. 6. and
Luke 5.35. Act. 13.2. and 2. Cor. 6.6.

For looking down to the earth, etc. read Luke. 18.13.14. and Jeremy 31.19.
For tears in prayer, with pity over sinners, Luke 19.41. Philip. 3.18. Act.
20.37. 2. Tim. 1.4. Judges chap. 2.4.5. 1. Sam. 7.6. Psalm. 6.6. and 56.8. and
Psalm. 119. verse. 136. and 2. Kings 20.3. and chapter 22.19. and Ezra chapter 10.1.
Joel 2.17.

For feasting and ioyfulnesse with special thanksgiving, read Jude verse 12.
and 1. Corinthians. 11.20.21.

And in this manner was it that Paul says, Act. 24 14. that he worshipded God,
believing all things which are written in the Law and in the Prophets.

It is true indeed, that the bowing of the body and all other outward
gestures are nothing without the bowing of the heart, as we may perceive by the
speech of Joshua, chap. 24.23. and 1. Kings 8.57.58. and Isaiah 58.5. But how
can we think that such a one boweth his heart, who refuses to make any
outward profession of it in the fit time and place thereof?

Every one therefore that will, may see that these things (though they be not
of the substance of religion) yet may they not be profanely and rudely
neglected of us, without sin against this holy commandment of God. And we
are the rather to consider of these things, because experience shows, that
many fall from Popish superstition, to a contrary extremity of irreverent
behavior before the Lord, as though it nothing at al mattered what gesture we
use in the congregation. This is no correction of abuses, but a changing of
one abuse for another, and therefore must needs be displeasing before the Lord.

But yet one thing more, which I pray you let us earnestly and in the fear of
God, concerning the ministration of the word and Sacraments: that is, whether
it be necessary, that there be any prescript form set down and agreed upon,
for the ordering of these actions, and that the same should be religiously used
in the worship of God, or no. For verily it is necessary that every one have
a sound judgment and persuasion in this point, and that we have a clear
conscience void of all scruple, seeing it does so nearely concern the worship
of God.

Show therefore what has been your instruction herein: and I beseech God to
give us true understanding in all things?

I have been taught, that it is not simply necessary, that there should he
any prescribed form, for then the Lord himself would by his holy Apostles
have expressly set down one for an unchangeable and exact rule for all
Christian Churches. And beside, it may be presupposed, that he which
(according to the ordinance of the Lord) is fit to be a Minister of the word
and Sacraments, is in some convenient measure instructed from the book of God,
how to pray in all things as the matter requires, as well as to teach every
man the whole doctrine of faith, and to instruct in every point of
righteousness, through the wisdoms and grace of the holy Ghost which is
given unto him. And finally, the gifts and graces of the Spirit of God are not
to be stinted and limited by man.

Nevertheless, I have here vvithall been likewise taught, that in some
respects it may be counted necessary, as a godly help and remedy, both for
Ministers and people, that they should have some form and order agreed upon,
and used for public profession of consent; provided that it be a sound
collection and interpretation out of the word of God, both for the substance
of matter, and also touching the form and order it self, as grave and simple
as may be, without all curious variety of humane invention, according to the
examples and practices of the Christian Churches recorded and set down in the
word of God for our imitation therein: so that the liberty of the preaching
of the Gospel, and of the prayer which is by the discretion of the Preacher
to be fitted thereunto, be not by the length and labor of that which is
prescribed, abridged, or prejudiced and hindered any way.

For the proof of these things, read 2. Timothy 3.16.17. 1. Peter 4.11.
Coloss. 1.28. 1. Corinthians. 11.1. etc. to the end, and chap. 14. Act. 13.15.27.
and chap. 15.21. and Coloss. 4.16. 2. Timothy 4.1.2.3.4.5.

See some examples of prescribed forms in the holy Scriptures. Of Prayer,
Psalm 102. Joel 2.15.16.17.18. Luke chap. 11.2. of thanksgiving, Deuteronomy.
26.5.6.7.8.9.10. Psalm 92.2. Chron. 29.30. Revelation 15.3. Of blessing,
Nombers 6.22. etc. Yea of blessing the godly, and cursing the wicked, Deuter.
27.11.12. Read also Nombers 5.21.22.

These examples and the like, are to be followed for soundness, plainness
and brevity, in a meet and convenient proportion. Otherwise, none ought to
presume either to prescribe or practice any thing for a worship yielded to God.

But which are those respects for the which a prescript form and order of the
ministration of the word and Sacraments, may be accounted necessary, as a
godly help and remedy to be agreed upon?

First, in regard of the weaker sort in every congregation, who are
necessarily herein to be tendered of all the rest; yea even in respect of the
common infirmity and humane weakness of us al.

Secondly, because of the importunity of the malicious adversaries of the
Gospel, who would otherwise take great advantage to cavil at, and to
slander the Churches of God, as if we were uncertain in all things, and
were full of confusion in our faith and worship of God, and in our whole
profession and religion.

As touching the weaker sort of our brethren, we know how they are in many
places offended, yea notwithstanding the faithful Ministers of God use good
discretion herein. They are hardly kept from waywardness against preaching it
self, which God has appointed to do them the most good, because they are not
fully satisfied the other way. But beside this consideration of the weaker,
surely they that are more strong and better confirmed in the ways of God, and
have the grace to discern betwixt things that differ (both Minister of the word
and other) they find good use of that which is well prescribed both for prayer
and for declaration of other the ordinances of God, not only for help of
memory, but also to quicken the affection, to the more excellent, more
necessary, more essential, and effectual parts of their ministry: wherein
God is to be blessed and praised of us, for our gracious liberty, both
touching preaching, and also concerning prayer, so far as God has distributed
the measure of his graces to every one.

Thus far therefore all are to be entreated in the Lord, that howsoever every
one is for his own part, to keep him self upright and sincere in the worship
of God, yet where some things are amiss, in an order set down which is
generally good and godly, we are to take great heed that we sin not so
unadvisedly, as to reject all because of some imperfections. Neither yet to be
over ready to object and hold forth the blemishes thereof to the disgracing of
the whole, and therein to be contentious, etc: but rather to sigh and mourn
for it, and to entreat the Lord for his merciful redress in his due time, we
always acknowledging our selves unworthy of so great perfection as we ought
humbly to desire and heartily to long for, etc.

Romans chap. 12.18.1. Cor. 10.32.33. Col. 4.5.
Now further also, as touching the adversaries of the Gospel, we know that we
must have care that we give no offense to any, but that we walk
circumspectly, even toward those that be without, against whose slanderous
reports a holy consent in doctrine liturgy, and in discipline set down, is a
just and real Apollogie and defense in the sight of all men.

This is that which we ought to think in soundness of judgment concerning
this weighty matter, and therefore was it of duty to be delivered unto you.

It remains also as belonging hereunto, that you show who they are, by whom
the word and Sacraments are to be publicly administered with prayer and
thanksgiving in the Churches of God, and so are to be acknowledged meet guides
unto the rest in the actions of Gods holy service and worship.

Show which they be?

They are such as being first called of God, that is to say, The Equity.
such whom he has endued with meet gifts and graces for so holy a ministry
and service, are also upon due trial of the same their fitness, both for
doctrine and life, called, ordained, and set apart thereunto with consent of
other godly Ministers, and that people, to whom they are to minister in the
disposing of the mysteries of God.

Read 1. Tim. chap. 3. and Titus chap. 1. Act. 14.23. Heb. 5 4. 2. Corinthians.
3.5.6.

Read also Romans chap. 12.6.7.8. and 1. Tim. chap. 5.9. etc. 17.18.21.22.

Hitherto of the evils forbidden, and of the contrary good duties commanded.

Now what is the equity of this commandment?

Seeing the Lord has not only created and redeemed our souls, but also our
bodies, yea seeing he has as it were espoused and married us and his whole
Church to himself, most dearly loving it as it were with the love of a most
kind husband toward his only wife which he tendreth as himself; it is most
equal and meet that we should in all pure and chaste manner worship him alone,
both with our souls and also with our bodies, because we are wholly his.

It is true: Read Psalm 95. and Psalm. 100. Read also 1. Cor. 6.20. Romans 8.23.
Phil. 3.21. 2. Corinthians. 7.1. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Read also Jeremy 2.1.2.32.
Yea the renewing of the marriage, chap. 2.2. and Isa. 62.4.5. and Hosh. chap. 2.
and chap. 3. Matthew. 9.15. and John 3.29. Ephesians. 5.22. Revel. 21.2. And the whole
Song of songs.

Now therefore how unworthy a thing it is, that mankind which is the noblest
of all bodily creatures, should prostrate, yea prostitute himself as it were,
in spiritual adultery to most vile and contemptible idols: which that they
have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, etc. every man that will open his
eyes, and is not as an idol himself, may easily see.

And that Idols are most vain and contemptible things, Gillulim of Galal,
which signifies dung. As Ezech. 4.11.15. even the excrements of the body.
read how great disgrace the Lord has cast upon them every where in his holy
Scriptures, as Ps. 115.4. etc. and Ps. 135.15.16.17.18. and 1. Cor. 12.2. and
Act. 14. verse. 15. and Ier. 10.14.15. and Hab. 2.18.19. and 2. Kings chapter 17.12.
dungie gods, and 1. Cor. 8. they are nothing in the world. And Isaiah chapter
44.9. etc. Read also Ezechiel chap. 16. and chap. 23. Where, the Lord does by
his holy Prophet most odiously describe the sin of Idolatry, comparing it to
most filthy adultery of the body.

Hence it is, that (as it follows in the reason of this commandment) the
Lord takes to himself the title of jealousy against Idolaters, as against
those which defile the marriage covenant: of the which reason we are now to
inquire. It contains two parts. Which are they?

The first is a threatening of the curse against all Idolaters, which the Lord
accompteth haters of him.

The second is, a promise of blessing to all pure and chaste worshippers of
God, whom only he esteems for his true lovers and friends, according as it
is said of Abraham, that he was called the friend of God.

So indeed we read James 2.23 And the Apostle may well gather so much by the
Lords familiar dealing with Abraham, as the holy story plentifully reports,
seeing he was a true worshipper of him, etc. read 2. Chron. 20.7. and Isa. chapter
4.18.

But in the reason of the commandment, which are the words of the curse
against Idolaters?

They are these: For I the Lord thy God mighty and jealous, do visit the
iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, upon the third generation, and upon
the fourth, on such as hate me.

What means the Lord when he says, he will visit the iniquity of the
fathers on the children?

His meaning is, that he will severely punish this grievous sin of Idolatry.

God indeed does not visit and make inquisition for sin in vain; but finding
it he takes vengeance of it, as we may observe his proceeding against Sodom
and Gomorrha, and the cities adjoining, Genesis 18.20.21. and chapter 19.23. Read
the 1. chapter of Zephaniah, where the threatening of the punishment is joined
with the visitation and search for sin diverse times in that chapter. And the
Lord professes himself specially wroth, as we see in this place against this
sin of Idolatry, which he accounts a spiritual and most filthy
fornication. Remember again Ezechiel, chapter 16. and chap. 8.15. and Josh.
24.19.20. The Curse.


Yea, let us mark in reading of the holy Scriptures, and we shall find, that
the Lord is not more often, nor more earnest against any sin, then against
this of Idolatry, Read Deuteronomy. 27 15. Ezekiel. 14.34.5. and chapter 8. verse
8.9.10.11.12.
both secret and open, which is the perverting of his whole true religion, as
has been answered in our entrance upon the interpretation of this commandment.

What is the punishment and curse which God threateneth?

Unquietness and turmoile of conscience, with many bodily calamities here in
this world, and after this life, everlasting and most woeful destruction both
of body and soul in the world to come, if it be not prevented by true
repentance.

Read Psalm. 16.4. Isa. 2.19.20.21. and chap. 8, 21.22. and chapter 16.12. and
chap. 47.11.12. etc. against the Babylonians, and chap. 57.10. etc. 20.21.
against the Israelites. And Hosh. 8.7.8. and chap. 10.15. and 1. Corinthians
6.9. and 1. Peter. 4.3.4.5. and Revel. 22.15.

But why does God call Idolaters haters of him, seeing they say they do that
which they do of singular love, devotion, and zeal which they bear unto him?

Because Idolaters can no more love God in truth, then the adulterous woman can
love her husband, howsoever she speaks him fair and flattereth with her
lips.

This indeed does the Lord give all Idolaters plainly to understand, if they
had grace to see.

But that we may have forward: the threatening as we see, is not made against
Idolaters themselves only, but also against their children and posterity, to
the third and fourth generation Is not this unequal, think you, that God
should punish the children from one generation to another for the fathers
offenses?

It is rather of wonderful mercy, that he does so graciously limite and
restrain the curse: seeing he might justly withdraw his grace from the whole
posterity of the Idolaters, as from an illegitimate and bastardly seed,
seeing he has as much as in him lies, made the condition of the covenant of
this spiritual marriage utterly void and frustrate.

Yea and herein also does the wonderful mercy of God more clearly utter it
self, because he does not so cast off the next generations of the idolaters,
but whosoever of them will forsake the sin of their fathers and be true
worshippers of him, they shall not only be accepted themselves, but the
covenant also shall in them be renewed to their children and posterity for
ever, whosoever among them shall abide faithful therein.

Read Ezekiel. chap. 18.1. etc. to the end: and chap. 20.18.19.20. read also
Psalm. 78.4. etc. 7.8. and Ier. 3.1. and Hosh. 3. Here therefore is wonderful
mercy indeed. And further also, the very curse it self serves to exceeding
gracious purpose, that is, both to fear parents from idolatry, even for that
love they ought to bear to their posterity, and welfare of their children,
both in soul and body: and also to withdraw children from the example of their
idolatrous parents, which is for them a very dangerous inducement to
idolatry, and so to the utter undoing of all that should come of them to the
third and fourth generation, by a pitiful interruption of the course of Gods
mercies toward them.

But all this concerns those children that live to come to knowledge.

What is to be said of those children of Idolaters, which dye before they can
discern of the Idolatries of their forefathers: shall all such be condemned?

They are doubtless in a fearful estate: nevertheless we must in fear and
reverence leave the secret judgments of God to himself, who will in due time
show himself most righteous in all his vvayes.

So said Moses, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things belong to the Lord our God, etc. Yet
thus far may we be in good hope, that notwithstanding they are cut off from the
benefit of the covenant of the Law, which is not made to thousands, but upon
condition of the childrens faithfulness in their generations after the example
of their godly parents, some of them may be saved through the grace of that
covenant which was made to Abraham, according to the free election of God in
Christ Jesus, before this covenant of the Law was made, and which is
established upon better promises. Heb. 8.6.

Hitherto of the curse against the transgressors of this Commandment, which as
was said, is the first part of the reason; The Blessing.
the second part follows: In what words is that contained?

In these: For I the Lord thy God do show mercy unto thousands, to such as
love me and keep my commandments.

What is that mercy which the Lord will show them?

He will bless them with all blessings of this life, so far as shall be good
for them: but more specially he will give them abundance of true spiritual
comfort here in this world, and everlasting happiness and glory in the
kingdom of heaven. Yea he will bestow these mercies not only upon themselves,
but also upon their posterity to a thousand generations.

That is, even to the worlds end, and for ever and ever. Read Deuteronomy. ^ 9. and
Psalm. 105.8.
So great is the largeness of Gods most gracious covenant to all that truly
love God, in dutiful and thankful regard of his most tender (as it were)
marriage love toward them; and in love (as a fruit thereof) do purely and
chastely worship him and keep his commandments. For the love of God in us is
the immediate root and fountain of all our obedience, even as his love toward
us and the sweetness thereof apprehended and felt in our hearts by faith, is
the original and first cause of our love to him. But shall all the posterity
of the true worshippers of God be thus blessed and saved without exception?

No: but they only which keep covenant with the Lord, following the example
of their faithful and godly parents, how few or how many soever they be.

So indeed do the words of the commandment it self limit the promise, Read
also Psalm 103.17.18.

Remember Ezechiel again 18.14. etc.

But what if the children of faithful parents dye before they know what
belongs to the true worship of God, neither have knowledge and faith to love
him and to keep his commandments?

There is notwithstanding very comfortable hope, because they are within the
compass and charter of the covenant.

It is true: for God has fayd of the faithful worshippers of him: I am thy
God and the God of thy seed, Genesis 17.17. and chapter 12.2. And our Savior
Christ assures us, that to such belongs the kingdom of heaven, Mark 10.14.
read also 1. Corinthians 7.14.

Yet we see that even of the children of the faithful, many that live to come
to knowledge, do afterward utterly degenerate and refuse to walk in the
steps of their faithful parents, and so pull down the curse of God upon
their heads: yea the true worshippers of God themselus, and their godly
children have always, and do still meet with many great afflictions and
troubles, according as it is said: Great are the troubles of the righteous,
Psalm. 34.19.

What is to be said to these things?

God hereby gives to understand, that his election is free, and also that all
mankind is naturally corrupt and sinful from the womb, and that the
obedience of his best servants is imperfect, which makes the jar, and
puts all as it were out of time. So that of necessity we must have
recourse to the fountain of Gods free grace and mercy in Christ Jesus, for
the assured ground of our stay and comfort in the midst of al our troubles,
until the Lord shall in his good time deliver us out of them all.

So it is in the place of the Psalm. before mentioned: Great are the troubles of
the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of them all. Undoubtedly, if we
could hold on in an even and constant course of obedience, his mercies toward
us should flow as it were with a continual stream upon us without
interruption; but because we go so often out of the way, we meet with the
curse, at the least with the tagge of it (as one may say) in stead of the
blessing. Now therefore these things being true, both touching the curse and
also the blessing (as they are indeed most true) how comes it to pass that
they do usually so little affect people, either to breed in them carfulness
to fly idolatrous and superstitious worship, or to provoke them to be upright
and zealous in the true worship and service of God. What is the cause of this?

It is, by reason that we do not consider duly of that which God himself
alleges, to admonish and provoke us all, to be above all things most careful
to yield him his most due service and worship.

What is that which God alleges to this end?

His almighty power and eternal decree, wherein he stands fully armed and most
zealously bent, both with justice to take vengeance upon al Idolaters, and also
in mercy to bless and reward all his true worshippers and faithful servants.

These things which are most weighty and of greatest importance above all
other, are contained in those his divine titles, which here again the Lord
repeateth from the preface or general reason of his Law; saying: For I the
Lord thy God: and in this new title of jealousy which he takes to himself,
by a similitude taken from the disposition of a most loving husband, who ca^
least endure to be unfaithfully dealt withal by his wife above all other, and
is a most hot pursuer of him which has defiled his marriage bed, as we read
Proverbs 6. in the end of the chapter: God grant that all of us may better
consider of these things.

Why is Idolatry compared to bodily adultery?

First, to set forth how abominable this sin is in the sight of God.

Secondly, to note the extreme delight and pleasure which Idolaters take in
this sottish haunt, they being as it were wood and mad in the haunting after
it.

Thirdly, because they are by all means most lavish and prodigal in the
upholding and advancement of it.

Finally, because the spiritual adulterer as well as the bodily, is
continually restless and unsatisfied, seeing they have both of them left the
ways of God, whereunto only he has promised the blessing of sacietie and
contentment.

Touching the first reason, we have seen it already from the 16. chapter, and
the 23. chap. of Ezekiel. where the Lord describes it so odiously, that (were it
not that the Lord has seen it so meet) we would think that it might not with
shamefastness be so uttered. But the reverence of his most holy and pure
wisdom teaches us, to lay all the shame justly upon our own extreme folly,
which has given so vehement an occasion of it. etc.

Of the second and third reason, their own practice in their often and long
pilgrimages, their many and great offerings and gifts, both in life and at
their death, their costly decking of their images, etc. are a plentiful and
real witness, famous as in a theater. etc.

Every man is a damnable transgressor.
Last of all, that they are restless and unsatisfied and never quieted, it is
affirmed Ps. 16. and may be gathered, by the name which the Lord gives in
many places, calling them, terricula, such things as rather terrify and vex,
then comfort, etc.

Hitherto of the interpretation and equity, and of the curse and blessing of
this second commandment:

Now that we may come to the use, and so as shortly as may be, grow to the
conclusion.

Have you perfectly obeyed this so just and equal a Commandment, that thereby
you stand freed from the curse threatened, and that ye may (as a recompense of
your obedience) look for the blessings promised?

To speak truly, neither I nor any other can say so: but rather all of us do
grievously and continually sin against it one way or other. It is the only
mercy and grace of God, vvherby we are preserved from gross idolatry and
the occasions thereof; and that we are taught and trained up in the way of
his true worship. And if we could rightly judge our selves, we should find,
that by nature we are as prone and ready to all superstition and Idolatry, as
any other which have been this way misled before us.

It is true: for idolatry is very pleasing to the natural man, as that which
is of his own devising, and which man has himself every way fitted to serve
his own humor. Suum cuique pulchram.
It has all things delightful to the sight of the eyes, to the hearing of the
ears, to the smelling of the nose, goodly and sumptuous Churches and
monasteries, beautiful and brave Images, sweet melody and descant, fragrant
and odoriferous smells of incense. To speak in a word, it is a marvelous and
easy way of worshipping God, according to that which one says of their most
devoted and religious persons, that they are humble but without lowliness,
poor but without want, and rich without labor. It were doubtless an easy
thing for any of us, to bring our hearts to as great a love and liking of
idolatry and idolatrous worship as any of the Papists bear unto it, if the
commandment of God did not through his grace restrain us, and inform our
consciences against it: So that they which boast and glory of their devotion
this way, they do but glory of their own shame.

The temptations of gross Idolatry (Go be thanked) are not of any great
force with us in this our gracious peace and liberty of the Gospel. Christ's
perfect obedience for us
But which of us knows how great they would be, if Idolatry (which God of
his infinite mercy forbid) might yet again be countenanced and commanded by
public authority, and enforced by severe persecution and penalty: we may be
sure of this, that unless we should be mightily assisted by the Spirit of God
to withstand them, they would fearfully shake us. Wherefore let us not deceive
our selves with vain confidence, without careful sifting and examining of our
selves in the sight of God, etc.

But to leave conjectures for the time to come, and to go no further then to
present signs and show tokens; surely the little sorrow which we have for our
former sins in the days of idolatrous darkness, and the little
thankfulness that is among us for the sweet and comfortable light of the
Gospel, with so wonderful deliverance as we enjoy: and finally that little
reverence and zeal which we bear to the true worship of God in the holy and
pure exercises thereof, they do strongly evidence and testify against us, that
our sin and guiltiness is great against the righteousness of this holy
Commandment.

We are therefore so far from the desert of blessing, that we have deserved a
great measure of the curse; and might justly fear it without all escape,
unless happily we shall take hold of that part of the obedience of our Savior
Christ, whereby he has obeyed this Law, and made satisfaction to God for our
sins in this behalf: for he only must be our discharge, etc.

But what proof have you that our Savior Christ has perfectly obeyed this 2.
commandment: that so we may have assurance that he is our righteousness
concerning this commandment, as well as concerning the former?

We have a notable proof of it in the 2. chapter of the Euang. John, verse.
14.15.16. and 17. which testifies of his perfect zeal against the abuses, and
for the right use of the holy place of Gods worship.

Rehearse that which he Evangelist writes of this matter.

14 And he found in the Temple those that sold oxen, and sheep, and doves, and
changers of money sitting there.

15 Then he made a scourge of small cords, and drove them all out of the
Temple, with the sheep and oxen, and powered out the changers money, and
ouerthrevv the Tables.

16 And he said unto them that sold doves, take these things hence, and make
not my fathers house a house of merchandise.

17 And his disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thy house
has eaten me up.

This zeal of our Savior Christ for the house of Gods worship, is indeed a
perfect confirmation of his zeal to all the duties of Gods worship, to be
performed in all holy and pure manner in the Temple of God, according as it is
said in the Psalm. 93.5. Holiness becomes thine house O Lord for ever, and
Psalm 5.7. I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy, etc. and
Psalm. 29.9. In his Temple should every man speak of his glory. And
according as the Israelites returning from captivity, Nehem. chapter 10.39. in
their subscribing of their oath and vow to the Lord express it by this, that
they would not forsake the house of their God.

Neither did our Savior Christ once only in this manner of reforming the
Temple, utter this his perfect zeal in the beginning of his miracles and
showing himself, but also toward the end of his course, as we read Matthew.
21.12. etc. and. Luke 19. verse. 45.46.47. And let us the rather observe the
perfection of the zeal of our Savior Christ, because he uses this reproof
and sharp censure against that which (though it was a great profanation of the
Temple) yet it had great color of carnal reason to set a gloss and fair
show upon it. For there was use of all those things in the worship of God; that
such as would offer sacrifices either greater or smaller, might have them at
hand there, and also their money of what coin soever changed there, for the
buying of their sacrifices, etc. The perfection therefore of the zeal of our
Savior Christ may hence be noted, in that no show of excuse could slack his
just censure and vehement reproof. He was so wholly taken up with the true
zeal of Gods worship, that he does as it were trample under his feet all
carnal reason, and specially the filthy covetousness of the Priests, which was
in them a chief cause of the tolleration of this abuse.

But beside this one, and that also a dobled co^firmatio^, we have the former
profes alleged in the first Commandment, Our imperfect obedience for Christ's
sake accepted.
for his perfect obedience in that spiritual and internal worship of his
soul. For they are so many warrants of his fulfilling of this, because in them
he has ioynt-witnesse both of his internal and external worship together.
Neither is it to be omitted here, that our Savior Christ usually frequented
the Sinagogues of the Jews, and Temple of Jerusalem, at the times of the holy
feasts: partly to celebrate the feasts according to the commandment of God:
and partly to manifest himself to be the Lord our righteousness, and to
publish the doctrine of salvation in the most solemn assemblies of the people
of God. Wherefore also we are hereby likewise further confirmed, that the Lord
who has in Christ Jesus accepted a satisfaction for our sins against this
Commandment as well as against the former* will for his perfect obedience
sake, accept of our poor endeavor and labor, if from our hearts we strive to
worship him in some measure, both of inward truth, and also of outward
profession and declaration of his worship, and also make us partakers of his
blessing, promised both to our selves and our children, even to so many as
shall yield him any measure of true service and obedience.

But what proof have we of this?

In the ninth Chapter of the Gospel of Saint John, the 31. verse.

Rehearse the Scripture?

Now we know that God hears not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of
God, and does his will, him he hears.

A comfortable testimony of him that was before a blind man, but now had not
only his bodily eyes opened, but also the eyes of his mind to see the truth of
God, as one taught by his holy Spirit, not only giving witness of our Savior
Christ that has given him his sight, that he was a true worshipper of God, and
therefore such a one whose prayers God would hear and did hear for the
restoring of him; but also that every true worshipper of God (which is not a
sinner) that is to say, is not such a one as has given himself over to sin,
but has repented of it, and strives against it, and to that end calls upon
God for grace, he shall be heard of him.

Scope of the Commandment.
Whereunto agree these last words of the Lord himself in this our Commandment:
assuring us that he will show mercy (that is, all kind of mercy for soul and
for body, etc.) upon all those that shall love him, and keep his
Commandments: And in this comfort let us proceed to the third Commandment.

Rehearse the words of it.

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

What is the scope and drift of this Commandment: and how is it to be
distinguished from the former two?

This third Commandment aims at these two points following.

First, to show what ought to be the ordinary course of the whole life and
conversation of the true worshipper of God, both in word and deed.

Secondly, to declare what is the chief end of life, and of all the
thoughts, words, and works thereof; not only in the duties of Gods worship,
both inward and outward, according to the first and second Commandment: but
also in every other duty ac^ording to all the Commandments of the whole Law
of God.

What is the chief end of all obedience?

The honor and glory of God.

This is indeed the general scope and drift of this Commandment, according to
the general instructions and admonitions and exhortations of the word of God,
showing how the life of the servants of God should differ from the life of all
profane and worldly ones, both in the manner and form of it, and also in the
end which they ought to propound to themselves therein: such as are the
instructions, etc. which we may read Math. 5.16. 1. Peter chapter 2.12. and
chapter 3.15.16. and chap. 4.1.2.3.4. Ephesians. chap. 4.17.18.19 20.21. and chap. 5.
verses 15.16.17. and Phil. 2.14.15.16. and chap. 4.8.9. and Col.
3.13.14.15.16.17.18. etc. Read also 1. These. 2.10. Acts. 20.18. and 2. Tim.
3.10.11.

And it was necessary that the Lord should add this Commandment, to such
end and purpose as has been thus declared, that thereby he might meet with
the hypocrisy or lightness and vanity of a number, who desiring not to be
accounted altogether profane and without Religion, do therefore come to the
place of Gods worship, and sit down or stand up to hear the Sermon, and
kneel down to prayer, etc. yet the same nevertheless so soon as they are
out of the Church-doore, let all their thoughts and words, and the whole course
of their life loose to a kind of Libertinisme, etc.

This the Lord cannot endure, it being an unworthy and dishonorable profession
of his name and Religion: yea, he accounts it no better then a defiling of
his name, as we may read Leuit. 22. verses 31.32.33. and chap. 20.3. The
polluting of his name, and the defiling of his sa^ctuary, the place of his
worship, they are joined together. And verily, they show themselves to have
little profited by the hearing of his word, and by their prayers, etc. whosoever
have no reverend regard to give glory to the name of God.

Such receive the word of God in vain, 2. Cor. 6.1. They call upon the name of
God in vain. All their worship is in vain, Isa. chap. 1.

The Lord requires of his worshippers to take another course. He cannot like
that we should under covert of his name follow our own vain minds and lusts,
neither yet one to sooth and flatter another by an Italienate behavior, etc.
after the manner of this world, which is full of subtility and glozing; but in
simplicity and truth, etc. as we have a notable description of a right godly
life, 2. Cor. 6.4.5.6.7.8.9.10. and James 3.17.18. The life of the true
worshipper of God, is not sychophanticall and effeminate, but it is cordial
and without hypocrisy or guile. The contrary therefore is condemned of God,
Read John 5.44. and chap. 12.43. and chap. 7.18. and Gal. 1.10. read also
Romans 2.24.

But these things will yet further appear to be the meaning of the Lord in
this Commandment, by the particular handling of the words thereof; as well
those of the Commandment, as the other of the reason annexed, which contains
the curse against the transgressors of it.

Words interpreted.
Let us therefore come to it.

What things are we to observe, that we may find out this to be the sense and
meaning of this Commandment?

Three things are to be considered of us.

Which are they?

First, what is meant by the name of God. Secondly, what it is for us to take
the name of God. Thirdly, how the name of God is taken in vain.
Of these things in order: that so we may perceive both what are the evil
things forbidden, and also what on the contrary are the good things commanded.

What is meant by the name of God?

First, all which makes God most famously known to be God, as one infinitely
differing from all other things, that is to say, his divine titles, word, and
works.

Secondly, God himself, and whatsoever he has by the same his divine titles,
word, and works, revealed of himself, that it should be known of us; as
his eternal power and Godhead, by the creation of the world and all things
else, according to that description which he has by his own voice from
heaven given forth, and by his own handvvriting set down of himself.

Touching the first of these points, let us consider that it is the very use of
a name to put difference betwixt one thing and another, and specially betwixt
the creature and the Creator, Read Exodus 34.5.6.7. Ier. 16.21. That the word
of God is as the name of God, in that it makes him most perfectly and fully
known, Read Psalm. 138.2. Consule Trem. read also 1. Tim. 6.1.

How the works of God do make the Lord known, read Psalm. 19.1. etc. Isa.
40.26. etc. and chapter 45.11.12. etc. Ier. 10.11.12. etc. Act. 14.17. and
chap. 17.23.24. Romans 1.19.20. More particularly how the judgments of God do
set forth his name, read Exodus chap 9.16. and Isa. 30.27. Psalm 9.16. Ezekiel.
30.19.26. and 33.29. and 35.11.15. and 38.23. and 39.6.7. And for his mercies,
Isa. 45.20. etc. and chap. 48.9.10.11. Phil. 2.9.10.11. Read also Exodus 23.21.
Ezekiel. 16.59. etc. and chap. 28. verse 29. etc. and chap. 29.21. and 37.13.
Joel. 2.26.27. etc. and chap. 3.16.17.

Now touching the second point of the answer, that the name of God is used in
the holy Scriptures for God himself, it is every where evident. For in this
respect the servants of God are said to call upon his name, to fear his name,
to bless his name, yea, to give all praise and glory to his name, which
excels all praise, etc. Psalm 115.1. and Nehem. 9.5.6.7. etc. The name of
the Lord is used thus, to note the Lord himself, because he is among his
people, and ought to be among all, of the most excellent and renoumed ^ame and
fame, read Micah. 6.9. and Psalm 20 8. and Isa. 29.23. To sanctify the name
of God, and to sanctify the holy one of Iaacob, is all one. As also in the
Lords prayer, Hallowed be thy name. And finally, for this cause it is, that
whatsoever is attributed to the Lord himself, is ascribed to his name: as
Zach. 14.9. One Lord, and his name is one. And every where in the holy
Scriptures his name is said to be eternal, and to endure for ever; to be holy,
to be glorious, to be fearful, and to be mighty, both for the defense of his
servants, Proverbs 18.10. and for the overthrow of his and their adversaries,
Psalm 44.5. and Psalm 118.10.11.12.

The rest of this point is plain by that which has been already said.

Let us therefore go forward.

What is it to take the name of God?

The name of God is taken of us, two manner of vvayes.

Show how that is.

Either in speech, and by woid of mouth.

Or in profession of Religion, and usual course and trade of life.

It is true, for first in speech we take the name of God, in such sense as we
say a man takes up a saying, sentence, or proverb, when he utters and
speaks the same: according to the same use of this phrase of speech, Amos
chap. 5.1. and Psa. 16.4. and Numb. chap. 23. and chap. 24. sundry times Balaam
took up or uttered his parable, etc.

And touching the second kind of taking the name of God, in the profession of
his name and religion, and in the usual course of our life, read Acts 9.15.
Jeremy chapter 15.16. Isa. 43.7. Reave. 14.1.4.5. Sins forbidden.


And are we not all baptized into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the holy Ghost?

Wherefore it is meet that all should live to the glory of his name, as we are
afterward further to consider, read Micah. 4.5. and Zach. 14.20.21.

Read also Ier. chap. 15. verse 16. and Joel. 2.17. and Mal. 2.7. and 1. Cor.
4.1. where we see how Ministers of the word of God bear his name.

And for civil Magistrates, read Psalm. 82. I have said ye are Gods, or
mighty ones, that is, powers ordained of God, as the Apostle Paul calls
them, Romans 13. yea, 1. Cor. 7.22. He that is in the estate of a bond-slaue to
me^, is the Lords free servant, whosoever does truly believe in the name of
Christ, and obey his Gospel.

Now therefore in the mean while what is it to take the name of God in vain?

It is either by word of mouth so lightly and vnreuerendly to speak of God,
his title, word, or works, and namely by vain oaths and accustomed swearing
and vowing; or else in the course of life and conversation, to walk so
slowly, indiscretly, and inconstantly, or any other way so unbeseeming the
profession of the name of God, that God has no glory, but rather is
dishonored by any in his several vocation and calling.

And among these loose livers, the name of God is so much the more unworthily
taken in vain, by how much any having more special government and charge over
others, either in public or private government, do nevertheless leave them
to their own liberty, to talk and to walk according to their own vain
minds and affections, without due restraint and correction: Yea, though they
run not by and by into any notable extremity and outrage, either in word or in
deed.

Yea, though as yet they are not grown to abuse their liberty so grossly as did
the children of Eli, 1. Sam. 2.12.13. etc. to the 26. verse, and again chap.
3.13.

And though a man in his own person do not dishonor God by any heinous sin,
as David did at a certain time, read 2. Sam. 12.14. or as many of the Jews
did. Romans 1.23.24.

Against idle, light, foolish, and jesting speeches, as it is the disposition
of some to delight in merry inuectiues against women, and to put off all grave
and religious communication by pleasant conceits, etc. Read Math. 12.36.37.
and Ephesians. 5.4. and Eccle. chap. 11.9. These things do not beseem the servants
of God, who ought to be sober and grave in all their speech and communication,
as hereafter will appear. See Psalm. 106.33. Moses unadvised speech punished.

Against vain oaths and accustomable swearing, read Math. 5.24. etc. and
James 5.12.

Against looseness of life, and the actions thereof in the service of God,
read 1. Sam. 15.13.14.15. the example of Saul Consider it also in the example
of Demas, 2. Tim. 4.10.

The rest of this answer is evident from that which has been already alleged.

Only it seems necessary in this place to give some special admonition
against the abuse of Gods name, by showing how manifold ways it may be, and is
usually abused of us in our common speeches. For the which, read Virell in his
Treatise of the principles and grounds of Religion, page 121. concerning this
third Commandment.

But is there nothing else forbidden in this Commandment?

Seeing the Lord forbids all negligent regard of giving glory to the name of
God, in honest, lawful, and holy callings, and by mixing vain oaths and
vows, or by making any irreuerend mention of the name of God in speeches,
otherwise tolerable and good: it must needs be, that he does much rather
condemn all unlawful and ungodly callings, all apostacy, and falling from
the truth and profession of his name, all swearing by that which is not God,
all periuries and blasphemies, together with all other pollutions of God his
most holy and glorious name, in wicked enterludes, in dice-play, in fortune
telling, in charmings, in sorceries, coniuration, and vvitchcraft, whether
tending to finding or loosing, to healing or to hurting by the help of the
Devil, and likewise all wrathful cursing and banning of others, either man or
any other creature, with all rash imprecations and vvishes against our selves,
and every other like notorious abuse whatsoever it be.

It must needs be so: for the which read Psalm 58.16. etc. to the end of the
Psalm: read also Mal. 1.6.7.8. And if negligence or lightness, and in
discretion in lawful and holy callings, be a taking of Gods name in vain, how
much more do they sin, who are shamelesly bold and presumptuous, fierce and
raging, or fraudulent and crafty, in wicked and ungodly professions and
practices, whether in false religion, as Revelation chapter 9. or in
mechanical crafts, as touching those whom the Apostle calls inuenters of
evil things, Romans 1.30.

Seeing vain speeches, oaths and vows be abuses of Gods name, much more all
blasphemous speeches, wicked oaths and vows, and the performance of them:
such as were the oaths and vows of Herod, and of those that vowed to muder
Paul, etc.

Seeing the using of good means with trust in them (as Asa looked to much
after Physic) is a taking of Gods name in vain, then it is a more heinous
abuse to seek to false gods, as Ahaziah did 2. Kings chap. 1. and all that
seek to sorcerers, etc* such as are consorted with the Devil, yea, how fair
pretenses soever they make, as though they cured by the name of God, or by
using good words.

Hereunto belongs Hamans casting of lots, Ester chapter 3.7. Read also
Jeremy 10.2. And another kind of casting of lots in the pride of their power
and victory, Joel. 3.3. Obadiah verses 11.12. Read also Psalm. 22.18. Math.
27.35.

The force of this kind of reasoning which has now been used, is plain to
every one that will understand, so that we need not stand longer to persuade
it: Let us therefore go forward, and come to the other part of the
interpretation, that we may see what good duties are commanded.

Which are they?

First, that every one of us do show forth the most reverend and vvorthie
estimation which we have of the Lord God himself, and of his divine titles,
words, and works, and of all his holy ordinances, and also that we show
forth the fruit of our true knowledge, and acknowledgement, faith, fear, and
love of him, and of our zeal to his glory, by speaking our selves, and
causing all other (as much as lies in us) to speak all good of his name, and
of the same his word and works, Duties commanded.
and of all his holy ordinances, and by the religious and right use of an oath,
according to the just and necessary occasions thereof.

Secondly, that every of us living in such a calling as may well agree to the
holy profession of Gods name, which he has put upon us, in calling us his
people, his servants, his children, etc. we be careful to the uttermost of
our power, both in respect of our selves, and also of all that do belong unto
us, or will harken unto us, to order and behave our selves and them every way
so vvisely and graciously, as well in example as government, that all which
behold us may see, that our Religion is joined with the power of godliness,
and with the sanctification of Gods Spirit, that so God may have the greatest
glory by the whole course of our lives which possibly we may for our part
procure. And that not only in prosperity, but also in adversity, and in the
time of persecution, we do boldly and conconstantly confess his name.

Yea, and finally this law requires, that if by any occasion we fall into
any sin, to the dishonor of the name of God, that we confess and bewail
it, and so earnestly return to God and his Church, and that our repentance may
be as not able and famous as was our fall.

It is very true: for if we shall not in such case give glory to God, as Joshua
charge and exhorts Achan, Ios. 7.19. God will in his justice refuse to show
us mercy, read Isai. 30.1. and Pro. 28.13. so likewise if we shall not for
fear or shame confess the name of Christ before men, even in the times of the
persecution of the Gospel, Christ will be ashamed of us before our heavenly
father, Math. 10 32.33. and Luke 9.26.

How we ought to sanctify the name of God in affliction, let us learn from
the example of patient Job, chapter. 1. verses 21.22.

Let him be a singular example to us, of that care which we ought to have, not
only for our selves, but also of those that belong unto us, that Gods holy name
be not dishonored, either by our selves or them, read in the same 1. chapter,
verse 5. Read also concerning Abraham chap. 18. and the profession of King
David, both touching his private and also his public government, Psalm 101.
How Ministers of the word ought to seek the glory of God in their callings,
and that in singular manner, consider it from the rule and practice of our
Savior Christ, John 7.18. and from the example of the Apostles of our Savior
Christ, according to that we read 2. Corinthians. 4.5. Read also Matthew. 5.16. and
Jeremy 23. verses 28.29. And more generally how all ought to be careful to
glorify the name of God, read Nehem. 5.9. Psalm 9. verse 10. Isaiah 26.8.
Zach. 14.20.21. Malach. 3.16.

And now that we may end this answer with that wherewith it was begun,
concerning our honoring and glorifying of God with our speech, eade Psalm
100.3. etc. Read also in the book of Job. chap. 36.24. and Psalm 8. etc. and
Psalm 75.1.

Yea, it is our duty to speak reuerendly of the least of his works: for we
cannot make so much as one hair white or black, as our Savior Christ says.

Deuteronomy. ^hep. 15.
We must praise him for his most fearful judgments against the wicked, Psalm
136. and for his sharpest afflictions upon our selves, according to the example
of Job alleged before. Read also Psalm 119.71 and verse 75. Read also Joshua
22.16.17.18.19.20. and 1. Sam. 3.18. and 2. Kings 20.19.

And concerning the word of God, how reuerendly we are to think and speak of
it, consider from that which we read Psalm 119. verse 86. and Psalm 19. and
Pro. 30.5. and 2. Tim. 3.16. That we stand bound to procure others to do the
like, read Psalm 34.3. and Psalm. 37.30. Leuit. 19.17. Jude verses 22.23.

Thus and every way it is our bounden duty to say and practice: The Lord has
given me a tongue wherewith I will glorify him, Deuteronomy. 32.3. Psalm 145.21. and
Psalm 63.5. read also Psalm 71.13.14.

But among all other ways of honoring the name of God with our tongues, he
requires that we have a special care thereof in the right and religious manner
of taking an oath, whether publicly before a Magistrate; or privately, if
there be a needful and just occasion thereunto. Let us therefore before we
proceed, consider of this so weighty a matter.

And first of all when have we just occasion offered to swear or to take an
oath, according to the will of God in this Commandment?

When the truth of any matter (by the certain knowledge and assurance whereof
the name of God may be glorified, and our neighbor benefited, or otherwise
satisfied in some weighty matter of doubt) cannot otherwise be sufficiently
certified, cleared and found out.

As an oath is the greatest and grauest way of clearing the truth of a
controversy or doubt, so it must needs be the last; and never to be used, but
when there is special need, read Exodus 22 7.8 9.10.11. Heb. 6.16. read also
2. Kings 8.31.32. See the practice, Genesis 21.31 32. and chap. 24.29. and chap.
26.31. and chap. 31.53. and chap. 47.29.30.31. and chap. 50.24.25. Read also
Neh. 13.25.

What is it to swear, or to take an oath?

It is a very solemn and religious calling of God to witness, with an
acknowledgement in the heart, that he is the only wise searcher and most
gracious defender of all truth, and on the contrary a most severe judge and
revenger of all such as shall abuse his name, to witness any false matter.

For the proof of this definition, consider that God is the God of truth, etc.
And remember again that beginning of King Salomons prayer, 1 Kings 8.31.32.

See the punishment of God upon Zedekiah for his perjury, Ezekiel. 17.18.19 Ever
and anon God makes some example or other of his heavenly judgment against
false swearers according to the threatening, Zach. chap. 5.4. and Mal. 3.5.

How may we swear or take an oath aright?

If we shall follow the Prophet Ieremias instruction, in the 2. verse of his 4.
chapter.

What is that which he or rather the Lord God himself by him teaches
concerning this matter?

The Lord says by his holy Prophet, Thou shall swear the Lord lives, in
truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, and the nations shall be blessed
and glory in him.

The Equity.
Thus far of the evil things forbidden, and of the contrary good things
commanded in this third Commandment.

Now what is the equity of it?

Because he (the glory of whose name is so highly commended unto us, and
wherewith we stand so deeply charged) is not only most vvorthie of all
honor and glory considered in himself, but also in regard of his most
gracious good will toward his people, in that he is minded to give them honor
and glory in this life, and in the world to come, according as they shall be
careful in obedience to this his Commandment, to seek the honor and glory
of his name.

Great is the equity of this Commandment, so that the more justly shall be the
curse due to those that shall trample it under their feet, yea, even to all
such as shall not dutifully regard to obey it. And of this curse are we now to
consider according to that which follows in the reason added to the
Commandment.

What is that?

The Lord pronounces, that he will not hold him guiltless that takes his
name in vain.

What means this, that he will not hold him guiltless?

The Lord gives to understand, that he will severely punish every such one as
shall any manner of way dishonor and abuse the most reverend and glorious
Majesty of his name.

That this is the meaning of the Lord, it may easily be gathered from the
consideration of his most pure and perfect justice, it being such, that he
cannot lay sin to the charge of any man, but he must take vengeance of it,
unless it be prevented by repentance, and that it please God to hold himself
satisfied and appeased through the blood of Christ, without which
reconciliation the very frame of the world it self, being defiled with man's
sin could not stand before him, Read Nahum chapter 1.2.3.4.5.6. and Hab.
1.13. Jeremy. 5.7. Heb. 10.31.

As it is our blessing to have our sins forgiven, because the sin being
forgiven, the punishment also is remitted, and chiefly the eternal punishment,
Psalm 32. So it is our curse and misery, to have our sin imputed, The
Curses.
for if we be held guilty, then does vengeance certainly follow, though not by
and by. And the longer it is deferred, the heavier will it be when it comes,
according as in the mean while the sin shall multiply and increase.

But let us come to see some of the particular curses, such as the Lord
threatens against the transgressors of this Commandment. And first what is
the curse against such as speak idly, or vainly and irreverently of God, or of
his name, or of his word, or of any of his works?

I say unto you (says our Savior Christ) that of every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give account thereof at the day of judgment. And
again: by thy words thou shall be condemned, Math. 12.36.37.

Read Pro. 13.3. Destruction shall be to him that prostituteth his lips, and
chap. 18.21. Death and life are in the power of the tongue, according as a man
uses it, so shall he eat the fruit thereof. And in many places of the
Proverbs.

For if this be true in the abuse of the tongue against men, and in humane
matters; much rather then in the abuse of it more directly to the dishonor of
God, read also Ephe. 5. verses 4.6.

What is the curse against those that speak more wickedly and contemptuously
against the Lord, or any part of his word?

The Lord Jesus shall come to give judgment against all the cruel speeches
which wicked sinners have spoken against him, Jude the 15. verse.

Read also Mal. 1.6.7. and chap. 3.13.14.15. Math. 12.31.32. Concerning the
civil punishment of the blasphemer, read Leuit. 24.10.11.12.13.14.15.16. And
concerning vengeance from heaven upon the host of Saneherib, 2. King.
19.22.23.35. What is the curse against the usual, vain, or froward and
impatient swearer?

Before all things (says the Apostle James) swear not, neither by heaven nor
by earth, nor by any other oath, but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay,
least you fall into condemnation, Chapter 5.12.

In these words the holy Apostle forbidding the sin, shows, that the
amendment thereof must be by the acquainting of our selves with a meek and
patient, reverend, grave, faithful and constant course of speech, in all
things which we either affirm when they are to be affirmed, or deny when they
are to be denied, or yield our consent thereunto, when they are worthy
consent. But let us go forward. What is the curse against those that swear by
false gods and idols?

The Lord cannot spare such, Ier. 5.7. They shall fall and never rise up
again, Amos 8.14.

Read also Ier. 12.16.17. Zeph. 1.3.5.

What is the curse against false swearers and perjured persons?

The curse (says the Lord of Hosts) shall enter into the house of the thief,
and into the house of him that swears falsely by my name, and it shall remain
in the midst of his house, and shall consume it, with the timber thereof and
stones thereof, Zach. cha. 5. verse 4.

Read also Mal. 3.9. I will be a swift witness against false swearers, and
those that fear not me, says the Lord of Hosts.

What is the curse of a loose and negligent life, under the profession of the
name and religion of God?

That which the Prophet Jeremy says against those that fight the Lords
outward battles negligently or deceiptfully, may be verified against all such:
Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently, chapter 48.10.

What is the curse of those, who (albeit they are for the most part careful to
honor the name of God, with a godly life) do yet upon some special
temptation, yield to some grievous sin, whereby the name of God is evil
spoken off?

Of this curse King David had his part, when he was grievously afflicted in his
conscience, for his sin in the matter of Vriah, in that his child begotten in
adultery, dyed of a very grievous sickness; and in that many other heavy
calamities followed, Psalm 51. and 2. Sam. 12. etc.

What is the curse of those that are unconstant, and finally fall away from the
true profession of the name of God, and from the obedience of his word?

He that puts his hand to the plough and looks back, is unapt for the
kingdom of God, says our Savior Christ, Luke 9.62. And again: The latter end
of such is worse the^ the beginning, Mat. 12.43.44.45. Read also 2. Pet.
2.20.21.22. and 1. Ioh. 4.16.

What is the curse against those that continuing in an outward profession of
religion, do notwithstanding usually lead a wicked and ungodly life?

The Lord will be as a Lion against such, and tear them in pieces, and none
shall deliver them. Psalm 50.22.

What is the curse against those that having government of others, are
negligent in looking to them, that the name of God be not dishonored by them?

We have Eli for a fearful example hereof, whose sons were slain in
battle, and he himself at the report thereof, fell down and brake his neck,
because his sons ran into a slander and he stayed them not. Whereupon also
God says generally: They that despise me shall be despised, 1. Sam. 2. chap.
from the 12. verse, and chapter 3. and 4.

A notable example, which the Lord has every way made very notabe, that all
might take warning against the like sin: yea, that all of us might learn to
keep our selves far from it, as the weightinesse of the matter requires:
and of the contrary to admonish us to be earnest in government, with a holy
severity, and not to be remiss as Heli was, to the great dishonor of God:
yea, though he spoke some words of cold rebuke, as the history lays it forth
at large. He should rather have dealt in the zeal of Moses, Phineas and
Nehemias. He should in this case have been a man of great anger, Pro. 19.19.
Consule Tremel.

What is the curse against false Prophets, such as teach the errors and lies of
their own device, in stead of the word of God?

It is in the civil course of Gods justice in Israel, bodily death, and by his
divine sentence, eternal death and destruction, both of body and soul in
hell.

So indeed we read Deuteronomy. chap. 13. and further Ier. 23.30.31.32. and Ezekiel.
chap. 13. and 2. Peter 2.1.2.3. etc. Revelation 19.20. and chap. 20.10. and
chap. 22.18.19. read also first of Kings. 22.15. and Ier. 28.15.16.17.

What is the curse against those that abuse the name of God, or his creatures
to sorceries or enchantings? etc.

The Lord departs from such, Isa. chap. 2.6. and chap. 47. verses
9.10.11.12.13. He will destroy them and there posterity, yea, suddenly and
without recovery will he destroy them.

What is the curse against those that shall not only be wicked themselves and
licentious, but also be ringleaders and Captains, to encourage others to
rebellious and ungodly practices?

They shall be in special reproach in the Church of God, Pro. 24 8.9. Neither
shall they dye the common death of all men, Number. 16. from the 28. verse to the
36.

What is the curse against those that in the bitterness of their hearts curse
others, or use wicked imprecations against themselves, either of impatience, or
to face out any untruth?

As any loves cursing, so shall it fall upon him: it shall be as a garment to
cover him, and as a girdle always about him, Psa. 109.17.18.19.

Read also Numb. 14.2. and verses 21.22.

Finally, what is the curse against those that speak blasphemously against the
holy Ghost?

This most heinous sin shall never be forgiven them, neither in this world
nor in the world to come, Math. chap. 12. verses 32. Heb. 6.4.5. and chap. 10.
verses 26.27.28.29.30.31.

These are the most heavy and woeful curses, which shall surely weigh down
all transgressors of this holy Commandment of the Lord, specially those that
be greatest in the trespass, even to the horrible pit of hell, if they will
not turn unto God by speedy repentance, but go on, till they grow to that
despiting of the Spirit of grace: for the which most heinous wickedness there
is no forgiveness, as was said, from the testimony of our Savior Christ
himself.

But let us now come to refresh and cheer our souls with the consideration of
the blessings which God has promised to all those that shall be found obedient
unto it.

And first, The Blessings.
what is the blessing promised to those that shall speak good of his name, and
of his word and works?

By thy words thou shall be justified says our Savior Christ, Matthew. 12.37.

This surely is no small blessing, to be in the number of those who are to be
esteemed for good and godly men.

What is the blessing of those that be careful to honor the name of God, in
the right and religious manner of taking an oath when the just occasion does so
require?

If they will learn the ways of my people (says the Lord) to swear by my
name, The Lord lives, as they taught my people to swear by Baal: then shall
they be built in the midst of my people, Jeremy chapter 12. verse 16.

What is the blessing of God belonging to a religious and zealous care of
honoring the name of God, with a godly life answerable to the holy profession
of his blessed religion?

Them that honor me I will honor, says the Lord, 1. Sam. chapter 2.30.

What is the blessing of those that be not only careful them selves in their
own persons to glorify God, but also having government over others, be
careful of them also; yea and to further and draw on all other (so many as
they can) to honor the name of God together with themselves?

They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they
that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever and ever,
Dan. chap. 12. verse 3. And in the Prophecy of Malac. chap. 3. verses
16.17.18. The Lord (says he) has a book of remembrance to record the names
of such. And further, that he accompteth them for his flock which he watches
over, and that he will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves
him.

To conclude this point of the blessings of this commandment: What is the
blessing of constancy in the profession of the name and religion of God in the
midst of persecutions, and even to the death of martyrdom it self?

Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven, says our Savior Christ, Matthew. 5.10. and verses
11.12. Blessed are ye when men revile you and persecute you, Every man is a
damnable transgressor.
and say all manner of evil against you for my sake falsely, rejoice and be
glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets
which were before you.

These are most comfortable and gracious blessings, and whose heart may they
not worthily allure to enter into this course of true wisdom, glory, and
happiness, whosoever have any spark of grace and true wisdom in them?

But alas it may be said, that in so much as the Law promises not any
blessing, but upon condition of perfect obedience: and seeing we are all, yea
even they that have received greatest grace, greatly behind and much failing
therein (that we say nothing of those that are so far from the course both of
speech and life here commanded, that they rejoice in wickedness, and think
themselves to remember God the better, when they swear and rap out all the
oaths they can think on, and condemn the obedience of this commandment as
too great preciseness, and to be an hypocritical holiness, etc.) what shall
we say for our relief against those so great discomforts?

Though our failings, yea though our rebellions have been great against this
holy Commandment, so as we may justly look to meet with the curses, and not
to have our part in any of the blessings: yet Gods mercy in Christ Jesus is
greater then our sins, and his blood shall wash away both them and the
guiltiness of them, not only from the eye of Gods justice, but also from the
accusation and prickings of our own consciences, if we shall truly believe in
his name, that he has satisfied for these our sins, and fulfilled this part of
obedience for us; and if we shall heartily repent and be henceforth more
careful, both with the words of our mouths, and also in the actions of our
lives to glorify the name of God, then hitherto we have been.

This is our only comfort indeed, according to that gracious promise of our
Savior Christ, Matthew. 12.31.32.

But what proof have you, that Christ has not only satisfied for these our
sins, but also has fulfilled the righteousness and obedience of this
Commandment for us, so as the Lord will be moved for his sake to forgive our
sins, and to accept and to bless our imperfect and unworthy obedience?

Our Savior Christ himself, Our Savior Christ's perfect obedience for us
who is most faithful and true, gives a plentiful witness of it in the
17. chapter of the Gospel written by his holy Evangelist Saint John.

The whole Chapter is notable to this purpose, being a most heavenly prayer of
our Savior Christ, to his (and thorough him) our heavenly Father, for his
whole Church and people. But let us hear the principal words tending to this
end?

In the 4. verse our Savior Christ says thus: I have glorified thee on earth,
I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. And verse 6. I have
declared thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the world: thine
they were, and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy word.

And verse 11.12. And now am I no more in the world, but these are in the
world, and I come unto thee. Holy Father keep them in thy name, even them
whom thou have given me, that they may be one as we are. While I was in the
world, I kept them in thy name, those whom thou gave me I have kept, etc.

And verses 15.16.17. I pray not that thou should take them out of the
world, but that thou keep them from evil. They are not of the world, as I am
not of the world. Sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is truth.

And the last verse of the chapter: I have declared to them thy name, and will
declare it, that the love vvherevvith thou have loved me may be in them and I
in them.

Here indeed we see a plentiful proof of our Savior Christ his perfect
obedience, in glorifying the name of God, by his perfect preaching and
publishing of it, according to his office and calling, and that also even from
the beginning to the end of the time thereof, verse. 4.6.26.

Secondly, we have a testimony of our justification in Christ through his
obedience, in the end of the 6. verse, and verses 11.12. where also we see how
careful he was over his Disciples to keep them in obedience to God, and that
his name should not be dishonored by them.

Thirdly, Our imperfect obedience is for Christ's sake accepted of God.
our Savior Christ prays for the increase of our sanctification and
obedience, according to the will of God, and therein gives to understand, that
God accepts the obedience of his servants, though it be still imperfect.

Read also a testimony of our Savior Christ his glorifying of the name of
God, and of our justification in him, Hebrews 2.9.10.11.12.

Finally, what his general care of glorifying the name of God, call to mind
from his doctrine, Matthew. 5.16. and verses 33.34.35.36.37. Yea his whole
doctrine is a most ample and full declaration of it. Read also John chapter
7.15.16.17. and chapter 8.49.50.

Nothing remains therefore, but that we placing our trust and belief in the
mercies of our God in the name of Christ, and repenting of our sins, do
carefully and in godly manner labor to increase daily in righteousness and
holiness, to the glorifying of his name, nothing doubting but that thus we
shall be plentifully blessed of him, though not for the worthiness thereof, yet
for the honor of his own name, and the praise of his rich mercies, to whom
be all praise and honor for ever and ever. Amen.

And thus come we to the fourth Commandment, the last of that great
commandment of almighty God contained in the first Table.

Rehearse the words of the fourth Commandment.

Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. Six days shall thou labor and do
all thy work. But the seventh day is a Sabbath to the Lord thy God: see that
neither thou do any work therein, nor thy son, etc. For in six days, etc.
Wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it.

This fourth Commandment, concerning the special time of Gods worship has
some near affinity with the second, which commands a special place to the
same end, and therefore they are sometimes in one common charge linked together,
Leuit. 19.30. and chap. 26.3. Nevertheless it requires a special practice of
all the former commandments of this first table, and the several duties
thereof, both inward and outward, private and public, to the perfecting of the
entire and whole practice of Gods worship. Yea it requires also a special
practice of all duties of love to our neigbour, both general in affection and
meditation: and particular in action, as the occasions shall require. Diverse
ways distinguished from every other Commandment.
And finally it is both the schoole-time, and as it were the nurcerie of all
godliness and virtue, to be practiced in the whole course of our lives; and
also the market or fayer day of our souls, wherein the Lord does in most
plentiful manner open his storehouse, and as it were sets out his most
precious merchandise both victual and Jewels, for the nourishing and
beautifying of the soul, to be bought freely and without money, of all that be
desirous to be fed and enriched by them, although they be able to bring nothing
worthy to be exchanged for them. Read Isa. 55.1.2.3. Ho, every one that
thirsts come ye to the waters, etc. ye that have no silver, come buy and
eat, etc.

Wherefore seeing it is a commandment of so great importance, so beneficial,
and of so necessary and manifold, yea of so universal good use: let us
continue our diligence without weariness, to make our inquiry into the right
understanding and use of the same.

And first of all in so much as the Lord in the manner of the publishing of
this Commandment, has made it notable by distinguishing of it so, as it may
diverse ways be discerned from all the rest of the Commandments:

Show therefore in the first place which those differences and distinctions are?

The first difference, whereby the Lord has distinguished this his fourth
Commandment, not only from all the Cammandements of this first Table, but
also from every Commandment of his whole Law, is that he does not only say;
Thou shall keep holy the Sabbath day: but, Remember that thou keep it holy.

The second difference is, that he has published and set it down both
affirmatively commanding the good duties, and also negatiuely with an express
prohibition and forbidding of the contr^^ie evil.

The third difference is, that he lays an express charge upon all those that
have any government over others, either private or public, civil or
ecclesiastical, that they do not only remember and regard their own duty
therein, but also that they look to those which be under their government,
that they together with them selves do sanctify and keep holy the Lords
Sabbath. Duties commanded.


The fourth difference is, that he uses more reasons to persuade unto the
obedience of it, then he sets down concerning any other of his
Commandments.

All is true which you answer: and the differences which you mention are so
plain and evident, that we need not use many words to show it to be so.

Let us therefore proceed. For what causes especially has the Lord by these
notable differences distinguished this Commandment from all the rest, in the
diverse manner of the publishing of it.

He commands us first of all, to remember his Sabbath to keep it holy,
partly to point us back to this his first and most ancient institution of it
from the beginning of the world, even from the very next day after that
mankind was created: and partly to admonish us by all good and well advised
foresight to prepare our selves, and to dispose of all our ordinary works
and business, in so wise and discreet an order, as without all unnecessary
disturbance and hinderance we may sanctify and keep holy the same.

These things thus observed, let us now come to the argument and matter of the
Commandment, proceeding in the same order which has been st down in the
beginning.

And first touching the sense and meaning of this Commandment, What are the
good duties which the Lord requires in it?

The Lord does generally command two things in this holy Commandment.

Which are they?

First, that every seventh day all his people of every estate and condition, do
rest and cease from all the ordinary labors and exercises of their bodies, and
from all studies and discourses either in their own minds by themselves, or
one with another by speech and communication concerning any vvorldly (though
in themselves lavvfull and honest) affairs and business, with any respect
of vvorldly gain or earthly pleasure and delight.

Secondly, and that also more principally God commands that all and every
one of and amongst his people, do with all holy care and ioyfulnesse of heart,
upon every such day of holy Sabbaths and rest, exercise themselves both
publicly in those parts of the day which are, and according to Gods
Commandment ought to be appointed to the public duties of his worships; and
also privately all the rest of the day, in and about the holy things of God,
even such as do directly concern his glory and our own spiritual
edification and comfort in the way of eternal salvation. And in either of
these respects, he lays the speciall-charge upon those that have government
over others, as was ansvvered before.

It is true, and we shall have further occasion hereafter to consider of it
more fully.

Either part of this answer is lightsome enough from the words of the
Commandment. The first in the 10. verse, the second in the 8. verse.

Now let us go forward.

Which are those bodily labors, studies and discourses, either in the thoughts
and meditations of our own hearts alone, or in talk and communication with
others, which the Lord commands all to rest and cease upon his Sabbath days?

Every husbandman and manual artificer, or other occupier and shopkeeper must
cease their work, both in the field abroad, or in the barn, shop or
vvarehouse at home, for that day, yea even in seed-time and harvest must they
cease, or though any vvorke-man were in Church-vvorke as we use to speak:
All fayres, markets and marchandizing must cease for that day. All assizes and
Sessions with their examinations, pleadings, and judgments, all summoning and
arresting both in Civil and Ecclesiastical Courts, and all their proceedings
must cease for that day. All Scriueners must cease their drawing and making of
their instruments and writings. All studies and actions of humane literature
and learning in Universities, and all other scholles, whether for reading,
writing, or disputation, must cease for that day, and give place to the highest
and most necessary study and learning: yea even the ordinary course of the
studies of Divines must be ceased, that the duties of Gods worship may be
practiced of them with the rest of the people.

The Physician must cease his usual studying, prescribing, and ministering of
bodily Physic to others, that he may seek after the health of his own
soul.

The traveler must cease his travel, that he may learn the way to the
kingdom of heaven.

The victualler and tauerner of Inn and every other victualling house, must
cease their ordinary victualling, least they famish their own souls.

All mustering and trayning of soldiers for voluntary and offensive vvarres
must cease, that we may learn to fight the Lords battles, against the world,
the flesh and the Devil, which are the most capital and deadly enemies that
we have.

Finally, every one must cease the ordinary course of the business and
labor of his vvorldly office and calling, that he be not either altogether
withheld, or by any means distracted in his mind from the the spiritual
service and worship of God, when he is bodily present.

For the proof of these things, read Exodus 34.21. Neh. 13.15. Exodus 31.1.
etc. and verses 12.13. etc. and chapt. 35.2.3. etc. Nehem. chapter 10.31. and chap.
13.16. and Ier. 17.21.22. John 2.14. and Matthew. 21.12.13.

But it may be demanded (for the removing of all doubt) whether at no hand,
nor upon any necessity, it may not be lawful to do some bodily works upon
the Sabbath day, yea some of these works which have already been mentioned.

What answer have you learned to give unto this?

All bodily labors, together with the thoughts, consultations, and speeches
thereof, which be of present necessity, either to further the worship of God
for our own spiritual benefit, or our selves to it for the glory of God,
or else be presently necessary for the bodily safety, either of our
neighbor, or our selves, or of any thing of good and necessary use,
belonging unto us or them: they are all lavvfull on the Sabbath day, yea though
it be (for the time of necessity) with ceassing from the public duties of
Gods worship, so as the mind and heart be disposed as it ought to be, in the
doing of the same.

Show further how you have been taught, that this ought to be, I mean how the
heart and mind of man ought to be affected in such cases of present necessity,
which enforce us to intermit the holy duties of Gods worship upon the Lords day?

We ought to be sorry for the occasion, in respect of our hinderance from the
worship of God, which above all things we ought to long after and to desire;
but yet in respect of our neighbors necessity, ought to be heartily glad,
that we may be instruments of Gods providence for any special relief and
benefit to him.

And therewithal also we ought to have care to make as speedy expedition as
the necessity will permit, that we may join with the Church of God in the
most principal duties of his holy Sabbath.

Show these things yet further by some instances, that we may see more clearly
how we are with good testimony of our conscience to behave our selves in these
cases?

The occasions are more particular, as thus: if our neighbor, for whose
comfort our attendance or service is necessary, be for the time of Gods
public worship very sore or daungerously sick, or if any of his cattle,
whose life I may preserve, be in my knowledge, without my speedy help in
special danger of decay.

There are also more general and public occasions, as they may fall out,
thus: if our neighbors house be on a fire: or if the enemy do upon the Lords
Sabbath make war upon our country: in such cases and the like, the Lord
requires mercy to our neighbor, and fidelity and fortitude for the safety
of our Prince and country, according to the instant necessity, and not
sacrifice, as the holy Scriptures teach us.

It is true: So we read the testimony of our Savior Christ Matthew. 12.11.12.
And again, Luke 6.9. Read also chap. 13. verses 14.15.16. And again, chapter
14.5.6.

And touching the like liberty in public dangers, read 2. Kings chap. 11.
And again, 2. Chron. 23. Read also Nehem. 13.19. And 1. Maccab. 2.40.41. and
chapter 9.43. etc. we have the practice of necessary defense by war.

Now, which are those holy things and businesses, wherein and about the which
we stand charged by Gods Commandment, to spend the whole day of his Sabbath,
as much as we may possibly attain unto, which he calls the sanctifying of
the Sabbaths?

These holy businesses and duties are, the religious frequenting of the holy
assemblies of Gods people in the holy places thereunto appointed, and in the
holy times and seasons thereof, that is, on the days of the holy Sabbath of
the Lord.

They are also the excercising of our selves both publicly with the rest of
the congregation, and privately apart by our selves, in all the holy duties and
exercises of Gods holy worship, both inward and outward, mentioned before in
the interpretation, both of the first, and also of the second and third
Commandment.

Furthermore, they are the trying of our own hearts and lives, how we
proceed or go backevvard, or stand at a stay, in the love and obedience of the
true religion of God: and accordingly in the remembrance and meditation of Gods
mercy, chiefly of our redemption by our Savior Jesus Christ, and of his
judgments, either upon our selves or others, a stirring up and quickening of
our own souls, either to thankfulness and joy in the Lord, or to godly
sorrovv and repentance, with the increases thereof, in regard of our own
sins, and faylings, as the matter it self, and as the several occasions
shall require.

Finally, they are the special exercises of mutual brotherly kindness and
merciful dealing, both toward the bodies in outvvard relief, and also the
souls of our brethren by spiritual succor of instruction, conference, or
prayer, to the uttermost of that grace and power, vvherevvith the Lord shall
make every one of us able from time to time.

You answer truly; for notwithstanding the institution of these duties of
Gods worship is set down in the former Commandment: yet the special
practice of them all is required in this fourth Commandment, which assigns
and lays forth unto us the principal times and seasons specially sanctified
of God to the same end.

But are these holy duties so tied and appropriated to the Lords holy Sabbaths,
and on the other side, are we so bound to incessant labor in the ordinary
duties of our worldly callings for the whole space of the six days of the
week, Duties commanded. Liberty of Sabbath. Six days labor.
that we be exempt and discharged from all holy duty of Gods worship upon
those days?

We may not understand the Commandment so: for as it is lavvfull for a man to
do such bodily works and labors as be necessary, even on the Sabbath day,
in such manner as has been already ansvvered: so, yea much rather, is it
lavvfull, yea even the bounden duty of all the servants of God, upon every
one of the six days in the week, to spend so much time in the holy and
spiritual duties of Gods worship, as he shall find necessary to keep his
heart with God, and by prayer morning and evening to commend himself and all
his affairs, and the whole Church of God, to the continual protection and
blessing of God.

Further also it is lawful, yea the bounden duty of every one, not hindered
by some necessary let, to cease his ordinary work or honest recreation or
delight, to hear the sermon, if there be any on the week day; yea to spend
the whole day, when it is commanded either for the public fast, or for a
public thanksgiving, and holy feast to the special honor of God, according
to the special occasion, which he himself shall give thereunto.

Hitherto of the good duties commanded, whereunto also belongs that special
point of the governors duty mentioned in the beginning of our interpretation:
but because the occasion of this consideration is expressly given in the
negative part of the Commandment, whereunto we are now to proceed, let us
consider of it there.

In which words therefore is this negative part contained?

In these: Neither thou shall do any work, nor thy son, nor thy daughter,
thy man servant, nor thy maid, nor thy beast, nor the stranger that is within
thy gates.

From these words, let us consider, first what is generally forbidden in this
Commandment, and then more specially, what is the charge of all governors.

Sins forbidden.
I demand therefore in the first place, what are the evil things forbidden in
this Commandment?

First, all those bodily labors belonging to this life, which (not being
necessary) would by our intermedling with them, either altogether withhold, or
at the least hinder us in the spiritual sanctification of the Sabbath: yea he
forbids all worldliness of mind, yea all negligence and improuidence, in
not preventing every such hinderance, so far as we may by any good
circumspection foresee.

Much more does the Lord forbid all vain games and pastimes, yea such moderate
exercises of bodily recreation, or harmless sporting and delighting of the
mind, which at some other times he will tolerate and bear withal.

Most of all does the Lord forbid all practice of idolatry and false worship
upon his Sabbath, together with the institution of any other holyday or Sabbath
by man's device, and all that excess, wantonness and riot, which usually
accompanies the same.

Finally, he forbids all unfruitfulness in the exercises of his own true
service and worship: that is, when we profit not thereby in knowledge, faith,
and repentance.

Now let us come to the special charge, which the Lord lays upon those that
have government over others, touching the sanctification of the Sabbath.

And first of all, seeing the Lord lays this special charge upon all
governors, as well public over common wealths and churches, as private over
families.

Why does he direct his speech, and the form of his charge more expressly to
fathers and masters of the private family, rather then to the other?

Because howsoever the establishment, perfection, and glory of holy and
religious government is in the hand of the public governor, yet the ground
and foundation of it, rests in the well ordering of the family, which also in
the order of nature it self is before the government, either of the Town,
City, or Country.

This indeed is evident from the order of Gods creation, and from the course
of his proceeding, in rearing up a Church unto himself from the beginning.

As the private family is in order of nature before the town or city,
Special duty of Governors.
so particular persons have been converted and turned to God, before cities,
countries, and nations. Nevertheless, so soon as Kingdoms were gathered to
the Lord, he gave the principal charge to the King, for the general
sanctification of the Sabbath, Read Jeremy chapter 17.20. Read also Isa.
49.22. and Psalm 102.13. etc. 18.21.

Now let us consider the excellent reason of this the Lords most grave and
weighty charge.

And first, why does he begin with the master himself?

First, that he may know, (whosoever he be, whether master of a greater or
lesser family) that he must give an account of his government to God, of
whom he has received it, who is the great Master and commander both in
heaven and in earth; who also will straightly inquire, not only how civil
and just, but much rather how holy and religious his government has been.

Secondly, that he may understand, that the Lord requires, that he do not
only command his sons and his household, but also that he go before them in
his own practice and example.

Thirdly, because if he were not brought to conscience of his own duty
first, he might by the abuse of his authority, frustrate all the holy care
which might happily be begun in his children and servants, by urging them to
do otherwise then the Law of God and their consciences would permit them.

Finally, that both servants, and children, and strangers, understanding how
straight a charge the Lord gives to governors herein, they might be induced
the more willingly to yield to this his holy appointment, or otherwise that
they might know, that they are no vvayes injured, though they should against
their wills, even by civil or domestical correction, be constrained and
compelled thereunto.

These are the reasons indeed; and they are very worthy in either respect to
be diligently observed both of governors, and also of those that are to be
governed, even as we would look for any comfort before the Lord, at the great
day of his dreadful judgment. For when God will bring every work unto
judgment, with every secret thing, whether good or evil, Eccles. 12.14. how
can we think that any shall escape, who shall neglect the government of
those that belong to their charge?

But here some will likely demand, why in this charge for the religious
ordering of the family, there is no mention made of the wife, as though she had
no part in this government.

What may be the reason hereof?

It is easily presupposed of all, that according to Gods ordinance, the husband
and the wife must be one, and without all jar mutual helpers, specially
for the furtherance and advancement of religion in their own hearts, and among
all that belong unto them.

It is true: they ought to rule with joint authority, howsoever it is the
wives part so to rule, as it may appear that she is willingly subject to her
husband. And chiefly her help is to be yielded for the government of her
daughters and maid-seruants: according to the example of Queen Esther, chapter
4.16. Read also Proverbs 31.15.27. and 1. Timothy 5.14. and Jeremy 9.20.
Read also how the Lord will have the mother or dame and mistress respected in
government, Leuiticus, chapter 19.3. and Deuteronomy 21.18. etc. and Genesis
chapter 16.5.6.7.8.9. and chapter 20.9.10.11.12. It is time that we come to
consider of those that are under government in the family.

Why are parents so specially charged with their children for their
sanctification of the Sabbath: that is to say, as touching so many of them as
be of understanding?

To admonish them of that, wherein they ought chiefly to manifest and exercise
their right godly and parent-like affection toward them.

This verily does consist chiefly in their love and desire of the
sanctification of their souls, and by that care which they have in the using
of the means which serve thereunto: that is, so far as they be careful to
bring them to the love and liking of the word and worship of God, and to train
them up in the religious sanctification of the Lords holy Sabbaths.

We come to the servants: Why are they also expressly mentioned?

To show that masters of families ought in a second degree to extend their
parent-like affection, even toward their servants also, in a tender care and
desire of their everlasting salvation.

Very true: for not withstanding they are servants to their masters, yet they
are children still in respect of their own parents; yea they are the children
of God and of his kingdom, under his covenant of grace, mercy, and peace,
which comprehends both parent, and child, and master, and servant. Neither
is there any respect of person with God. Masters therefore ought in these
respects to have a fatherly affection toward them, as unto children in a second
degree. Read Leuiticus 25.42.43.55.

Why is the brute beast mentioned?

Not only to the end that the cattle ordinarily used to daily labor (such as
are the oxen or the horse, to plow and to cart) might have intermission and
rest, and so have a kind of mercy or pity showed them: but chiefly that no
man should presume to break the outward rest of the Sabbath, and take liberty
to neglect the public sanctification of it, under pretense that he (to serve
his own pleasure) takes his pampered beast, either his Coach horse, or
gelding for the saddle, to ride his journey without any labor to himself; yea
though he takes his Bible and prayer book with him to read as he sits in
his Coach.

It is true: and if this prouiso had not been made, many would have made their
cunning euasions to deceive their own souls thereby. One would have said, I
can grind in my horse-mill without any labor. So also would the water-miller
and wind-miller say, etc. But all such shifts are taken away, unless in case
of necessity, as has been answered before. So then, that which the Lord
commands concerning the rest of the brute beasts, both here, and Exodus
23.12. it does principally serve to restrain men. Read Deuteronomy 25.14.
with 1. Corinthians. 9.9 10.

Now in the last place, why is the strannger mentioned?

The Equity.
Partly, because such strangers as were of the same religion with the Jews:
that is to say, circumcised Proselites, they were equally bound by the same law
of sanctifying the Sabbath, like as should be all baptized Jews or Turks, if
any were living amongst Christians.

And as touching other strangers, such as come on embassage to Princes, or
according to their own private minds to see countries, etc. they must be
caused at the least to observe the bodily rest, that the offense and danger of
so evil an example might be avoided.

It is very meet indeed that it should be so, in so much as we are over
ready to take hurt by every evil example of liberty and license, whenever
it comes in the view and sight of our eye. And therefore also says the Lord:
One law shall be to him that is borne in the Land, and to the stranger which
dwells among you, Exodus 12, 49.

Hitherto of the interpretation what things are commanded, and what are
forbidden in this fourth Commandment:

Now what is the equity of it?

Much every way, as the due consideration of the sundry reasons annexed to
the Commandment will declare.

Show which those reasons are.

The first is, that the Lord has left us the free liberty of six days, for
the honest and lawful business and affairs of this life, unto one weekly
Sabbath set apart for his special service.

The second is, the example of the Lord in his own ceassing upon that day from
the works of creation, which he finished and perfected in the six days
going immediately before.

The third is, the institution, blessing, and sanctifying of the Sabbath, which
is as ancient, as is the example of the Lord in that his holy rest.

The fourth reason is, the ends whereunto the Lord did sanctify his Sabbath,
that is to say, for the memorial of the Lords works of creation, to his
honor and glory, and for our own sanctification and salvation, through the
blessed use and sanctification thereof.

Manifold therefore is the equity of this Commandment. The Blessings.


Now let us come to the particular blessings which God has promised to the
obedience of this Commandment, the which blessings no doubt are of all sorts,
in so much, as in the right manner of the sanctification of the Sabbath, all
obedience is after a sort infolded.

But I only desire to hear of those that are particularly mentioned in the
word of God.

Show at the least which some of them be.

The Lord does assure his people by this his holy ordinance, that he will be
their God, and that he will sanctify them by his Spirit, if they will be
careful to santifie his Sabbath, Exodus 31. verses 13. and 17. and Ezekiel. chap.
20. verses 12. and 20. And Isai. 56. verse 2. Blessed is that man that keeps
the Sabbath, and polluteth it not, and keeps his hand from doing any evil.
And verses 3.4.5.6.7: Even unto the Eunuchs and strangers which will keep my
Sabbath (says the Lord) I will give in my house, and within my walls, a
place and a name better then of the sons and daughters: I will give them an
everlasting name, which shall not be put out. And again: I will bring them
also to my holy mountain, and make them glad in my house of prayer: their
burnt offerings and sacrifices shall be accepted upon my Altar: for my house
shall be called a house of prayer for all people.

And chap. 58. verses 13.14. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath and
not do thine own will on my holy day, but call the Sabbath a delight to
consecrate it as glorious to the Lord, and vvilt honor him, not doing thine
own ways, nor seeking thine own will, nor speaking a vain word:

Then shall thou delight in the Lord, and I will cause thee to mount upon the
high places of the earth, and I will feed thee with the heritage of Iaacob thy
father: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

And Ier. 17. verses 24.25.26. If ye will sanctify the Sabbath, so that ye do
no work therein.

Then shall Kings and Princes enter in at the gates of this City, and shall
sit upon the throne of David, and they shall ride upon chariots, and upon
horses, they and their Princes, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem: and this City shall remain for ever.

And they shall come from the Cities of Judah, and from about Jerusalem, and
from the land of Beniamine, and from the plain, and from the mountain, and
from the South, which shall bring burnt offerings, and sacrifices, and meat
offerings, and incense: and they shall bring sacrifice of praise into the house
of the Lord.

These are the most gracious blessings of this Commandment, etc. But because
the promises are not duly regarded of us, let us come to the curses wherewith
the Lord has armed this Commandment against the transgressors of it. These
curses are likewise of all sorts, in so much as God esteems the profaning of
his Sabbaths, to be the profaning of his whole religion.

But let us call to mind those only which are most expressly mentioned: and
first what was the curse of God in the civil course of his justice among his
people?

It was bodily death. He that defiles the Sabbath shall dye the death:
Whosoever works therein, the same person shall be cut off from among his
people. And again: Whosoever dath any work in the Sabbath day, shall dye the
death, Exodus chap. 31.14.15.16.

Of this part of Gods justice, the Magistrate was his instrument.

There are other curses which God threateneth to bring upon the breakers of his
Sabbath, more immediately from his own hand:

Which are they?

In the 17. Chapter of Jeremy, verse 27. Thus says the Lord: If ye will not
hear me, to sanctify the Sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, nor to go
through the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day: then will I kindle a fire in
the gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall
not be quenched.

A grievous judgment of God: and that which may point us to the cause of the
often burnings that we hear off, and see among our selves, even because the
Sabbaths of the Lord are so greatly profaned, etc. The Curses.


But let us go forward.

What is the curse against those who notwithstanding they will peradventure do
no bodily work, or make their market on the Sabbath day, yet their hearts
run after their earthly profit and gain, neither regard they to exercise
mercy, but rather deal hardly against their poor brethren?

Hear this (says the Prophet Amos, chapter 8. verse 4. O ye that swallovv up
the poor, that ye may make the needy of the land to fail:

Saying, when will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell corn, and the
Sabbath, that we may sell forth wheat, and make the Epha small, and the
shekell great, and falsify the weights by deceit.

That we may buy the poor with silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes
(that is) for a matter of small price, for little or nothing (as we say) yea,
and sell the refuse of wheat.

The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Iaacob (that is to say by himself)
surely I will never forget any of his works.

Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwells
therein?

This judgment also is very grievous and fearful, as the Prophet still
prosecuteth it to the end of the Chapter, showing that these evil fruits
arise from the contempt of the word and the preaching thereof, which is as it
were the life of the Sabbath. Read also Nehem. chap. 13.17.18. The profaning
of the Sabbath is the ruin both of the Church and commonwealth.

Hitherto of the doctrine of this Commandment.

The use is yet behind: have you perfectly obeyed it?

No, but I beseech God of his infinite mercy to forgive me my manyfold and
grievous transgressions against it.

God of his infinite mercy pardon and forgive us all: for as often as we
examine our selves, we shall every one find, that we both are and have been
grievous transgressors of it, etc.

Now therefore seeing our only succor against our own sins, and against
the curses thereof, together with all our hope of blessing rests in our
Savior Christ alone: Christ only has perfectly obeyed.
it shall be greatly for the comfort and confirmation of our faith, to see some
proof and confirmation out of the word of God, that he has perfectly obeyed
this Law of God for us.

What proof can you allege for it?

The whole history of his Gospel does manifestly and very plentifully
confirm it, under the undoubted testimony of all the Evangelists.

Show how that is.

It is evident, not only that they do all (and specially Mark and Luke)
diligently set down and record in holy writ his most holy and constant
labor, in the preaching of the Gospel upon the Sabbath days, for the
instructing of the souls of men in the right way of their salvation; and
therewithal likewise how upon the same days he exercised his spiritual
works of mercy, toward the bodies of all sorts of impotent and diseased men,
yea, toward both bodies and souls, of such as were wholly possessed and vexed
by Devils.

But also it is evident by that more particular testimony of the Evangelist
Luke, concerning his most holy care, even from his childhood, to resort to the
places of Gods worship in the special times thereof, to worship God, and to
hear and inquire of the doctrine of his word, at the mouths of those which
were the Doctors and teachers thereof, as we read 2. Luke from the 42. verse
to the end of the Chapter.

So indeed we read there, that when he was twelve years old he went up to
Jerusalem, etc.

But much more when he came to man's age, and that he was to manifest himself
to Israel, etc. It is plentifully testified that he most carefully and
perfectly sanctified the Sabbath days.

By him therefore are we redeemed from the curse of this Law, and justified in
the sight of God.

By him also, if we believe in his name, and repent of our sins, indeuoring
more and more after the true sanctifying of the Sabbath, the Lord will accept
our obedience, though it be imperfect, yea, and he will for Christ's sake
interesse us in all those promises which he has made to all such as will have
care to sanctify them as they ought to do, The perpetuity of the Sabbath.
though they cannot fully attain thereunto here in this life.

But what particular ground or proof of Scripture may we have for this?

Even the same which was alleged before out of the 9. chap. of John, the 31.
verse: that God will hear every man that is not a sinner, but is a
worshipper of God, and indeuoureth to do his will.

This one place may well serve to either purpose, etc. And thus might we end
the whole doctrine and use of this fourth Commandment, save that the unadvised
contradiction of some does occasion a further business, as though the Sabbath,
that is, the sanctifying of every seventh day, were nothing but a mere Jewish
ceremony.

But we will use as quick speed as may be in the rehearsal of this point.

What is the sum of that which has been said, and which ought to be firmly
held of us against that opinion and assertion which is against the Sabbath?

We have learned, that the Sabbath cannot be truly said to have been at any
time a mere ceremony; but that it has always been, and so is still a moral
and unremovable Commandment of God.

We have learned also, that neither our Savior Christ himself nor hic
Apostles, have abrogated, nor ever minded to abrogate the Lords Commandment
touching the Sabbath, but they have firmly confirmed and established it.

What proof have you that our Savior Christ never minded to abrogate the
Sabbath: seeing that it may seem that he both taught and practiced a greater
liberty then the Law permits?

He himself speaking of the whole moral Law, and of the doctrine of the
Prophets, who were the true and faithful interpreters thereof, says
professedly, that he came not to destroy it, or any part of it, but wholly to
fulfill it.

And therefore also it must be, that all is misconstrued, whatsoever may be
imagined, either of the contrary doctrine or practice of our Savior Christ,
against the Commandment of the Sabbath.

It is true: so our Savior Christ says, Matthew. 5.17. Think not that I am come
to destroy the Law or the Prophets. I am not come to destroy them, but to
fulfill them. And there is no boubt but as he came not to destroy, loosen, or
disauthorise, the first, second, or third Commandment: so neither has he
destroyed, or disauthorised the fourth. But contrariwise, like as he has
established the rest of the ten Commandments, so also has he ratified and
established this. Only he clears the right use and interpretation of them
all against the false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees.

But what proof have you that our Savior Christ did not abrogate and take
away the Sabbath, seeing (as some allege) they both taught and practiced
greater liberty then the Law of the Sabbath permits, yea, and leave that
day altogether: What can you say to this?

In so much as the holy Apostles did only alter and change the day, and that
also to the very next day: that is to say, seeing they only translated it
from the seventh day, which was the very next after the works of Gods
creation were ended, to the first day of the week, upon the which the
world began, and upon the which the Son of God, by whom the world was at
the first made and all things therein, rose again by the mighty power of God,
to declare himself to be the perfect redeemer of the people of God, and the
only means of the upholding and preserving of the whole frame of this
transitory and decayed world.

And further also, seeing they both by doctrine and example, employed that
first day of the week in the vveekely recourse of it, to the religious
assembling of Gods people, and for the holy exercises of the Christian duties
of Gods worship; even the same which have been rehearsed before for the duties
of the Lords Sabbath.

Finally, seeing the same first day of the week, has the name of the Lords
day translated unto it.

It is by all these reasons manifest, that it was not their purpose to
abrogate and abolish the Sabbath of the Lord, that is to say, the sanctifying
of every seventh day, but rather to establish it with this so near a change,
to the perpetual memorial, not only of the first creation, but also of this
latter renewing of all things by our Savior Christ: to the more clear and
full honor of God, in the name of Jesus Christ, in these last days of the
clear revelation of the Gospel.

These reasons may suffice to every one that is not contentious: for seeing
the holy Apostles were most faithful in all the house of God, as was Moses;
how may we with any reason once call it into question, as doubting whether they
had their commandment and direction from our Savior Christ himself after
his resurrection, or no? And that the Apostles did only change the day, and
not absolutely take away the Sabbath, read Acts 20.7. and 1. Corinthians
16.1.2. and Revelation 1.10. for they spent the first day of the week in the
same holy exercises with Christian Gentiles, wherein they spent the seventh
day with the Christian Jews, etc. But that we may draw to an end.

How can you show that the Sabbath is not a mere vanishing ceremony, now since
the appearance of Christ and the clear revelation of his Gospel?

Because there should not then be ten, but only nine Commandments of
perpetual durance in the moral Law of God: and also because this
Commandment was ordained for man before yet there was any use of any
figurative ceremony concerning Christ to come.

Hitherto therefore of the first Table of the Law, concerning the several
branches of that which our Savior Christ calls the great Commandment; the
sum whereof he shows to be the perfect love of God.

The second Table follows, which our Savior Christ likewise calls the
second Commandment, and says that it is like to the former.

Wherein have you learned that they are like?

The second is like unto the first in many respects, as follows.

How the second Table is like unto the first, and how it differs from it.
First, in that it is given by the same heavenly Lawgiver.

Secondly, in that it requires perfect obedience in all the duties thereof.

Thirdly, in that it has like promises of perfect reward to the perfect
obedience of it.

Fourthly, in that it has like curses, not only temporal, but eternal also,
against every transgression of the unbeliever, not repenting thereof.

Fifthly, it is of like force and virtue with the first Table, to make known
our sin and misery, yea, not only to make known our failings in duty to
men, but therewithal also detecteth our hypocrisy against God, in our
unfruitful profession of his name and religion.

Finally, it does in like manner show us the necessity of our Savior Christ's
perfect sufferings and obedience, for our redemption, justification, and
salvation.

This manifold similitude and likeness of the second Table with the first is
partly clear in it self, and will further be more manifest in the particular
handling of the Commandments thereof. But is there no difference of them like
worthy of our observation?

Yes very worthy.

Show wherein this difference is.

The second Table differs from the former.

First, in the subject, matter, and argument of it, which is the perfect love
of our neighbor: but the argument of the first Table (as has been declared
before) is the perfect love of God.

Secondly, there is difference in the manner or measure of that love wherewith
one neighbor is to love another, which is not without limitation, as is the
love of man toward God: for it is only in the Lord, and for his sake, according
to that natural, kindly and well ordered love and affection, which every man
may and also ought in the Lord and so as may be most for his glory, to bear
toward his own self, and not otherwise.

These things thus observed in general, concerning the second Table, to show
the likeness of it compared with the first Table, as touching the author and
uses of it, etc. Let us use the like diligence in seeking out the particular
interpretation and uses of the several Commandments of it, Words interpreted.
which through the grace of God we have in some poor measure used concerning
the Commandments of the first Table.

Let us therefore come to the fifth Commandment, which is the first of this
second Table: which is that?

Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be Or that they may
prolong, etc. For this verb in the Hiphil form is usually a transitiue:
though otherwise in Call.
prolonged on the land, which thy Lord thy God gives thee.

In these words we have not only the Commandment, but also the blessing
promised to the obedience of it. Touching the words of the Commandment, we
have heard also, that two things are diligently to be examined.

Which are they?

First, who are meant by these honorable titles father and mother.

Secondly, what that honor is which God commands us to yield unto them.

Show therefore in the firs place who are meant by these titles of father and
mother.

First our natural parents, by whom as by the instruments of God, we have
received our being and life.

And then also all those which in any respect are in stead of parents unto us,
for the preservation, direction, and comfort of life.

Who are they, whom we ought to account to be to us in stead of parents,
according to this Commandment of God?

First, civil Magistrates in the commonwealth, such as are sovereign Kings
and Princes, with their Judges and Justices, and all in public office under
them.

Secondly, Pastors and teachers of the word in the Church of God, with all that
have government and charge of souls, together with them according to the same
his holy word.

Thirdly, schoole-maisters and teachers of the tongues, and other liberal Arts,
as also such as have the wardship and government of fatherless children: and
likewise masters of manuell trades and occupations.

Fourthly, all that be any way specially beneficial to any of us.

Finally, the aged in years, and all that are our ancients in grace and
godliness.

Moreover, it is here to be noted, that as in the first degree of natural
parents the mother is mentioned: so in these other degrees that women when by
the special providence of God, any have sovereignty of government, or any
inferior place of regency, they are to be accounted mothers in the
commonwealth and Church of God, as Deborah in that respect is called a mother
in Israel, Judges 5.7. Yea all matron-like and merciful women are mothers, etc.

But why are all other degrees both of civil office, and natural age, and
spiritual gifts, etc. thus comprehended under the titles of natural parents?

First, because they are by the law and course of nature the first and most
ancient degree of honor among men.

Secondly, because the loving and tender government of natural parents, is
the principal pattern and example whereunto all other government is to be
framed.

Thirdly, because child-like subjection is the entrance and preparation to all
obedience and subjection.

Finally, that it might the more clearly appear, how acceptable to God the
subjection of every inferior is to his superior, of what degree soever he be:
and on the contrary, how grievous a sin disobedience to any superior is, in
so much as it is of like nature with the undutifulness of a child against his
natural father, or against his mother that bare him.

Hitherto, who are meant by the honorable titles of father and mother.

Now let us come to see what that honor is which God commands us to yield
unto them: the which, because we cannot better understand then by searching out
what those several duties are which God in his word expresses, as belonging
to every one, either in common or more specially, according to his several
degree and calling, let us follow this course. And first what is the honor
which children are commanded to yield unto their natural parents?

The Lord commanding us to honor our natural parents, requires of us these
things.

First, that we do all the days of our lives reuerendly esteem of them and of
their holy prayers and blessing, Duties commanded: and first to natural
parents.
and of their wise instructions and counsels, both for the course and trade of
life which we are to take, and for the company which we are to make choice
of, and especially then when we shall come to think of seeking a companion
to live with us in married estate.

Secondly, that as a fruit of that reverend estimation, we do not only in
outward gesture and speech behave our selves dutifully toward them, but also
that we obey them from the heart, submitting our selves to their godly
government and discipline, and that every way we seek to vvin them to pray
for us, and to bless us, and to give all good occasion to joy in us, and to
bless and praise God for us.

Thirdly, that we show our selves thankful, in all readiness to recompense
their goodness toward us to the uttermost of our power, wherein soever they
shall at any time stand in need of our help.

Finally, seeing we cannot recompense them, or at the most but in part, we are
to pray continually unto God, so long as they live, that it may please him on
our behalf, fully and for ever to recompense and reward them. Yea, and all
these duties are to be performed from hearty love and affection toward them.

This is the honor that children owe to their natural parents, beside seemly
burial, if we survive them, and dutiful speech and memorial of them, etc.
But why are all these duties comprehended under this word, Honor, rather then
under love?

To put a difference between that love we owe to our inferiors or equals,
which is more familiar, and this love wherein we stand bound to our parents and
all other our superiors, which may not be severed from fear and reverence.

Now, what is the honor that subjects owe to their sovereign kings, and to
all other their inferior Magistrates?

The same which we are commanded to yield to our natural parents, according to
the particular interpretation of the Scriptures following.

My son (says king Solomon) fear the Lord and the king, Reverence.
and meddle not with them that are seditious, Duties to Prin^^s and civil
^ouernours.
Prou. 24.21.

Submit your selves (says the Apostle Peter) unto all manner ordinance of man,
Obedience.
for the Lords sake, whether it be to the king, or to the superior, 1. Pet.
2.13.

Or unto governors, as unto them that are sent of him for the punishment of
evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.

For so is the will of God, that by well doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men.

As free, but not as having liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the
servants of God, 1. Epist. 2.13.14.15.16. And the Apostle Paul, Romans
13.1.2.3.4. And then it follows, verses 5. and 6. Wherefore ye must be
subject, not because of wrath only, but also for conscience sake.

For, for this cause ye pay also tribute: for they are Gods ministers, applying
themselves for the same thing.

Thankfulness.
Yea, not only must we show our selves thankful for their careful
protection over us, by yielding a portion of our goods, but also in bestowing
our whole substance, and in the hazarding of our lives in their wars, if need
so require, according to that saying of the soldiers of king David: Thy life
is more worth then ten thousand of us, 2. Sam. 18.3. and chap. 21.17. Thou
shall go no more out with us to battle, least thou quench the light of Israel.

Prayer.
And concerning prayer, the Apostle Paul exhorts, that in the Church of God,
and in the holy meetings of his people, first of all supplications, prayers,
intercessions, with giving of thanks be made for all men.

For Kings and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and a
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, 1. Timothy 2.1.2.

Here let us observe, that the same honor which is due to sovereign Kings, is
due also to Queens, when they have by Gods special providence, sovereignty of
government.

The inferiority of their sex must not in this case prejudice their authority
over their subjects, no more then it must diminish the honor which children
owe to their natural mother, whom therefore the Lord does in his Law mention
as well as the father. And Leuit. 19.3. he puts her before the other, Duties
to M^nisters of the word.
that it might the rather be observed.

But leaving this point, let us proceed: What is the honor which God has
commanded his people to give to their pastors and teachers?

The same duties, in such manner as follows.

He that hears you (says our Savior Christ) hears me, Reverence
and he that despises you despises me: and he that despises me despises him
that sent me, Luke 10.16. Whereupon (says the Apostle Paul.)

Let a man so think of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and disposers of the
secrets of God, 1. Cor. 4 1.

In the 13. chap. of the Epistle to the Heb. verse 17. Obedienc^
Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves, for they
watch for your souls, as they that must give accounts, etc.

Touching prayers for the Ministers of the word: Prayer.
Pray for us (says the Apostle Paul) that the word of the Lord may have free
passage and be glorified, 2. Thessal. 3.1. And again Ephesians 6.18. Read
also Hebr. 13.18. Pray for us, for we are assured that we have a good
conscience in all things, desiring to live honestly.

And for convenient maintenance, Thankef^^nesse.
and every other duty of honor belonging to the Ministers of the Gospel, we
read what the will of God is.

1. Tim. 5.17.18. The elders that rule well are worthy of double honor,
specially they which labor in the word and doctrine. For the Scripture says,
thou shall not mouzell the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn, and
the labourer is worthy of his wages.

This is the honor which by the commandment of God belongs to the Pastors
and teachers of the Church, wherein also schoole-maisters and teachers of the
liberal Arts have their portion, to whom not only their scholars themselves,
but also the parents of the scholars owe reverence and thanks, with good and
liberal recompense.

Now what is the honor which God requires that servants should yield to their
masters according to the flesh, as the Apostle calls them, in regard of
their bodily service, which they owe them? Duties to masters of families, etc.


Let as many servants as be under the yoke, count their masters worthy of all
honor, Reverence.
that the name of God and his doctrine be not evil spoken of:

And they which have believing masters, let them not despise them, because
they are brethren, but rather do service because they are faithful, and
beloved, and partakers of the benefit: These things (says the Apostle to
Timothy) teach and exhort. 1. Tim. chap. 6.1.2.

Obedience.
Servants be ye obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh,
with fear and trembling in singleness of your hearts, as unto Christ.

Not with service to the eye as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ,
doing the will of God from the heart.

With good will serving the Lord and not men, Ephesi. 6.5.6.7.

And the same again, Coloss. chap. 3.22.23.

Moreover in the second chapter to Titus, verses 9.10.

Let servants be subject to their masters, and please them in all things, not
answering again.

Neither pickers, but that they show all good faithfulness, that they may
adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things.

Prayer.
For prayer we have the example of Abraham's servants, Genesis 24.12.13.14. and
verse 48.

Thankfulness.
For thankfulness Joseph is a notable example for all servants to follow,
Genesis 39. verses 8.9.10. And Iaacob for diligence and faithfulness, yea, though
he served an unkind kinsman, Genesis 29.15. etc.

Let us peruse these places of holy Scripture, and first Genesis 24.12. etc.

The Like honor in all good reason and proportion, and from the equity of this
Commandment (as it follows to be considered) is due from the soldier to his
Captain, for he is his master and martial Magistrate: from the patient to
his good Physician or Surgion; who are as nouicing fathers to his bodily
health, as it is well expressed Ecclesiasticus 38.1. etc. Honor the Physician
with the honor that is due unto him, because of necessity: for the Lord has
created him, Duties to elders in years.
that is to say, he has appointed this calling, and given this gift and skill
to him, etc. The like honor is due from the client to his faithful
Counselor and pleader at Law, seeing he is a father in the defense of his
outward estate and just title and right: and from the beneficiarie to his
liberal benefactor, whether to man as to Gaius, or to woman as to Dorcas, etc.
And note also, that in obedience to this Commandment, the wife is to
reverence her husband, Ephesians. 5.22. etc. 33. and Coloss. 3.18. Maid-seruants are
likewise to submit themselves to their dames and mistresses, Genesis 16.9.

To conclude this point: What is that honor which God commands the younger
in years to give to their ancients and elders?

Thou shall rise up before the horehead, Reverence, a fruit and declaration
whereof is this rising up.
and honor the person of the old man (says the Lord) and dread thy God. I am
the Lord, Leuit. 19.32: A fruit also of the which honor is the silence of the
younger, in reverend regard of the experience and wisdom of their elders,
Job. 12.12. And as we read again, Job. 32.4. Elihu waited till Job and the
rest had spoken, because they were more ancient in years then he. And verse
6. he says, I am young in years, and ye are ancient: therefore I doubted and
was afraid to show you my opinion. Read also Psalm 107.32.

Ye younger (says the Apostle Peter) submit your selves unto the elders,
Obedience.
and submit your selves every man one to another: deck your selves inwardly
with lowliness of mind: for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble, 1. Epistle, chapter 5.5.

Yea, the Minister of the word, though he himself be an Elder in respect of
his office; yet must he not check his elder in years, but exhort him as a
father, and the younger men as brethren: the elder women as mothers, the younger
as sisters, with all pureness, 1. Tim. 5.1.2.

And further, A fruit of thankfulness.
in respect of the maintenance of such elder women as be in outward want,
such especially as have lived as becomes good and Christian matrons: it
follows in the third verse of the same Chapter: Honor widows which are
widows indeed. Duties to ancients in grace. Superiors are to honor their
inferiors.


Finally touching prayer for our elders, read Lamentation of Jeremy the whole:
where the Prophet pitifully bewailing the overthrow of all estates, noble and
of low degree, parent and child, young and old: in the end he prays for all
estates: Turn thou us unto thee, Prayer.
o Lord, and we shall be turned: renew our days as of old, chapter 5.21.

Thus then we see in the whole discourse how all degrees of superiors are
(according to the commandment of God) to be honored of their inferiors,
whether they be such as be so in respect of the order which God has set in
nature, or in policy. To the which also we cannot but add that order which he
has set in aunciencie of spiritual gifts and graces, according as we see the
Apostle Paul to give it the note of honor. Read Romans 16.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.
etc. and 1. Cor. 16.15.16.

Now brethren I beseech ye be obedient to such.

And Paul himself prays for such, 2. Timothy. 1.16.17.18.

Behold therefore the manifold bond whereby we stand bound to give honor unto
other, in humbling of our selves, etc.

But not only are inferiors to honor their superiors: but superiors also
must know, that God requires of them, that they do yield a certain honor to
their inferiors, and deal honorably and well with them, according to the
duties of their several places and degrees.

For there is no doubt, but the Lord requires them at their hands, as has
been partly declared in the interpretation of the fourth Commandment:
wherefore it is to good purpose, that in this place we do lay them forth in a
more full discourse, as follows.

To speak generally, they are these:

First, faithfulness in governing, according to true justice and judgment, in
the fear of God, who is the judge of all superiors and governors.

Secondly, love toward the people of God, with a parent-like affection.

Thirdly, Duties of Superiors to their inferiors.
liberal encouraging and rewarding of such as deal faithfully in any
special duty or service.

Fourthly, gravity and constancy both in word and deed, as may best beseem
the credit of that place and office which every one bears.

Fifthly, modest and humble behavior both in word and gesture: yet so again,
as may best beseem the honor of the person which any sustaineth, and as may
likewise stand with that holy courage and severity which his office requires.

Sixthly, a merciful tollerating or bearing with infirmities, by moderating the
strict rigor of civil laws and penalties upon reasonable considerations, so
far as may stand with a current and inoffensiue course of justice. These are
the duties in general.

More particularly: The duties of natural Parents toward their children are,
that they 1. Nourish and bring them up. 2. Provide all things meet and
convenient for them, 2. Cor. 12.14. Ruth 31. 3. Defend them against injuries.
4. Instruct them in the ways and commandments of God. And this is their
chief duty as has been noted in the fourth Commandment. 5. Pray heartily
and continually to God for them; and the rather because in this respect, God
has after a sort put the blessing of the child's long life into the hands of
the natural parents: as the words of the Commandment (That they may prolong
etc.) do give to understand. 6. Govern and rule them by a godly and Christian
course of household nourture and discipline: according to that Hebr. chap. 12.7.
What son is there whom the father does not chasten? The precept hereof is
often in the holy Proverbs.



Duties of Superiors to inferiors.
The duties of kings and sovereign Princes are:

1. That they command their subjects to observe the whole Law of God, and to
worship him in that manner only which he has prescribed.

2. That they punish the transgressors of either table, according to the
quality and degree of the trespass: and contrariwise, that they defend and
encourage all that are dutiful and obedient.

3. That they fit all their civil laws and penalties thereunto.

4. That they place good magistrates under them, and take order that the people
may have good and faithful Ministers of the word of God, spiritually to teach
and govern them: and that they displace the contrary: as King Solomon deposed
Abiathar, 1. Kings 2.26. Read also 2. Chron. chap. 17.7. etc. and chap.
19.5.6.7.8 etc.

5. That they pray unto God for their Subjects, after the example of king
David, 2. Sam. 24.17. and of king Hezekiah, 2. Chron. 30.18.19.20. and Isa.
chap. 37.14.15. etc. and chapt. 38. and of king Iehoshapat, 2. Chron. 20.5. etc.

What the duties of Ministers of the word are: read Deuteronomy. 33.10. Ezekiel. 33.7.
etc. and chap. 34.4. John 21.15.16.17. Act. 20.28. and 1. Thessalonians.
chapter. 2. and 1. Timothy. 3. and Titus 1.

The duties of Masters of liberal Arts and sciences, and also of handie
labors are:

1. That they do wisely, faithfully, and diligently teach and instruct those
that are committed to them, according as their capacity will bear.

2. That they order and govern them by such a course of discipline and
nourture, as may best further their learning; and that they encourage them to
learn and labor, with as much facility and ease, and with as great delight
as may be.

3. Moreover, that masters of occupations do provide meet food, clothing, and
lodging for their apprentises, and that they pay their hired servants their due
wages, etc.

The duties of the husband toward his wife, are, 1. To keep the marriage
covenant faithfully. 2. To love cherish and defend her. 3. Patience to bear
with her infirmities. 4. Wisely to govern and further her in the way of
salvation.

The duties of the wife toward her husband are, to love, reverence, and obey
him, and in the care of governing and prospering the family, to be an helper to
him.

The duties of the Captain in war, are, to tender the life of his soldiers,
so as he do not hazard them in needless or desperate attempts: that he yield
them their just and ordinary pay: that he be of good courage and comfort to
them in time of necessary danger: finally, that he make them partakers in the
spoil of the victory, Genesis 14.24. 1. Sam. 30.22.23. etc.

The duties of the Lawier are; that he do willingly accept and further good and
honest suits, specially the suits and causes of the poor, the widow, the
fatherless and the stranger: that he earnestly dissuade evil and litigious
suits or quarrels, and that as much as lies in him he further friendly
composition and agreement: that he deal faithfully on the behalf of his
client, without delatorie excuses: and that he content himself with a
reasonable fee.

The duties of the Physician or Surgion are: that first he seek out the disease
of his patient: that then he minister the most fit medicines: that he pray for
a prosperous cure: that he accept of a competent reward.

The duties of such as exceed other in number of years, or in measure of
gifts and graces, are: that they help the rest with their godly advice and
counsel: and that they go before them, as good patterns in all wise and holy
conversation. Read Titus chapter 2.1.2.3. and Psalm 107.32.

These are the duties of superiors toward their inferiors.

But what if they do not their duties as they ought, but deal dishonourably*
etc. are inferiors then discharged of duty, so that we stand not thenceforth
bound to honor our parents and Princes, etc. according to their several
places and degrees of honor, which God has bestowed upon them?

Albeit (if they be very wicked specially against the true religion of God) we
cannot every way and so fully honor them, as if they did perform the duties
of their places to the honor and glory of God: neither indeed are they
worthy of it: yet for the Lords sake, How honor and worship due to men,
differs from that which is due to God.
and in dutiful regard of his commandments and ordinances (in so much as all
the powers that be, are ordained of God) we stand bound so far to honor
them, as we do not dishonor him: to obey and bow to them, so far as we do not
disobey and lift up our selves against him. Yea even in all things are we to
submit our selves to them, so as in nothing we rebel against him: we must be
thankful to them, so far as we show not our selves unthankful to him. And
above all things, we must remember to pray earnestly to God for the most wicked
of them, that it might please him of his infinite mercy to turn their hearts,
and to give them grace to do their duties faithfully, that so they may have
more worthy honor, both before God and men.

But as touching all humane infirmities of those that be otherwise both good
and godly, it is the duty of every one patiently to bear with them, yea as
much as we may, to cover and hide them, that they break not forth to their
dishonor, either among our selves, or in the sight or hearing of any other.

It is true, as we are instructed from the example of Sem and Iapheth, Genesis
9.23.

And further touching wicked Kings and Princes, that it is our duties to pray
for them, we learn from the Apostles, who so charged Christians to do, while
yet they were enemies to the Gospel.

Nevertheless, if they command us any thing contrary to the word of God, we
must obey God rather then man. For in that respect, we have no father, king, or
master, etc. but God alone, etc.

Here might we come to the negative part of this Commandment, but for the
removing of a certain scruple. I pray therefore, let us stay our course
awhile, seeing it gives occasion of a very good and necessary instruction.

In so much as all honor belongs unto God, and we are commanded to worship
him alone, Matthew. 4.10. 1. Tim. 6.15.16. etc. yea in this respect Peter
reproves Cornelius for bowing down very low, to declare his honorable and
reverend estimation of him, Acts 10.26.

And Revel. chap. 19.10. and again chap. 22.8.9. even the Angel of Christ
reproves John twice, for bowing down low to give honor unto him, and bids
him worship God: How honor and worship due to God, differs from honor and
worship due to me^.
And Job 32.21.22. I may not give titles to man, etc.

How therefore may we account any men honorable and worshipful, and
accordingly yield them the outward gestures and titles of honor and worship;
and yet not defraud God of that which is proper and due unto him?

To the clearing of this point, we must necessarily put a great difference
betwixt divine honor and worship, which is only proper to God: and civil
honor and worship, which God himself permits, yea commands to be
yielded of man unto a man.

Show what that difference is.

We honor and worship God immediately for his own sake, that is to say, we
bow the knees both of our bodies and also of our souls before him, and we are
most humble and hearty suitors unto him, in all things according to his will,
with sure trust and confidence in his mercy, and with an acknowledgement, even
from the bottom of our hearts, that he only is of most high and excellent
majesty, above all superiority and degree either of earthly Prince or
heavenly Angel, and so consequently, we acknowledge him worthy more reverend
honor and worship, then can possibly be yielded to him of our selves, or of
any of all his creatures.

But all the honor and worship which we give unto men, we yield it only in
and for the Lord; that is to say, although we bow not only the knees of our
bodies, but also the affections of our minds and spirits before them as in the
sight of God: and though as our necessities and duties require, we do sometimes
make our humble suits and supplications to them: nevertheless we knowing, that
as our honor and worship toward God is always too short and failing, so this
unto men may be excessive and too much: therefore we always retain and hold
this persuasion in our hearts, that even our highest superiors here upon
earth, are but the instruments of Gods goodness toward us from heaven, though
indeed they be his very honorable instruments, and that all their power is
limited according to the good pleasure of his divine will. Neither do we
yield unto them, or ask of them, or fear and expect from them any thing,
which God has reserved as proper and entire unto himself.

Sins forbidden.
This is a true difference indeed: and if you shall express this last point by
some particulars, you shall make the whole matter much more plain.

Rehearse therefore some of those things which God has reserved wholly to
himself, and are only to be sought and expected from him.

We do not seek to any earthly Superior or Power, whether parent or Prince
or any other, for the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, nor for the inheritance
of his heavenly kingdom: no neither do we seek to them for health and
preservation in time of plague and sickness, nor for fruitful seasons and
plenty in the time of dearth and famine, etc. but to God only, as the author
and giver of them.

If they wrong us, God is righteous and will do us justice; though they should
kill our bodies, yet God will save our souls.

Hitherto of the affirmative part of this fifth Com. of almighty God, the God
of all divine honor, worship and glory.

Now on the contrary, what are the evils and transgressions which the Lord
forbids in it? etc.

The Lord having in this Commandment established a distinction of degrees of
honor, both in nature, and also for godly policy and communion of life: and
having likewise commanded all inferiors to yield to every one of their
superiors their due honor: and that all superiors also should so live and
govern, as they may be worthy honor, it is hereupon plainly to be gathered
that the Lord forbids on the one hand all anarchie or want of government,
and disordered confusion, together with all tyrannous, ouerstately, proud, and
rigorous Lordlinesse and dominion, yea every unkind and vnparent-like abuse
thereof.

And on the other hand, he forbids all stubborn contempt and disobedience,
with all envious and ambitious conspiracy and rebellion: yea all failing in
the faithful performance of any good service and duty, either in will,
word, or deed, in every one not answering to that place of inferioritie and
subjection wherein the Lord has set him.

This is indeed the sum of the negative part of this Commandment in few
words: but the more particular opening of it, would require a larger discourse
to show the particular transgressions both of inferiors and superiors in the
rehearsal of the contraries to all the good duties: as for example in the
inferiors, the contraries to true reverence, etc. in superiors, the
contraries to just and equal government, etc. Nevertheless, let us as
briefly as may be run through these contraries, whereby we may as in a short
view see, how infinite ways this one Commandment may be transgressed and
broken. And let us begin with the transgressions of inferiors, which are
these that follow.

First, the co^traries to true reverence, both in defect and in excess. Not to
esteem of them according to the worthiness of the place whereunto God has
advanced them. To despise them, because of some infirmities which they labor
of. To yield more honor and worship to the^, then were meet to be yielded to
mortal men. To fear them excessiuely. To sooth and flatter them in their
faults and ouersights: yea not to signify in reverend manner our dislike and
sorrow, if they fall into any foul and enormious sin.
Secondly, the contraries to true obedience. Failing of them in any just and
lawful service and duty. Obedience in good duties only to the teeth outward
as we say, or with service only to the eye, as the Scripture speaks, Ephe.
6.6. Obedience to iniust and wicked laws and commandments, as Doeg obeyed
Saul in killing the Lords Priests, etc. Conspiracy and rebellion against them.
Thirdly, the contraries to true thankfulness. Iegratitude of heart. Neglect
of ayding them when they stand in need of our help. Injurious or fraudulent
dealing, in keeping back or concealing any part of maintenance due to them.
Gratifying of them by flattery, or with wronging others, as Ziba did king
David in the cause of his master Mephibosheth.
Fifthly, the conttraries of well moderated and dutiful love. Excessive love,
and therein more care to please them then to please God, and to further their
civil commandments and laws, then the holy laws and commandments of the
only wise and just God. Hatred of them for doing their office roundly and
without respect of person: as namely, if they should punish our selves for our
defaults, or any that be near and dear unto us, etc.

Hitherto of the transgressions of inferiors against those duties, which this
fifth Commandment charge them to yield to their superiors.

The transgressions of superiors, in violating those duties which this same
fifth Commandment requires of them toward their inferiors do now follow. And
first more generally, and this also diverse ways, as we shall see in the
contraries of the several duties commanded to them. Such as are: First, the
contraries to just and equal government. Careless neglect of just and equal
government. Error in discerning what is equal and right, through rashness,
and for want of due aduisement. Acceptance of persons for favor, or for
bribes, against the known equity of the cause.
Secondly, the contraries to right loving and parent-like affection. Want of
affection, as Gallio Act. 17. cared not to see Sosthenes outragiously beaten
before his judgment seat. Foolish pity. Vain popularitie. Heavy and
tyrannical exactions.
Thirdly, the contraries to just incoraging of those that are dutifully
affected. Neglect of rewarding such services as have bin performed with
special diligence and faithfulness, in causes of great weight and moment.
Rewarding of the unworthy.
Fourthly, he contraries to stayednesse and gravity. Lightness in and
constancy. Pride and ambition.
Fifthly, the contraries to modesty. Vain glory. Arrogancy. Counterfeit
modesty.
Finally, the contraries to clemency, or gracious and merciful dealing.
Ouer-loose remissness. Rigorous severity.



These are the general transgressions against the duties which God requires
of Superiors to their inferiors. The more particular do now henceforth follow.

First, in natural parents. The contraries of meet nourishing up and
providing for their children. Such as are, neglect of providing even bare
necessaries: or on the contrary, riotous education, and aspiring after too
great things for them. The contraries of due defense against injuries.
Encouraging or hartening of any to shrewd and cursed dealing, either against
strangers or among themselves. No inuring of them to patience and meekenes.
Rash and unadvised defense or revenging their wro^gs. The contraries to
teaching and instructing of them. Such as are, neglect of teaching and
instructing them, either by their own industry, or by some other, in the
knowledge of such things as are meet for their years, etc. The teaching of
them evil things, or putting of them to evil teachers. The bringing of them up
idly. The giving of them ill example in any thing. The contraries of praying
to God for them: such as have no regard at all, or very little and seldom
regard to entreat God for his blessing upon them. Imprecatio^s or cursed wishes
against them in their fury. The contraries of wise and discreet government:
that is, either no rebuke or correction at all for their falts, which is noted
to be the fault of king David concerning Adoniah. 1. King. 1. Or over sharp and
bitter, and haining rebukes and reproaches, or reuilings, to the discouraging of
their minds, contrary to the rule of the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. Finally, no
mitigation of severity, though reasonable causes do offer themselves to induce
thereunto.
In the King or sovereign Prince. No requiring or urging of his Subjects, or
very remiss and negligent urging of them to the obedience of both the tables
of the moral law of God. No care, or slender care in framing and fitting his
civil laws and penalties thereunto. Neglect to make due choice of worthy
vnder-magistrates and officers, or to ouersee and inquire, whether they do
their duties faithfully. No defense, or too slight and houerly defending and
encouraging of the dutiful subject. Neglect of due severity against the
wicked, or rather preferring and advancing them, according to that Eccl.
10.5.6.7. Pr. 26.1.8. Finally, tyranny in sifting their Subjects, by causlesse
inquisitions, and officious oaths, in punishing or grieuing the innocent, in
punishing offenders above measure.
In the Minister of the word. More care of the fleece, then of feeding the
flock. Corrupt doctrine in any point. Evil example in any action of life:
yea all failing in encouraging to godliness, and in staying the course of sin,
by the admonitions and rebukes of the word, etc.
In the School-maister and teacher of more liberal learning Neglect of teaching
his scholars good things, and of using the most easy and commodious way
thereunto. Teaching them evil things. Evil example. Too great familiarity
and lenity. Sower austeritie. Unreasonable correction by the rod, much rather
by the fifth, etc.
In the Master of other trades and occupatio^s. Neglect to ouersee the ways
of his servants, that they be preserved from idleness and lewd practices, etc.
Commanding them unjust services. Defrauding the^ either of food or clothing,
or wages due to the^. Churlishnes after the example of Nabal, 1. Sam 25.17
Furious outrage either in word or deed.
In the husband toward his wife. No honorable regard, to tender her as the
weaker vessel, though she ought to be esteemed as a jewel of singular price.
Neglect of defending her against injuries. No patience, or very little bearing
with her infirmities. Rough and churlish dealing. Unfaithfulness in the marriage
covenant. Excessive or wanton love.

In the wife toward her husband: No subjection. No fear or reverence:
Malipartnesse. Neglect of yielding her help to the well ordering and
furthering the wealth of the family. Ill housewiferie. Unfaithfulness touching
her part in the marriage covenant, which is the greatest dishonor she can do her
husband.

In the Captain, Neglect of the life of his soldiers. Urging of them to
desperate attempts. Defrauding them of their ordinary pay. Withholding from
them their part in the spoil of the victory. Faintness in time of necessary
danger.

In the Lawyer, Neglect of accepting and furthering the good and honest suits
of the poor widow, etc. for want of a rich reward. Encouraging of the
contentious and wilful in their unjust suits, because they feed them with fat
fees, wherein as all labor is dishonest, so every recompense thereof is no
better then the hire of iniquity, the bread that is eaten with that gain is
the bread of deceit, and the wine which is drunk is the wine of violence, etc.
Prou. chap. 4.17.

In the Physician or Surgion, Neglect to search out the disease of their
patients. Ministering of hurtful and unfit medicines, specially if it should be
done purposedly, that they might hold their patients long under hand for the
increase of their gain, or in any other sinister respect. For herein they
should not do the part of a kind father, but of a stepfather, yea of an
unnatural tormenter and murderer. Finally, exacting of an unreasonable
reward, although they do their cure well and speedily, if they regard not the
inabilitie of their Patients when they are poor.

In those that exceed other in number of years, or measure of gifts, Neglect
to help their youngers and inferiors with their grave advise and counsel.
The Equity.
Counselling them to their hurt. Giving them evil example, etc. Neglect of
prayer for inferiors, is a sin generally in all sorts of superiors.

Now, what is the equity of this commandment. And first, why inferiors
should honor their superiors?

The general equity of it, is:

First, because as the distinction and difference of degree it self, so also
all the degrees of the same distinction according as they have been mentioned
before, they are the honorable ordinance and appointment of God.

Secondly, because (as a testimony thereof) they are honored with sundry of
Gods own titles and names.

Thirdly, because God has set them over us, to provide for us, to guide and
direct, to rule and to govern us, as in his own stead.

Fourthly, because of the many and great benefits which we receive from the
hand of God under their godly care and government over us, while we be
obedient and dutiful unto them.

Finally, because of the great and manifold evils which do follow upon contempt
and disobedience against them.

The benefits of obedience to good government we shall see in the blessings.

The evils of disobedience we shall likewise see in the curses following.

In the mean while: what is the more particular equity of this Commandment;
why inferiors should honor their superiors?

1 Because by our natural parents we receive our natural life, and all the
private benefits and comforts thereof, as from the honorable instruments of
God under their tender education and bringing up.

2 Because by our Princes and rulers in the commonwealth, we enjoy all the
public benefits and comfortes of life, not only those that belong to civil
society in common peace and honesty, against the enemies and disturbers
thereof; but also those that appertain to the holy communion of Saints in true
godliness and religion, under their vigilant protection and defense, through
the singular mercy of God.

3 Because by the holy ministry of the faithful Ministers of Gods word, we
receive our regeneration to nevvnesse of life, and are nourished up by the
immortal food of Gods word to everlasting life and glory, under their
spiritual vvatch in the Church of God, for the vvelfare and happiness of our
souls, which is more then natural life and all the benefits and comfortes
thereof.

4 Because Tutors, Schoole-maisters, and Masters of other sciences, trades,
and occupations, are in stead of parents, to teach and to bring up their
scholars and servants to such an honest and profitable course of life as our
Parents could not.

5 Because our elders in years, specially such of them as are ancient in
grace and godliness, they are honored by God himself, as it were with a
Crown of glory in that respect: and so are made examples of Gods constant
goodness and mercy in the prolonging of their lives before our eyes. As also
because they (so many as be such as they ought to be) are patterns of
godliness and gravity unto us, and are ready also to help us with good
counsel and instruction in our young years, according to that wisdom and
experience which God has given to them to gather in a long space and tract of
time.

6 Finally, because the only path-vvay for inferiors in their time to come to
honor (when it shall please God to make them parents, or to set them in any
other degree of superiority) is by giving honor to their own parents, and
to all other, unto whom God commands honor to be given.

These verily are very forcible reasons to all reasonable men to persuade the
equity of this Commandment, why all inferiors should honor their
superiors.

Show likewise, as shortly as you can, why superiors should deal honorably
with their inferiors?

1 Children are a gracious gift and blessed inheritance from the Lord: they are
also the defense and guard of their parents in time of their need, Psalm
127.3.4.5. and Proverbs 17.6. Childrens children are the crowns of the elders,
as fathers be the glory of the children, that is to say, when they are well
brought up and prove good and dutiful children. According to the other
Proverb, chapter 27.11. My son be wise, and rejoice my heart, that I may
answer him that reproves me. But on the contrary, a child ill brought up and
set at liberty, and so growing licentious, makes his mother ashamed.

2. As touching subjects, we read in the same book of the Proverbs, chapter
14.28. In the multitude of the people is the honor of the King, and for the
want of people (which comes by oppression and tyranny) is the destruction of
the Prince. Moreover, the King is maintained by the tillage of the field,
Ecclesiasticus chapter 5.8.

3. Ministers of the word are maintained by the assemblies and congregations to
whom they minister, the which their assemblies and congregations are the
precious inheritance of the Lord, bought with the most precious blood of our
glorious Lord Jesus Christ: who also according as they are brought nearer to
the Lord by the wise and faithful ministry of his word, so are they the more
comfortable hope and joy, yea even the crown of the rejoicing of their
Ministers before the Lord, 1. Thessalonians 2.19.20.

4. Tutors and schoolemaisters have likewise a worthy charge of great trust, in
that the well ordering of the minds and manners of youth is committed unto
them, to the end they should make them fit, to be in due time employed for the
best uses and services that may be in the common wealth or Church of God.
Neither may the thankful recompense of the parents, or of such as be
benefactors to their scholars or pupils, be without sin neglected of them.

3 Masters of other trades and occupations have the like charge: and beside
that, they enjoy the profit of all the skill which they teach, and of the
strength and labor of their servants, so long as they are under their
government. The like is to be considered of all the rest.

The great and manifold equity of this commandment, will yet further appear
from the blessing promised to the obedience of it: to the which point we are
now come.

Which are the words wherein it is expressed? The Blessings


In these; That thy days may be prolonged on the land which the Lord thy God
gives thee.

We have a notable example of Gods blessing upon the posterity of Ionadab,
Jeremy 35.18.19.

But insomuch as sometime it falls out, that dutiful children, and the same
also dutiful subjects, are taken away before they come to any great length of
days, how is the promise of this blessing performed unto them?

First, God verifieth his promise toward every true dutiful child or subject,
etc. in that he prolo^geth their life here on earth, until he has prepared
and made them fit to be translated out of this sinful world, into his heavenly
and most blessed kingdom.

Secondly, that which he denies to some upon special causes secretly known
to himself, and when long life could not by reason of some common calamity
and misery be a blessing, he performs it to them in granting it to their
posterity and children.

Thirdly, some that seem dutiful children or subjects etc. before men, they
are not so in truth in the sight of God, but do that which they do, in servile
flattery, or looking to an earthly recompense and reward.

Fourthly, some again that have in some measure a dutiful regard of their
parents and other governors, do yet by some other grievous sin either open
or secret, provoke the Lord to cut them off as it were before the time.

Finally, see^ng the obedience of the most dutiful child or subject, and
every other inferior is imperfect, no marvel though God to make the
perfection of his justice known; do (as seems good unto him) shorten the
temporal blessing.

Let us well observe in this place, that the same blessing thus promised to the
dutiful child, belongs also to the dutiful subject to the obedient
scholar, to the faithful servant, etc. For a^l these are one. And he that is
truly dutiful in one estate will be dutiful in another.

Nevertheless, let us for the more full light of instruction, consider the
particular blessings, from particular testimonies of holy Scripture.

What proof have you for the blessing of God upon the dutiful subject?

We have a most clear example of it in David. King Saul pursued him with all
the subtlety and force that he might, to take away his life: but his
faithful allegiance to God and his Prince was as an armor of proof, so to
shield and defend him, that Saul with all his spies or armies could never
prevail against him.

What is the blessing of those which do honor the faithful Ministers of Gods
word?

Verily, verily (says our Savior Christ) if I send any, he that recieueth
him receives me, and he that receives me, receives him that sent me, John
chapter. 13.20.

And Matthew. 10.41. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall
receive a Prophets reward.

Here note the earnestness of our Savior Christ in this point, expressed in
the former of these scriptures by that doubled asseueration, Verily, verily, I
say unto you.

What is the blessing of the wife that is loving and reverend toward her
husband, and wise and careful in the education of her children?

Her children shall rise up and call her blessed, and God requires that her
husband should give her all worthy praise and encouragement, Prou. 31. verse
28.29.31. Yea this is the way whereby God will guide her unto his glorious
kingdom.

For as the Apostle Paul teaches: By bearing of children she shall be saved,
if she continue in faith and love, with holiness and modesty, 1. Timothy
2.15.

What is the blessing of those that honor their masters who are their private
governors and instructors?

As he that keeps the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof: so he that
waits upon his master shall come to honor, Proverbs 27.18.

And the Apostle Paul, encouraging servants to do their faithful and willing
service: Know ye (says he) that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same
shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free, Ephesians. 6.8.

And again, Coloss. 3.24. Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward
of the inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ.

Now, what is the blessing of those that do honor their elders in years, and
are also ready in giving honor to go one before another: yea so, that they
refuse not to yield a certain reverence, and to have in good estimation their
equals, yea, even the poorest and most inferior and base among them?

Of all such the Apostle Peter says in the place before alleged: God gives
grace to the humble, 1. Epistle, chap. 5. verse 5. And Luke 14.11. He that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

Hitherto of the blessing of all sorts of inferiors, which yield due honor to
every degree of their superiors.

It follows that we inquire into the blessing of God upon superiors,
whosoever shall deal honorably according to the office of their several
places and callings toward their inferiors.

And first, what is the blessing upon natural parents, which bring up and
govern there children as they ought to do?

The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice, and he that begets a
wise son, shall have joy of him. Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and
she that bare thee shall rejoice, Prou. chap. 23. verse 24.25.

This presupposes good education, as a means of this wisdom and
righteousness of the child, according to that which follows in the same
book of the holy Proverbs, chapter 29.15.16 17.

The rod and correction give wisdom, but a child set at liberty makes the
mother ashamed, etc. Correct thy son and he will give thee rest, yea, he will
give pleasure to thy soul. And otherwise we know, according to that chap.
22.15. Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child, etc. wherefore chap.
13.24. it is said: Chasten him betimes. This is the blessing of God upon good
parents.

What is the blessing upon good Princes and rulers, who are foster fathers to
the people of God, in the Church and commonwealth?

Mercy and truth preserve the King: for his throne shall be established with
mercy, Prou. chapter 20.28.

And chap. 29.14. The throne of the king which judges the poor in truth,
shall be established for ever.

Read also 1. Kings 2.1.2.3.4. where king David charge his son Solomon to
do the office of a king courageously, etc. with a most comfortable
encouragement from the assurance of Gods blessing, according to his gracious
promises in the same behalf: and namely of this, that his posterity should sit
upon the throne of Israel, read the the words of the text.

All the godly kings are mirrors of Gods blessing this way, as the holy stories
of them do declare.

And namely, it is said of the good King Josiah, Ier. 22.15. Did he not eat
and drink and prosper when he executed judgment and justice? when he judged
the cause of the afflicted and poor he prospered: Was not this because he knew
me, says the Lord?

What is the blessing of God upon Ministers of the word which do the part of
fathers and nources, in feeding and tendering the flock of Christ?

Feed the flock of God which depends upon you (says the Apostle Peter)
caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a
ready mind.

Not as though ye were Lords over Gods heritage, but that ye may be examples to
the flock.

And when the chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive an
incorruptible Crown of glory, 1. Epistle, chapter. 5. verse 2.3.4.

What is the blessing of the husband which is loving and kind to his wife?

God makes the vviues of such faithful to them, to the preservation and
establishment of love betwixt them: which is a blessing far above the jewel
of most excellent price, according to that we read Prou. 31.10.11.12.

What is the blessing belonging to good masters and governors of families,
which rule their servants with a parent-like mind, and deal equally, justly,
and beneficially with them, as they are commanded, Colossians. 4.1. and as
has been alleged before out of the fifteenth Chapter of Deutronomie?

God blesses the habitation of the righteous, Prou. 3.33. And in that 5. chap.
of Deuteronomy. verse 18. God will bless beneficial masters in all things that they
do.

Read also Ephesians. 6.8.9. where the Apostle requiring like dealing from the
masters toward their servants, does not doubt to give them to understand, that
there is the like blessing belonging also unto them.

Now finally, what is the blessing belonging to such as being elders in years,
give good example to their youngers, and be teachers of good things?

They shall be filled with days (as the Lord says by his Prophet Isaiah) and
he that is an hundredth years old, shall dye a young man, chapter 65.20. Read
also verse 22. And Job chap. 5.26. They shall go to their grave as corn which
comes in due season into the barn.

Thus large is the blessing of this Commandment, which spreads it self
far and near, over high and low: and therefore in all good proportion ought
it accordingly to be very carefully regarded and obeyed of all: or else we must
needs acknowledge the curse so much the more justly due unto us. And this we
are henceforth to search out for the awaking of our drowsy consciences, as we
have done the blessings that they might be as a treasury of comfort unto us,
while we endeavor to walk in the holy ways of God in our several callings,
etc.

First therefore, what is the general curse of God upon all, both superiors
and inferiors, whosoever shall refuse to give honor to God in the obeying of
this his ordinance, both for honorable government, and also for dutiful
subjection?

God does for this cause, in his just displeasure, sometimes dissolve the good
order of policy and government, which he had established for the common
benefit of his people, either by setting over them evil Rulers, or leaving
them to confused mutinies and rebellions from among themselves, or else by
giving them over into the hands of tyrants and forrayne Lords and governors.

But let us consider of the curse more particularly.

The Curses.
And first, concerning undutiful and disobedient inferiors. What is the curse
of God against undutiful children, specially such as shall stubburnely and
contemptuously rebel against their natural parents: of whom it is said, Prou.
30.11. There is a generation which curses their father, and which do not
bless their mother. What I say, is the curse of God against such?

God in his civil course of justice among his people of Israel, commanded that
such should be stoned to death.

So indeed we read, Deuteronomy. 21.18. etc. Rehearse the place of Scripture.

If any man have a son that is stubburne and disobedient, which will not
hearken unto the voice of his father, nor to the voice of his mother, and they
have chastened him, and he would not not obey them. Then shall his father and
his mother take him, and bring him out to the Elders of his City, and to the
gate of the place where he dwells. And they shall say to the Elders of the
City, This our son is stubburne and disobedient, and he will not obey our
admonition, he is a riotour and a drunkard.

Then all the men of his City shall stone him with stones unto death: so thou
shall take away evil from among you, that all Israel may hear it and fear.

Read also Exodus 21.15. and verse 17. Leuit. 20.9. Math. 15.4. Deuteronomy. 27.16.
Prou. 20. verse 20. etc. chap. 30.17.

What is the curse upon rebellious subjects, and such as shall curse their
Rulers?

A seditious person seeks only evil, but a cruel messenger shall be sent
against him, Prou. 17.11. And chap. 30.31. There is no rising up against the
king: wherefore worthily is the exhortation of the father to the son to be
harkened unto, chap. 24. verse. 21.22. My son fear the Lord and the king, and
meddle not with them that are seditious: for their destruction shall rise
suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

What is the curse against those that despise the faithful Prophets and
Ministers of the word of God?

He that despises you, despises me (says our Savior Christ to his
Ministers) and he that despises me, despises him that sent me (as has been
answered before) Luke 10.16. And therefore the curse of this sin must needs
be a grievous curse. For no man can despise the Lord, and be innocent before
him.

Show it by some example, wherein God would have his wrath against this sin be
evidently seen and discerned of all.

In the 2. chap. of the 2. book of the Kings ver. 23.24. we read that little
children of the idolatrous people of Bethel, came out of the City, and mocked
the true Prephet of God Elisha as he went by the way, using these reproachful
speeches: Come up thou bald-head, come up thou bald-head, come up thou
bald-head. Whereupon the hold Prophet turning back, and by the Spirit of God
discerning the spitefulness of these idolatrous and ungracious boys, he
cursed them in the name of the Lord: and the Lord sent two bears out of the
forest, which did tear in pieces two and forty of them.

A fearful judgment for all children to take warning by: yea, and for
parents also, to take warning that they bring not up their children in contempt
of the faithful Ministers of the word.

Yea further, for this sin were all the people of Israel and Judah destroyed
and led into captivity, after they had hardened their hearts to despise and
mock at the Prophets of God, 2. Kings 17.13. and 2. Chron. 30.10. and chap.
36.16.

What is the curse against the wife that despises her husband?

Mical despising David in her heart, when he daunced for joy of bringing home
the Ark of God, was for the same cause made childlesse all her life, 1. Chron.
15.29. and 2. Sam. 6.23.

This is revealed by the Spirit of God to have been her curse: neither is it to
be doubted, but every co^temptuous wife has some curse or other from God in
that respect.

Now what is the curse against the undutiful and unfaithful servant?

The servant which does wrong to his master, shall receive for the wrong which
he has done: and there is no respect of persons, Coloss. 3.25.

Against unfaithfulness, the Lord gives all servants warning by the example
of his punishment upon Gehazi, the servant of Elisha the Prophet, 2. Kings.
5.27. upon whom God casts the leprosy of Naaman, for his crafty dealing to
get money and apparel of Naaman fraudulently in his masters name.

What is the curse against those that be unthankful and contemptuous against
such as have been good and beneficial unto them, whether patron, friend,
Physician, Lawyer, or any other?

He that rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house, Prou.
17.13.

What is the curse against those that despise their elders in years, yea,
though they be otherwise their inferiors?

Of all such it is said, God resists the proud, 1. Peter 5.5. and Luke 14
11. Whosoever exalts himself shall be brought low.

Read James 4. verse 5.6. It is a great sin for any to despise age, as Job
gives to understand by his complaint against it, chap. 30.1.12. and therefore
it cannot be but the Lord will punish it. And we say in our common speech,
mock age and see what will come of it.

Our own consciences (if there were no other law) would tell us, that it must
be punished. And that comes here again to be considered, which fell upon the
wicked children of Bethel: rather because they mocked Elisha who was a man of
years and reverend gravity, besides that he was a Prophet of the Lord.

Thus far of the curse against undutiful inferiors, who are all and every
of them accursed before God here in this world, beside that they have no
portion in the kingdom of heaven, if they find not grace to repent, which is
the heauiest and wofullest curse of all.

It remains that we inquire now of the curse against superiors which abuse
their power and authority, or any other excellency, wherewith the Lord has
honored them above others.

And first, what is the curse of God against natural parents, which walk not
aunswerably to the honor of their place?

We have seen in the third Commandment, the fearful judgment of God upon
Eli, because his sons ran into a slander, and he stayed them not, 1. Sam.
3.13.

But more generally, Psalm. 78. verse 5.6.7.8.9.10. and verses
56.57.58.59.60.61.62.63.64. Because fathers in Israel did not teach their
children the ways and commandments of God, as he had commanded them, but were
disobedient and rebellious, and did not set their heart aright, nor keep their
spirit faithful unto God: therefore he was wrath and greatly abhorred Israel,
so that he forsook them, and gave the^, their choice men, their maidens, and
their Priests to the fire and sword of their enemies.

Read also Ezekiel. 16.20. the like, yea, rather a greater judgment: because
their children which God challenges as borne unto him, were by them brought up
and dedicated to the service of idolatry.

What is the curse against the Prince or Ruler that governs wickedly,
tyrannously, and not like a father?

Tophet, that is to say, hell or the place of destruction is prepared of old:
it is even prepared for the king: he has made it deep and large: the burning
thereof is fire and much wood: the breath of the Lord, is like a river of
brimstone which does kindle it, Isa. chap. 30.33.

What is the curse against the wicked Minister of the word, which tendreth not
the flock of Christ, as a father and nource among them?

O idol shepherd that leaves the flock: the sword shall be upon his arm, and
upon his right eye. His arm shall be clean dried up, and his eye shall be
utterly darkened, says the Lord by his Prophet Zachary, chap. 11.17.

What is the curse against the husband that is unkind and churlish to his wife?

He is therein a curse to himself: for he troubles his own flesh, he
hinders the joy of his own heart, and interrupteth the course blessed of
prayer, which is one of the best factors and friends that the married couple
has. 1. Peter 3.7.

What is the curse against masters that deal hardly with their servants?

Because the cruel masters in Israel did not set their servants free, as God
commanded their fathers, when he brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of
the house of servants: behold (says the Lord) I proclaim a liberty for you to
the sword, and to the pestilence, and to the famine, and I will make you a
terror to all the kingdoms of the earth: Jeremy chapter 34. verse 17.

Read from the 6. verse of the Chapter, etc.

What is the curse against such aged persons as have no regard to walk wisely,
and as it beseems their years, for the good example of their youngers?

Though a sinner do evil an hundredth times, and God should prolong his days,
yet I know that it shall not go well with him, because he fears not before
God, Eccles. 8.12.13. And Isaiah chap. 65.20. The sinner being an hundredth
years old shall be accursed.

His bones are full of the sin of his youth, and it shall lie down with him
in the dust, Job. chap. 20.11.

This must needs make him miserable indeed. For even as the Spirit of God
earnestly affirms, that they are blessed which dye in the Lord, whose works
follow them, etc. Reave. 14.13. So on the contrary, they whose sins accompany
them to their death, and in their death, must of necessity be extremely
miserable.

To conclude this point: what proof have you of the curse against those that
do not give mutual honor one to another: yea, the more honorable to the
baser, the richer to the poorer, the learned to the unlearned, and much rather
if one equal do not so to another, servant to servant, brother to brother,
poor to poor, and rich to rich? etc.

The sinner (says the holy Proverb) despises his neighbor (and so
consequently is accursed:) But he that has mercy on the poor is blessed,
chap. 14.21. And chap. 11.2. When pride comes, then comes shame: but with
the lowly is wisdom.

And chapter 28.3. If a poor man oppress the poor, he is like a raging rain
that leaves no food. And Math. 24.48. etc. The evil servant which smites
his fellow-seruants, shall be cut off, and have his portion with hypocrites:
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Thus far of the curses. And thus we see, how even as God blesses every
duty of obedience, Every man is a damnable transgressor.
both in this Commandment and in the rest: so both here and every where, there
is no transgression of his Law, which is not accursed in his sight: and to the
which some special punishment or other does not belong, according to that we
read, Heb. chap. 2.2.

Now therefore, that according to the course of our Catechism, we may come to
the use of this Commandment: Have you so obeyed it, that you may escape these
curses, and obtain the former blessings?

No: but contrariwise, I have infinitely transgressed it, above that I know
against my self, both in thought, word, and deed: so that unless happily I
may find favor with God, through the perfect redemption and obedience which
Jesus Christ has wrought, I must of necessity perish in my sins, which I
have committed against it.

This verily is not only your estate, but it is the condition of every mothers
son among us: yea, it is the common estate of all, both of parents and
children, of Princes and subjects, of pastors and people, of masters and
servants, of young and old, of poor and rich, of learned and unlearned, etc.

By Jesus Christ only are we redeemed through his blood, from the curses and
punishments due to the transgressions of this Commandment: and by him alone
also are we made partakers of the blessings promised to the obedience of it:
provided always (as must be understood in every commandment) that we truly
believe in his most blessed name, repent of our sins, and endeavor to walk
more and more in the obedience of it.

But that the persuasion of your faith, may be the more comfortable to you:

What proof have you that our Savior Christ has perfectly fulfilled the
obedience of this Commandment for you, and for so many as shall truly believe
in him, and repent of their sins?

Hereof, through the goodness of God, we have very evident and manifold
confirmation in the holy Scriptures, to our singular comfort.

Our Savior Christ's perfect obedience.
Which are those manifold confirmations, whereof we have so comfortable evidence?

They are partly such as give testimony of his perfect obedience to man, in
every estate of inferiority and subjection, whereunto it pleased him of his
own accord to submit himself for our sakes, though he were the Lord of glory:
whom all both men and Angels stand bound to worship, honor and serve.

And partly, they are such as do witness his perfect obedience to God, in a
most gracious course of government, in respect of that superiority which he
received above all creatures, in that he alone was and is for ever found
worthy, to be the only mediator betwixt God and man.

Let us therefore inquire of these things in the same order.

And first, what proof have you that he was perfectly obedient to his natural
parents, that is, to the Virgin Mary his mother, and to Joseph though he was
but his father in law, as one may say?

In the 2. chap. of the Evangelist Luke, verse 51. it is expressly testified
that he was subject to them.

Yea, no doubt it is the meaning of the Evangelist, that he was constantly
subject to them, so that he most willingly obeyed them in all things, as might
best beseem a most dutiful child: that is, so far as might stand with that
principal duty, wherein he well knew himself chiefly bound to his heavenly
father, whereof we have sufficient proof from time to time, yea, even from the
beginning, as is plain in the same text, verses 48.49. And again afterward,
John 2.4. and Matthew. 12.48.49.50. and Luke chapter 11.27.28. Yea, so far was
he obedient, that he willingly submitted himself, to be even as a servant, or
a manual artificer, to work in works of Joseph his fathers science or trade
or occupation, even to the time that he was to manifest himself, to be that
Prophet sent of God to Israel: that is, until he was about thirty years of
age, as we may see Matthew. 13.54.55.56. Is not this the carpenters son, say
the people, who knew his bringing up? And more expressly, Mark 6.2.3. Is not
this the carpenter Mary's son? whence then has he this wisdom? And Luke
3.23. whereby it is evident, that for all that time his education was not
studient-like at learning, for then there had not been so great reason of their
admiration and question.

And that we may be confirmed by a testimony above all exception, concerning
his most perfect love and thankfulness to his mother, for her tender and
motherly care over him, and for her pains in nourcing of him up in his
infancy, she traveling with him into Egypt, etc. let us duly consider that
which the Evangelist Saint John writes Chapter 19.26.27. in that even in his
agonies upon the cross, he takes care for the comfortable maintenance of his
mother after his death; and it shall be instead of a thousand witnesses.

This therefore may suffice for the proof of his most perfect obedience in the
duty of a child.

What proof have you of his perfect obedience as he was in the form of a
subject, though indeed he was not by right a subject to any earthly Prince in
Israel: for King David speaking by the holy Ghost, called Christ his Lord,
Psalm 110. and Math. 22.43.44. much less was he a subject to the foreign
usurpation of the Roman Empire?

We have an evident proof hereof, in that he refuses to be made a king,
though the people would have done so, John chapter 6. verse 15.

And in that he professed plainly that his kingdom is not of this world, John
18.36.

And in that he himself paid tribute, and taught the people that they also
should do so, Matthew 17.24. etc. and chapter 22. verse 17.

What proof have you of his perfect obedience to the ministry of the word,
so long as he was in his private estate, and in the place of a hearer and
disciple, to receive the doctrine of God at the instruction of the Priests of
the Law, whose lips should preserve knowledge, and at whose mouth all were to
seek the Law of God, by the holy ordinance and appointment of God himself?

We have a notable testimony of it, even from his youth. Luke Chapter. 2. verse
41. etc.

And to his man's age, in that he came to the preaching of John Baptist, John,
Chap. 1.29.

And in that he sbmitted himself as others did to be baptized of him, Matthew.
3. verse 13. etc. to the end of the Chapter.

What proof have you of his perfect obedience, in an humble course of
conversation going before his elders in years as also all other, in giving
honor, yea even to the poorest among them.

Seeing he is faithful and true, and one that sought not his own glory, but
the glory of him that sent him, as we read John 7.18. and Chapter
8.49.50.54.55. we may boldly rest in his own testimony, concerning that
which he says of himself: I am meek and lowly in heart, Matthew 11.29.
according to the Prophecy of Isaiah, Chapter 42.1.2.3.

We have also his practice joined with his doctrine, Luke 14.7. etc. to the
15. verse: where he both reproves the pride and ambition of those that sought
to sit in the highest rooms at feasts, and also teaches that the poorest of
all should not be thought unworthy to be invited, and to have their meet and
convenient place.

But as touching his practice, we have a most lively proof in that he was
among his Disciples, not only as a master and Lord, but rather as a most
loving, sweet, and familiar brother or friend, John 15.13.14.15. Yea, even as
a servant, in that he vvashed his Disciples feet: he thereby, of purpose
giving them an example of all humble service, and of mutual love among
themselves, Chapter 13.4. etc. yea he professes that he came not to be served,
but to serve, Matthew. 20.28. and Luke chapter 22.27.

And beside, we have to the same purpose a most notable testimony of the
Apostles: As first of Paul, Phil. 2. verse 3. etc. where from the example of
our Savior Christ, the most humble man that ever was, he persuades all
Christians to the same most excellent virtue. And of the Apostle Peter 1.
Epistle chap. 2. verses 21.22.23. Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an
example that we should follow his steps, who did no sin, nei- was there
guile found in his mouth: who when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed it to him that judges righteously.

These testimonies do sufficiently confirm his perfect obedience to this
Commandment, in respect of his subjection in every estate of inferiority among
men, etc.

Now let us come to his perfect obedience before God, in his superiority, etc.

Hereof, there are two principal points to be considered: his heavenly
prophecy, and his spiritual government.

What proof have you of his perfect obedience in respect of his prophecy, and
in that he was the only true shepherd of the sheep, to guide the children of
God with a parent-like affection in the ways of the kingdom of heaven?

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem (says our Savior Christ himself) thou which killest
the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee: How often would I have
gathered thy children together, as the hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not, Math. 23.37.

Read also Math. 28.20. Revel. 3.20. Prou. 8.30.31. He teaches most clearly
and faithfully, as it were from the bosom of the father, John. 1.18. and chap.
4.34. and chap. 8.28.29. and chap. 12.49.50.

Now, what proof have you that he has perfectly obeyed the will of God, in
ruling and governing his Church, as a spiritual king and prince, and as a most
tender foster-father over his people?

In him, and by him, are all the prophesies performed, concerning that most
gracious and princely government, promised under the name and kingdom of king
David, or any other good king of Israel: according to that which the holy
Angel testifies to the Virgin Mary, Luke chap. 1. verse 31.32.33. and
according to that we read Heb. 3. verses 3.4.5.6.

Yea, by so much is the government of our Savior Christ more gracious, then
the government of any other king or prince, ever could, or possibly can be,
because he only vanquisheth our greatest enemies, and gives us that victory
which is the most glorious of all other: Our Savior Christ's perfect obed ence
for us,
for he subdueth not only our outward foes, but also our spiritual
adversaries; not only hosts and armies of men, but also the legions and
thousands of Devils that war against us.

And finally, he sets us in heavenly thrones with himself, etc.

Most sweet therefore may the comfort of these testimonies be justly unto us.

And whom of us may they not worthily move, to deny our selves, and after the
example of our Savior Christ, and by his grace, to give all due honor to
every man, and chiefly to the Lord himself: Our imperfect obedience for
Christ's sake accepted of God.
every of us contenting our selves with our estate, and under God walking
honorably in our places and callings: that so God may honor us, according to
his rich mercy and free grace in Jesus Christ, to whom be all honor and glory,
all worship, praise and thanksgiving, both now and for evermore, Amen.

The sixth Commandment follows.

Which is that?

Thou shall not kill. Or, as it is more usually Englished in the same sense,
Thou shall do no murder.

This latter interpretation, as it is more usual, so it is more significant:
wherefore we may well make choice to read it thus. Thou shall do no murder,
like as in the next Commandment we chose rather to say, Thou shall not commit
adultery: Then thus, Thou shall not commit fornication: though this we know,
that God forbids all cruelty, greater or less in this Commandment, and all
filthiness and uncleanness of the flesh in the other following, as we shall
see in the handling of them.

But first of all, concerning the reason of the proceeding of the Lord in the
publishing of this Law, two things seem worthy to be considered in this
place: The first, why the Lord does not rest in the former Commandment: which
is a perfect Law for the well ordering of all society, if it were thoroughly
observed: The second, why this Commandment forbidding murder, has the next
place after that.

What have ye learned for answer to these things? The scope of it.


First, the Lordresteth not in the former Commandment only, because that
contempt of good order and government, which reigns in our nature, breaks
forth into sundry outrages and mischiefs, which he saw likewise necessary
that they should be expressly mentioned and straightly forbidden.

Secondly, he gives the Commandment against murder the next place, because,
not only in the account of man, but also even in the estimation of God
himself, life is more precious then any other vvorldly thing, which man
enjoys.

And further also it has the next place, to the end that all which have any
power and government, may see what that is (which as touching humane
society) they stand chiefly charged with: and that also even to this end, that
the blessing of long life promised in the former Commandment, might not by any
contrary attempt of any man, be any way hindered or interrupted.

These indeed are the reasons, both why the Lord ends not his Law in the
former Commandment, though one would think that it alone might suffice for
the well ordering of all human society: and also, why he places this our
present Commandment next after that.

Let us now come to the interpretation:

And first, what mean you by murder, which is the only finne expressly
forbidden in it?

Murder is the unjust, and malicious, or vvilfull taking away of the life of
any of mankind, by any of the same kind; or of our own life by our selves, by
what way or means soever it may be.

It is true, thus far does murder reach.

But is there nothing else forbidden in this Commandment?

Yes: God does not only forbid all outward evils, whereby this wicked murder
is occasioned, but also all inward and corrupt affections, from whence it
springs, or whereby it is any way furthered and perfected.

Sins forbidden.
Yea, the Lord in this commandment straightly forbids the evil thought of
murder, with all crafty devises and practices wherewith any do lie in wayt for
blood.

It must needs be so, else should not the Law of God be perfect: for as our
Savior Christ says, out of the heart come evil thoughts, murders, etc. the
which do defile a man, Math. 15.19.20. Such was the murtherous thought of Esau
against his brother Iaacob, Genesis 27.41. Read also Ezekiel. 22.6.

Which are those outward evils whereby murder is occasioned?

Sower, disdainful, and wrathful countenances, taunting and reuiling
speeches, captious quarrelling and fighting.

These are the more immediate forerunners and occasions of murder, as daily
experience shows. For the sword would not be so rashly drawn as it is wont,
if the tongue could be kept in the scabbard, as it ought to be: and if the
countenance and behauior were so amiable as it should be, etc.

But let us go on.

Which are those inward affections of the heart from whence murder springs,
and whereby as by the secret and whispering accessories and abbettors murder
would be perfected, if God should not graciously stay and hinder it?

They are partly such as be contrary to the virtues which are required to
harmlesenesse and innocence, touching man's person and life. And partly, they
are such as be contrary to the virtues of helpfulnesse, concerning the relief,
succor, and comfort thereof.

These kinds of evil, unkind, and troublesome affections, are indeed the
breeders and hatchers of all violence and bloody murders.

All which contrary affections, both to harmelesnesse, and also to
helpfulnesse, though they all consent in doing of hurt: yet for the help of
our understanding and memories, we will follow this order of distinction here
in this negative part of this Commandment: because it is the fittest order to
be held afterward in the affirmative part of it.

Touching the first branch therefore of the distinction:

Which are those evil affections which be contrary to the virtues of
harmelesnesse and innocence, touching man's person and life?

They are of three sorts.

Which are they?

First, the contraries of meekness.

Secondly, the contraries of tractablenesse or gentleness and easiness to be
entreated.

Thirdly, the contraries of peaceablenesse.

Of these therefore, let us now henceforth inquire: And first, which are the
contraries of meekness?

They are these which follow.

1 Pride, in that every man thinks too highly of himself.

2 Envy and repining at our neighbors prosperity.

3 Rash and unadvised anger, when no just cause is given.

4 Treafenesse or hastiness to anger, when one is teachie and tangle upon
every light and trifling occasion.

5 Immoderate and bitter anger, though there be never so great cause given.

6 Desire or purpose of revenge, though reconciliation has been sought, yea
though satisfaction and recompense has been tendered and offered, as sometime
it falls out.

7 Finally, impatience, the fruits whereof are restless murmuring, with
cursed exclamation and complaining.

The contraries of tractablenesse, or gentleness and easiness to be
entreated, are next:

Which are they?

On the one hand, too great softness, or a servile and timorous kind of
blockishnesse, when any shall pass by great abuses against their person and
life, or against any that belong to them, and have no care to use the lawful
means which God has appointed for the remedying thereof: such as are, private
rebuke, and if that will not prevail, public complaint to the magistrate for
the punishment of such as shall go on in harmefull and mischievous practices,
without all regard of amendment, or of seeking any private reconciliation.

On the other hand, hardness to be entreated when reconciliation is sought.

Now in the third place, which are the contraries of peaceblenesse, the which
God does likewise forbid in this Commandment?

In one extremity, cowardly yielding to unlawful conditions of peace, or to
peace it self, in such cases as we ought to use constant resistance.

In the other extremity, first vnapeaceablenesse, in such cases wherein we
ought to seek and follow after peace with all men.

Secondly contentiousnesse, or a delight in an obstinate course of brawling and
contention.

Thirdly, inueterate hatred, or rancor and malice.

All these are the contraries of the virtues belonging to harmelesnesse and
innocence, touching the life and persons of men.

Show furthermore, which are the contraries to the virtues which belong to
helpefulnesse, concerning the relief, succor, and comfort of life?

These are likewise of three sorts.

Which are they?

First, the contraries to the virtues of peacemaking.

Secondly, the contraries to those virtues which belong to the repelling of
injuries.

Thirdly, the contraries to the virtues which serve to the well placing and
bestowing of benefits.

Let us therefore likewise inquire of these in the same order, as we have
already done of the former.

And first, which are the contrary vices to the virtue of peacemaking?

They are these two:

1 Sowing of contention, by secret tale-carying and privy slandering.

2 Hindering of peace and friendly agreement, by contrary persuasion and
counsel.

The contraries to the virtues of the second sort are in the next place: that
is, the contraries to just repelling of injuries.

Which are they?

They are partly, such as be contrary to that lawful and just revenge, which
ought to be sought at the hands of those that have power to punish such as
shall grow mischieuously injurious and hurtful to any of our neighbors and
brethren.

And partly, they are such as be contrary to that Christian fortitude,
whereby the innocent party extremely oppressed, is presently to be relieved,
or else he must perish, or be very daungerously damnified, or utterly undone,
as we use to speak.

Show therefore first, which those vices be that are contrary to just revenge?

They are these four following:

On the one side, careless and unkind neglect of seeking just and necessary
revenge, by the help of the godly and Christian Magistrate.

On the other side.

First, private reuengement, with neglect of the magistrate.

Secondly, mis-informing or bribing the magistrate, in an inordinate desire of
revenge above measure.

Finally, cruelty in an ouer-eger or bitter pursuing of revenge and punishment
assigned by the magistrate, though it be no greater then is equal and meet.

Which be the contraries to godly and Christian fortitude?

They are these two.

First, cowardly fearfulness and want of holy courage, wisely and warily to
undergo necessary dangers, for the just rescue and defense of our neighbor,
when we see him in extreme danger, and when by the course of ordinary
helps we might have hope to do him good.

Secondly, indiscreet, rash, and presumptuous venturousnesse, when a man
enterpriseth any thing above all likelihood of good success, he therein
greatly indaungering himself, to no benefit to his distressed neighbor.

The contraries to the last sort of the virtues which belong to helpefulnesse
for the relief, succor and comfort of life, namely they that belong to the
well placing and bestowing of benefits, they are yet behind.

Which are they?

They are of diverse sorts.

Rehearse them.

First, the contraries of kind-hartednesse, or goodness, as the Scriptures call
it.

Secondly, the contraries to mercifulness, or tender and bowel-like pity and
compassion.

Thirdly, the contraries to friendship and friendly dealing.

Finally, the contraries to well-wishing or prayer, and to good and well
dealing toward our enemies.

Let us therefore now last of all inquire out these kinds of contraries also,
in such order as you have rehearsed them.

And first, which are the contraries to kind-hartednesse or goodness?

First self-love, when a man thinks all too little for himself.

Secondly, evil will or vnbeteeming, when one is loath that his neighbor
should fare the better for him, though it be of another man's cost.

Thirdly, inhumanitie or churlishness, in a rude and discourteous denial, to
show that kindness which is entreated of a man.

Fourthly, fair words, but no performance, or with very great failing.

Last of all, unjust gratifying or pleasuring.

The contraries to mercifulness or tender pity and compassion are next.

Which are they?

On the one hand, want of compassion over the miseries of such as ought to be
pitied: as also laughing and rejoicing at shrevvd and unhappy turns, as we
call them.

And on the other hand, foolish pity, in sparing such as are vvorthie of
sharp severity.

In the third place are the contraries to friendship and friendly dealing:

Rehearse likewise which they be?

First, hostility, or open enmity. And then diverse other, as they follovv.

First, lightness in the entering and breaking off of friendship.

Secondly, feigned friendship or flattery.

Thirdly, neglecting or failing a man's special friend in the time of his
special need.

Last of all, unlawful or unjust befriending.

The contraries to wel-wishing and well dealing toward our enemies, are now
only remaining: Which be they?

They are these two:

First, rash and hateful imprecations or cursed vvishes against them,
proceeding of that private grudge which we bear them.

Secondly, profane and carnal rejoicing at their adversity and fall.

Thus have we through the grace of God, the whole interpretation of Gods
meaning in the negative part of this Commandment.

But can you show me the reason, why the Lord forbidding so many sins; makes
express mention only of murder: and why under that one he comprehends all
the rest, even from the greatest to the least of them: which course also, the
Lord takes in the next Commandment, and also in the 8. and in the 9.

Show here once for all, what the general reasons hereof may be?

I have learned that there are sundry very notable reasons of it.

I would gladly hear you to make rehearsal of them.

First, the Lord does it for plainness, least any should say, that through
weakness of capacity they could not understand his Laws.

Secondly, for brevity and shortness sake, least any should pretend, that
because of the length of them, they are not able to remember them.

Thirdly, to let us understand, that all the affections and thoughts from
whence such grievous sins proceeded, be themselves also great and grievous
offenses in the sight of God.

Finally, that by the more effectual avvaking and rousing up of our drowsy
consciences, our souls might be soon possessed with such a fear and horror
of Gods displeasure against the greater sins, that we might the rather be
preserved from the lesser, which we should otherwise too lightly regard, and
at vnvvares easily run into them.

These things thus observed in this place, both concerning this present
Commandment: Duties commanded.
and also concerning the 7. 8. and 9. following:

Now let us come to the affirmative part of this Commandment: what does God
require of us in it?

In this 6. Commandment the Lord our God commands all those virtues, which
belong either to innocence or harmelesnesse, touching the person or life of
man: or else to helpefulnesse for the relief and comfort of the same.

These virtues have been mentioned already, according to their several kinds,
in the negative part of this Commandment: but now we are more purposedly to
inquire of them, seeing to this affirmative part they do properly belong.

First therefore, which are those virtues which belong to innocence and
harmelesnesse, as touching the person and life of man?

They are these three.

First, meekness or patience and long suffering, which virtue lightly
passes by and endures all such offenses done against our selves, or any that
belong unto us, which duty does not necessarily bind us to stand earnestly
upon, in the reproving, censuring and pursuing of them.

Secondly, tractablenesse, or gentleness, and easiness to be entreated, to
forgive the trespass; yea though great anger or displeasure has of any of us
been justly conceived against other.

Thirdly, peaceablenesse, or desire of lawful quiet and peace, upon good and
lawful conditions, yea even to our own loss, if need so require, for the
compounding of all matters of strife and variance: with a circumspect care of
our own parts, to avoid all occasions of giving offense to any, so much as
lies in us.

These indeed are the virtues which appertain to innocence and
harmelesnesse, according to the Commandment of our Savior Christ: Be ye
simple as doves, Matthew. 10.16.

Show now which they be that belong to helpefulnesse?

They may be referred to three heads.

Which are they of the first sort?

They are such as belong to peacemaking betvveene neighbors and brethren
offended: as, loving persvvasion and gentle entreaty, yea even a certain
compelling of them to be friends, if possibly they may by any means be
overcome.

Which are the virtues of the second sort belonging to helpfulnesse?

They are such as serve to the just repelling of injuries.

Which are they?

They are lawful revenge, and holy fortitude.

What mean you by lawful revenge?

Lawful revenge is, when without all hatred or bitterness against the
person of the offender, and only in pure zeal against injurious dealing, the
unreasonable and obstinate party which by no private persuasion will be
entreated, is pursued in course of common justice before the magistrate, until
upon just information and suit he have received his due punishment, if it may
be obtained, or at the least be brought to yield himself to surcease from his
former injurious and mischievous course.

What is that virtue which you call holy fortitude?

Holy fortitude, is that godly boldness or stoutnesse of courage, which is
employed in the private defense of the innocent party, when for the present
he is in extreme and urgent danger of his life, or of any other imminent
mischief from his malicious and vehement adversary, but cannot enjoy so
speedy protection and defense from the public magistrate, as his necessity
requires.

Hitherto of the second sort of the virtues belonging to helpefulnesse. Which
are the third sort?

They are such as belong to the well placing and bestovving of benefits, for
the refreshing and comfort of life.

Let us hear you make rehearsal of them, as you have done of the former.

The first is kindhartednesse or goodness, as the scriptures do call it:
which is a general readiness and disposition of the mind and will of a man,
to help and succor, for the preventing of all extremity of evil, to the
uttermost of a man's power.

The second is mercifulness, or tender and bovvel-like pity and compassion:
which is a more particular readiness and disposition of the mind and will,
to help and succor upon the beholding of any present necessity or misery.

The Equity.
The third is friendship or friendly dealing, for the cherishing and increasing
of mutual love among neighbors and friends, though they be in no necessity.

The fourth is well vvishing and prayer, even for our enemies and ill willers:
with the practice of love and kindness, both in word and deed, for the
ouercomming and winning of them to the love of God and of his truth, and of our
selves if it may be.

Hitherto of the interpretation, both of the negative, and also of the
affirmative part of this Commandment.

Let us now come to that which remains to be yet further considered as
belonging to the same: And first, what is the equity of it?

First, because God has created us, and given us life, and many excellent
gifts according to his own divine image and likeness.

Secondly, because he has given us being and life to singular ends and
purposes.

Thirdly, because the taking away of life, is the bereauing of him from whom
it is taken, of all the benefits and blessings which God has given for the joy
and comfort of life.

Fourthly, because he that murthereth and takes away the life of another,
destroys the image of God, first in himself, and then also makes himself
guilty of his own death.

Fifthly, because through the benefit of this Law of God, we enjoy our own
lives in safety and peace.

Sixthly, because God has so disposed of his manifold gifts, according to the
manifold necessary businesses and labors of this life, that every one
stands in need of the help or service of the other.

But most of all, because we being by the grace of God Christians, are not
only by creation and natural birth, of one and the same kind of flesh and
blood, but also by regeneration and new birth in Christ Jesus, we are by a
more near and holy bond joined together in one spirit, baptized with one
Baptism, nourished up as at one table in the house and family of God,
appointed to the same everlasting inheritance of glory in the life to come, if
we shall live peaceably and godly, as becomes the children of God, the time
of our short and transitory life here in this world.

The equity of this holy and just Commandment of God, resting upon so many
excellent grounds and reasons, The Curses.
does not only justify the commandment it self, but also confirms all the
curses which God the righteous giver thereof, threateneth against every
transgression of it.

To the rehearsal of which curses, from the testimony and repetitions thereof
out of the book of God, we are now in the course of our order come.

Wherefore first of all, what is the curse of this Law of God, against the
grievous sin of murder?

In the civil course of Gods justice, allowed also even by the light of
natural reason in all nations, it is the temporal and bodily death of the
murderer, and by the eternal sentence of God, the death both of body and
soul for ever and ever. For so we read first in the 35. chapter of the book
of Numbers; and then Revel. chap. 21.8. Murderers shall have their part in the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

Here let us note, that as there are degrees of murder, some more horrible
then other, so the punishment thereof shall be, from the divine sentence of God
for ever. Yea even among men, we see the practice of this equity, that he
which shall but intend the murdering of his Prince, is more shamefully
executed, then if he should have committed the act of murder against a private
man.

And the heathen knew not what punishment might be devised, miserable and
execrable enough, for him that should murder his father or mother.

Let us note also, that though there are diverse kinds of practices and
courses, which murderers take to bring their wickedness to pass; some
seeking to hide their sin one way, and some another, yet howsoever they go to
work, they are every way accursed in the sight of God.

Hereof let us see some testimonies: What is the curse against such as (though
they lay no violent hands upon a man) yet commit murder under a colorable
pretense of just and lawful proceeding?

We may take king Ahab for a memorable example, unto whom the Lord says by
his Prophet Elijah: Have thou killed and gotten possession? In the place where
dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs even lick thy blood also says
the Lord, 1. Kings chap. 21.19.

Yea let us mark, that the Lord threateneth the heavy curse against king
Ahab, although he was sick and kept his chamber, when Naboth was by false
witnesses brought to his death: so as it might seem that he had no hand in it.
Yet because it could not be, but he must understand of Iezabell his wives
practice against Naboth, (for it was done in a public and solemn manner.)
Therefore because he stayed it not, God punishes him, as if he had been the
principal agent. But not only Ahab was accursed but Iezabell also, as it
follows in the same text:

What was her curse?

The Lord says likewise concerning Iezabell: The dogs shall eat Iezabell by
the wall of Israel, verse 23.

And yet further against Ahab, in the 24. verse: The dogs shall eat him of
Ahabs stock that dies in the city, and him that dies in the field shall the
fowls of the air eat.

The accomplishment of these curses we read, first, against Ahab, in the very
next chapter, verse 38. and against Iezabel though she over lived Ahab; and
also against Ahabs stock: 2. book of the Kings chapter 9. verses 6.7.8.9.10.
and verse 30. etc. to the end of the Chapter. Read also Judges chapt. 9.
verse. 23. etc.

Read in the book of the Martyrs, how fearful the ends of cruel
persecutors were, both of Emperors and others.

But there be other that go yet something more closely to work, then if they
should so openly forge wrong for a law.

What is the curse against such?

Cursed be he (says the Lord) that smites his neighbor secretly, and all the
people shall say, Amen, Deuteronomy 27.24. And verse 25. Cursed be he that
takes a revvard to put to death innocent blood, and all the people shall say,
Amen.

What is the curse against him that cruelly hacketh and mangleth any man's
flesh, albeit he do not pursue him to death?

Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, etc. says the
Lord by Moses, Exodus chap. 21. verses 24.25.

And Judges 1.6.7. Adombezek having the thombes of his hands and the toes of
his feet cut off, says thus in the guiltiness of his conscience against
himself: Seventy Kings having the thombes of their hands and of their feet
cut off, gathered bread under my table: as I have done, so God has rewarded me.

This is the law of revenge, which God both commands his Magistrates, and
also practices himself.

And let us observe, that this curse is threatened in special manner against
those that deal injuriously and cruelly against the poorer sort, the widow,
the fatherless, the stranger, the blind, the lame, etc. because they are most
succourlesse. Read Exodus 22. verses 21.22.23.24. And again Deuteronomy
24.14.15. and chapter 27.18. Cursed be he that makes the blind to go out of
the way, etc. And Proverbs chapter 22. verses 24.25. Rob not the poor,
because he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in judgment. For the Lord
will defend their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoil them. Read
also Isa. 1.23. and Ierem. 5.28.

What is the curse against the usurer, which spoileth the poor that way?

Shall he live (says the Lord) that has given forth upon usury and taken
increase? He shall not live, seeing he has done this abomination, he shall
dye the death, his blood shall be upon him, Ezekiel. 18.13.

There are some (as was said before) evil instruments of mischief, who carry
tales to shed innocent blood, is there any curse for such?

David the servant of the Lord says, they were accursed before the Lord, which
by false suggestion stirred up king Saul against him. 1. Sam. 26.19. And Ezekiel.
22.9. It is one of those grievous sins, for the which the Lord gave his
people into their cruel enemies hands: In thee (says the Lord) are men that
carry tales to shed blood.

Read also Dan. chap. 6.4. etc. 11. etc. 24.

There are besides these, some, who though they put not their hand, nor give
counsel, etc. to murder and cruelty, yet when they see it done, or hear of
it, they rejoice at it: are such under the curse of this Commandment?

He that mocketh the poor (says king Solomon) reprocheth him that made him,
and he that rejoices at destruction, shall not go unpunished, Prou. chap 17.5.

Read also Prou. 24.17.18. Be thou not glad when thine enemy falls, etc.
But that we may go forward, what and if a man abstain from murder and
cruelty, and only neglects to stay cruel practices, when there is power in
his hand to do it: is there any curse for such?

In the book of the Judges, chap. 5.23. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the
Lord) curse the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help the Lord,
to help the Lord against the mighty.

Mark how the Lord accounts himself to be forsaken and neglected, when any
refuse to succor his people in time of their dangers.

What is the curse against those that neglect to show mercy to such as be
poor, impotent, and distressed people, though they be not pursued by the
outward violence of adversaries?

There shall be judgment merciless against such as show no mercy. In the
Epist. of James chap. 2.13. And our Savior Christ says of all such, Matthew.
25.41. Depart from me ye cursed into ever lasting fire, which is prepared for
the Devil and his Angels.

Consider also to this purpose, the parable of the rich, voluptuous, and
unmerciful man, Luke 16.19. etc. Thus they that be not merciful where mercy
ought to be showed, are accursed: is there any curse against those that
neglect to do justice for the cutting off of those that be cruel and
murtherous persons?

Yes: for blood unrevenged defiles the whole land. Numb. chap. 35. toward the
end of the chap. And Prou. 17.15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord: and therefore
it cannot be, but they must be in a cursed estate.

It is true: it is verily an accursed thing to be abhorred of the Lord, and to
be accounted unclean and defiled before him. Read 1. Sam. 15. The Judgment
of God was against King Saul for sparing Agags life contrary to his
commandment. Read also 1. Kings 10.24. the judgment of God against king
Ahab for the sparing of the king of Aram. Read further 2. Sam. 21. and 1.
Kings. 2.31.32.33.

Now what is the curse against such as use reuiling and quarellous speeches,
the property whereof is, to provoke to fighting and murder, if they should
have the full course?

In the 5. chapter of Matthew, verse. 22. our Savior Christ affirms, that
whosoever says to his brother Raca, shall be vvorthie to be punished by a
counsel. And whosoever shall say fool, shall be worth^e to be punished with
hell fire. And 1. Corinthians 6.10. the Apostle Paul says: No raylers shall
inherit the kingdom of God.

To conclude, what is the curse against the angry and hateful man, yet though
he should not utter his malice by such railing and reuiling speeches?

In the place of Matthew even now alleged, our Savior Christ says, Whosoever
is angry with his brother unadvisedly, is culpable of judgment.

And Genesis 49.5.6.7. Iaakob in the name of the Lord curses the fierce wrath and
cruel rage of his two sons Simeon and Leui.

And 1. John 3.15. the Apostle says of the hateful person, that he is a
manslayer, and that no manslayer has eternal life abiding in him.

Read also both concerning hatred and anger, Proverb. 22. verses 24.25. He
that learneth the ways of the angry man, shall receive destruction to his
soul. And chapter 26. verse. 26.27. Hatred may be covered by deceit, but the
malice thereof shall be discovered in the congregation.

He that diggeth a pit shall fall therein, and he that rowleth a stone, it
shall return to him.

Hitherto of the fearful curses of God against the transgressions of this his
sixth Commandment.

Let us now come to the gracious blessings which he has promised to the
obedience of it.

And first, touching those that are innocent and harmless.

What is the blessing of such as be meek and of a long suffering and patient
spirit?

The Blessings.
Blessed are the meek (says our Savior Christ) for they shall inherit the
earth, Matthew. 5.5.

And Psalm 37.11. They shall have their delight in the multitude of peace.

That is, in much peace and prosperity. It is a promise of singular comfort
against all present encumbrances. Read further Psalm 37.34. etc.

What is the blessing of those that be gentle and tractable, or easy to be
entreated to forgive offenses and trespasses?

If we forgive men their trespasses, our heavenly Father will also forgive us.

But if we will not forgive men their trespasses, no more will our Father
forgive us ours. Matthew. 6.14.15.

The same promise is repeated again, Luke 6.37. Judge not and ye shall not be
judged, condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned, forgive and ye shall be
forgiven.

What is the blessing of those that be of a peaceable and quiet spirit,
desirous of peace?

They that seek peace and follow after it, shall see many good days: For the
eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
prayers. 1. Pet. 3.10 11.22.

And Prou. 20.22. Say not I will recompense evil, but wait upon the Lord,
and he will save thee.

A gracious blessing: and this no doubt is one of those righteous ways which
so please the Lord, that he will make the enemies of such as walk in it, to be
at peace with them, Proverbs 16.7.

Such are the blessings of those that be harmless, the blessings of the
helpefull do follow.

First therefore, what is the blessing of the peacemaker?

Our Savior Christ pronounces such also blessed. Matthew. 5.9. Blessed are the
peacemakers (says he) for they shall be called the children of God. And Prou.
12.20. To the counselors of peace shall be joy.

What is the blessing of such as be helpefull to any that are injuriously
oppressed, or be in great distress, by seeking the lawful revenge or succor
of the civil magistrate, against the ouer-mightie and cruel adversaries?

We may see it in the example of Queen Esther, whom God blessed for
succouring the Jews against the malice of Haman, by her petition and suit
made to the king for them.

The story is notable, as it is recorded in the book of Esther.

What proof have you that God will bless them, that do of holy fortitude and
courage, yield succor and help to such as be in special distress and danger;
yea and which take more private revenge, when so it is necessary, and the
ordinary help of the magistrate cannot be so speedily obtained?

We see a proof of it in the example of Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite, of
whom it is written, that she was blessed above other women, because she
being but a woman, yet took courage to kill Sisera a mighty Captain and
chief enemy of the people of God, Judges chap. 5.24.

Yea and Psalm 137 verse. 8.9. O daughter of Babell (says the holy Psalmist)
worthy to be destroyed; blessed shall he be that rewards thee as thou have
served us. Blessed shall he be, that takes and dasheth thy children against
the stones. This blessing came upon king Cyrus, and his soldiers which were
employed in the service of his wars, to the subduing of Babylon.

And thus also came the blessing of God in the like case upon Iehu, for
executing the judgment of God upon Ahab and his house, and upon the false
prophets of Baal: yea thus all the extraordinary Judges which saved Israel,
and took vengeance upon their cruel oppressors, they were blessed of God in
all their holy and courageous enterprises to that end, as is plentifully
testified in the Book of the Judges.

Now, what is the blessing of those that be good and merciful to such as be
poor and stand in need, though they be not in so present danger, by reason
of any adversaries which do furiously pursue and assault them?

In the 13. chap. of the Proverbs, verse 22. A good man (says king Solomon)
shall give inheritance to his childrens children.

And Matthew. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful (says our Savior Christ) for they
shall obtain mercy.

Read also Mat. 25.34. etc. Come ye blessed of my father, etc. For I was
hungry, and ye gave me meat. Thus in the Epistle of James chap. 2.13. mercy
is said to rejoice against judgment. He that is merciful rewards his own
soul, Proverb. 11.17. and chapt. 17.19. He that is merciful to the poor
lends to the Lord, and the Lord will recompense that which he has given. It
causes great comfort to the conscience, in the assurance of Gods love. Read
1. John 3.17.18.19.20.21.22.23. Read also Luke 14.12.13.14. When thou make a
dinner, etc. bid the poor, etc. (says our Savior Christ.) and thou shall be
blessed, because they cannot recompense thee: for thou shall be recompensed at
the resurrection of the just.

It follows, that we consider of the blessing of God upon friendly dealing,
yea even toward those that be not poor or in present misery, one Christian
friend to another, for their mutual rejoicing and comfort in the ways of God.

What proof have you of this?

Jonathan had the blessing of God upon his faithful and godly friendship
toward David before he was King: in that God moved David after that he was
King, when Jonathan was now dead, to recompense his friendship by friendly
and merciful dealing tovvard his posterity. 2. Sam. chapt. 9.1.2.3. etc.
Read also 1. Sam. 15.6.

You do well in restrayning the blessing to holy and godly friendship; for as
touching mere civil or worldly friendship in carnal respects, when men
delight in companying together for good cheer, and for pastime sake, at the
tables or cards, or in the bowling-alley, etc. such friendship comes into no
reckening before the Lord One carnal friend has his recompense with another.
Good holds himself no debtor to either of them.

A proof whereof we have in the place a little before alleged, Luke 14.12. And
again chapter 6.32.33.34. If you love them that love you, what thank shall ye
have? for even sinners love them that love them, etc.

God will no more recompense carnal friendship, then vainglorious alms, etc.

They therefore that be truly wise, will avoid such wast and lost works: they
will not work thus for naught, seeing the Lord has prepared so many blessed
works for us to walk in. Every work is lost labor, which God does not
undertake to bless and reward.

But godly friendship no doubt is a virtue, to the which the blessing of God
belongs.

The blessing of those that are loving and kind, not only to their godly
friends, but even to their enemies also, in readiness to forgive them, and in
their need to help them, etc. the blessing (I say) of these is yet behind:
What proof have you that God will bless such?

It follows in the same place of Luke, chapter 6. verse 35. wherefore (says
our Savior Christ) love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, looking for
nothing again, and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of
the most high: for he is kind to the unkind, and to the evil. Be ye therefore
merciful, as your father also is merciful.

Read also Proverbs 25.21.22. If he that hates thee be hungry, give him
bread, etc.

The Lord will recompense thee. But in the place of Luke, our Savior Christ
does most lively set forth the excellency of this duty in the sight of God, by
the blessing which he assures us to belong unto it.

And verily, the Lord will be so much the more careful in that case to make
recompense, not only because all kindness to such is most unthankfully
accepted at their hands; but chiefly because the children of God do in this
duty most of all deny themselves: yea, because herein they have the greatest
victory over themselves.

Hitherto both of the interpretation, and also of the equity, and of the curse,
and now last of all of the blessing belonging to this Commandemnt.

The use is yet behind.

Have you perfectly obeyed this holy and righteous Commandment of God: that is,
have you been so perfectly meek, patient, peaceable, etc. and have you been so
helpefull every way to every body: yea, even to those whom you take to be your
enemies, Every one of us is a damnable transgressor.
that you may persuade your self to be out of the danger of the curse, and
that you may rejoice in the hope of the blessing of this Commandment for any
worthiness thereof?

No: but contrariwise I find my self to be by nature cruelly and spitefully
minded: for upon every occasion I am easily provoked to anger, and to reuiling
speeches, quarelling and fighting: I am very apt to wish evil, and to seek
revenge, either openly or privately, against all that I imagine to do me the
least wrong, and therefore I must needs acknowledge my self to be so far
from the blessing of this Commandment, that the curse is due to me: yea, I am
already under it, save that I trust God will for Christ Jesus sake, have mercy
upon me, and forgive me my sins.

It is true, both concerning your self, and every one of us. The Scripture
says not in vain: The spirit which is in us lusts after envy, James 4.5.
Read also the beginning of the same Chapter.

And to this purpose, let us mark and we shall perceive, that when the Spirit
of God minds to set out the corruption of our nature (as he does oftentimes
in his holy Scriptures) he stands much upon this point, to describe how
exceeding cruel and reuengefull we are, even resembling the Devil, by whom we
are perverted, who was himself a murderer from the beginning. Read Isaiah
chapter 1.15. Your hands are full of blood, that is, of cruelty. And chapter
11.6. we are in our natural corruption compared to the Wolf, Leopard, Lion,
Bear, Aspe, Cock-atrise. And chapter 59.3. Your hands are defiled with blood,
etc. And the like, Psalm 14.3.4. and To. 3.10. etc. Yea we think it great
reason, that we may boldly give every man as good as they bring: that is, that
we may lawfully revenge our selves to the uttermost, etc. We see how little
children will strive to give the last stroke or tap. And touching the strength
of this sin, we have a lively pattern in Lamech, Genesis. 4.23.24. Hear my
voice, etc. I would slay a man for my greater wound, and a young man for my
lesser hurt.

It is evident therefore, that unless we find redemption and justification by
our Savior Christ, we cannot but perish for ever in these our sins.

And this we are the rather to observe in this Commandment, because our
cruelties and bloody sins are not otherwise washed away, but by the blood of
our Savior Christ, and by his enduring of all cruel and hard dealings at the
hands of men, and all severity of punishment from the hand of God for our
sakes. For without blood there is no remission of sins, Heb. 9.22.23. etc.
Yea note, that as the height of our sinful corruption appears generally
against us all in this, that both Jews and Gentiles conspired in most cruel
and despitefull manner, to put our Savior Christ the Lord of life and glory, to
a most reproachful and cursed death: so on the contrary, the infinite
perfection of Gods mercy shines forth most brightly, in so much as he has
appointed that to be the only means of our eternal redemption and salvation,
which alone in his justice might have been as the broad seal of our
everlasting condemnation, according to that we read Matthew 22.33.34. etc. And
again, Luke chap. 20. verse 9. etc.

Wonderful therefore is this mercy of our God, whereby the blood of our
Savior Christ speaks better things for us, then the blood of Abell did
against Caine, Hebrews chapter 12. verse 24. For this blood cleanses us from
all sin, 1. John, chapter 1.7. Yet so, as if we would have forgiveness of
murder with David, of hatred with Iosephes brethren, of persecution with
Paul, etc. we must repent with them in godly sorrow for the same, or any other
our sins in the same kind, against this holy Commandment. Yea further, we
must labor not only to be harmless, but more and more to be helpefull, to
the preservation and comfort of life, etc. For the power of our Savior Christ
his death to the mortifying of sin, and to the quickening of us unto newness
of life, goes always with the merit and worthiness of his death, to take
away the guiltiness of sin, etc.

Who was more tender hearted then Paul after he was converted, etc.

Our Savior Christ's perfect obedience for us.
But that your faith may be established to believe in Christ for your
redemption, touching your transgressions against this Commandment: and that he
is your righteousness in the obedience of it:

What proof have you that he has perfectly obeyed it for you? And first
touching his innocence and harmlesnesse, with all the virtues belonging
thereunto, what proof have you thereof?

We have a full proof of our Savior Christ his perfect innocence, in that it
is truly testified of him, that even then, when he was most grievously
oppressed and provoked by his enemies, yet he did not open his mouth; for so it
is written: He was brought as a sheep unto the slaughter, and as the sheep is
dumb before the shearer, so opened he not his mouth, Isa. 53.7. And 1. Peter
2.23.24.25. When he was reviled he reviled not again, when he suffered he
threatened not, etc.

And as touching his perfect meekness in obedience to God, even then when he
did bear the most heavy burden of our sins, and did drink the bitterest
cup of Gods wrath that might be, even dregs and all: it is further most
faithfully testified, that he did not with the least coffeehouse mutter
against it, but in all reverence humbly prays: My father, if it be possible
let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not my will but thine be done,
Matthew. 26.36. etc. and Luke 22.42.

These are indeed very sufficient proofs: for if there had been any unadvised
anger, or any other bitter affection in him, it would then surely have broken
forth and uttered it self, when he had most vehement provocation thereunto.

Moses though when he lived he was the meekest man that was upon the earth, yet
when he was provoked, he spoke unadvisedly at a certain time: but so did our
Savior Christ never. He was sometime angry indeed, but with a holy anger, not
of impatience or unbelief, but for the unbelief and hardness of heart that
was in the people, he together with his anger mourning for them, Read Mark
3.5. yea though his wicked adversaries did of purpose provoke him, what they
could, yet were they not able to put his holy soul out of patience, Luke
11.53.54.

He was therefore a perfect well stayed man, seeing he knew how to be angry
without sin, neither offended in his tongue. For if any man sin not in word
(says the Apostle James) he is a perfect man, chap. 3.2.

Thus then it is evident, that our Savior Christ was perfectly innocent and
harmless, Hebr. 7.26.

Show likewise what proof you have of his perfect obedience in doing all good,
in showing mercy, pity, and compassion, and in delivering and saving all such
as it was meet for him (according to the appointment of God) to succor and
relieve, and to deliver and save?

This is so manifest in all things recorded of him in the holy Gospel, both
touching his word and workers, and also touching the very thoughts and
intents of his heart, that it can be no more hidden then the Sun shining in
the full brightness of it. His doctrine is a most gracious and saving
doctrine, and altogether tending to settle and confirm all perfect peace, both
betwixt God and man, and also betwixt men among themselves. His works
likewise were all works of mercy, toward all sorts of impotent and diseased
persons, and specially toward the forlorn souls of all, both sick and
whole, poor and rich, etc.

And finally, what may be added to this, that in his death and by his death he
has given life, yea, everlasting life and happiness, not only to his
friends, whose hearts he had already won to himself, by his most gracious and
more then friendly dealing toward them, but also to many of those who were yet
his bitter enemies, he praying most heartily for them upon the cross, saying,
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do, Luke chapter 23. verse
34.

Read Matthew. 4.24. and chapter 8.16.17. and chapter 15.32. and Luke 19.41. etc.

Read also Matthew. 9.11.12.13. and chap. 18.11.

What remains therefore, but that we yield all worthy honor and praise to
this our most blessed and perfect Savior?

Let us therefore unfeignedly repent of all our former sins against this holy
Commandments; of all our anger, wrath, bitterness, of our cursed speeches
and wishes, and of all our murtherous and hateful thoughts, etc. And let us
labor, more and more to mind, speak, and practice all goodness, etc.

If we shall not do thus, behold sin lies at the door, as the Lord said to
Caine, Genesis 4.7.

And as he says to the Jews, Ier. 7.9. Will ye murder, etc. and come and
stand before me, and say, we are delivered, etc. so will he say unto us, Will
ye be hateful and wrathful? will ye curse and rail? will ye quarrel and
fight? and yet for all that think to find mercy with me, etc. Read also
Psalm 50.16. etc. Keep thou this wretched unfaithfulness from us o Lord: and
grant us always thy salvation, as well from the power of sin, as from the
guiltiness and punishment of sin, we humbly beseech thee for Christ Jesus
sake, that we truly worshipping and serving thee, and living in love toward our
brethren all our life here, may live for ever with thee in thy heavenly
kingdom, through the same our blessed Lord and only Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

The seventh Commandment is next.

Which is that?

Thou shall not commit adultery.

The Lord having in the former Commandment provided for the defense and
cherishing of those to whom he has already given life; he does in this which
comes now to hand, take order for the pure and honorable propagation of
mankind: because otherwise, by reason of the mortality of man, the earth should
soon be left empty and void, at the least of an honest and godly posterity,
etc.

And besides next unto murder, this sin of adultery has the next place in
the greatness of the offense.

This Commandment, as well as the rest, binds all estates and degrees,
as well high as low.

Let us now come to the interpretation. And first concerning the negative and
forbidding part.

What is the sin of adultery, which is here thus expressly forbidden? Sins
forbidden.


It is the breach of the marriage covenant, either on the husbands or on the
wives part: and of their parts also which break it with them, whether they be
married or unmarried.

It is that sin which is forbidden Leuit. 18. verse 20. where the Lord does
more plainly express what it is.

It is committed also, if any upon unjust divorces marry any other, while their
former yoke-fellowes do live, Mark 10. verses 11.12. and Matthew. 5.32. and
chap. 19. verse 9. and Luke 16.18.

Yea the husband commits adultery, if he take any other wife to the former,
though he do not put her away, but keep her still as his wife, together with
the other.

This sin is forbidden, Leuit. 18.18. Vide Tremel, and Iunij interpretationes
and annotationes, Deutronomie 17.17. and chapter 24.1.2.3.4. and Mal. chapter
2.14.15.16. See Tremel Matthew. 19.3.4.5. and 1. Cor. 7.2. The espoused party
breaking the faith of her marriage promise, commits adultery, though as yet
she is not married, and therefore has the adulterers punishment by the Law of
God, Deuteronomy. chap. 22. verses 23.24.

Thus adultery is forbidden, howsoever it is committed.

But is there no sin else forbidden in this Commandment as a transgression
against the law of marriage, but only the unfaithful breach and violating of
the covenant thereof?

The Lord no doubt forbids every intemperate and irreverent or dishonorable
abuse of marriage, betwixt those which be already married: yea, and all light,
wanton and unadvised purposes or thoughts, which any have with themselus, to
make entrance into that estate hereafter.

It is true: for marriage being in it self a very reverend and honorable
ordinance of God, Heb. 13.4. there is good reason, that it should be every way
reuerendly and honorably, both enterprised and dealt with. The sin therefore
and errors on either hand, are to be avoided.

Which are the sins and errors to be avoided concerning entrance into them
aried estate?

They are partly such as do concern the mind and inward affection of those
that intend marriage, and partly such as do concern their outward persons.

Which are those that concern the mind?

When any do not esteem reuerendly of marriage, as of the good and honorable
ordinance of God.

When such as have in some measure an honorable estimation of it, do not yet
in their minding of marriage respect the right ends, or not the principal ends
principally. When such as respect the right ends, yea, and the principal ends
principally, yet have not due care to prepare themselves with meet gifts,
either for wisdom and government, or for an honest and convenient trade of
life and calling, to live and maintain a family thereby.

Finally, when such as are in some good measure prepared with all meet gifts
for their condition and estate, do inordinately affect and aspire after marriage
with such as be above their degree, while they suffer their hearts to be stolen
away by beauty or riches, or any like vain and dangerous temptation.

These indeed are sins and errors of the mind, contrary to the right manner
of intending and desiring marriage. Now which may the errors be, concerning the
persons of such as shall intend marriage?

When either the one or both of them are unfit, either by reason of the first
childhood, which is not far enough from the cradle: or by reason of that
which we call the second childhood, which by the course of nature is too near
the grave.

When such intend to marry, who (though for years they are meet) yet the one
of them is not meet, through some defect in nature, or through some noisome or
contagious disease.

But then especially is the enterprise of marriage unlawful, when the persons
so intending, are such whom nearenesse of blood, or of affinity and kindred by
marriage, does forbid: such as God forbids to marry together in the
eighteenth Chapter of Leuiticus.

It is true: and this now last mentioned, is that sin which is called incest,
because it is a special breach of chastity: yea, as though it should be said,
that such are altogether void of chastity, whosoever regard not to avoid such
incestuous defilements as are here rehearsed.

Such therefore are the errors and sins to be avoided, touching entrance into
marriage.

There are also abuses of marriage it self, as has been further mentioned in
the former answer: but I leave that to the consideration of those that be
married, from the speech which was directed to them for their more particular
instruction and admonition that way; according to that which is written in
diverse places of the holy Scriptures: such as we read 1. Cor. 7.3.4.5.
Leuiticus 18. verse 19. and chapter 12. with some cautions against ceremonious
scruple, and chapter 15. verse 25.

Hitherto concerning the sin of adultery, and of those other errors and
sins which are against the Law of marriage.

Let us now go forward.

What other sin of uncleanness is forbidden in this Commandment beside
adultery?

The Lord our God does here also straightly forbid those sins which are
known by the name of fornication: not only that which is otherwise called
whoredom, practiced in the stews or brothell houses, by common harlots,
whores, and strumpets, with all such as will give them the prise and hire of
their wickedness: but also that which upon occasion, and through special
temptation, is committed by such single persons as never committed the like
before: whether they did it in mutual purpose and promise of marriage,
without lawful espousage, or after betrothment and contracting, while yet
the marriage has not been solemnized: or whether they did it without any
purpose of marriage, or with a false pretense thereof on either part, which
makes the sin so much the more grievous.

There is no doubt but it does so: as m^^^e gathered from that Law of God,
Deuteronomy. 22. verses 20.21.

And touching common whoredom, read how that is forbidden, Leuit. 19.29. and
Deuteronomy. 23.17.18.

There are yet many other sins which God forbids in this Commandment, as
has been declared: Rehearse you which they be.

The Lord does furthermore forbid in this his holy Commandment every other
kind of filthiness of the body; together with all outward prouocations and
occasions thereof: yea, and also even the very inward consent and lust of the
heart, after any kind of filthiness and uncleanness of the flesh whatsoever.

There are three parts or branches of this your answer.

First, the Lord (beside the prohibition of the former sins) forbids all
other filthiness of the body.

Secondly, that he forbids all outward prouocations and occasions thereof.

Thirdly, that he forbids the very unclean lust of the heart.

In this order therefore let us inquire of these things, that we may see the
more fully, both into the excellent purity of this Law, which forbids and
condemns all filthiness whatsoever: and also that we may the better know,
what great cause we have to be humbled before God, by reason of the most
abominable filthiness which is in our nature, until we be washed and cleansed
from the same by the washing of our new birth in Christ Jesus, etc.

And first, which are those other kinds of filthiness of the body, which the
Lord does moreover and beside all the former, forbid in this his Commandment?

They are either violent deflowring and rauishment, whether of maid or married
wife, young or old, whosoever: and specially all incestuous fornication and
adultery.

Or else, they are those abominable actions which be contrary to the lawful
use of nature, such as are those sins, which may be understood by these three
names, not once to be named, save only for necessary admonition and warning
against them: Onans sin, Sodomitrie or buggery with men, and buggery with
beasts.

Or last of all, when any works filthiness alone with himself, and is
defiled in his body, by unchaste and filthy dreams, as a devilish fruit
thereof.

These are most abominable kinds of filthiness, even such as our hearts and
ears ought to abhor and tremble at whenever we think, or speak, or hear
any thing of them, though it be to the reproof and condemnation of them.

Nevertheless they are no other, then have been practiced of men and women,
young and old, of no worse nature then we our selves are without the grace of
God.

O violent and that also incestuous rauishment we read 2. Sam. 13.12.13.14.

Of incestuous fornication and adultery we read of the practice thereof,
Genesis chapter 19. verse 31. etc. and chapter 35.22. and 1. Corinthians
chapter 5. verse 1. These sins are forbidden Leuit. chap. 18. verses
6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.

Of Onans sin we read Genesis 38.9.

Of the more abominable filthiness of the Sodomites or buggery with men, we
read Genesis 19.5. etc. And Judges chapter 19.23. and 1. Kings chapter 14.
verse 24. and chapter 15.12. and chapter 22.46. and 2 Kings 23.7. Ezekiel. 8.14.
See the interpretation and note of Tremel. Habbak chapter 2. verses 15.16.
Finally, Romans chap. 1.24.26.17. This sin is forbidden Leuit. 18.22.

Of the abominable filthiness of buggery with beasts, we read how the Lord
has forbidden it, Leuit 18. verse 23. and 1. Tim. 1.10. And there have been
some among our selves justly executed for it. And woeful are the practices of
many with their own bodies, which God only sees and knows, and will
certainly in his time take vengeance thereof, if it be not prevented by speedy
repentance.

But alas, what shall we say? are children to hear of these things? and are
they to be taught and warned thus plainly against them? No doubt, there is
great need they should: or else God would never have mentioned them in his holy
Scriptures.

And shall the Devil be suffered to draw both young and old into these sins,
and even partly for want of knowledge, how odious and abominable they are
before God: and shall not we give one another warning, that so great and gross
wickedness might be prevented?

The like is to be said of other grievous sins.

It is pity indeed that it should be once heard off, that the son should kill
the father, that the wife should murder her husband, yea even with her own
hands: that the husband should break his wives neck, that any should have
drowned or poisoned themselves. Yet seeing these sins are committed of men and
women among us, shall they not be cried out against from the word of God, etc.

Wherefore children be ye admonished, as well as you of the elder sort, and
take heed betimes to avoid all filthiness of your bodies: for if you will not
call to God for grace and take heed betimes, it will ask you deep heart-smart
ere you dye, or else everlasting torment after death in hell fire: from the
which I beseech God of his infinite mercy, even for Christ Jesus sake to
bless, preserve and keep us both young and old, Amen.

Hitherto of the first branch of the former answer.

The second branch follows, wherein it was answered, that God forbids not
only all these kinds of outward filthiness, but also all outward prouocations
and occasions of all filthy lust whatsoever.

Show what manner of prouocations and dangerous occasions they may be.

They are these which follow, and if there be any other like unto them.

1 Houses of open whoredom.

2 Bawdes, which are the factors of whore-mongers and harlots or whores, to
spy out, solicit, and bring such lewd persons together.

3 All intemperancy in eating and drinking, especially of such things as any
know to be more mighty then other, to provoke and increase lust: as also the
provoking of others to eat of such things, and to drink unto drunkenness,
etc.

4 Over much sleep and idleness.

5 All wandering and unchaste looking and gazing upon the beauty of women, either
in faces or breasts, etc.

6 Likewise, the beholding of pictures, unshamefastly pictured or painted, and
the reading of amorous books: much rather the unshamefast representation of
the lewd and filty behavior of naughtie-packes, by interlude upon the stage,
or by dancing, or any other way: but most of all, if any embolden themselves
to use lascivious speeches or filthy songs, and to fall to wanton kissings, or
to any other unseemly dalliance.

Of all these evil prouocations, we have earnest warning given us, as you have
heard, out of the word of God: and they are such things as both men and women
are to beware of.

There are other prouocations more particularly to be avoided of women.

Which are they?

1 All light and curious setting out of themselves, in bravery of apparel.

2 All excessive perfuming of them.

3 All immodest broiding, curling, and laying out of the hair: yea of strange
hair, with like laying forth of their breasts naked and bare.

4 All unnatural coloring and painting of the face.

5 All niceness in their going, and in the mincing of their words, to dravv
and allure the eyes and senses of men toward them.

6 All unseasonable and ouer-familiar companying of any woman with any man: as
likewise of any man with any woman, though never so honestly minded: specially
in such places, as of themselves are apt to minister any dishonest temptation.

Finally, all whatsoever agrees not with shamefastness and modesty of
behavior, which is the chief outward ornament of that sex.

Of these things also you have heard how the word of God gives us like earnest
warning.

Thus much therefore of the second branch of that your former answer.

The third branch is yet behind, wherein you said, that beside all these
outward prouocations to unclean and filthy lust, God does in this Commandment
forbid the very unclean and filthy lust of the heart it self.

What proof have you of this?

In the 5. chapter of Matthew our Savior Christ plainly affirms, that
whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with
her already in his heart. And chapter 15. verse 19. The very adulterous thought
does defile a man.

The words of our Savior Christ are very plain indeed to this purpose.

But seeing the Lord forbids so many, and those so gross and abominable
kinds of filthiness of the flesh: Why does he under the name of adultery
comprehend them all?

Because howsoever all filthiness against nature, as also all violent
rauishment and incest considered in the act it self, or most vile manner
thereof, are more heinous then adultery: yet in regard of diverse weighty
reasons and circumstances, the Lord has thought good to make mention of
adultery, as of the greatest and most grievous sin among them all.

Can you show which those reasons and circumstances are?

First, because of that high estimation which the Lord God has of the marriage
covenant, which by adultery is most directly broken and dishonored.

Secondly, because even they that are wickedly bent to follovv their lust, do
more easily and more usually imbolden themselves to this sin (if they see how
they may attain unto it) then unto rauishment and incest, or unto those sins
which are against the use of nature.

Thirdly, because this sin has in their conceit, a more cleanely and safe
covert, to conceal and hide it self from the eyes of men, then any of them
all.

Finally, because more persons are more deeply injured and damnified by the
committing of this sin, then of any of the rest.

The truth of these things is easily discerned.

But now at the last, leaving these filthy sins of the flesh, which cannot
but be odious to all honest and chaste hearts, and even an humbling unto us all,
to be detained in the thought of them, and to hear and consider of the
vileness of our nature, through the corruption of sin: Why all other
transgressions of this commandment, are comprehended under adultery.
and further also, a tedious and unwelcome discourse, save that of necessity
all flesh must herein give glory to God, in the acknowledgement and bewailing
of the same so horrible a corruption of our nature: which as we se is free from
no kind of sin.

Let us come to the affirmative part of this holy Commandment, and see what
pure and undefiled virtues and duties our most pure and holy God does command
us in it.

Show which they be?

The Lord our God commands every one of us, both in single life, and in the
married estate, from the first of our years, to the last of our days, to
possess our vessels, that is, our bodies, in holiness and honor: and that to
the same end, we labor after all those graces and virtues, and use all those
good means and helps in the practice of the same virtues, which be meet and
necessary thereunto.

Of these virtues whereof ye speak, some are necessary, both for the one
estate and for the other, both for young and for old: and some are more
particularly belonging to the married estate: and that also, partly for
comfortable entrance into it, and partly for happy continuance in it.

Which are the virtues of the first sort, and the means and helps thereunto,
such as belong to all, both married and unmarried, young and old, even from the
first time that we come to any discretion, to the end of our lives?

They are these four.

First chastity, which is an undefiled cleanenesse of the mind, suppressing
and keeping under all inordinate lust of the body.

Secondly shamefastness, which is as the nource of chastity, when the heart
being as it were stricken and rebuked in it self, the face blusheth, so soon
as we eitheir think or hear, or behold (though at unawares) any uncleanly
and unshamefast speech or action.

Duties commanded.
Thirdly temperance, which is as the bridle of bodily lust, in that it utterly
absteineth from all unlawful pleasures and delights.

Fourthly sobriety, which is as one may say, the beauty and perfection of
temperance, consisting in the moderation of all lawful pleasures and delights.

And finally (as means and helps to all these virtues) earnest prayer, and
the same also sometimes joined with the holy exercise of private humiliation
and fasting: and always diligent exercise in some honest business or other.

These virtues, with the means and helps thereof, are indeed common to all
both young and old, one and other, Concerning the which also, we are not only
to be careful every one to practice them himself, but all stand further more
bound, as much as lies in every of us, to cherish them in other, and to
suppress the contrary. And specially such as have government stand bound to
look unto it, concerning all that belong to them, Tit. 2.1.2.3. etc.

But as was said, there are other virtues and duties, which do more
particularly belong to the married, and that also partly for comfortable
entrance into it, and partly for happy continuance therein.

Which are those that appertain to comfortable entrance into the married
estate, in way of preparation thereunto?

First, that the parties intending marriage, do in their hearts acknowledge it
to be the holy and honorable ordinance of God.

Secondly, that they have such gifts as do of right belong to the married
estate: such as are, some skill and honest trade to get their living with the
labor and exercise thereof, as also wisdom for the religious ordering and
governing of a family; with a mind prepared to endure, and chearefully to pass
through the manifold troubles which are mixed with the comforts of that
condition of life.

Thirdly, that they seek their yoake-fellow by hearty prayer to God.

Fourthly, that they seek the counsel and consent of their parents; or for
want of natural parents, the counsel of such as are in stead of parents unto
them.

Fifthly, that after all due advice and free consent obtained, and their own
hearts firmly united betwixt themselves, they seek thenceforth to be
religiously contracted and espoused.

Finally, that they defer to come together as man and wife, till their
marriage be publicly and in lawful manner solemnized and blessed in the Church
of God.

Such are the graces and virtues to be observed, for the right manner of
comfortable entrance into the married estate.

Now which are they which be necessary for happy continuance in it?

They are these which follow.

First, that the promise and faith of the marriage covenant be entirely and
constantly kept.

Secondly, that mutual love and benevolence be always on both parts, wisely
and soberly cherished and maintained, as well in adversity as prosperity, with
a fellow-feeling each of others joy or grief.

Thirdly, that long and unnecessary absence or separation be avoided.

Finally, that, as they be one flesh, so also they be of one spirit, consenting
in all good things, and specially in the spiritual duties of Gods holy service
and worship; and even for the same cause, in bodily abstinence it self, so
often and so long as the word of God, and partly the very course which God
has set in nature, shows that it is convenient and meet they should
abstain.

But are all bound upon the due observation of all the former rules and
cautions, to seek marriage by the charge of this Commandment?

Whosoever have not a special gift from God, to live purely and chastely
without marriage, they are all bound to seek it, yea although in their own
hearts they would chose rather, or had already rashly vowed to live a single
life.

There is no doubt but it is so: according to the Apostles rule, 1. Cor. 7.2.
To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, and let every woman have
her own husband. And again verse 9. It is better to marry then to burn.

And then consequently, it must needs be much better to marry, and so to
avoid the burning heat of lust, then by shunning marriage, to fall into those
filthy practices which are worse then fornication, as many do, according to
that which has been declared before.

They also do very wickedly against this Commandment, who soever standing in
need of Gods ordinance, do shun it because of the trouble and charges of it,
which grow by increase of children, etc. For they, therein plainly bewray
against themselves, that they are without true conscience and remorse of sin,
and that they are also void of faith in Gods fatherly providence etc.

Yet so, as again we are to remember, that marriage must not be rashly and
inordinately hasted before the time.

But now, as touching those few, which have the gift to live chastely in single
life; is it in no wise lawful for them to marry?

They are not forbidden to marry. Nevertheless, when God has given the gift,
and so long as it pleases him to continue it; they that have received it shall
do best, who will have care to use it in their single estate, so long as they
may bring most glory to God, by their abstayning from seeking a wife.

It is true: and so are the words of our Savior Christ Mat. chapter 19.
concerning this matter to be understood, where he says, verse 12. in the end
of the verse: He that is able to receive this, let him receive it. And so also
is the Apostle Paul to be understood, in his whole disputation about the same
question, 1. Cor. the 7. chapter.

Hitherto of the interpretation of this seventh Commandment, both touching
the evils forbidden, and also concerning the virtues and good duties commanded.

The equity of it comes now to be considered: Show you therefore, what the
equity of it is.

The equity of this Commandment may be considered diverse vvayes.

How is that?

First, in respect of God the author and giver of it.

Secondly, in respect of every one to whom it is given apart. The Equity.


Thirdly, in respect of the Church and common wealth of God, more generally and
jointly considered.

First therefore, in respect of God himself, what is the equity of it?

First, because God our heavenly Lawgiver, is in himself most pure and holy,
therefore it is most meet, that he should forbid his people all uncleanness;
and on the contrary, command all purity and cleanenesse both of soul and
body.

Secondly, in so much as the continual propagation and increase of mankind, as
well as their first creation is belonging unto God, it is likewise very
meet, that he should appoint the way and means of the same increase, and not
that it should be left to man's own wandering and inordinate lust.

Thirdly, because he has sanctified and appointed marriage, for a most gracious
and comfortable remedy against all uncleanness.

Fourthly, because he has adopted our bodies as well as our souls, to be the
temples of his holy Spirit, and members of the mystical body of our Savior
Christ.

Finally, seeing all lawful promises, covenants, and bargains, are to be
performed, yea thought it be to a man's hinderance, as we read in the 15.
Psalm, it is much rather every way equal and meet, that the covenant of
marriage, be especially regarded, seeing (above all other humane contractes)
this is honored with the title of the Covenant of God.

Thus therefore in respect of God, we see how great the equity of this
Commandment is.

What is the equity of it, in regard of our selves more particularly
considered?

It arises from the former ground: for in so much as God has advanced us to
especial dignity, above all brute beasts, and every kind of his
unreasonable creatures, it is meet that every of us should seek the increase
and propagation of our own kind and generation, in a more holy and honorable
manner and way then any of them do: and accordingly, both in marriage and out
of marriage, to possess our bodies in more holiness and honor then they do,
according to that which has been answered before.

And further also, because the sin of bodily uncleanness, bringing a
special reproach upon the person of every offender, as that which a man
commits more directly against himself then any other sin.

So indeed does the Apostle Paul reason in the place before alleged, 1. Cor.
6. verse 18. Fly fornication; every sin that a man commits is without the
body, but he that commits fornication sins against his own body.
Wherefore, let us reason here again, as the Apostle has taught us in the 15.
verse of the same chapter: Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make
them the members of an harlot? God forbid. As though he should say, Fic upon
that. And much rather then, let us reason: shall I take the members of Christ,
and commit any sin of incest, or rauishme^t, or against the law and ordinary
course of nature? God forbid. Yea with most deep detestation against all such
abominable sins, let us say again, and again, and the Lord give us grace to
say in truth of heart, God forbid. Far be it from any of us once to think
to do so. The very brute beasts would then condemn us, for they show
themselves more orderly then so.

Now, what is the equity of this pure and holy Commandment in respect of the
common wealth and Church of God, more generally and publicly considered?

First, because by fornication and adultery, they are cumbred with the mixture
of a base and cursed posterity.

Secondly, because the right of inheritance is thereby many times woefully
interrupted, specially in the base descent of noble men and Princes.

Finally, because by the wicked and bold example even of a few, specially if
they be of high place and calling, many are easily emboldened to commit much
filthiness, till the whole land be filled with adulteries, as the Prophet
Jeremy complains in the 10. and 11. verses of the 23. chapter of his
prophecy.

Hereby, as the same Prophet in diverse other places complains, the
judgments of God were hastened against the land: The Curses.
for because of adulteries and others (as he says in the same chapter) the
land mourned, and the pleasant places of the wilderness were dried up, etc.

Hence therefore we have a fit occasion to come to inquire of the curses and
punishments, which God in his justice threatens against the transgressions of
this his so equal and pure a Law.

And first, what is the curse against adultery?

The curse is manifold, according to the manifold trespass of this sin.

Let us consider diligently of them: rehearse you as shortly as you can, which
they be.

In the civil course of Gods justice, commanded and practiced among his
people Israel, it was bodily death if it came forth to light. Yea even among
all heathen people and nations, God provides that this sin has been usually
punished, either with death, or some other very grievous and sharp punishment,
to the singular reproach of the offenders in the midst of them.

And whereas this sin of adultery is oftentimes kept secret, from the
knowledge and sentence of the earthly judge, it meets notwithstanding with
sundry curses from the divine justice and vengeance of God, such as are,
either barrenness of the womb, or cursed offspring, or monstrous conceptions,
or with some one grievous bodily disease or other: and namely with that which
is called the French pockes, which usually waits upon it. Yea it meets
with a general wasting, both of the whole bodily and worldly substance, and
with an untimely and wretched death.

Finally, no adulterer shall inherit the kingdom of God, but they shall have
their portion together in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone for
ever in hell.

That temporal death is the punishment of adultery by the civil ordinance of
God, read Leuit. 20.10. and Deuteronomy. 22.22. And for the practice of other
nations, read Genes. 26.10.11. and chap. 39. and Ezekiel. chap. 16.36. etc. and
chapter 23.10. and Ierem. 29.22.23.

Concerning other punishments and curses from the hand of God, we read
oftentimes in the Proverbs, and in many other places of the holy Scriptures.

Finally, touching everlasting destruction both of body and soul, 1. Cor.
1.6.9. Revel. 21.8. and chap. 22.15. Hebr. 13.4.

The same eternal destruction, belongs also to the incestuous person, and to
those that commit the sins against nature as in the same place of the Apostle
to the Corinthians.

The laws also of our own nation agreeable to the Law of God, do punish
buggerie and rauishment by death. And further also by our law, the carnal
knowledge of any woman-child under ten years of age, is fellonie, and so death
to him that defloureth her, though the child should give consent.
And likewise also, God has commanded all those abominable sins to be
punished with temporal death, in the civil course of justice among his
people, as appears in the 20. chapter of Leuiticus, and in diverse other
places. Genes. chapter 28. read how God by his own hand punished Onans sin.
The like indignation he bears against all self defilements.

Moreover, God commands the fornication of the maid found with child by
another after marriage; as also the fornication of the espoused person, to be
punished by death, Deuteronomy 22.20. etc.

These things thus considered, let us now go forward.

What is the curse of God against the transgression of the law of marriage, by
taking more wives the none, which is also a sin against this Commandment, as
has been showed?

It is no doubt in it self, without the mercy of God, a damnable sin,
seeing it is a kind of adultery; and God has from the beginning always
punished it with much disquietnesse, and vexations in the families where it
has been entertained.

Read Genesis 4.23.24. Yea we may see it in the family of Abraham, and of
Iaakob, Genesis chapter 16. and chapter 29. and chapter 30. And also 1. Samuel
1. Contrariwise Isaak lived a more sweet and comfortable life with his only
wife Rebecca, for that he kept both himself and his love entire unto her.
Genes. 24.67.

Now, which is the curse against fornication committed betwixt single persons?

Albeit the Lord does not judge it with so heavy a temporal punishment as he
does adultery; yet he shuts the very fornicator as well as the adulterer,
yea, the vvanton body also, and filthy talker, out of his heavenly kingdom,
1. Corinthians. 6.9. and Ephesians. 5.4. etc.

So indeed we read it plainly expressed in those places. And concerning
temporal punishment, read Exodus 22.16.17. and Deuteronomy 22.28.29.
Leuiticus chapter, 19.20.21.22. it is such, as when it was in practice did
sufficiently fray all well disposed persons from this sin, beside the fear
of the eternal punishment of hell.

What is the curse against intemperance in eating and drinking?

King Solomon does notably lay it forth in the 23. chapter of his Proverbs,
verse 21. The drunkard and the glutton shall be poor, and the sleeper shall be
clothed with rags. And then verses 29.30. To whom is vvo? (says he) to
whom is sorrovv? to whom is strife? to whom is murmuring? to whom are
vvounds without cause? to whom is the redness of the eyes? Even to them
that tarry long at the wine, and so forth to the end of the chapter. And our
Savior Christ Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, least at any time your
hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life,
and least that day (that is the day of the last judgment) come on you at
unawares.

Read also Isa. 5.11.12.13.14. The curses of this sin are banishment and
famine in this life, and everlasting destruction in hell. Read also verse 22.
And likewise Amos 6. Chapter 1. etc.

What is the curse against the curious pride, and wanton niceness of women in
apparel, with immodest curling and laying out of the hair, etc?

In the 3. chapter of the Prophecy of Isaiah, verse 17. etc. The Lord says he
will make the heads of such bald, and that he will discover their secret
parts: he will take away all their ornaments, wherein they delight and pride
themselves. And in stead of svveete savor (says the Lord by his holy
Prophet) there shall be stink, and in stead of a girdle a rent, and in stead
of dressing of the hair baldness, and in stead of a stomacher a girding of
sackecloth, and burning in stead of beauty. Finally, the svvord, famine,
misery, and all outvvard calamity.

This is the curse of vain and proud women.

What is the curse against the vanity and pride of men in the same abuse?

In the Prophecy of Zephaniah, chap. 1.18. In the day of the Lords sacrifice
(as says the Prophet) he will visit the princes, and the kings children, and
all such as are clothed with strange apparel.

That is to say, such as are full of the manners and fashions of other nations,
Isa. 2.6.

What is the curse of adulterous thoughts and motions, if they be in the least
measure consented unto?

The curse and punishment of them is hell fire. Mat. 5.29.30.

And besides, all they that strive not against thoughts and motions unto
uncleanness, do at one time or other fall into the actions of uncleanness
themselves: and so all the former curses already rehearsed, take hold of them.

We have seen it before in the example of king David: and therefore it is that
he prays so earnestly: Create in me a clean heart o God, etc. Psalm. 51.

Daily experience confirms the truth of it. Wherefore, it most vrgently
stands us upon, to hearken to the admonition of our Savior Christ: If thy
right eye cause thee to offend, pluck it out and cast it from thee: for it is
better for thee that one of thy members perish, then that thy whole body should
be cast into hell.

Finally, what is the curse of those that are so far from care to further
chastity and temperance in others, and to stay the course of their uncleanly
conversation, that they willingly suffer themselves to be drawn into
fellowship with them?

In the 50. Psalm verse 18. and 22. The Lord threateneth destruction, yea so
as none shall be able to rescue and deliver.

These then are the curses and plagues, which in the righteous judgment of God
belong to the transgressions of this holy and pure commandment of God. Every
kind of uncleanness is abominable in his sight. Fornication does greatly
provoke his anger. Adultery does set it on fire. Incest causes it to break
forth into a flame. The sins against nature draw down fire and brimstone to
consume all from heaven.

The blessings follow: and they are either such as do more generally and
jointly belong to chastity, The Blessings.
both in single life and in the married estate: or else they are such as belong
partly to chastity in single life, and partly to chastity and faithfulness
in the marriage covenant.

First therefore, which are the joint blessings of all that live chastely,
temperately and soberly, as well in the one estate as in the other?

It is a great blessing to either sort, that they are preserved, and set free
from the former curses both of soul and body, of life, goods and name, the
which the Lord threateneth against all unchaste, intemperate and wanton persons.

But their blessing is yet greater, in that they may with the unspeakable
comfort and peace of a good conscience, look for the blessed appearance of our
Savior Christ, to their eternal salvation at the day of the last judgment,
Titus, chapter 2. verses 11.12.13. And Matthew chapter 5. verse 8. Blessed are
the pure inheart (says our Savior himself) for they shall see God.

He means that all such shall see him to their unspeakable comfort, and
enjoy the happiness of his glorious presence, etc.

Read also Ezekiel. 18.6.9.

But let us more particularly consider of the blessing belonging to chastity
in either estate of life.

And first, what proof have you concerning the blessing of those that live
chastely in single life?

We may behold it in the example of Joseph, whom God not only delivered from
the false slander of his Lady or mistress this way; but also, he turned it
to be a means of his advancement to a higher degree of vvorldly honor, for
the singular benefit of the Church of God, Genesis chapter 39. and chapter 41.
etc.

We may see it also in that law of Moses, wherein God graciously provides by
an ordinary course of justice, for the defense of the maid falsely accused of
dishonestie, Deuteronomy chapt. 22. verses 18.19.

Finally, concerning the unmarried, whether man or woman, maid or vvidow,
whosoever have so special a gift of God, that they can live chastely without
the help of marriage, which has diverse encumbrances going with it; and if
they have care to use it to the right end, the Apostle Paul says, that they
are the more blessed in that respect, so long as it shall please God to
continue that his gift and bounteous grace unto them, 1. Corinthians. chap. 7.

This point indeed is fully disputed and determined in that Chapter: but with
no prejudice against the married estate, specially as touching those that have
not the gift to live chaste without it: Concerning the blessing of chastity in
single life, read verses 1.7.8.25.26.27.35. and so forth to the end of the
chapter.

Now, what is the blessing of those that live chastely, temperately, purely and
soberly in the married estate?

We may perceive it by that defense which God gave unto Abraham and Sarah,
Genesis, chapter 20. and to Isaac and Rebecca, Genes. 26.

And also, in that he promises to clear the honest wife falsely suspected of
dishonestie by her jealous husband, as we read in the fifth chapter of the
book of Numbers, concerning the law of jealousy, verse 28. If the woman be
not defiled (says the Lord) but is clean, she shall be free from the curse,
and she shall conceive and bear.

And further, as the Apostle Paul teaches, through bearing of children, the
wife continuing in faith, and love, and holiness with modesty, shall be
saved, 1. Tim. 2.15.

And the Apostle Peter, 1. Epist. chapter 3. and verse 7. affirms, that both
Christian husbands living with their vviues as men of knowledge, and their
wives also which live purely and trust in God, are heirs of the grace of
life, promised to them in Christ Jesus.

Yea sometime God shows this special mercy, that the believing wife, is a
means of her unbelieving husbands salvation: and the believing husband a
means of the salvation of his unbelieving wife, 1. Cor. 7.16.

Read also Psalm 128.1. etc. and Psalm 127.5. For as barrenness is reckened
for a curse against the uncleanness of such as have defiled themselus, as we
read Leuiticus, chapter 20. verses 20.21. and sometime even for intended
adultery, Every one of us is a damnable transgressor.
as Genesis 20, 17.18. so is fruitfulness the blessing of a chaste and sober
life in holy marriage. It is true indeed, that some honest women are barren for
some other causes, as the Lord sees meet, and it may be for the sin of the
husband. It is true also, that some unclean persons, who live unchastly in
marriage have children, but that is to be accounted a blessing of God upon the
innocent party, and not for the husbands or wives cause, which soever of them
be wicked and unfaithful to the other.

These, and if there be any such like, they are the gracious blessings of God,
upon those that shall obey this his holy and pure Commandment.

Hitherto therefore, of the whole interpretation and doctrine of this seventh
Commandment.

The use is now last of all to be considered.

Have you perfectly obeyed this holy Commandment of God, in so pure and chaste
a life, both in thought, word and deed, that you may think your self worthy
to escape the curse, and fierce wrath of God, and to be partaker of the
blessing?

It were a great sin in me, if I should think so: for as I have been borne
in sin, and conceived in iniquity: that is to say, even as I am from the
beginning, through the corruption of nature disposed to all other sin, so, and
that also in a special manner, am I inclining to the transgression and
disobedience of this Commandment. And as I grow in years, so I have cause to
fear that I shall increase in the breaking thereof, unless it shall please
God to preserve me from the same by his grace and fatherly affection: which
blessing I do humbly and heartily beg at his hands.

God of his infinite mercy, even for Jesus Christ his sake, bless and
preserve you, and us all from so great an evil. For that which you do confess
against your self (according as you are truly taught out of Gods holy word,
that you ought to do, and namely from the fifth verse of the 51. Psalm, where
king David by occasion of his fall, makes the same confession against
himself) the same is likewise to be acknowledged of every one of us, though
(as touching actual transgression) some have offended more then other,
according as we are elder in years, or have been more negligent in resisting
the vehement temptations of these sins.

For as the holy Proverb shows, there is a growth in sin, as there is a
proceeding in years, if it be not by the grace of God, and by his blessing
upon good nurture and education repressed and driven away. Read Proverbs chap.
29.15.16.17. and chap. 22.15.

And how easily children will learn filthy words and behavior, if they hear
and see them in others, every one can tell that knows any thing: whereby it
is evident that naturally we are all greatly inclined this way.

So that, unless our Savior Christ had satisfied the justice of God, that is
to say, unless his blood had been shed, yea even that water and blood which
ran from his very heart, to wash away this filthiness of our nature, and all
the evil and unclean fruits thereof: and if he had not also in his own
life, fulfilled the righteousness and obedience of this Commandment for us,
as well as the rest of the Commandments of God, this alone would condemn us
to the very bottomless pit of hell, for a just reward of our transgressions
against the same.

Against the which damnation therefore, that our faith may be comforted and
established in this point; I mean the faith of so many as shall truly repent
of their sins, and labor after pureness of life; let us to our comfort
earnestly consider of the perfect obedience which our Savior Christ has
yielded unto it on our behalf.

What proof have you of this part of his perfect obedience?

Although our Savior Christ, (being in all things like unto us, sin only
excepted) had an aptness in nature to know what belongs to the desire of
marriage, so far as he might know it in the purity of man's nature without
sin, yet he lived a most chaste, temperate and sober life, in the unmarried
estate: as it is evident by that which is testified in the holy Gospel, of
his most pure conversation tovvard all, Our Savior Christ's perfect obedience
for us.
both men and women, and of his effectual reproving of the sins of bodily
uncleanness, so that many harlots were converted and brought to repentance
by his most holy and pure doctrine, not only in public sermon, but also in
private speech, according to every just occasion. Such as was the woman of
Samaria, of whom we read in the fourth chapter of the Gospel of the
Evangelist John, and that other sinful woman, who vvashed the feet of our
Savior Christ with the tears of her repentance, and wiped them with the
hairs of her head, Luke chapt. 7. verse 37. and so forth to the end of the
chapter.

And the perfect obedience of our Savior Christ to this seventh Commandment
is yet further confirmed, in that albeit he lived all his days in the unmarried
estate (he using his most perfect gift of chastity without marriage, as was
every way most meet for him, both in respect of his divine person, he being
both God and man, and also in respect of his most holy office and calling) yet
he by all means honored marriage, as the holy ordinance, the divine gift and
grace of God, both by doctrine and also by miracle.

For (as we read in the second chapter of John) he wrought his first miracle
at a marriage feast, he there turning water into wine.

And Matthew chapter 19. where he reproves the abuse of unlawful
diuorcements, which were against the perpetuity of the marriage covenant: we
read how he calls all back to the first institution of God, in the
beginning of the creation, for the reformation of every abuse against it: and
for the restoring of marriage to the first and most honorable dignity of it.

And for the same cause also it is, that he was so vehement and severe against
adultery, yea even against the unchaste look of the eye, and against the very
lust of the heart, as has been ansvvered before out of the fifth chapter of the
same Gospel according to S. Matthew.

These things duly considered, do sufficiently confirm the perfect obedience
of our Savior Christ to this Commandment.

Thus then, if we believe in our Savior Christ, and if by says we apprehend
in him both our redemption through his blood, for our transgressions against
this Commaunnement, and also our justification by his perfect obedience, and
the imputation thereof unto us through Gods most free and bounteous grace; and
if we shall labor after a temperate and sober life, we may then comfortably
persuade our selves, that we shall escape every curse, and be partakers of all
blessing and happiness.

But what particular proof have you that God will forgive the transgressions
of this Commandment, yea the most heinous of them, to all such as shall truly
repent thereof, and believe in the name of our Savior Christ?

In the 21. chapter of Matthew, verses 31.32. our Savior Christ himself
says, that Publicanes and harlots believing and repenting, shall go into the
kingdom of God, and enjoy the everlasting crown of happiness.

Yea, he says, they shall go into his kingdom before such, as in comparison
of them, seem to themselves righteous, and therefore regard not to believe,
neither are moved to repentance.

What proof else have you?

The Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. chap. 6. having made mention of fornicators,
adulterers, wantons, buggerers, says that such were some of the Corinthians
before their conversion by the preaching of the Gospel: but now (says the
Apostle) ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

O most gracious and wonderful riches of Gods free grace and bounteous mercy
in our Savior Christ! what blessing, and praise and honor, and thanks, may
we render unto his majesty for so unspeakable a grace.

But is not this the way to make sinners the more bold to commit these sins,
by such preaching of the forgiveness of them?

It is not, so long as repentance is preached as well as forgiveness.

It is very true: for all they that have grace to repent, The Equity.
(to whom only forgiveness does belong) the more and greater sins they
understand by the Gospel to be forgiven them through the riches of Gods mercy
in Christ, the more do they love God and Christ their Savior, and the more do
they hate their sin, and the more careful they are to please God for ever
after, according to that which our Savior Christ says of the sinful woman,
Luke chapter 7.47. Many sins are forgiven her, that is, she has comfortable
persuasion thereof in her heart by faith: and therefore as our Savior Christ
argues from thence, she loved very much. And so no doubt do all they that
have the like persuasion.

We must always remember the words of our Savior Christ: Go and sin no
more, least a worse thing come unto thee. John 5.14.

And thus is the repentance of Judah noted, touching his incestuous adultery
with his daughter in law, that he acknowledged his sin and lay with her no
more, Genesis chapt. 38. verse 26.

The like are we to think of Lot, Noah, David, and of the incestuous
Corinthians, that they sinned no more in such sort as they had sinned before
their true repentance, concerning their special sins.

Whosoever do not thus in the like cases, they can have no true comfort, that
their sins are forgiven them, but shall dangerously deceive themselves, to
the everlasting destruction of their souls.

And thus are we now (by the gracious blessing of God) come to the eight
Commandment.

What is that?

Thou shall not steal.

The Lord having in the sixth Commandment provided for the safeguard of man's
person and life, and in the seventh for the propagation of the life of mankind,
least the earth should be left void of a posterity lawfully descending: it
follows now fitly in the eight Commandment, that the Lord should take order
concerning the outward commodities of his life, for the comfortable maintenance
thereof.

Sins forbidden.
But that we may attain to the understanding of this Commandment, let us
inquire of it in our former order from point to point.

And first, concerning the negative part.

What does almighty God forbid under this word stealing?

Under this word stealing, almighty God comprehends and forbids all
injustice whatsoever may be committed of any person, young or old, in any
matter or interprise little or great, touching the goods and outvvard
commodities of this life, whether the same injustice should be compassed and
brought to pass by force and violence, against the will of the right owner,
or by any kind of subtlety and fraud, without his knowledge.

Hereby then, it appears that the property of every man's right and
possession, and all distinction of mine and thine which is in the world, is of
the hand of God; and that his provident distribution is the ground and
foundation of all justice, to be observed in nations betwixt people and people,
and in all societies betwixt every man and his neighbor, according to that
positive law, which the Lord has set, Deuteronomy. 19. chapter 14. Thou shall
not remove thy neighbors mark, which they of old time and antiquity have set
in thine inheritance, etc.

And Proverbs 22.28. and chapter 23.10.11.

This law indeed did specially respect the people of Israel: nevertheless it
is evident also by the holy Scriptures, that God has distributed the whole
world according to the pleasure of his own will, Genesis chapter 10. and
chapter 11.8. and Deuteronomy 32.8. etc. Read also Psalm 8. and Psalm 24.
and Psalm 50.10. etc. and Psalm. 95.4.5. and 115.16.

But many get that which they hold, by no honest and lawful means, but by
wicked practices, and that partly by force, and partly by deceit, as has been
answered before: What is to be said to this?

Howsoever it be, that any hold goods and possessions, whether by right or by
vvrong, it is injustice for any living in a settled commonwealth, to steal the
least thing from them, or to use any unlawful force, yea, though they be such
as have just right thereunto.

What is to be done then?

Only lawful means must be used for the righting of all wrongs.

So it ought to be indeed: One evil must not be remedied by another: for that
would make the evil worse, etc.

The Magistrate is appointed of God to hear and determine such cases. To them
therefore must all that be wronged resort and seek for judgment, Exodus 22.7.
etc. and Deuteronomy. 17.8. etc.

But what if all lawful means fail, and that the Judge will not do his
office in the execution of justice?

The matter must then be peaceably left to the righteous judgment of God.

God verily must be the only refuge in such extremities: and we may well
comfort our selves in him, that he will in due season righteously judge both
the just and the wicked. Read Eccles. 3.16.17.

Now let us come to inquire of the particular sins whereby this Commandment
is transgressed and broken.

The which, as I suppose, we may not unfitly do in this order.

First, if we search out the sins of such as be in authority over the rest:
and Secondly, what are the sins of those that be under their government.

Show therefore in the first place, which be the sins of those in authority,
whether they be tyrants or lawful governors: for even the one as well as the
other, may be thieves and robbers in the sight of God, and by the verdict of
this his Commandment, Read Job 12.5.6. Psalm 62.10. Isaiah 1.23. Hosh 6.9.
and chap. 7.1.

Show therefore (I say) which their sins of injustice be?

Tyrants with their Lieutenants, Captains, and soldiers, yea, and all other
sovereign Kings and Princes sin against this Commandment of Almighty God,
the Kings of Kings, and Prince of all Princes; when by unjust wars they
invade the lands and dominions of other Princes, and spoil their subjects of
their goods, either by piracy upon the seas, or by robbing and stealing upon
the land.

The same again, both tyrants, and also all lawful Kings and Princes, with
their Judges and under officers, do then likewise break this Commandment of
God, in time of peace among their own subjects, when of malice, or for love of
corrupting bribes and gifts, they either utterly pervert, or in any point
corrupt true judgment; and also when they delay and hinder the speedy course
thereof, specially touching the pitiful cause of the stranger and the poor,
the widow and the fatherless: and finally, when they lay burdensome
exactions upon their subjects, without just and weighty causes, and when they
consume the common treasury upon their private and pompous lusts.

These sins of Princes and Rulers are every where mightily cried out against
by the Prophets of God, in the holy Scriptures.

Now, what are the sins of those that live together in more equal estate and
condition of life?

There are very many of them.

It is true: for beside secret stealing and open robbing practiced among men,
injustice may be committed both in regard of other men's goods and commodities,
and also in regard of their own: and that also diverse ways, in either
respect.

First therefore, which are the ways whereby injustice may be committed in
respect of other men's goods and commodities?

First, when we do negligently, but much rather if we should vvilfully
damnifie or hinder them in any matter.

Secondly, when we do any way get out of their hands any part of that which
we have no right unto.

Thirdly, when we detain or keep in our own hands any part of that which
belongs unto them.

But most of all, when any do utterly alienate the title of inheritance from
the right heir thereof.

Of the first of these points of injustice, we have two instances given unto
us: the one of wilfulness, the other of negligence, Exodus 22. verses 5.6.

Let us come to the second point.

How may injustice be committed in getting other men's goods out of their hands?

This may be practiced many ways.

Show how.

In buying or selling, letting or hiring, borowing or lending, paying wages, or
doing of work, in exchange of commodities, in partnership, or in any other
lawful kind of contracting and dealing betwixt man and man.

But much more when any get them by dice-play, or any other cogging and
cousening practices, as we call them.

Most of all, by crafty lawing and bribing, to the perverting of right from the
holy seat of justice.

Let us briefly run these things over.

And first, how may injustice be practiced in buying?

When the buyer huckleth with the seller, and dispraiseth his ware above that
there is cause, and under pretense of his dislike thereof, will not give to
the worth of it, because he supposes that his neighbor has great need to
sell. Or, when any pretending to be vvilling to give to the vvorth, makes
payment with counterfeit and false coin.

This corruption the Spirit of God notes to the reproof of it, Prou. chap.
20.14. And in the next verse he commends the contrary course, that is, when
men using good discretion, put away such fained collusions.

Show likewise how injustice is committed by the seller.

When he ouerpriseth his vvare, and will not content himself with a reasonable
gain.

When he sells the second, praising it for the best, and that which is mixed
and soily, for that which is pure and good.

Or though he do not so, yet if he use false vvaights, or skant measure, or
untrue tale, etc.

Also, when any sell lands or houses, under a false title, or by false and
forged evidence.

Or surfeted cattle for sound of limme and wind: or by any other like evil
practice.

It is very true: for in these cases the Law, or rather the licentious outrule
of the seller, Caveat emptor, Let the buier take heed, it is corrupt and
naught: The heathen have reproved this kind of dealing, and much more is it
condemned in the word of God, read Leuit. 19.35.36. and Deuteronomy. 25.13.14.15.16.
Prou. 11.1. and 1. These. 4.6. and in many other places. The rule which God
gives for buying and selling is this; When thou sellest ought to thy
neighbor, or buyest at thy neighbors hand, ye shall not oppress one another,
Leuit. 25.14. etc.

We ought therefore to buy and sell so, as it might be evident by our dealings,
that our hearts are not possessed with self-love and covetousness, etc. but
that even in our common dealings we have the fear of God before our eyes, and
loving hearts toward our brethren. And so also ought it to be in letting and
lending, etc.

But let us go forward.

How is injustice committed in letting?

When landlords do so improve the fines and rents of their houses and farms,
that their poor farmers and tenants cannot live comfortably in them by the
fruit of their labor, and by the employing of their cattle, but rather waste
their stock upon the same. And yet more, when they let poor men houses, but
either increase the rent of them according to the benefit of their commons
which belong to them, or which is worse then that, do utterly take away
their commons from them: or which is vvorst of all, do lay towns or villages
desolate, that they themselves may dwell alone.

In the 14. Psalm this is made an argument of a dead conscience, in such as do
eat up the people of God by their hard dealings, and yet can eat their bread
without remorse.

This is to be extended also to all ouer-deare letting of cattle, or any other
thing that may be let.

How on the other side may injustice be committed in hiring of land and houses?

When farmers and tenants themselves lie so greedily in wait for reuersion of
leases, that by their bidding and outbidding one of the other, they are the
workers of their own woe.

A great part of the present improuements of rents has grown up no doubt by
this means.

But let us have forward.

How is injustice committed in borrowing?

When the borrower pays not again, or not so good as he borrowed, or not at
the appointed time.

So we read Psalm 37.21. Read also Exodus 22.14.15. and the contrary good care
of restoring 2. Kings 6.5.

How is injustice committed in lending?

When he that is able to lend will not do it at the need of his neighbor,
unless he give him for the lending, or leave with him some unreasonable pawn,
whether it be money or any other necessary which he lends, though he sustain
no loss or hinderance thereby.

Read against these unjust and unmerciful practices (for both these sins
meet in this one action) read I say, Exodus 22.25.26.27. and Leuit. 25.35.
etc. Deuteronomy. 23.19. and chapter 24.6.10.11.12.13. and Luke 6.34.35. Read also
Nehem. chap. 5. and Ezekiel. 22.12. But leaving this point.

How is injustice committed in paying of wages?

If he that sets any man to work, do keep back any part of the wages
which is due according to covenant and agreement, or when the payment is
deferred over long.

Read concerning this point, Leuit. 19.13. Deuteronomy. 24.14.15. James 5.4. Mal.
3.5. which places belong also to show the curse due to this sin.

How on the other side is injustice committed in doing of work?

If he that is hired to work, be negligent or unfaithful in doing his duty
according to covenant and promise, or if he (presuming above his skill) do
mar that which he takes in hand.

It must needs be so: we will not stand long in these things that be plain. Of
this kind of injustice is the Counselors neglecting of his clients cause, when
he has taken his money. And the Physicians neglecting of his patient, etc.

How is injustice committed in the exchange of commodities?

When there is not an equal proportion kept according to the vvorth and value
of things.

How in partnership?

When either party fails in oversight and labor, or puts up a greater
part of the gain then the covenants agreed upon betwixt them will bear.

These practices being unjust, even in the lawful contracting or bargaining of
man with man: then (as was answered) much more unjust is it for any, by mere
unlawful and wicked practices (such as are the cogging of the dice, packing of
the cards, telling of fortunes, playing of vain and wicked enterludes, and by
sorcerous practices) to spoil their neighbor of any part of their goods.

But most of all (as was further answered) if any by crafty lawing and bribing,
do under pretense of justice defeat any man of his right, and the rather if
these evils be furthered by by false swearing, and if they be practiced against
the poor, which ought not only to be justly but also mercifully dealt
withal: that is to say, with the most gracious and favorable justice that may
be.

Thus therefore, and in particulars above that can or need be rehearsed at any
one time, is injustice committed by the getting of goods from other men.

Now show in the next place, how injustice may be committed in detaining and
withholding of other men's goods from them. How is that?

When any keep them, or any part or parcel of them, notwithstanding they know
the same to be none of their own.

Against this point of injustice, read Exodus 23.4. Deuteronomy. 22.1.2.3. Of this
sort also, are such as deal unfaithfully with things committed to their
custody and keeping. Read Exodus 22.7. etc. and Leuit. 6.1.2.3.4. and Numb. 5.
verses 6.7.8.

In this point of injustice do they likewise greatly sin, which fail in the
performance of legacies, bequeathed by will of the deceased, and which
interuert the goods of the poor given to hospitals, etc. But most of all, such
as keep away that which should be for the maintenance of Gods pure worship and
Religion.

But let us go forward.

In the last place, as touching other men's goods, injustice is committed in the
alienating of possessions from the right heirs thereof, as was noted.

To the which purpose consider the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 21.15. Read also Prou.
24.15.16.

And thus we have seen which be the kinds of injustice that concern the
getting, detaining, and alienating of other men's goods.

But there are some, who do not these things themselves, but only are
partakers with them that do them, and give their consent.

What is to be said of such?

All such by giving their consent to the actions of unrighteousness, and by
their partaking in the wicked gain thereof, they do make themselves partakers
of the sin, and also of the punishment thereof, by the Law both of God and
man.

The common saying is, If there were no receivers, there would be no thieves.
At the least we may say, if there were no receivers there would be the fewer
thieves, and those that would be so, should be the sooner found out, and
suppressed by due correction and punishment.

Hereupon therefore, the civil Magistrate does justly punish the accessaries
together with the principal, after they be found out and convicted.

Hitherto of injustice concerning other men's goods.

Now therefore, we are come to those kinds of injustice which men do commit
touching their own goods.

I would have you show how that may be.

Men may deal unjustly with their own goods, either by a niggardly and fast
keeping of them, or contrariwise, by an ouerlauish and prodigal mispending of
them.

Yea, all unthriftiness is a sin of this kind of injustice.

Show either of these extremities more particularly.

And first, how may injustice be committed in too niggardly or fast keeping or
holding of a man's own goods?

Even so often as they are not wisely and liberally employed to good and
merciful uses, according to every man's power and ability, and according as God
himself does at any time give just and fit occasion.

What these good uses are we have seen before. In which respect also, read
Prou. 11.24. The niggard therefore is not the best husband for himself, and
much less for his posterity. Read also Prou. 3.9. and verses 27.28.

Consider also the examples of Ananias and Saphira concerning their
concealment, Acts 5.

Now on the other side, how do men commit injustice by ouer-slauish and
prodigal mis-spending of their own goods?

Whenever any spend excessiuely, or more then is meet; either upon
themselves or any other, whether it be in apparel or in building, or in
belly-cheare, or in any other superfluous expenses: but most of all, if the
expense be made upon harlots and lewd company.

Likewise, whenever any do consume or waste that portion which God has given
them, by playing at the cards and dice, or by any other unthrifty gaming. Rash
suretyship also is forbidden under this branch of injustice.

Finally, that sin which we call Simonie, and all giving and bequeathing of
money or goods to ungodly ends and purposes.

Read 1. Tim. 2.10. where the holy Apostle opposes good works to costly
aparell: as though he should say, that charge ought to be limited even in
women, to the end they might be more rich in those good works which the
Apostle mentions. Now who can deny, but that men ought to be more wise and
grave this way then women?

The like must needs be confessed concerning buildings, etc.

And touching dice-play, etc. see how contrary it is to the will of God, Prou.
14.1. and chap. 21.20. and verse 17.

As for rash suretiship, read Prou. 6.1. etc. and chapter 17.18. and chapter
22.26.

Of the sin of Simonie, so called from the name and intended practice of
Simon thee sorcerer, read Acts 8.18.19. etc.

And for other kinds of wicked employing of money, read Nehem. 6.12. Consider
also the superstitious vanity of popish wills and testaments.

Now touching the last point of injustice concerning men's own goods by
unthriftiness: how is that?

When any thing that might be well saved, is negligently lost: yea, when every
thing is not wisely and carefully employed, to the best and most profitable
uses that may be.

Against the first of these points of injustice, we have the Commandment of
our Savior Christ, John Chapter 6.12. And contrary to the second, see what is
commanded, Prou. 27.23. etc.

But are there no other sins then these forbidden in this Commandment?

Yes, all covetous desire, and longing after other men's goods, to enrich our
selves.

All envy at our neighbors prosperity.

All unthankfulness, murmuring and complaining of our own wants: and on the
contrary, all vainglory, and boasting of vvorldly riches and wealth, with a
mind taking scorn to be beholding to any, by accepting of benefits or tokens
of friendly goodwill.

Also, all vvorldly and excessive sorrovv for losses.

Moreover, all sloth and idleness is by this holy and righteous Law forbidden
and condemned.

Finally, all trust and confidence in our own wit and labor.

Against covetousness, read Luke chap. 12.15. Heb. 13.5. Read also Pro.
15.27. and chap. 20.21. and chap. 21.5.

Against envy, read Prou. 14.30 and chap. 24.19.20. And in the holy Gospel:
Is thy eye evil because I am good, says our Savior Christ, Math. 20.15.

Against murmuring, read Exodus 16.2.3. and in diverse other places in the
books of Moses. Read also Psalm 106.25. and 1. Cor. 10.10. Jude verse 16.

Against boasting of riches, Prou. 13.7. Ier. 9.23.24. and 1. Tim. 6.17.

Against worldly sorrow, we have seen it to be also a breach of the sixth
Commandment.

Against idleness, Prou. 6.6. etc. and chap. 20.13. and many other sentences
to the same purpose in that book, and 1. These. 3.10.11. And note well, that
both covetousness, and idleness, and prodigality, etc. are as the highways
to theft and all injustice: and therefore must needs be here condemned.

Finally, against confidence in our own wit, or forecast, or labor, Why all
sins of injustice are called theft.
read Prou. 3. verses 5.6.7. and chap. 23.4.5. and James chap. 4.13.14.15.16.

And thus we have at the last attained to see how great and manifold injustice
is forbidden in this holy and righteous Commandment of God, whereby it is
clear and manifest, that there be many kinds of thieves, beside those that in
course of man's law come to the gallouse: who all shall be arraigned before God,
and condemned to hang in hell (as the common speech is) whosoever of them shall
not repent in time.

Thus far of the negative part of this Commandment.

The affirmative part follows. But one thing first: What may be the reason
why the Lord comprehends all injustice under this name of theft, saying, Thou
shall not steal?

First, because deceiuable theft is the most usual and common injustice
practiced among men.

Secondly, because the name of a thief is commonly used, for the most odious
name in this kind: and therefore also is most sit to show how odious all
injustice both deceiuable and violent, together with all the occasions, yea,
the very root thereof, is in the sight of our most holy and just God.

Read also Job. 30.5. and Ier. 2.26. and 48.27.
It is true: whose choler and stomach does not extremely rise, if he be called
a thief? The thief himself cannot endure to be so called, etc. we care not
so much if we be called hard-dealers, near or fast men, etc.

Now let us come to the affirmative part of this Commandment; wherein God
requires all inward graces and virtues of the mind, and as fruits thereof,
all outward actions and duties which be contrary to all the former unrighteous
dealings which we have already considered of.

These good inward graces and virtues, with the outward fruits thereof, as you
have heard in the Sermon concerning this point, they are many; and the same
also not all of one sort.

Let us call them to our remembrance again.

Which are they?

They are such as belong to the right manner of getting the outward goods and
riches of this world, Duties commanded.
which may be called preservatives against theft and all kind of
unrighteousness.

And partly they are such, as belong to the well using and bestowing of the
same outward goods of this world, whether well gotten by our selves, or that
they are any other way come into our lawful custody and possession: even all
such virtues as yield the contrary fruits to all kind of theft and injustice.

Such indeed are the several kinds of the good virtues and duties of this
Commandment, in such order as they have been declared unto you.

The particulars of either kind are next to be rehearsed.

Which are the virtues of the next sort, that is to say, such as belong to the
right manner of getting worldly riches; the which (as you truly answered) are
preservatives against all theeuish and unjust dealing?

The first is, a full and settled contentment of mind, with that present estate
wherein God has set us.

The second is, a principal care of seeking after the kingdom of God, and the
glorious happiness of the world to come: which most justly is infinitely to be
preferred before all the riches and glory of this present world.

The third is, faith in Gods holy providence and promise, touching all meet
provision and maintenance for this life.

The fourth is, love unto righteousness, with a conscionable care to deal
justly and faithfully in all things, both in line, weight, and measure; and
according to all lawful promises, covenants, agreements, and bargains; and
according to that trust which in any honest and good matter, either of
arbitrament, or distribution, or superuisorship, is any way, either by public
charge, or by private entreaty committed unto us.

The fifth is, love to our neighbor, with joy in his prosperity, as if it
were our own.

The sixth is, diligence in the labor and exercise of some good and honest
calling.

The seventh is hearty prayer to God for his blessing upon the same our
labor.

Finally, the fear of God and of his secret curse, which attends upon all
unrighteous dealing.

Concerning the first of these virtues, read again Heb. 13.5. Philip.
4.11.12.13. and 1. Tim. 6.6.7.8.

Concerning the second, read Matthew. 6.19. etc. 33. and Ioh. 6.27. Read also
Psalm 67.

Concerning the third, read Prou. 10.3. and chap. 13.22.25. and chap. 24.15
16. and Psalm 37.25.26. and 55.22. and 112.1.2.3. Heb. 13.6.

Concerning the fourth, read Leuit. 19.35. and Deuteronomy. 25.15. and Prou. 11.1.
and chapter 16.11. and Ezekiel. 45.9.10.11.12. Prou. 21.15.

Concerning the fifth, read 1. Cor. 13.4.5.

Concerning the sixth, read Prou. 10.4.5. and chap. 12.27. and 13.4.23. and
chap. 14.4.23. and chap. 20.13. and chap. 27.23. and Ephesians. 4.28 1. These. 4.11.
and 2. Epist. 3.7.8.9.10.

Concerning the seventh, read Psalm 127. and Pro. 30.7.8.9. and Prou. 10.22.
and James 4.2.3.

Finally, that the fear of God serves as a special preservative against
injustice, read Leuit. 25.17. and verse 36.

These therefore are the graces and virtues belonging to the right manner of
getting or gathering of riches: whereby also both heart and hand is preserved
from injustice.

Now, as touching the second sort, belonging to the well using and bestowing of
those that are well gotten, the outward fruits whereof (as has been answered)
are contrary to the former unjust practices: Which are they?

The vertus of this second sort are.

First, godly thriftinesse, in avoiding all vain and superfluous expenses, and
in saving all that which may well be saved: yea, even in the wise and careful
employing of all things to the best and most profitable uses, in an honest,
lawful, and husbandly course.

Secondly, a willing and cheerful yielding of that which is any way due,
either to God and his Church, or to the Prince and commonwealth, or to any
private friend or neighbor, or to any child or servant of the house.

Thirdly, liberality toward poor neighbors dwelling near unto us, and to
good Christians both far and near.

Fourthly, hospitality to the Saints and servants of God, which resort to any:
specially, if they be driven from the places of their abode, by unjust and
cruel persecution.

Touching the first point of this answer, read Prou. 21.20.

Touching the second, read Matthew. 22. verse 21. and Romans 13.7. Job 31.13.
Prou. 27.27. and chap. 31.13. etc. 21.

Touching the third, Prou. 31.20. and chap. 11.24.25.26.27. Eccles. 11.1. etc.
1. Cor. 16.1.2. and 2. Epist. 9.5. etc. and Gal. 6.7. Ephesians. 4.28. Luke 6.35.

Touching the last point, read 1. Tim. 3.2. and Tit. 1.8. Heb. 13.2. and 1.
Pet. 4.9.

Thus then we see what that righteousness is, which God requires of all his
people, both in the well getting of riches, and also in the well using and
bestowing of them; and which be the virtues in either respect belonging
thereunto: whereby, it may plentifully appear, that God would have us so far
from iniuring of any, that we should seek the wealth and prosperity of all. We
must be so far from taking advantage against any because of his simplicite,
that we must be an eye to the blind, etc. even to help all such, that they be
not deceived. Such therefore are the good things commanded, and such also are
the evil things forbidden in this Commandment.

Now the equity of it follows: what is that?

It is to be considered diverse ways.

Declare how.

First, in respect of God himself.

Secondly, in respect of those that be owners and possessors of the riches and
wealth of the world.

Thirdly, in respect of the poor, which be in want.

Fourthly, in respect of common society.

Let us therefore consider of these things severally.

And first, what is the equity of this Commandment, in respect of God himself?

Seeing God is the God of righteousness, and of all equity and judgment; it
cannot be but it must needs be very just and equal, that he should command his
people all justice and judgment, and that he should forbid them the contrary.
The Equity.


And likewise, because he (having the sovereign right of all things in his
own hand) has in most excellent wisdom distributed and disposed to every
man his several portion, as was answered before concerning the ground and
foundation of the righteousness of this Commandment.

The Lord in the unequal distribution of the riches of this world, follows
the same course which he holds in all other of his works. There is a
differing glory of the heavenly creatures, and so there is of the earthy in the
several kinds thereof. He gives to the rich abundance, that the poor may
therein behold his bounteous mercy: he gives to the poor less, to some very
little, to other as it were nothing at all in comparison of the rest, that both
poor and rich might behold their own sin, and by sin their unworthiness
of the least benefit of this life.

God makes not all poor, because he would have some to relieve and succor
the rest: he makes not all rich, because then none should be humbled through
want, etc.

Now therefore in the second place, what is the equity of this Commandment, in
respect of those that be owners and possessors of the wealth of the world?

Because God has not so passed away his right and interest unto them, but that
the fee-simple (as it were) remains still in himself alone.

The rich therefore are but as stewards to God, that they may give to every one
their due portion on the Lords behalf, according as they shall stand in need.

It is true: he has not given to any man his riches, that he should consume
them according to his own corrupt will and lust, but according to the will of
God, who is the sovereign Lord and possessor of them.

It follows in the third place, that you show what the equity of this
Commandment is, in respect of those that be in present want.

Because albeit God might in his justice altogether withhold every blessing of
this life, both from poor and rich: yet, besides that he has commanded the
rich to deal liberally with the poor, he himself undertakes to be a
foster-father to provide for them, upon condition that they will patiently
bear their wants, diligently follow their callings, and in all things deal
truly and justly with all men.

To this purpose it is, that God calls himself in special manner, the father
of the fatherless, and of every one that is destitute: though he be indeed the
general foster-father of all mankind.

Such therefore is the equity of this Commandment in respect of God himself;
and also in respect of the rich, and of the poor considered a part by
themselves.

Now in the last place, what is the equity of it, in respect of common society?

The Lord God, as pleases him, does oftentimes for just causes known to
himself, make the rich poor, and the poor rich: and therefore great equity
that they which be rich now, should relieve and succor those that be
presently poor, that the poor again, whosoever from among them shall be made
rich, may likewise relieve and succor such as shall be impouerished by the
hand of God, whether they themselves or any of their posterity; as it often
falls out, within a fevv generations, yea, sometime in one and the same age.

This is that equity which the Apostle Paul reasons from, that he might move
the faithful Corinthians who were for the present more wealthy, to help the
afflicted Christians at Jerusalem, 2. Cor. chap. 8. verses 13.14.15. Read also
Prou. 27.24. and Psalm 113.

Thus then, the equity of this Commandment (the argument whereof is true
justice and judgment concerning our neighbors goods and our own) it is as
you have answered very manifold.

This Law of God therefore being so equal, it follows hereupon (according to
that which we have seen concerning the former Commandment) that all the
curses threatened against the transgressions of it, are likewise very equal and
just.

Let us therefore now come to consider of them.

And that in the same order, wherein the sins forbidden have been set down
and rehearsed: not of all the particulars (for that would be ouerlong for us at
this time) but of the more general heads, and of the particulars which be more
principal and chief among the rest, so near as we can.

In the first place, what is the curse against the tyrant, which openly
violateth all justice, to work his own ambitious and licentious will, which
he makes his sovereign Law, for the spoiling of other men of their goods, to
the enriching of himself?

Woe to thee that spoilest, and wast not spoiled, and do wickedly, and they
did not wickedly against thee (says the Lord by his holy Prophet Isaiah) when
thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled, and when thou shall make an
end to do wickedly, they shall do wickedly against thee, chap. 33.1.

Read also Hab. chap. 2.5.6. etc. 12. and Prou. 21.7. The robbery of the
wicked shall destroy them, for they have refused to execute judgment.

What is the curse or punishment against the thief, which makes stealing as
it were his professed practice and occupation to live by?

In the civil course of Gods justice in Israel, it was for the stolen ox,
restitution of five oxen, and for the stolen sheep four fold restitution, if
the thief should have killed or sold them: because that is as it were the
perfect conviction of the theft. But if the cattle should be found alive with
the thief, then the Lord commanded but double restitution. Yet so, as if the
party could not make restitution, either double or more, as the cause should
require: that then he should loose his freedom, and be sold for a bond-slaue.

This indeed is the Law of God, as we read Exodus chapter 22. verses 1.4.

The same penalty of double restitution is laid upon the thief, that steals
any thing out of a man's house: as we read in the same Chapter, verse 7. Yet so
again, as if the stealth be attempted in way of burglary, and breaking up of
the house, and that also in the night time, he is put out of the protection of
the Law, as an outlawed man, so as if he be slain in his enterprise, he that
killed him is quit from murder, The Curses.
the blood of the thief is upon his own head, verses. 2.3. That manifold
restitution therefore, or for want of restitution, the loss of liberty, and
this vile account of the thief his life in the case of burglarie; show that
they are under the curse of God, touching this life and the things that belong
to the comfort thereof.

Of this kind of more open and professed theft, there was a most grievous
practice of man-stealing among the Israelites, and selling them to the heathen.
What is the punishment which God in his civil justice appoints unto it?

That thief shall dye (says the Lord) so shall thou put evil away from among
you, Deuteronomy. chap. 24. verse 7.

This is a very great sin, to betray any man's liberty, specially the
liberty and freedom which any of Gods people have with their brethren in the
worship of God, etc. as David complains in the 1. of Sam. 26.19. And
therefore the punishment of this theft is increased by a more grievous
temporal punishment.

The greatness of this sin may evidently appear, by the contrary
patronage, which the Lord grants unto him that shall fly from the heathen
to his people, for the love of their religion: as we read Deuteronomy. 23.15.16.

Thou shall not (says the Lord to Israel) deliver the servant to his master,
which is escaped from his master unto thee.

He shall dwell with thee, even among you, in what place he shall chose, in any
of thy cities where it likes him best: thou shall not vex him, etc.

Of this kind of sin (as has been showed before) is the stealing away of any
man's daughter or son out from his government; though it be not to sell them
to strangers, but to marry them at their disposition, they having no right to
deal in that action. And seeing it is of this kind of sin, it cannot be
doubted, but the like curse and punishment from the wrath of God, belongs
unto it.

And though any be spared in this life, yet without repentance, no thief shall
escape the spiritual sentence and judgment of God: as 1. Cor. 6.10. No
thieues shall inherit the kingdom of God.

What is the curse against the public magistrate, whosoever amongst them,
either inferior or superior, do execute injustice under pretense of justice,
he sitting in the seat of justice; and specially when he does it against the
fatherless and widow?

In the 23. chapter of the Prouer. verse. 10.11. thus we read: Remove thou not
the ancient bounds, neither enter thou into the fields of the fatherless. For
he that redeemeth them is mighty, he will defend their cause against thee. And
Deuteronomy. 27.17. Cursed be he (says the Lord) which remoueth his neighbors mark,
and all the people shall say, Amen. Likewise verse 19. Cursed be he that
hinders the right of the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and all
the people shall say, Amen.

Here again, call to mind the judgment of God against king Ahab and Queen
Iezabell, for their cruel injustice against Naboth. Read also Prou. chap. 22.
verse. 22.23. and Ierem. 22.13. etc. 24.25.26. Amos 4.1. etc. Micah.
3.9.10.11.12. Zephan. 3.1.2.3.

What is the curse against such Landlords as join house to house, and lay
field to field, that they themselves may dwell alone?

The Lord pronounces a fearful woe against all such, Isa. chapter 5. verses
8.9.10. Woe unto them (says the Lord by his holy Prophet) that join house to
house, and lay field to field, till there be no place, that you may be placed
by your selves in the midst of the earth. In my hearing (that is in the
Prophets hearing) says the Lord of hosts: Surely many houses shall be
desolate, even great and fair without inhabitant. For ten acres of the
vineyardes shall yield but one Bath: and the seed of an Homer, shall yield but
an Ephah.

What is the curse against the private person, which practices theeuish
deceit in some honest calling, and under the profession of Gods true worship
and religion?

The gathering of treasure by a deceitful tongue, (says king Solomon) is
vanity tossed too and fro of them that seek death. Proverbs chapter 21.6.

Read also Proverbs, 13.11. The riches of vanity shall diminish. And chap.
22.16. He that oppresses the poor to increase himself, and gives to the
rich, shall surely come to poverty: Read also chap. 20.17. Amos chapter
8.4.5. etc. and Micah. 6.10.11.12. etc. the curse threatened against those that
use false weights, and sell corrupt wares for good.

And no marvel; for the false balances are abomination to the Lord, Prou.
11.1. Read also Zachary chapter 5.2.3.4. where note the grieuousnesse and
greatness of the curse, from the description of the greatness of the book
which was represented to the Prophet.

And note also, that when unjust dealing is countenanced by lying and swearing,
that the theft is made the more heinous thereby. And yet alas, this practice is
usual almost in every occupiers shop, etc. And therefore justly may we fear,
that the grievous curse of God is even already entering in at the doors, etc.

A special judgment of God (as I have heard it very credibly reported) fell
upon an Ostler in the city of Norwich, who fell in despair of Gods mercy,
because he had defrauded the poor traveling horses, in their allowance of hay
and prouender. Yea in the terror of his conscience he thought his sin the more
unpardonable, because he had injured the pore beasts which could not complain
of the sinful wrong done unto them, etc.

What is the curse against him that keeps back the hired servants wages?

The Lord will come near to judgment, and be a swift witness against such,
Mal. 3.5. And James 5.1. many miseries shall come upon them.

Read also Deuteronomy. chap. 24.14.15.

What is the curse against the servant, that practices deceit for his masters
advantage?

In the day of the Lords sacrifice, I will visit (says the Lord) all those
that dance upon the threshold so proudly, which fill their Masters houses by
cruelty and deceit. Zephan. chap. 1.9.

What is the curse against him that is any way partener with a thief, though
he be not the principal agent?

He that is partner with a thief (says king Solomon) hates his own soul,
Prou. chap. 29. verse 24.

Read also Psalm. 50. verse. 18.19.22.

Hitherto of the curse against all unjust increasing of men their own selves,
with the impouerishing of others.

Now further as touching those that commit injustice by their not using of
their own goods which they enjoy, as they ought to do.

First and foremost, what is the curse against the covetous and niggardly person?

He that makes have to be rich shall not be innocent, Prou. 28.20. and verse
22.

A man with a wicked eye hastes to riches, and knows not that poverty shall
come upon him. And again chap. 21.5.

But more then this: No covetous person shall inherit the kingdom of God. 1.
Cor. 6.10.

Read also Prou. 1.19. Sed consule Tremel. And Isaiah 57.17. Ezekiel. 22.12.13.
Read also a more general curse, Isa. 24.1.2.3. This is the curse of the
covetous person: but you have not yet showed the curse of the niggard: What is
that?

He that spares more then is right, surely comes to poverty. Prou. 11.24.

See more of this in the curse of God against unmerciful men in the sixth
Commandment.

Now on the other side, what is the curse against the prodigal and unthrifty
wasters and consumers of their own goods?

He that loves pastime shall be a poor man, and he that loves wine and oil
shall not be rich, Prou. 21.17.

This curse may be considered also from the parable of the prodigal son in
the literal sense of it, Luke, chapter 15.11.12.13.14.15.16.

What is the curse against rash suretiship, which is a kind of prodigality?

He shall be sore vexed that is surety for a stranger, Prou. 11. chapter 15.

What is the curse against the slothful and idle person, which for want of
diligence consumes his goods, and do without just cause live upon the labors
of others, and devour that portion, which of right belongs only to those
that be impotent, and (notwithstanding all the diligence they can use) have
need to be relieved?

The idle shall be under tribute, Prou. chap. 12.11. and chap. 18.19. He that
is slothful in his work, is the brother of him that is a great waster.

Read also chap. 20.4. and verse. 13. and chap. 6.11. and chap. 24.32.33.34.
His poverty comes as one that trauelleth by the way, and his necessity like
an armed man. Read also Eccles. 10.18. By slothfulness the roof of the
house goes to decay, and by the idleness of the hands the house dropped
through.

No marvel therefore though the idle person be said to be destitute of
understanding, Prou. chapter 12.11. And again chap. 28.19. He that follows
the idle shall be filled with poverty.

What is the curse of him that trusts in his riches, while he enjoys them?

He that trusts in his riches shall fall. Prou. 11.28.

What is the curse against him that sorroweth inordinately when he loses them?

A sorrowful mind dries the bones. Prou. chap. 22.17. And 2. Cor. 7.10.
Worldly sorrow causes death.

Finally, what is the curse against that high injustice, which is called
sacrilege, and is committed more directly against God himself?

God curses this sin, with the outward decay of all worldly blessings, and
to the destruction of the souls of all such as deal fraudulently and
injuriously with him.

It is true: for so we read Hagg. 1.4.5. etc. 11. and chapter 2.16.17.18. And
furthermore, Prou. 20.25. and Mal. 3.9. ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have
spoiled me, this whole nation.

These are the curses of Gods most holy and righteous Law against the
transgressions of this Commandment. Of the which, though many threatenings
contained in the Scriptures of God be not rehearsed: yet by these we may easily
conceive what the rest are.

Let us therefore in the next place, come to the blessings promised to the
obedience of it: and so shall we yet more clearly see into the greatness, The
Blessings.
both of the goodness of God, and also of our own sin and disobedience,
revealed and discovered by it. And finally, the use of the whole doctrine
hereof will more lively utter it self to our guilt it consciences, as touching
the necessity both of faith and repentance in the sight of God.

First therefore, what is the general blessing of God upon just dealing,
according to the truth of a man's profession?

First seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness (says our Savior
Christ) and all things of this life shall be cast as an overplus unto you,
Matthew. 6.33. And Prou. 10.2. Righteousness delivers from death. Yea chap.
21. verse 21. He that follows after righteousness and mercy, shall find
life, righteousness and glory.

Read also Prou. 12.28. Life is in the way of righteousness, and in that
pathway there is no death. And chapter 28.20. A faithful man shall abound in
blessings. Read Psalm 15. and Psalm 106.3. Blessed are they that keep
judgment, and do righteousness at all times. And Psalm 112. and Ezekiel. 18.
the reason of all is rendered. Prou. 21.3. To do justice and judgment is more
acceptable to the Lord then sacrifice. According also to that, Act. 10.34.35.
Of a truth (says the Apostle Peter) I perceive that God is no accepter of
persons, but in every nation he that fears him, and works righteousness,
is accepted with him.

Such is the blessing in a more general consideration. Now more particularly:
What is Gods blessing upon the public magistrate that refuses bribes, and
deals justly in judgment?

The throne is established by justice, Proverbs 16.12. and again, chapter
25.5.

Moreover, chapter 15.27. He that hates gifts shall live. And chapter 28.16.
The Prince that hates covetousness, shall prolong his days.

Read also Deuteronomy. 16. verses 18.19.20. See more of this point in the blessing
of the fifth Commandment: Read 2. Chron. 19.6.

Now, what is the blessing of the private person, whosoever he be that deals
justly?

Thou shall have a just and right weight (says the Lord) a perfect and a just
measure shall thou have; that thy days may be lengthened in the land which the
Lord thy God gives thee, Deuteronomy 25.15.

The reason and ground of this blessing is rendered, Prou. 11.1. For a perfect
weight pleases the Lord. And chapter 10.11. A true weight and balance are of
the Lord: all the weights of the bag are his work.

What is the blessing of him that being just uses diligence in his calling?

The hand of the diligent makes rich, Proverbs 10.4. and chapter 12.24. The
hand of the diligent shall bear rule.

Read also chapter 20.13. and chapter 22.29. and chapter 28.19.

What is the blessing of the righteous man, who also practices liberality?

The liberal person shall have plenty: and he that vvatereth shall also have
rain, Prou. 11.25. And 2. Cor. 9.6. He that sows liberally, shall also reap
liberally.

Read more in this text, as it follows there in many verses. And Gal. 6.8.
the Apostle speaking of the same matter, assures us, that he which sows to
the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. Read also Prou. 28.27.
He that gives to the poor shall not lack. And Luke 6.38. Give (says our
Savior Christ) and it shall be given unto you; a good measure, pressed down,
shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom: for with
what measure ye meat, with the same shall men meat to you again. Thus we may
see briefly, how God is minded to bless the obedience of this Commandment, as
touching those that deal justly with men.

Now last of all, what is his blessing upon those that deal justly with
himself more directly, concerning the maintenance of his true religion, and
the holy ministry of the Gospel, contrary to the practice of those that do
in this behalf sacrilegiously rob and spoil the Church?

The Lord promises great plenty and abundance of all his blessings, to such
specially, if there be a general and public consent and care herein: as it is
plentifully declared, Prou. chapter 3.9.10. and Hagg. chap. 2.19.20. and Mal. chap.
3.10.11.12. Eueryone of us is a damnable transgressor


These places of holy Scripture do plentifully declare it indeed. Let us
diligently read and consider of them.

Read also Zephan. 3.13. for the ground of this blessing, seeing the people in
whom the Lord delights, is such a people, as do no iniquity nor speak lies,
and where a deceitful tongue is not found in their mouth, etc.

Thus much for the promise of blessing. It is time that we come to the use.

Have you perfectly obeyed this eight Commandment, that you may look thereby
to escape the curse, and to be partaker of the blessing thereof?

No: I have not perfectly obeyed it. But in many things both lesser and
greater, I have dealt deceitfully: and continually, both I and all other do
fail in the best actions of righteousness that we do perform, according as
it is written: There is none righteous, no not one, Romans chap. 3.10.

This sentence is general, concerning all actions that have equity and right
in them; whether they belong to riches, or a man's person, or any other thing,
in the most general signification: and therefore it must needs condemn us all
of unrighteousness against this Commandment, etc.

And further also, as we have done in all the former Commandments: let us for
our comfort enquire now henceforth, from what ground of holy Scripture we may
strengthen our faith, that our Savior Christ has perfectly obeyed this Law
for us, according as we have seen how he has obeyed all that we have
interpreted before. For so it is necessatie for us, that we do know, that we
have such a Savior, as is perfectly righteous in the obedience of every
Commandment: and namely touching that more particular righteousness, which is
here commanded. And if we do not know and believe our Savior Christ to be
such a one, we cannot possibly be saved by him.

Show you therefore, what proof you have thereof?

All the testimonies of our Savior Christ his righteousness in general, they
must needs prove his righteousness in the fulfilling of this Commandment.
But besides them, we have particular proofs more properly belonging to our
present purpose. Our Savior Christ's perfect obedience for us.


Let us consider either of these kinds of proofs, both general and special.

And first which are the general?

In the 23. of Jeremy verse 5. the holy Prophet has prophesied of him, that
he should be a righteous branch, and that he should execute judgment and
righteousness in the earth. And in the next verse: that both Judah and Israel,
shall call him the Lord our righteousness. There are many other such like
testimonies.

It is true: so we read again in the same prophecy, chap. 33.15.16. In those
days, and at that time will I cause the branch of righteousness to grow up
unto David, and he shall execute judgment and righteousness in the land: In
those days shall Judah be saved. And thus we have the general confirmations
of Christ's perfect righteousness, the which do include the righteousness
commanded in this eight Commandment. Nevertheless, the particular proofs are
not to be ouerpassed:

Rehearse some of them also.

Like as the Prophet Isaiah prophesied of our Savior Christ before he came
into the world, clothed as it were with our nature; that he should do no
violence, and that no deceit should be in his mouth, as we read chap. 53.
verse the 9. So the Apostle Peter, shortly after he had manifested himself to
the world, bears faithful witness to the same, 1. Epist. chap. 2.22.

This also is that which was typically prophesied of our Savior Christ under
the kingdom of king Solomon, Psalm. 72.14. where it is said, that he should
redeem the souls of his people from deceit and violence, by the execution of
justice against the enemies of the Church, and by exercising mercy toward the
rest. Read the Psalm.

And here again, let us call to mind, that the chief heads or parts of
injustice, are these two, deceit and violence: according to that of the Apostle
Paul, 1. These. 4. where he minding to forbid all injustice, he says: Let no
man oppress nor defraud his brother.

So then, seeing our Savior Christ is free from either of these points of
injustice; yea, seeing he redeemeth his people from them, according to that 72.
Psalm it follows, that he is, by the undoubted testimonies of the holy
Scriptures, perfectly righteous. But it may peradventure be thought of some but
a small matter, though our Savior Christ did no violence, seeing he was to the
world-ward in poor and weak estate: and therefore that the particular proof
of his righteousness must stand rather in the confirmation of this, that he
used no deceit, nor any crafty and unlawful shifts to help himself, though
he was poor etc. What have you to say to this?

It is to be confessed, that a principal part of our particular proof does
most apparently consist in this point. Nevertheless, albeit our Savior Christ
had no worldly power and authority, after the manner of men; yet he could by
his divine power have consumed his enemies, or cast them from their dignity,
or wasted their substance, etc. But he chose rather meekely to endure all
injuries and wrongs, which all men did against him, even to the rifling of him,
and to the casting of lots upon the inmost garment that was upon him.

This therefore shows plainly, that the righteousness of our Savior Christ
was excellent eue^ in the sight of the world, in that he did forbear all such
dealing, as might at the least have had the show of a violent course, though he
could have revenged himself upon his enemies, as you have answered. For he
that threw the Devils out of that possession which they had taken of the
persons of men, he could much more easily in all reason, have thrown men out
of their possession of houses and goods, etc.

He that by the sound of his voice (when he might seem to be at the weakest)
made the soldiers which came to apprehend him in the garden to fall down
backward, John 18.6. he could have taken all strength and courage from any
other, and have delivered himself, etc.

But he would in no wise work any revenge, but committed all to him that
judges righteously, 1. Pet. 2.23.

For as touching that which he did, concerning the heardes of the swine of the
Gaderenites, Matthew. 8.30. he did it in other most holy respects, and not for
any the least carnal revenge. Nay, we see how he plainly rejects that kind
of motion which his own disciples made unto him, against the Samaritanes that
would not lodge him. Luke chapter 9. verses 54.55.56.

Perfect therefore was the righteousness of our Savior Christ in avoiding all
violence, yea in the meek enduring of all wrongs.

Let us now come to the proof of his righteousness, from the particular
consideration of his poor and base estate as touching the world.

How can you declare him to have been righteous therein?

Because from the time that our Savior Christ came to a meet and convenient
age, and thenceforth so long as he lived with his parents, he wrought
diligently in the work and labor of Joseph's occupation, Mark chap. 6.3.

And afterward, when the time was come, that he should more immediately do the
will of his heavenly Father, he (having no house of his own to hide his head
in, as we read Mat. chap. 8. verse. 20. and painefully going about from place
to place to preach the Gospel) most willingly contented himself with that
maintenance only, which grevv unto him as a fruit from his preaching, no
otherwise then as God moved the hearts of those that received spiritual
comfort from him, to minister of their outvvard things unto him, Luke chap.
8.2.3.

This he did, all the time wherein he went about preaching, even till (as a
reward from the hands of wicked men) he was put to death, and nailed to the
cross between two thieues which were crucified with him; they counting him
among transgressors, as the Prophet Isaiah says, as if he had been a most
unrighteous person: though in truth (as the same Prophet testifies) he never
did any violence, neither practiced any deceit, as has been noted before out
of the 53. chapter of his Prophecy.

And further also, that our Savior Christ was free from covetousness, we have
a principal and most evident proof, even from the beginning of his entrance
into the discharge of his public ministry: at what time the Devil tempted
him most subtly diverse ways, and namely to ambition and desire of earthly
glory, pomp, dignity, and riches, but he could not prevail.

Behold therefore a singular proof of our Savior Christ his perfect
righteousness, in his contentment with his poor estate, patiently enduring
hunger and thirst, never using any unlawful means to relieve himself, but
rested upon Gods providence by faith, as is evident by his answer to the
Devil: Man lives not by bread only, but by every word which proceeds out
of the mouth of God, etc.

By this righteousness of our Savior Christ, are we justified from all our
unrighteousness against this Commandment, if we do truly believe in him,
and earnestly repent, and labor after righteous dealing, remembering that this
is one principal end of our redemption and justification, Luke 1.75. and Titus
2.9.10.11. and 1. Pet. 2.24.

And that all such as do thus repent of their unrighteousness and believe in
the name of Christ, be justified by him, and are received into the favor of
God, read Acts 10.35. Read also Leuiticus 6.1. etc.

Consider here of the thief repenting on the cross.

Consider also the example of Zacheus, Luke 19.

Read also Leuiticus, chapter 24.18.21. with Numbers 5. verses 6.7. and Exodus
21.33.34.35.36. and chapter 22.1.2.3.4.5.6. etc. Where also note, that as a
fruit of true repentance, restitution is commanded by God, and practiced of
his servant; yea and that with some recompense, in way of satisfaction in a
civil course of justice.

But what if a man knows not whom, nor how many he has injured, and is
sorry for it, and would gladly make restitution, but he knows not how?

What is to be done in this case, which is surely more or less, the condition
and case of us all?

We must so much the more speedily break off our former course, and
accordingly be so much the more careful to practice both justice and mercy,
then heretofore at any time we have been.

This is indeed the blessed counsel of the Prophet Daniel to Nebucadnezzer
that great robber and spoiler of the nations of the world, chapter 4.24. O King
(says the Prophet) let my counsel be acceptable to thee, and break off thy
sins by righteousness, Anabaptists community of goods and possessions
overthrown.
and thine iniquity by mercy and compassion toward the poor; lo, let there
be an healing of thine error.

The like, is the general counsel and charge of the Apostle Paul, to every
unjust person, yea even to the petty thief, Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole,
steal no more, but let him labor and work with his hands the thing which is
good, that he may have to give unto him that needs.

And now only for the conclusion of this Commandment, let us after all the
premises, observe (as a truth most evident and clear against all Anabaptists)
that the Lord does at no hand approve of their confused community of goods.
Nay this Commandment leuelleth, as it were the maine shot of the Lords
ordinance, to the utter battery and overthrow of it, even to the worlds end,
according to the perpetuity of the force and power of this his express moral
Law and Commandment.

As touching the communion of goods which was among the Christians in the
primitive Church in the Apostles time, it was no such as they imagine, but
only the kindness and liberality practiced among them was very
extraordinarily abounding to the releeuing of the common and great necessity
of the poor Christians. The same God who wrought that abundant love and
liberality in them, and yet preserved them from all barbarous and fantastical
confusion, he for his mercies sake, grant that all true professors of his
blessed and glorious Gospel, may more and more honor it, with daily increase
of all liberal and kind dealing, with like preservation of the ground of
justice, in that propriety of goods and possessions, which he by his good
providence has set and determined among his people, Amen.

The ninth Commandment of the Law of God now follows: Which is that?

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

The word (...) Thahhaneh used in this Commandment, properly signifies to
answer, as though the Lord should say, thou shall not answer false witness,
that is, thou shall not bear false witness when thou art demanded to testify
any truth, which thou know and ought of love and duty to make known for
the benefit of any neighbor. Word^ interpreted.


After the former Commandment therefore of righteous dealing, follows now
the Law of true speaking: according as they are in the same order rehearsed in
diverse other places of holy Scripture, and namely, Leuiticus. 19.11. Psalm
15.2. and Psalm. 119. verse 138. Ephesians. 4.24.25. and chap. 5.9.

For the understanding of the which Commandment ye may remember that ye were
taught, that three things are to be considered:

Which are they?

First, who is to be reputed and taken for a man's neighbor.

Secondly, who he is that must not bear false witness.

Thirdly, what it is to bear false witness.

Touching the first of these points: whom have you learned that we ought to
repute and take for our neighbor?

I have learned that this word neighbor, comprehends every one without
respect of persons, concerning whom we have just occasion to yield our
testimony in any matter, which on his behalf is called into question.

So it is: and thus generally is the same word neighbor to be understood in
the sixth, seventh, and eight Commandments going before, although it is not
expressed till now: Thou shall not murder any neighbor, etc. that is, no man.
For this general signification of the word neighbor, read Luke chap. 10.
verse 29. etc. to the 38.

Now touching the second point, who is he whom God forbids to bear false
witness?

All stand straightly charged here vvithall, but specially they whose false
testimony may do most hurt: and namely such as be in credit with great
persons, and such as are called forth to give witness in any weighty
matter upon their oath.

To this purpose, consider the admonition of John Baptist to those soldiers
that would know of him what they should do. The holy servant of God being as
wise as zealous, knowing that they might do special hurt, by their false
accusation against any to their Captain, he gives them special warning
against this sin, Luke chap. 3.14. The like is to be said of all other in any
like place, wherein they may procure any special mischief by the same means.
The third point follows. Sins forbidden.


Show therefore what it is for any to bear false witness against his
neighbor?

To bear false witness, is to utter and affirm any untruth, how little soever
the same may either discredit or impair the good name of any man: or procure
any other the least hurt or danger against him, either in life, honesty, or
goods, and specially, if it be against the spiritual happiness and salvation
of his soul.

It is true: false witness reaches as far as does all that, for the which
any man may be worthy to be either justified or condemned in the sight of God
or men: as may be particularly exemplified through every Commandment, both
of the first and also of ^he second Table.

And further, though this sin of false witness bearing, is grievous in the
least degree; yet it is to be esteemed more heinous, according to the
greatness of the accusation which is falsely laid to the charge of any man:
specially of such a man as has best deserved to be well spoken of, etc. False
accusation in capital matters is more heinous then in matters otherwise
penal: in matters belonging to God, more then in matters pertaining to men, a
certain proportion of one degree of sin compared with another: before the
magistrate and by oath, more then privately and by bare affirmation:
deliberately more then rashly: by writing or open printing, more then by word
of mouth: by a Magistrate or Minister of the word, more then by a private
person: against a society, more then against one person: against whole
Churches and nations, more then against some few among them. Finally, God
forbidding false witness in the matters of the natural life and body, must
needs be understood, much rather to forbid false witness to the everlasting
peril of men's souls, which are more precious then their bodies and whole
outward and worldly estate.

But not only the first inuenter of the false accusation is here condemned, of
whom it is said, He that inuenteth slander is a fool, that is to say, a
wicked man. Proverbs chapter 10.18. but also, he that is ouer-light of giving
credit to it, or to any uncertain rumors, of whom also it is said: The fool
believes every thing, Prou. 14.15. Read also Exodus 23.1. Yea it is a sin
in any not to stay and suppress such flying reports, as we are after more
fully to consider. And for this cause it is, that God gives the magistrate
especially, so special a charge as he does, to examine the false witness
very diligently: and that no man should be condemned under two or three
witnesses, Exodus chap. 23.6.7.8. and Deuteronomy. 17.14.6.7. and chapter 19.16. etc.
Read also John 7.51.

But that we may proceed:

Is false witness borne only by affirming a falsehood, or open untruth against
a man's neighbor?

No: for false witness may be borne by the denial and gaine-saying of that
which is true.

There is like reason of either of these. This was the sin of Zidkijah the
son of Chenaanah against Micaiah, 1. King. 22.24.

It is an evil, that is generally very ready with all of us, specially
concerning our own excuse, if there be not the greater grace. See in the
example of Sarah, Genesis 18.15. yea though she was a good woman.

That which we will do for the excusing and benefiting of our selves, as we
take it, we will not stick (if natural corruption prevail) to do the like to
the hurt of him whom we take to be our enemy: we will deny or lessen all the
good which he has done, etc.

This kind of bad dealing, there is no doubt, but the Lord condemns it for
false witness bearing.

But some man peradventure will ask, what if my false witness may help my
good neighbor, and be no hinderance to any other, either friend or fo: may I
not in such a case make that lie; which they beautify with the name of an
officious or dutiful lie? What is to be said to this?

No evil must either be done or spoken that any good or profit may come of
it. Neither in truth can any good fruit come of it, but rather it will prove
over officious and hurtful, specially to the evil doer or spe^ker himself,
if God do not pardon it.

God the author of all that is good and true, yea who is all only goodness and
truth, he will doubtless work, and further them by true dealing and true
speaking: and therefore does straightly require, that we serve his blessed
providence only in the way of truth, read Romans 3. verses 4.5.6.7.8.

It is true that in some cases God has borne with the weakness of his
servants this way, when in their hearts they have minded to serve his good
providence, but have failed in their right choice of the right way and means:
as Rebecka and Iaakob did for the obtaining of the blessing, Genesis 27. and the
mid-wiues of Egypt for the preservation of the lives of the male-children of
the Israelies, Exodus chap. 1. and David for the preservation of his own life,
1. Sam. 21.1.2.3. and verses 12.13. But such examples (being as it were
out-rules) cannot be followed without great danger, to those that will of
purpose draw them to an inordinate course of imitation.

Is there no way else, whereby a man may bear false witness against his
neighbor?

Yes: he may do it also by misconstruing and deprauing, either the meaning of
his words, or the purpose and intent of his actions.

After the former manner of deprauing the words and meaning of the speaker, were
the adversaries of our Savior Christ false witnesses against him: read John
chap. 2.19. compared with Matthew. 26.60.61. and chap. 27.39.40. wherein that was
fulfilled which we read Psalm. 35.11.12. And thus also dealt the false
witnesses and accusers of Stephen, and of the holy Apostles of our Savior
Christ, Acts 6.11. and chapter. 7.58. and chap. 16.20.21. After the latter
manner was Ahimelech accused by Doeg, 1. Sam. 21.7. and chap. 22.9. etc. And
Nehemiah by Sanballat and Geshem, Nehem. chap. 6.5.6. etc. and our Savior
Christ also, John. 19.12. All these false witnesses in either respect following
therein the suggestion of the Devil the father of lies, John chap. 8. and the
accusers of the brethren, Reave. 12.10. Which wickedness the Lord expressly
forbids, Leu. 19.16. Thou shall not walk about with tales: where note the
signification of the word, (...) racil coming of the verb (...) racal which
is by making merchandise to seek gain: See Tremel. By this therefore which
has been said, we may sufficiently perceive that all kind of lying,
slandering, and backbiting is forbidden in this Commandment: whether against
our foe, or for our friend, or for our own advantage, read Leuit. 19.11.

We may not lie of the Devil, according as it is truly said: It is a shame to
lie of the Devil.

As we must not use cursed speech, Jude verse 9. so neither may we use lying
speech against him, and therefore much less against our neighbor, yea, our
good neighbor. We may not lie on Gods behalf, Job 13.4.7.8.9.10. Romans 3.7.8.
much less for man's cause.

To conclude this point, we must not lie against our selves, by flattering and
blessing our selves while we walk in wicked ways. For this is to trust in
lying words, as the Lord says by his Prophet Jeremiah, chapter 7.4. etc.

Trust not in lying words, etc. Not that those words were lying in themselves,
but because hypocrites under that pretense soothed themselves in an outward
profession of Gods religion, without amendment of their lives.

But have we now all the evils and sins which the Lord forbids in this
holy Commandment?

No, we have not: It is also against the will of God in this Commandment, that
any should conceal that truth which ought to be uttered: either for the
benefit of our good neighbor, or for the rebuke and chastisement of him that is
evil: as also that on the other side, any should unseasonably utter and
disclose that truth, which for the present ought to be kept secret.

Moreover, it is against this Commandment that any should praise that which
ought to be discommended, or commend that which ought to be dispraised.

Yea, to praise and encourage, or to dispraise and discomfort rashly, and
without good and discret moderation.

Finally, all vainglorious boasting and hunting after our own praise,
together with all dissembling and double dealing; yea, all want of plainness
and simplicity, which will not stand with good duty, is contrary to the
obedience of this Commandment.

These no doubt are transgressions of this Commandment: for they hinder the
truth, that it cannot be acknowledged and advanced as it ought to be: and
likewise they hinder the discerning of vice and wickedness of life, that it
cannot be so reproved and condemned, as it should be.

Now this we know, that he who justifies the wicked, and he that condemns
the righteous, they are even both of them abomination to the Lord, Pro. 17.15.
And again, chap. 28.4. They that forsake the Law praise the wicked; but they
that keep the Law, set themselves against them.

To praise above measure, is flattery: of the which it is said, that he which
flattereth his neighbor, spreads a net for his steps, Prou. 29.5.

Detracting is a sin on the other hand, against the which read Psalm 15.

Against vain boasting, read Prou. 27.1. and against dissembling and double
dealing, read again Psalm. 12.2. They speak deceiptfully, and Psalm. 41.6.

And thus we have seen what be the external sins and transgressions
forbidden in this Commandment.

But not only are these outward evils forbidden, but also all those inward
vices and hidden corruptions of the heart, which be as the root and cause of
these.

Show therefore now, which those inward evils and vices be?

Of this sort, are all uncharitable and groundless suspicions, all rash
judging and taking of such things in the vvorst part which may be well
construed, and chiefly all hatred and malignant envy against our neighbors
good name, credit, and vvelfare.

These are indeed the inward evils of the heart, from the which all false
witness, lying, and slandering do spring, according to that we read Matthew.
15.19. Out of the heart (says our Savior Christ) come evil thoughts, etc.
false testimonies and slanders. Read also the ground of the same evils noted
Prou. 21.10.

Against evil suspicions. Read 1. Tim. 6.4. a fruit of corrupt doctrine.

Against rash judging, read Matthew. 7.1.2.

Consider also the sin of Jobs friends. Read also Luke 13.1. and John. 9.2.

Against the taking of things in evil part, and whisperings, read Romans 1.29.

And of envy it is said: who can stand before it, Prou. chapter 27.4.

But yet one thing more, that we may conclude the negative part of this ninth
Commandment.

Is this Law of God fulfilled, if we for our own parts avoid the evils, both
inward and outward, which have been mentioned, though we should allow or wink
at the same sins in others?

No, in no case: but contrariwise, God requires that we hate them in other,
as well as in our selves: and that, as much as lies in us, we reprove,
repress, and sharply correct and punish them.

It is true: for seeing God abhors all false witness, lying, and
slaundering, etc. Prou. 6.19. and chap. 12.22. it cannot in any reason be
thought, but that he requires also that all his servants should likewise do
so. And so it is expressly testified, Prou. 13.5. A righteous man hates the
lying word (or false matter) whatsoever it be. On the contrary, he is affirmed
to be a wicked man, whosoever he be that gives heed to false lips, Prou.
17.4. and again, chap. 29.12. Wherefore worthily it is to be noted to be the
property of a godly man, to show an angry countenance against the slaundering
tongue, chap. 25.23. And Psalm 101.5. King David speaking in the holy zeal of
Gods Spirit, says: Him that privily slandereth his neighbor, will I destroy.

Read also Psalm 140.10. and Psalm. 31.18. a fearful imprecation against
this sin: Gal. 2.11. etc. See the zeal of the Apostle Paul against Peter
dissembling. And Luke 23.50.51. the praise of Joseph of Arimathea, for not
consenting with the rest to give sentence against our Savior Christ upon the
false accusation brought against him. And John 9.50.51. the like practice of
Nicodemus is recorded.

Thus have we according to that measure of grace which God has vouchsafed for
the present, the whole negative part of this Commandment, and from thence
also, a fit passage to the affirmative part, which now follows.

Show therefore henceforth, by the renewing as it were of our treatise, for
our further and more full instruction, what on the contrary, Duties commanded.
are the good duties which our righteous God, the God of truth commands us in
this his holy Commandment?

The Lord God straightly commands every man, in all causes, to speak and
witness the truth, and to testify against all falsehood, lies, and slanders,
to the due credit, commendation, and safety of every neighbor, wherein he
does well: or for his due reproof and correction wherein he hoth evil, and
for the ending of contentions and controversies betwixt man and man: whether
we be lawfully called forth, to do it upon our oath before a Magistrate, or
that we have any just occasion more privately so to do.

It cannot be otherwise concerned, but that the Lord forbidding false
witnesse-bearing against our neighbor to his discredit or hurt, does on the
contrary command the speaking and witnessing of the truth for his benefit or
credit.

And because it often falls out, that a man's good neighbor cannot be
benefited and relieved, but the wicked and false accusation or lie of another
must therewithal be detected: therefore it must needs be, that a true witness
must be given against every evil neighbor, to his just rebuke and punishment.

And generally, it is to be considered, that all discovery and reproof of lies
and slanders, to the discredit of the wicked: it is on the behalf of every
good neighbor, and of the truth it self.

Yea, it is for the benefit of our neighbor, who has sinned any sin which
is to be discovered, that we do therein witness against him, that by the just
rebuke and correction of his sin, he may be brought to true repentance.

Moreover, because even good neighbors, may be at variance for want of the
knowledge of the truth; therefore it is further added, that this is the use of
bearing a true witness, to end controversy and contention, according to that
we read Heb. 6.16.

But not only in judicial course of judgments before the Magistrate or Judge
of the court: but also in all private speeches and testimonies, God requires
that we always speak and affirm the truth, to the benefit of our neighbor,
in the way of righteousness and truth, etc. read Ephesians. 4.25. and Colos. 3.8.

Thus then (to speak in a word) the brief sum of this Commandment is truth
of speech commanded for the benefit of our neighbor: yea, even for the mutual
benefit of one neighbor by another, according as it is written: A faithful
witness delivers souls, but a deceiuer speaks lies, Prou. chapter 14.25.

But hereunto, as unto a very great and weighty duty, there are diverse
excellent virtues and graces necessarily required, as you have been taught.

Which are they?

The first is, an hearty love and zealous affection to the truth in general,
with a vvilling and ready cheerfulness of mind, to give witness unto it.

The second is, a particular knowledge and assurance of the truth of every
matter whereunto we do give witness.

The third is incorrupt affection, ^oid of all ill will and hatred, or of
partiality and flattery, touching the person whom our testimony concerns:
whether he be friend or foe, howsoever we shall esteem of him.

The fourth is, simplicity and plainness in the declaration of the truth.

The last is, constancy in standing to the confirmation of that truth which is
once uprightly and faithfully affirmed.

Concerning the first of these virtues, which I call an hearty love and zealous
affection to the truth in general: I do not only extend it in this place, to
the witnessing of that truth which pertains to the outward safety and credit
of every neighbor, but also to the witnessing of the whole truth, which is
according to godliness, Tit. cha. 1.1. And as it is said of the true servant
of God, that he speaks the truth in his heart, Psa. 15.2.

Concerning the second, read Pro. 15.28. The heart of the righteous studieth
to answer. And chap. 16.23. The heart of the wise guides his mouth wisely. And
chap. 14.5. A faithful witness will not lie. And verse 15. The foolish will
believe every thing, but the prudent will consider his steps. Herein consider
the wise discretion of the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 1.11. and chap. 11.18.

Concerning the third virtue, note that the truth is to be preferred before any
person, and before every reward, and before all displeasure, whatsoever may
arise from the testifying of it. And herein let us take special heed against
our own hatred and wrath against any man; for that blinds the eye, and all
such are by and by all to naught with us, etc. so the uprightness of truth
shall be neglected because of our crooked affection.

Concerning the fourth, read Isaiah chap. 32 4.5. Veritas non quaerit
angu^los. In testimony veritatis, non est ludendum vel occultationibus vel
ambiguitatibus. Truth seeks no corners. It dallieth not by ambiguous and
doubtful answer^.
Read also 2. Cor. 2.17. and chap. 4.2. Read also Ioh. 1.20. and 1. Sam.
3.17.18. and Josh. 7.19.

Concerning the last, read Tit. 1.9. for that which the Minister must do for
his part, in the great truth of God: the like is to be performed of all in
every truth. It is a foul sin in every such one, as shall be ready to
shrink back from any true testimony, when they perceive their landlord, or
some other great man to be offended therewithal.

All these virtues, and if there be any other like to these, they are carefully
to be regarded in bearing witness, as every man will answer before God: with
whom truth in every matter is very precious.

But that we may go forward.

Is there nothing else commanded in this Law of God, but the things which you
have already rehearsed?

Yes, God does moreover command us in this his holy Commandment, to perform
every other good duty, whereby both the good name, and also the good and
comfortable estate of our neighbor, may not only be continued so much as we
may procure, but likewise whereby the same may be recovered again, if by any
occasion they be lost and impaired.

All this must needs be required, according to the general law of love to our
neighbor, whose good name and comfortable estate, should be as dear unto us
as our own ought to be.

Show therefore in the first place, which those duties be, that are to be
performed for the continuance and preservation of our neighbors good name, and
of his good estate?

First, it is every man's duty to teach and instruct his neighbor in every
good way of God wherein he shall perceive him to be ignorant and to want
counsel: yea, it is every man's duty, to exhort and stir up his neighbor to
all care and conscience, to walk in obedience to every Commandment of God.

Secondly, it is every man's duty to yield every neighbor his due praise, for
all his godly wisdom and care, and for every good grace and virtue in the
well ordering of his life, and to encourage him to continue and increase
therein.

Thirdly, God requires, that in all actions or speeches (though something
doubtful and suspicious) we hope and speak the best of every good neighbor,
until the contrary shall break forth and be known; yet so, as in the mean
while, we admonish them to use better aduisement, and speedily to remove all
causes of suspicion.

Fourthly, that each neighbor be faithful and trusty, in keeping the secrets
of the other vvhatsoeur may lawfully, and of faithful love to our neighbor
ought to be concealed.

For the first of these points, read 1. These. 5.11. Heb. 3.13.

Read also, Mal. 3.16. and Isaiah 2.3. As touching that which we read Ier.
31.34. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying: Know the Lord, etc. this does not prohibit this duty, but only
in way of comparison, sets out the abundance of knowledge in the time of the
Gospel, above the time of the Law, etc.

That there is continual need of mutual instruction: see Heb. chaprer 5.12.
Read also Prou. 10.21. The lips of the righteous feed many. And chap. 15.7.
The lips of the wise do spread abroad knowledge, and chapter 16. verse 21.23.

For the second point, read Prou. chap. 12.8. A man shall be commended for his
wisdom. Read also chap. 31.18. etc. But in this point diverse cautions are
to be observed. Our praise must not be excessive, nor to flatter the party; but
to the glory of God, and to provoke other to holy imitation. We must so praise
that which is good in any, as we must dislike and discommend that which is
amiss, read 1. Cor. 11.2. and verse 17. etc. and Revel. chap. 2. and chap. 3.

For the third point, read 1. Cor. 13.5.6.7. Love thinks not evil, etc. It
suffers all things, it believes all things, it hops all things, it
endures all things.

Read also Matthew. 7.1. where rash judging is forbidden, as has been declared
before in the negative part of this Commandment.

For the last point, read Prou. 10.12. Love covers all trespasses. And chap.
11.13. He that goes about as a slaunderer (or detracter) discovers a secret:
but he that is of a faithful heart concealeth a matter. And chap. 17.9. He
that covers a transgression, seeks love: but he that repeateth a matter
seperateth his chief friend. Read also chap. 25.9. and Matthew. 18.15.16. and
1. Pet. 4.8.

These are the duties serving to the procuring and preserving of our neighbors
good name and welfare.

It follows that you show which be the duties commanded, for the recovery
thereof, when by any manifest fall into some grievous sin or other, both his
name and the comfort of his whole estate is lost, or at the least greatly
impaired.

Which are they?

Wise, loving, and zealous reproof and persuasions, drawn from the word of
God, by our selves apart: and if that will not serve, by the further help and
assistance of other good and loving neighbors, till happily he may be brought
to repentance, and to seek reconciliation, both with God and his people.

Read for this Leuit. 19.17. read also Matthew. 5.23. etc. and again chap. 18
16.17. James 5.19.20.

Of seeking reconciliation, we have an example in Jobs friends, chap. 42. of
that book, verse 8.

But in so much as by reason of the stubburnnesse of our nature, it is a very
hard thing for flesh and blood to stoop to any reproof, and to take profit by
it: and seeing in regard thereof (as you answered) great wisdom is requisite
to the well ordering thereof, to the end it may take due effect, according as
we read Prou. 11.30. He that wins souls is wise. I would have you
therefore call to remembrance, and show what is required to the due ordering of
reproof?

First, the quality and degree of the sin is to be considered.

Secondly, the quality and disposition of the offender is to be regarded.

Thirdly, choice is to be made of the most fit and convenient time.

Finally, love, pity, and compassion over the offender, with desire of his
repentance to salvation, must be joined with zeal of Gods glory, and hatred of
the sin.

The first consideration must be, whether the sin be smaller or greater,
either in it self and of the own nature, or by circumstance: whether it be
committed of infirmity, or otherwise: once, or more often, etc.

The second consideration must be, whether the offender be of a meek, or of a
more stirring and stubburne nature: old or young: whether a private or public
person, etc. for age and authority must be reverenced, etc. read 1. Tim. 5.1.2.

Again, whereas some must be more mildly dealt withal, others must be more
sharply rebuked: according both to the Commandment of God, and also according
to the practice of his wise and faithful servants. For the Commandment, read
Gal. 6.1. Tit. 1.13. and chap. 3.10. and 1. These. 5.14. and 2. These. 3.14.15.
and Jude, verses 22.23. and Isa. 58.1. For example, see how the Apostle Paul
moderateth his reproof toward the Corinthians, 1. Epist. chap. 1. and chap.
4.21. and chap. 5. and chap. 11. compared also with Nathans manner of dealing
with king David in his reproof, 2. Sam. 12. with Samuels dealing in the
reproof of Saul, 1. Sam. 15. Compare likewise Peter's reproving of Simon
Magus, Acts 8.20. etc. with his reproving of Cornelius, Acts 10. and Paul's
reproving of Elymas the forcerer, Acts 13.9. etc. and of Hymeneus and
Alexander, 1. Tim. 1.20. with his reproving of Peter, Gal. 2. Read also
chapter 3.1. and compare it with his precept, chap. 6.1. Read also Ieremies
practice, chap. 2.10.11. and the rest of the Prophets. Love and compassion over
sinners, must moderate and season all reproof.

Reproof must be as an electuary co^pounded of many simples, the mildness or
sweetness of the one delaying the sharpness or bitterness of the other, that
there may be a kindly operation: for otherwise there is danger, least it should
rather inflame and poison, then supple and heal.

The third consideration must be for the fitness of the season, under the
which also falls the regard of a fit place. For if the offender should be in
his unruly passions, and among his coapmates (as we may say) who would be ready
to animate him, etc. the reproof (I speak of private reproof) should then be
unseasonable. Read Matthew. 7.6.

Such a time therefore is rather to be waited, and as it were picked out, when
the bold sinner may be singled alone, and when he may be found in a more
seasonable te^per. And chiefly if God so provide, that he may be humbled by
some se^sible judgment against the same or the like sin. Or after the
hearing of some zealous and piercing Sermon, let not the occasion be negcted.
To this purpose mark the wisdom of the Prophet Daniel, in giving his reproof
and counsel to Nebuchadnezzar, after that he was somewhat skared by his strange
dream, chap. 4. Read also 2. Chron. 19.2. how the Prophet Hananie is directed
by the Spirit of God, to take the occasion to reprove Iehoshaphat upon his late
escaping of a great danger. Read also 1. Sam. 19.1.2.3.4.5.6. how Jonathan
chose his time to deal with the king his father, in the behalf of his friend
David. And chapter 25. verse. 36.37. how Abigail waits her season to deal with
her churlish husband N^bal. Thus therefore it stands us in hand every way to
be very circu^spect, in the well ordering of reprehensio^.

The discretion of a man (says King Solomon) differreth his anger, and it is
his glory to pass by an offense, Prou. 19.11.

Moreover, he that will reprove as he ought, must most diligently take heed,
that he be careful to reform himself first, Matthew. 7.3.4.5. and then that he
presume not above his gifts, or his place and calling, by meddling with matters
above his reach, or with persons of whom he may easily conceive that they will
scorn his admonition. Read Prou. 9.8.

Nevertheless, it must there withal be considered also, that the wisest of
Gods servants, cannot always observe the time so fitly, nor carry the reproof
in so convenient and due manner, but they must make reckening, that some of the
wicked (whom of love and duty they shall admonish and rebuke) will harden their
hearts against the same: yea, and render hard measure, against those that shall
most lovingly reprove them. As Herod dealt against John Baptist, casting him
into prison. Read Prou. 27.22. Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar,
etc. yet will not his foolishness depart from him.

It is true, that a wise reprouer is as a golden eare-ring, and an ornament of
fine gold: but he is so, only to a wise and obedient ear, Prou. 25.12. For
compassion over the offender, beside that Jude verse 22. read also Psalm. 119.
verse 136. Ier. 9.1. etc. 2. Cor. chap. 12.12. Phil. chap. 3.18. Josh. 7.19.

Thus much therefore for the witnessing of the truth, and tendering our
neighbors good name and welfare, may suffice for this time. Remembering
always, that in so much as God commands truth to be witnessed for the
benefit of our neighbor, specially, of our good and godly neighbor; that
therefore in such cases, wherein by the declaration of some truth, our
neighbor should be unjustly prejudiced and hurt, we are at no hand to disclose
it. As for example, we must not betray our good neighbor and Christian brother
into the hands of cruel persecutors, much less the whole congregation, if we
should be examined of the time and place of their secret meetings for the
worshipping of God, and for their own mutual edification and salvation.

And thus now we have seen at the last (according to the measure of grace
which God in mercy has vouchsafed upon us) what our whole duty is toward our
neighbor, according to this ninth Commandment.

But is there nothing commanded, or at the least necessarily implied in it
concerning our selves, and the tendering of our own good name and safety?

Yes: for by the duties which the Lord God commands us toward other, he
gives us to understand what regard we ought to have of our selves and our
own good name.

What regard is that which you speak of?

As we must truly repent of all our sins past in the sight of God, and make
outward profession of our repentance before men, touching those sins
especially, whereby we have given offense to any, either publikly or privately:
so, for all time to come, it is our parts so to order our lives in unfeigned
obedience to all the holy Laws and Commandments of God, that we may not only
have praise with God, and the testimony of every good neighbor, for our credit
and welfare in the midst of them. Yet so, as we must always for our own
parts, both think humbly, and speak modestly of our selves, and our own
actions or virtues, according to that admonition of the holy Prou. cha. 27.2.
Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth, a stranger and not thine
own lips. And Gal. 5.26. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, etc.

It is true: for first the only way to win or recover a good name, is by
amendme^t of our lives, wherein we have transgressed, and so procured our own
reproach: and if we shall harken to the admonition and rebuke of others, as well
we as would have any in the like case harken unto us etc.

And secondly, that every man stands bound to have care to seek a good name
in the Church of God, by walking humbly in the ways and Commandments of God,
we may consider it by diverse reasons. For the ways of God are the only
commendable ways. Fear God, and keep his Commandments (says the preacher,
Eccl. cha. 12. ver. 13.) for this is all of a man. All whatsoever beside is
vanity. And what else in any sound reason can any man be worthily commended
for, if he want the fear of God, etc. May a man be commended for profaneness,
or for idolatry, or for wrath, or for drunken^esse, or for fornication, etc.
God forbid. The Lord himself makes the faith of his servants the ground of
their good name, Heb. 11.39. and their obedience the confirmation thereof.
Read Phil. 4.8. In this respect, let it be considered, that the whole Law of
God bears the name of truth; to the obedience whereof also is opposed the
general vice of lying, as Psa. 119. verse 29. Take away from me the way of
lying (says the holy Prophet) and of thy good grace grant me thy Law. And
verse 89. All the Commandments of God are truth. And Psalm. 19.9. The
judgments of the Lord are truth: whereupon also says the Apostle John, 1.
Epist. 1.9. If we say we have fellowship with God and walk in darkness, we
lie, and do not truly. And chap. 2.4. He that faith I know him, and keeps not
his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. Thus, Romans 1.25.
Idolaters are said to turn the truth of God into a lie, and James chapter 3.14.

They that have bitter envying and strife in their hearts, they are liars
against the truth. On the contrary, he that does truth, comes to the light
that his works might be made manifest, that they are wrought according to God,
John 3.21. Such are said to walk in the truth, John 2. Epist. verse 4. and
Epistle 3. verses 3.4. even that truth which is according to godliness, Titus.
1.1. even that truth which is in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4.12. and for the which
we must do all that we can; and nothing against it, 2. Cor. 13.8. for the which
we must not only be witnesses, but even Martyrs in a special manner, if need
so require.

And a particular branch of this obedience from whence a good name is argued,
is the speaking and witnessing of the truth, according to this ninth
Commandment. And when a man is a man of his word, as they say; and when (as
our Savior Christ speaks) his yea is yea, and his nay nay; and when we be
careful to avoid ^alkatiuenesse, after the manner of idle gossipping, etc.
Read Prou. 10.19. and 1. Tim. 5.13. Read also Prou. 17.27.28.

Thus must we walk, that we may have praise both before God and man: read
Romans 2.28.29. But that we may conclude this point of our treatise: What is to
be said concerning our secret sins: do we s^nd bound to make them known, as
being a means whereby God would have us seek a good name?

As God requires it for a duty of love to our neighbor, that we discover not
his secret sins, either before the Magistrate or otherwise; that is to say,
those his sins, by the concealing whereof no peril or hurt grows to the
commonwealth, or to any particular and private neighbor: so he permits it
as a fruit of love belonging to a man's self, that he should not to his own
diffamation, disclose his like secret offenses: unless happily he should find
it necessary, for the relief of his conscience, to make the^ known to some
choice and faithful neighbor, according to the instruction of the Apostle,
Iam. cha. 5.16. saying: Acknowledge your faults one to another, and pray one
for another, that ye may be healed: for the prayer of a righteous man avails
much, if it be fervent.

This stands with good reason. For as no man will make known his bodily
disease, The Equity.
to that Physician which would have no care to do him good: so what should
induce a man to acknowledge his faults to any that would not tender the
spiritual health of their souls, etc? Hereupon also it may appear, that the
law of Popish auricular confession of all sins, both secret and open, to the
full number, in the ear of the Priest, to receive his iniunction of penance
in way of satisfaction to God, is an absurd and tyrannous cruelty against men's
souls and consciences.

Likewise their oath ex officio, driving men to accuse themselves, according to
the pleasure of any man's captious inquisition and demand: it is against that
gracious liberty which God has granted to his servants in this behalf.

And for any to discover his own secret corruptions without just cause, and
not to singular good end and purpose, would it not be judged of all, to be
done either of hypocrisy, or of a profane and unadvised folly?

Nevertheless, if any keeping close his sins, do harden his heart therein, he
may justly fear, least God in his displeasure, do make him in the terror of a
hellish conscience, to cry out against himself, and to be a trumpet of his
own shame, as oftentimes it falls out against such close and hard hearted
sinners.

But enough of this point for the present: We come now to the general equity
of this Commandment.

What is that?

The equity of this Commandment may be considered diverse ways, like as we
have seen in the former.

Show here again how that may be?

First, in respect of God.

Secondly, in respect of our selves.

Thirdly, in respect of our more private and usual course of dealing with our
neighbors and brethren.

Fourthly, in respect of public society and government.

Finally, in respect of our profession of the name and religion of God.

Let us examine these things particularly.

And first how can ye declare the equity of this Commandment in respect of God?

Because he is the God of truth, most entire, faithful and co^sta^t in all
truth: it is most quall, that he should forbid his people all untruth, as that
which is most directly contrary, both to his nature and will, and also to all
his counsels, words, and works.

Your answer is most true, whether we consider of God in the unity of his
nature, he is the God of truth, Jeremy 10.10. Or whether we consider of him as
he has revealed himself in the Trinity of persons. The father is the father
of truth, John 5.30.31. and chapter 8.26.27. The son of God is true, yea,
truth it self, Proverbs 8.6.7.8. John chapter 1.9. The holy Ghost is the
Spirit of truth, John. 14.15.16.17. and chapter 16.13. and 1. John chapter 5.
verse 6. And in the same place, verses 7.8.9.10. The joint witness of the
whole Trinity is true from heaven.

Hence also it is, that the word of God is called in a singular and
incomparable excellency, the word of truth, 2. Cor. 6. verse 7. and Tit. 1.9.
the faithful word, and James 1.18.

The counsels and purposes of God are all faithful and true, Hosh. chapter 13
verse 14. Romans 11.29. 1. Cor. 1.9. 1. These. 5.24. James 1.17. Psalm. 105* verse
8. and Psalm. 14.6. All the works of God also are perfect and true: they are not
counterfeites of things, but true substances of things, in their several
kinds, Deuteronomy. 32.4. and Psalm. 112.7.8. and Psalm 119.90.91.7.

God therefore being every way most true, must needs in all equity command both
true speaking and true dealing, in regard of his own nature.

Proceed now to declare likewise the equity of this Commandment, in respect of
our selves.

How may we perceive this to be so?

Insomuch as God has showed so great love on us, that we should be called his
children; it is very equal and meet, that we should resemble the image of our
heavenly father, in all righteousness and holiness of truth.

So indeed do the Apostles of the Lord reason, 1. John 3.1. etc. and Paul
Ephesians. 4.24. Yea such are their very words. Read also Col. 3.9.10.

Now verily such must we be, unless we will show our selves to be the children
of the devil, and not the children of God, Ioh. 8.44.

But let us come to the third point.

How can you show the equity of this Commandment, in respect of our more
private and usual course of dealing with our neighbors and brethren?

Cast off lying (says the Apostle) and speak every man the truth unto his
neighbor: fer we are members one of another, Ephesians. 4. verse. 25.

A notable and lively similitude taken from the natural body, to the which
God has given diverse members, and sundry faculties and powers unto them, and
all for the conservation of the whole body.

Now therefore, were it not an unequal and a very absurd course, that any one
member should deal unfaithfully with another? as if the eye should take chalk
for cheese, as we say: or the hand to put a stone to the mouth in stead of
bread, or rank poison in stead of wholesome nourishment?

No less absurd were lying in the new work of Gods grace, then that should be
in the frame of nature: whether one Christian should ly to another, or that
they should tell lies the one of the other.

Now fourthly, how can you declare the equity of this Commandment, in
respect of public society and government?

The ordinary course of justice and judgment cannot proceed for the defense
of the innocent, and punishment of the offender, neither yet for the ending of
controversies betwixt good neighbors, but by the testimony of witnesses; and
that also, even upon their oaths, for the more certainty of finding out the
truth.

It is true: for as the Lord says, Deuteronomy. 19.15. At the mouth of two witnesses,
or at the mouth of three witnesses shall the matter be established. Read also
Matthew. 18.16. and 2. Cor. 13. which places also were mentioned a little before.
And again, Hebr. 6.16. An oath for confirmation is with men an end of all
strife.

It stands therefore with all equity, that every man should be willing
according to his knowledge, in a due course of inquiry, to give witness to
the truth: yea it is every man's part, carefully to observe and mark those
things which it is fit for them to know, The Curses.
that they may (as occasion shall require) be meet witnesses of the truth.

It is not a sufficient excuse for a man to say, I know not what to say to it,
whereas he might have known if he had listed. Even as we would gladly have the
just testimony of others, for the clearing of our selves, etc. so ought we to
be willing to yield ours for the benefit of other. And likewise, as we would
be loath that so precious a jewel as a good name is, and that so sweet a
fruit, as is loving favor which grows from thence, should be stolen as it
were out of our gardens by any false witness, lies, and slanders: so ought we
of the same equity, to take heed that we defraude not or spoil any of their
good name and estimation, by the same unjust and wicked practices.

Moreover, the equity of this point appears, in so much as false witness,
lying and slaundering, is the common harbourer and vpholder of all sins, and
also an enemy to all virtue and godliness, both in deprauing thereof, and
also in denying all just defense and succor thereunto. We are come to the last
point.

How can you show the equity of this Commandment in respect of our
profession of the name and religion of God?

Because they that slander and defame any their good neighbors and brethren,
and they also themselves, who walk not answerable to their profession, do give
occasion to the enemies of Gods true religion, to blaspheme and speak evil of
the most holy and reverend name of God.

So it is said indeed of king David, that by his grievous sin of adultery
and murder, he caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, 2. Sam. 12.14. And
more generally it is said of the wicked Jews, that through their breaking of
Gods Law, they dishonored God, and that through them the name of God was
blasphemed among the Gentiles: Romans 2.23.24. Now surely, this is the most
unequal thing that can be, that God who honors his people with putting his
name upon them, and in calling them to the profession of his heavenly kingdom
and glory: it is the most unequal thing that may be (I say) that God should
be dishonored by them. Ought ye not (says that honorable Nehemiah, chap.
5.9.) to walk in the fear of God for the reproach of the heathen our enemies?
So the equity of this Commandment and of the third, is in this respect the
same. And the rather also is it unequal, that one Christian should slander an
other; because the enemies of Gods truth are over ready, to seek the
diffamation and slander of us all, though we be careful to maintain the
credit one of another, so much as in truth and equity we may.

The equity of this Commandment being thus manifold and great, no marvel
though God in his justice has threatened and assigned so many and great
curses or plagues and punishments to the transgressions of it.

These curses therefore let us now come unto: for this is the place, wherein we
are according to our order to consider of them.

And first, what is the curse and punishment of those that bear false witness
upon their oath before a Magistrate?

The punishment of such in the civil course of Gods justice, was appointed to
be the same, which they by their false witness would have brought upon
their neighbor, as we read in the 19. chap. of Deuteronomy. from the 16. verse to
the end of the chap. And Deuteronomy. 27. verse. 17. and 19. such as are instruments of
wrong this way, they are by the consent of the people of God, even according to
his commandment, pronounced accursed before the Lord.

So indeed we read expressly in those places of holy Scripture: and there is no
doubt, that God who commands civil Judges to use this severity against the
bodies and outward estate of false witnesses, will be behind in the execution
of his divine justice, both upon their bodies and also upon their souls,
whosoever shall not have grace to repent them earnestly of so great and
grievous a sin.

And notwithstanding the course of civil justice among us, is more slack then
that of the Lords in Israel and by so much more failing and imperfect then that
was: yet it is no small punishment or curse and reproach, that the perjured
person is disabled from the credit of giving testimony in any matter of
judgment so long as he lives.

And further also, concerning the more heavy curse against the false witness,
read Prou. 19.5. and in the same chapter, verse. 28.29. And again, chap. 21.
verse 28. where the often repetition argues the special displeasure of God
against this sin, as against that which is greatly abhorred of him: according
to that we read, Prou. 6.19. and Psalm. 59. from (...) 11. verse: where, read
a fearful imprecation against the perjured person.

And thus we may by very plentiful and authentic witness perceive, that the
false witness shall be surely and severely punished.

Now, what is the curse against the wicked judge or Magistrate, who shall
without diligent sifting of the false witness, admit and allow his false
testimony, and accordingly give a wrong sentence?

He that says to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people curse,
and the multitude shall abhor him, Prou. 24. verse 24. yea, the Lord himself
does abhor him, Prou. 17.15.

How then should he not stand fearfully accursed? Read also Prou. 29.12. Such
a prince must needs make wicked proceedings, and so haste the curse of God
against himself.

What is the curse against the common and unconscionable liar?

We have partly seen it in the curse of the false witness; from the
testimonies of diverse holy Pro. the^ rehearsed. And we may see it further,
Prou. chap. 12.19. The lying tongue shall soon vanish, the deceit of such shall
turn to their own hurt: according to that which follows there in the next
verse. And in the same chapter, the 22. verse: Lying lips are an abomination
to the Lord. Wherefore also it is written, Psalm. 5. the 6. verse: The Lord
will destroy them that speak lies. And Revel. 21.8. All liars shall have their
part in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death.

Read also Revel. chap. 22. verse 15. and Psalm. 31.18. a vehement imprecation
against liars: and namely against that doggish Doeg, Psalm. 52.3.4.5.

Among men also, this is a just recompense against the liar from the hand of
God; that he shall not be believed though he speak the truth.

And finally note, that as the sin of lying is increased by common swearing,
so also shall the curse be the more heavy against such. Read here again
Zachary 5.4.

But let us have forward.

What is the curse against the privy and malicious backebiter and slaunderer,
etc.?

Psalm. 140. in the 9. verse thus we read: Backebyters shall not be
established upon the earth, evil shall hunt the cruel man to destruction.

Yea, and by that which we read in the 15. Psalm, we may perceive that this
sin is as a bar against all such, that they cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

And beside, by that we read, Psalm. 101. verse 5. we may see they are such a
kind of people, as are not to be suffered in a godly family or Christian common
wealth.

And further, concerning the civil punishment of the slanderer in the common
wealth of Israel, to wit, in the case of the slander of a virgin touching her
virginity, read Deuter. chap. 22. verse 13. etc. to the 19. verse.

Thus then the curse is great against false witnesses, liars and slaunderers.

Is there any curse also against them that conceal that truth which of duty
they ought to disclose and utter?

It is said of such, that they shall bear their iniquity, Leuit. chap. 5. the
1. verse.

Now surely, if iniquity be upon them, the punishment will follow, if it be
not prevented by repentance, and by humble supplication to God for the pardon
and forgiveness thereof.

But let us proceed.

What is the curse against him that does discover the secrets of his neighbor,
which he ought of love and faithfulness to have concealed?

He that deals thus, shall worthily loose his chief friend: according to
that we read, Prou. 17. verse 9. He that covers a transgression seeks
love, but he that repeateth a matter separateth the Prince. And chapter.
25.9.10. Debate the matter with thy neighbor, and discover not the secret to
another, least he that hears put thee to shame, and thine infamy cease not.

Thus reproach is punished by reproach.

The curse of him that flattereth and dissembleth with his neighbor is yet
behind: What proof have you that such are accursed?

The curse (says king Solomon) shall be imputed to him that blesses his
friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning to do it, Prou. 27.14.

And Job, chap. 17. verse. 5. The eyes of his children shall fail that speaks
flattery to his friends.

Or thus, The eyes of those that give themselves to flatter and sooth up their
friends, they shall fail.

Such is the curse of the flatterer, even of such who (as was said before) rise
up early to do it: as it is written of Absolon that he did, 2. Sam. 15.2. Read
also Prou. 12.2.3.

Now what is the curse of him that rashly mis-iudgeth his neighbor, and
mis-construeth his words and deeds, interpreting them in the worst part?

Judge not (says our Savior Christ) that ye be not judged: for with what
judgment ye judge ye shall be judged, and with what measure ye meat, it shall
be measured to you, Mat. 7.1.2.

Our Savior Christ speaks of this no doubt, as of a just punishment of God
upon all rash iudgers. Wherefore seeing he thus orders the hearts of men,
shall we not much rather suppose, that he himself will use severity of
judgment against such rigorous censurers? What is the curse against those that
refuse to hearken to instruction, that so by leading a faithful and godly life
they might get them selves a good name?

The just and due curse hereof, is shame and reproach both before God and man.

Such indeed is the fruit of a licencious life, Prou. 5. verses 12.13.14. and
chap. 10.7. The name of the wicked shall rot. And chap. 13.18. Poverty and
shame is to him that refuses instruction. Read a fearful imprecation in that
respect, Psalm. 109.13.14.15. read also Eccles. chap. 11.9.

Show likewise, what the curse is against such, as forsaking the ways of God,
refuse to hearken to instruction and rebuke, for the recovery of a good name?

Instruction is evil to him that forsakes the way: and he that hates
correction shall dye. The Blessings.
Prou. chap. 15.10. and verse. 32. He that refuses instruction despises his
own soul, and chap. 29.1. A man that hardens his neck when he is rebuked,
shall suddenly be destroyed, and cannot be cured.

Read also Matthew. 12.43.44.45. and 2. Pet. 2.20.21.22. Hebr. 6.4.5.6.7.8. and
chap. 10.26.27. But we have witnesses enough. And thus we may also yet further
perceive, how the Lord accursing all untruth against a man's neighbor in matters
of this life, must needs much rather hold those accursed which lie unto
himself, or bear false witness, more directly to the falsifying of the rruth
of his divine will and doctrine, to the special dishonor of his name, and to
the peril of men's souls. Of the curse of such as lie unto God, consider from
the example of Ananias and Sapphira, Act. 5.3.4.5. etc. And of such as speak
lies, and teach false doctrine through hypocrisy: read 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3. Read
also Deuteronomy. 13. and Ierem. 23. and chap. 28.15. Ezekiel. chap. 13. Revel. chap.
19.20. and chap. 20.10. and chap. 22.18.19. Read also Numb. 14.37. Those men
that did bring up that vile slander upon the land, shall die by a plague before
the Lord. But this consideration does more properly belong to the curses
against the transgression of the first Table, where also it has been
considered of.

Let us therefore leave this point, and come to the blessing which God has
promised to the obedience of this Comm.

And first of all, what is the blessing of the true and faithful witness
before a Magistrate, as also of him that has a general care to speak the
truth from the heart?

The Lord assures all such, that they are the true members of his Church here,
and that they shall for ever rest with him in his heavenly kingdom, and never
be cast out or removed, as we read in the 15. Psalm.

This surely is an excellent Scripture, most comfortable to the purpose, as we
have lately heard from the sermons made upon it. Read also Prou. 12.19. and
verse 22. and chap. 21. verse. 28. Show in the next place, what the blessing of
such Judges and Magistrates is, whosoever be truly careful to examine
witnesses diligently, that according to a true testimony they may judge truly?

Mercy and truth preserve the King: as we read Prou. 20.28. and chap. 24.
verse. 25.26. To them that rebuke the wicked shall be pleasure, and upon them
shall come the blessing of every good man.

They shall kiss the lips of him that answers upright words.

Here are three notable blessings bound up as it were a threefold cord twined
together: The safety of the estate of the king in his princely royalty: Much
inward joy and comfort of conscience, great pleasure as it is called: And the
loving and reverend subjection of the people, noted by their prayers to God for
them, and by the kissing of their lips, which are special fruits and tokens
of special love. Read also Prou. 29.14.

The blessing thus promised to the King as to the head and chiefetaine of the
common wealth, descends no doubt upon every inferior Magistrate, as upon
other principal members of the public body.

Now therefore, that we may go forward: what is the blessing of him that is so
far from false witness bearing, lying and slaundering, flattery, and evil
suspicions without just cause; that contrariwise he is of a charitable
judgment, loving and tendering the good name and estimation of every good
neighbor, desiring that it may continue and prosper without all prejudice,
either in his own heart, or in the opinion of any other.

What I say is the blessing of every such man?

Blessed (says the holy Psalmist) is he that judges wisely of the poor,
saying: The Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble. And so forth, as it
follows from the beginning of the 41. Psalm.

This charitable judgment which the holy Prophet speaks of, is the ground
and foundation of much truth in speech, and as a strong fortress against all
lying and slaundering.

And therefore also does our Savior Christ assure all such of like recompense,
at the hands of all other good and well advised and charitable minded men:
Judge not (says he) and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not
be condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. Luke chap. 6.37.

We will have forward.

What is the blessing of them that will hearken to the instruction and counsel
of such as teach and instruct them in the ways of God, that so they may have a
good name; which surely ought of all the children of God to be greatly desired
and labored after: What is the blessing of such?

Let not mercy and truth forsake thee, (says king Solomon) bind them upon thy
neck, and write them upon the table of thine heart. So shall thou find favor
and good understanding (or as some translate, prosperous success) in the sight
of God and man, Proverbs chapter 3. verse 3. and 4. and chapter, 10.17. He
that regards instruction is in the way of life. And in the same chap. verse.
7. The memorial of the just shall be blessed.

That is to say, the remembrance of such as walk in the righteous ways of
God, shall be gracious and acceptable in the Church of God, both while they
live, and also after their death. It shall be a continual occasion of praising
God, and a spur to stir up other to imitation.

Wherefore, earnest is that often repeated exhortation, wherein the holy Ghost
moves to the obedience of holy doctrine, Prou. 1.8.9. And again chap. 4 13.
likewise chap. 6.20. and verse 23. And yet again, chap. 7.2. and chap. 8.10.
and verse 33. and also chap. 13. verse 14. and verse 18. He that regards
correction shall be honored. And is there not a blessing also for those that
have care to teach and instruct others to walk in the gracious and commendable
ways of the Lord: that so they may have favor both with God and man?

Yes very great, according to the excellency of this duty in the sight of
God, and according to the greatness of the blessing which hereby they procure
unto their brethren: as we may read, Dan. 12. verse 3. and in the end of the
Epistle of the Apostle James. Whereof also we have Abigail for a lively
example. 1. Sam. chap. 25. verse. 32.33.

Let us for example sake, and to the end that by a particular instance the
matter may be the more clear: let us (I say) hear the blessing which David in
this respect put upon Abigail.

Blessed (says the Prophet David) be the Lord God of Israel, who has sent
thee this day to meet me. And blessed be thy counsel, and blessed be thou,
who have kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and that mine hand has
not saved me.

This is a notable instance, and may well serve for our issue and conclusion of
this point.

And thus, we having through the gracious blessing of God, the whole
interpretation of this Commandment, touching the evils forbidden and the
virtues commanded: touching the curses against the one, and the blessings upon
the other, let us now come to the use.

Have you pefectly obeyed this 9. Commandment, that so you may think your
self worthy to be freed from the curses, and to be partaker of the blessings
of it?

No: I have no more perfectly obeyed this Commandment then any of the former,
but I have every way sinned against it, partly through ignorance and
forgetfulness of the truth in many matters, which I ought to have known and
remembered: and partly for want of love both unto the truth, and also to my
neighbor: but much more by reason of that hatred and envy which abounds in
my corrupt nature. For hence is it, that I have been so far from speaking the
truth always, and giving a faithful witness in all things concerning my
neighbor; that upon every occasion of unkindness and displeasure, I have been
ready to deny him his due praise, yea to speak all evil of him, and to
invent all manner of lies and slanders against him. Moreover, as I am ready to
accuse and blame those whom I account my foes, falsely and above that there is
just cause, so am I apt to flatter such as I take to be my friends: and again
to make untrue excuses and partial defenses for my self, to all those of whom
I stand in any fear.

Finally, I am by my natural disposition so far from amending my faults when I
am reproved, that of wilful stubburnnesse I will rather do the worse, because I
am reproved for them. Wherefore I must needs acknowledge, that I am so far
from worthiness to enjoy the blessing of this Commandment, that I have
justly deserved all the curses of it, unless it shall please God of his free
grace and bounteous mercy for Christ Jesus sake, to forgive these my grievous
sins, and to give me grace unfeignedly to repent of the^.

It is true which you answer concerning every one of us; yea concerning all
the sons and daughters of men, through the whole race of mankind. For thus
the holy Prophet of God affirms, Psalm. 58.3. and Psalm. 62.9. Read also
Psalm. 116.11. and Romans 3.4. Experience also shows, Eueryone of us is a
damnable transgressor
that all men naturally are liars, and that naturally we are more delighted
with lies then with the truth.

The beginning of this vice appearing in childhood, increases with age,
unless God by his grace does correct the same; as they have plentiful
experience, to whom the examination of malefactors appertains.

And as we are altogether corrupt and sinful in lying all manner of lies, both
earnest lies, merry lies, and officious lies; in cunning excuses in false
accusations, and in the root of all these, self love, hatred and evil
suspicions: so are we as apt to flatter, and sooth up such as we fear, or such
from whom we look for benefit or preferment, etc.

And touching our obstinacy against rebuke, is not every one ready to bewray
the deep corruption which lies lurking in his heart? I speak of all such as
have not yet received the spirit of sanctification. For do not such use to say
when they are persuaded withal, by this reason of a good name: What care I
what any man thinks or speaks of me, let them say what they will, I care
not a pin, etc? Thus rude and brutish is our naughty nature. Who therefore
may truly deny, that we are not through the corruption of nature, and because
of the evil fruits thereof against this Commandment justly accursed and
damnable in the sight of God?

So then unless (as was answered) we shall find redemption and justification
by our Savior Christ, how many of us all think to escape the eternal wrath
and condemnation of God?

It is therefore to great good purpose, that we consider of some proofs, that
may assure us that our Savior Christ who has dyed for these our sins, as
well as for any other, has also perfectly obeyed this Commandment, as well as
he has done the other, that so we may know him to be a perfect Savior. What
proof have you for this?

We have evident proof of it, in that it is every where in the holy
Scriptures testified, that our Savior Christ is not only true, but also the
very truth it self, to all that shall truly believe in him, and unfeignedly
repent of all their errors, and thenceforth endeavor to mind and speak the
truth from their hearts: Our Savior Christ's pe^fect obedience for us.
For we know (says the Apostle John, speaking of himself and all true
Christians) that the Son of God is come, and has given us a mind to know him
which is true: and we are in him that is true, that is, in his Son Jesus
Christ, he is very God and eternal life, 1. John 5.20.

This only one place is a sufficient proof: but as was truly answered, we
have many other testimonies, both former in that part of the holy Scriptures
which is called the old Testament, and later in that part which is called the
new. Of the former, we read Prou. chap. 8. verse. 6.7.8. and Isa. chap. 11.1.
Concerning the later, we read Reu. 3.7. and verse. 14 Moreover, John 1.6.14.
and chap. 5.19.24. and in many other places: where the manner of our Savior
Christ his delivery of his doctrine with this doubled asseueration, verily,
verily, is worthy to be noted to this our purpose. Neither is John Baptist
only a witness, that our Savior Christ is the truth, verses 32.33. of the
same chap. but also God the father himself, and the divine works which our
Savior Christ wrought in his Fathers name: as it follows in the same chap.
verse. 36.37. and verse. 39. The holy Scriptures give the same witness of him.
And more particularly the writings of Moses, verse 46. Read also concerning
the testimony which our Savior gives of himself, Ioh. chap. 14.6. and chap.
8.14.15.16.17.18. and verse. 45.46.

Thus then, seeing our Savior Christ (to speak in the most general
signification of all truth) is most true, yea in himself even the most
excellent and perfect truth it self, yea and unto us the way, the truth, and
the life: and seeing the Father, from whence our Savior Christ is come, who is
the God of truth, and the holy Ghost also, who is the Spirit of truth, give
witness of Christ, that he is very truth: what lets why we should not assure
our selves, that he is true in the particular obedience of this Commandment:
yea what lets that we should not believe, that he has perfectly obeyed this
Commandment, as well as he is perfectly just in the obedience of the 8.
Commandment; and chaste in the obedience of the 7. and meek in the obedience
of the 6. and dutiful to parents and to all superiors in the obedience of the
5. And the rather because our Savior Christ professes that this was the
cause, why he came into the world, that he might give witness to the truth for
the benefit of so many as should receive his testimony thereof, Ioh. 18.37.

In this Christ therefore must we believe, to the end that (we being liars in
our selves) may be true in him, and clothed with his righteousness touching
this Commandment, as well as with his obedience to all the rest. For if we do
not believe in this Christ (of whom it is testified that he is every way
perfectly true) we cannot be saved, as Christ himself affirms, Ioh. chap.
8.24. Except ye believe (says our Savior Christ) that I am he, ye shall dye
in your sins.

And finally, this also we must know, that if we be in Christ, we must of
necessity, or rather we shall by his grace, truly repent of all the lies and
slanders that we have made; and of all other our transgressions against this
Commandment. Yea putting away all lying, etc. we must have unfeigned care both
to speak and to do the truth, in some measure of true and perfect love both to
God and man; laboring also to increase more and more therein. Read Philip.
chap. 4.8. Let this suffice therefore for the use of the whole doctrine of this
ninth Commandment.

And so come we now to the last, which is a most worthy conclusion of all the
rest.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his manseruant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, neither any
thing that is thy neighbors.

For the understanding of this last Commandment, besides that we must keep in
mind that which was said concerning the former Commandment, who is to be taken
for our neighbor; we have furthermore to inquire of these two things: First
what the Lord means by this word covet, that is, what be the evil
corruptions and sins of our nature comprehended under it. And secondly, which
be the things of our neighbor which he forbids us to covet.

Show therefore in the first place, what the word covet means?

To covet, is to have any the least lust, desire, or motion in the mind, after
any thing that is our neighbors.

The Lord has forbidden coveting or longing, with all unlawful desire after
any thing that is our neighbors, in the Commandments going before. How it is
distinguished from the former Commandments.
For in the 8. Commaundment he has forbidden us to covet our neighbors house,
or any part of his worldly riches: In the 7. Commandment he has forbidden us
to covet or lust after our neighbors wife, etc. as our Savior Christ
expounds that Commandment in the 5. chap. of Matthew. Yea this corrupt
coveting or Iusting, this longing after, desiring or wishing (for all these are
one) it is as it were a short and summarie abridgement of all sin. The
coveting or desiring after divine honor and glory, that is, after any honor
and glory above that is meet for a creature; as Eve was tempted by the Devil
to desire to be like God, it is the transgression of the first Table.

All coveting or lusting which tends to the hurt of our neighbor, is a
general transgression of the second Table.

Coveting therefore or lusting, is as an universal leprosy or contagious
poison ouerspreading, or rather undermining all good duty. It may seem
therefore that this Commandment is nothing else but a repetition or
interpretation of that which has been already forbidden.

How may this stand with the wisdom of the most wise God, that he minding to
set down his Law most briefly should forbid one and the same thing more then
once?

This question contains in it self a full and sufficient answer under it:
for in so much as God is most wise and discreet, yea even the very author of
all that distinction whereby any thing differs from other: we may in no wise
think that he should in so short a Law as he gave to his people, make any
unnecessary repetition of one and the same thing.

It is very true: God that has made and disposed all things most exactly, as
it were by line, weight and measure, Isa. 40.12.13.14. God who numbreth the
stars, and calls them all by their names, Psalm. 147.4. God that gives man
all the understanding and discretion which he has to discern betwixt things
that differ: he that takes the wise in all their crafts and quirkes, etc.
shall not he know how to speak distinctly? It follows therefore, that we do
necessarily make a distinction betwixt this coveting which is forbidden in this
Commandment, and that which is forbidden in the Commandments going before.
What distinction may this be?

In the former Commandments all coveting is forbidden, to the which consent
is given. Here coveting is forbidden in the least motion, though no consent be
yielded at all.

Yea the least flitting and vagrant motion which has never so little delight
mixed with it. And not only so, but also the idle, vain, and loose thought, of
the unjust enjoying of any thing that is our neighbors, which our Savior
Christ seems to call discoursing in the air, Luke 12.29. yea even the very
original inclination of our corrupt nature to any unrighteous lust and desire
is forbidden, albeit there arise no motion or any the least delight
therewithal. And therefore much rather does the Lord forbid all continued
consultation and deliberation of the heart, tending to any unlawful and
inordinate lust.

So then in this Commandment we have diligently to consider four degrees of
sin to be forbidden, which go before that consent, which is given to wicked
coveting or lusting.

I would have you make rehearsal what they be?

They are these which follovv.

First, the natural inclination of the heart, which, since the fall of Adam
has been and is in us and in all his posterity, corrupt from the womb.

Secondly, the thought and imagination, which arises from that secret and
inmost corruption.

Thirdly, the motion which springs from the thought.

Fourthly, consultation and deliberation, which arises from the motion and
delight, is the next forerunner to full consent.

Or thus to the same effect: In this Commuandement the Lord forbids first
the contraries to original inclination to that perfect righteousness and
love, which we do owe to our neighbor: that is to say, original inclination
to injustice, and to the hatred of our neighbor. Yea and also original
inclination to the inordinate and excessive love of our selves. Even all the
corruption which is come upon our nature by the fall of Adam.

Secondly, the Lord forbids the immediate fruits of the same inclination to
injustice and unrighteousness, and to the vile hatred of our neighbor, and to
the inordinate love of our selves; Sins forbidden.
that is to say, all unjust and hateful thoughts and motions of the heart,
enticing and provoking to the hurt of our neighbor, as also vain and fond
thoughts, motions and discourses, tending to the puffing up of our selves in
self-love, pride, etc.

Yea further let it be observed, that the former inclination, thought, motion,
and deliberation, even concerning lawful things, and such as do belong to our
selves, if they arise in our hearts before the just time and season thereof,
they are comprehended under this coveting which is here forbidden of God.

As for example, the thought and desire of marriage before the time meet fot
it; also longing after the possession of an inheritance while a man's father is
living, or being under wardship, before he is come to lawful and convenient
age, to enter upon the possession and use of it. Yea the flitting desire or
longing after any thing whatsoever, before the time and season appointed of
God, or by no lawful and good means, though the time and season may be
thought meet and convenient: all such flitting desires are here condemned.

Finally, the not resisting of these thoughts, motions, and discourses, is
against the righteousness of this Commandment, as being the hinderance of
love, and every other good fruit thereof; and the cherisher of all sin
against our own consciences in the fruits of self-love and unkindness
against our neighbor.

And thus we have the unfolding of the sin forbidden in this Commaundemeut:
whereby the difference betwixt it and all the former Commandments of this
second Table, may plainly be discerned: whereby also we both understand the
excellency of the divine wisdom of God, in giving so perfect a Law of all
righteousness and love toward our neighbor; and likewise, we may see more
deeply into that misery or rather sink of iniquity, that lurketh in our
corrupt nature, till we be renewed in the spirit of our mind, and made new
creatures fashioned again by the Spirit of God, in a more secret manner then
we were in our mothers womb.

Now therefore, having help against the difficulty and hardness of the
understanding of this Commandment, Knowledge of this Commandment most
necessary.
I would gladly hear the reasons of you, why the knowledge of it should be so
specially necessary and profitable, as you have been taught the same to be.

Which are they?

Because without the knowledge hereof, we can neither see into the full
greatness of our own sin, and the extreme misery which is due to the same:
nor into the perfect excellency of Gods righteousness, in the punishing of
sin, nor into the riches of his mercies in forgiving sin and saving of
sinners, nor the necessity we have of a Savior, neither what godly sorrow for
sin means, nor what regeneration and repentance is, nor what it is to be
truly humbled before God, nor how great cause we have to be in continual watch
and ward, yea, in earnest battle and fight against sin, least it should get
strength to reign in us, to the everlasting destruction both of our bodies and
also of our souls.

All this is evident from the former discourse already laid open in the example
of Saint Paul, Romans 7. and by that conclusion which he makes upon that
discourse, verses 24.25. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Hence therefore we may perceive, that we do altogether deceive our selves,
when we do not judge our selves sinners but from the euiction of outward
disobedience to Gods Law, and also when we think well of our selves, and that
we are in good estate, because in our own conceit we are better then other.
Our actual sins should be as bloud-hounds unto us, by them to trace out our
original corruption after the example of the prophet David in the 51. Psalm.

For let us look into the evil lust and concupiscence of our hearts, and we
shall find a workhouse, yea, a world of wickedness, the which shall give us
just occasion to condemn our selves in the sight of God, even when other men
can see nothing wherefore they should greatly blame us; even then (I say) shall
we find plentiful occasion to cry out with the Apostle, Miserable men that we
are.

Godly sorrow must begin from the inward ground of the heart, The sin of
coveting exemplified.
and for the most secret evil lusts and motions thereof, or else it is no true
godly sorrow.

As for example, he that has fallen into fornication, must not only be sorry
for the fact, but chiefly to think that he should have an adulterous and
filthy heart. The angry man is not truly sorry for his wrathful speeches and
furious dealing, unless he be sorry that he is of an angry and testy or
cholerike nature. The drunken man is not truly sorry for his drunkenness,
unless he be sorry that he is intemperate in desire after drink, etc. Neither
he that has dealt contentiously against his neighbor, unless he be sorry that
he has a proud heart.

The same is to be said of every other sin. True repentance must begin the
change of the heart, by the change of the thoughts and motions thereof, or else
it is not true repentance, Ier. chap. 4.14. O Jerusalem wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved: how long shall thy wicked thoughts
remain within thee? To speak in a word, God begins his work of the
reformation of man, where Satan from the beginning began to deforme man. True
resistance of sin must begin at the first thought and motion, yea, even at our
inclination unto sin. Whosoever do not consider this, and submit themselves to
this work of Gods grace, and seek after the increase of it, etc. they be no
better then hypocrites, they be no true conuerts and faithful servants of God,
whatsoever fair show and appearance they may have.

Thus then we may perceive what it is to covet.

It follows that we do consider which be the things of our neighbor, which
God forbids us to covet: whereof, some are expressly mentioned, the rest are
all understood.

Which are those which are expressly mentioned?

First his dwelling house, and in the 5. chap. of Deuteronomy. ver. 21. his field is
also mentioned; then the parts of his household or family, as first and
principally his wife, who^ God has given for his special comfort, and then
his good and profitable servants, both man-seruant and maid, for his inward and
home business. And last of all, his cattle, both ox and ass, for his more
outward works, the one for draught and plowing, the other for the use of
iorneying and other burden.

These indeed are the things of our neighbor, which the Lord our God expressly
forbids us to covet, or to have the least desire after them, to the
diminishing either of his more inward lawful pleasure and comfort, or of his
just profit and outward welfare.

A man's wife we know is or ought to be as his chief dearling and treasure, and
therefore is compared to the loving hind and pleasant Roe. Read Prou. 5.19.
Yea preferred to all jewels, Prou. 31.10. and therefore is called the delight
of her husbands eyes, as the Lord speaks to Ezekiel concerning his wife,
chap. 24.16.18.

A good and faithful servant also, is of all justly accounted a great blessing
of God, and there is no man which does not think himself greatly injured, if
at any time such a one be vnneighbourly egged and enticed away from him.
Consider further of this point, from Paul's Epistle to Philemon.

Finally, touching the profit that comes by the ox; the holy Proverb
speaks of it, chap. 14.4. Where no oxen are, there the crib is empty: but
much increase comes by the strength of the ox.

Behold therefore how graciously the Lord tendreth every man's comfort and
welfare, that he forbids not only the taking away of these things, as King
David did Vriahs wife, and as the Shabeans took away Jobs oxen and asses, and
slew his servants that kept them, chap. 1. of that book of Job. verses 14.15.
but he forbids even the least coveting and desiring, or lingering after
these things, which as has been showed is the original of the outward action.

Now in that the Lord forbids the coveting after any neighbors wife, which
is first mentioned in the 5. of Deuteronomy. (whether the coveting be because of her
beauty or good houswifry, or wisdom in government, yea, or though it should be
for her godliness) he does under this instance forbid both that which we call
a voluptuous, fleshly and carnal mind; and also a light vain and foolish
mind. And in that he forbids us to covet our neighbors house, field,
man-seruant or maid, ox or ass, which are all set down in the second place,
as we read in Deuteronomie, the Lord does by the prohibition of these, forbid
that sin which we call worldliness of mind.

To conclude all in few words therefore: It is as much as if the Lord should
say: Thou shall neither for thy pleasure sake, nor for thy profit, desire any
thing that is thy neighbors.

Thus much of the things expressly mentioned.

But the Lord gives plainly to understand, that he forbids us to covet any
other thing beside.

What things may they be?

As we are forbidden to covet our neighbors house and lands, so we are
forbidden to covet any of his mouable goods, gold or silver, jewels or plate,
corn, wine, oil, or any other thing in like sort.

As we must not covet our neighbors man-seruant or maid, so neither may we
covet his son or his daughter.

As it is not lawful for us to desire his ox or his ass, so neither may we
wish to have his horse or his sheep.

Finally, we must needs understand, that in so much as the Lord forbids us
to covet the lesser, much more does he forbid all coveting after the greater:
As for example, seeing we must not covet his outward goods to his vvorldly
decay, we must much less desire his place of vvorldly honor, as to be some
Lord, Duke, etc. And least of all, may we covet his spiritual gifts and
graces, or the means thereof, to the hinderance of his salvation. Seeing we
must not covet any man's private servant, much less must we for our private
benefit, or affectation and liking, covet to have any peoples public good and
faithful Minister of Gods word from them.

It may not be denied, that there may fall out just occasion when a Minister of
Gods word may be translated as it were, and removed from one people to another.
But that must be in an orderly course, when it may be discerned to be more to
the glory of God, etc. and not to serve the private humor of this or that man,
which will say, such a one shall go for my money, and so contemn all other,
etc.

The first of the things in this answer, are so plain in themselves, that they
need no further speech or allegation for the proof of them. In a word, the
coveting of any thing of our neighbors (whatsoever is couetable, if we may so
speak) or in any respect desirable, all is forbidden in this Commandment.

For so the Lord himself speaks in his holy language, both in this
Commamndement and in many other places, where he uses a word from the which
all things of desire, or which be as we say in request among men take their
name, as Genesis 3.6. where Eve judging the forbidden tree to be a tree to be
desired, gave place to her desire or coveting eye, and so brought evil lust
into the world. So Josh. 7.21. in the confession which Achan makes: I saw
among the spoil (says he) a goodly Babilonish garment, etc. and I coueted
them, and took them. And every where in the holy Scriptures, things not to be
coueted or desired from our neighbor, they are called from this word of
desire, as vessels of desire for precious vessels, Dan. 11. verse 8.38.44. And
Prou. 21.20. In the house of the wise is pleasant treasure, or as the word is,
a treasure of desire, that is, which men count worthy to be desired. And Isa.
32.12. f^^elds of desire for pleasant fields. And Amos 5.11. vines of desire
for pleasant vines.

And generally, all precious and pleasant things are called such things as be
desirable, Lament. 1.10. The enemy has stretched out his hand upon all her
desirable things, etc.

And now from this repetition of things, both mentioned and also more generally
to be understood, which God forbids us to covet, let us observe that the
reason hereof is, because the corruption of our nature is so plentiful in this
evil of coveting, that our neighbor cannot have that thing of the bountiful
hand of God, which our hearts cannot afford an evil lust after it, etc.

Furthermore also we may from hence well perceive, that it is not lawful for
us to wish any of the same things to any friend to the hurt of our neighbor,
which we may not wish to our selves: for this were to prefer our affection to
our friend, before the good will and pleasure, and most wise providence of God,
who has otherwise appointed and disposed thereof.

Moreover seeing we may wish no good thing from our neighbor, either directly
to our selves, or indirectly to any of our special friends, let us note well,
that we may much less, and so not without greater sin, wish our neighbor
any damage or hurt, Duties, or rather the grounds of all good duty commanded.
either in body or soul, goods or name, wife or child, servant or cattle, etc.

Neither let us forget here, that the same coveting which is forbidden to every
man concerning his neighbors wife: the same I say, is forbidden to every woman
concerning her neighbors husband, etc.

Finally, that we may briefly comprehend all which we may not covet, let us
consider the admonition and charge of the Apostle John, concerning the things
which we must not love to the hinderance of love, either toward God or our
neighbor: as we read in the 1. Epistle of John chap 2. verses 15.16.17. where
he deuideth lust into three branches as it were; The lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eye, and the pride of life.

So that accordingly, does the Lord forbid all covetousness of the mind after
riches; all voluptuousness of mind, in desire after pleasures, and all
ambitious desire of honor.

Thus much therefore concerning the evils forbidden in this Commandment.

Now let us come to see on the affirmative part, what good things God
commands in the same.

Show which they be.

First, God staightly requires, that every of us do dispose of our minds, to
stand fully satisfied and contented with that portion of blessing, both
spiritual and belonging to this life, which he of his divine wisdom and
grace, alotteth unto us from time to time: whether it be plenty or want, more
or less, following our present business, and using all lawful means, with
a quiet mind, and without any distrustful care for the morrow, paitently
waiting upon God, until it shall please him in his good time, and by his most
gracious and provident hand to better our estate.

Secondly, that we have our hearts and minds, readily and constantly inclined
and bent, to rejoice at all the mercies which God has already, or shall
hereafter bestow upon every of our neighbors, in what measure soever it be.

Thirdly, that we do studiously devise how we may do them most good, and
from the secrets of our souls desire and long after their further benefit, as
may stand with the good-vvill and pleasure of Almighty God.

Fourthly, that on the other side we be ready to lament whatsoever falls out
vnprosperously against them, and that we be vvilling to our power to procure
the remedying of the same, according to all the Commandments of the second
Table of the Law going before.

Finally, that we do earnestly and constantly settle our selves to bewail,
resist, and suppress all contrary lusts, motions and temptations, which shall
at any time arise in our hearts, whatsoever they be.

Or more briefly thus: The Lord our God requires of us in this his last
Commandment: first, original righteousness and perfect love toward our
neighbor, as the ground of all good duties toward them, according to our first
creation.

Secondly, he commands us the immediate fruits of the same original
righteousness, and perfect love of our neighbor, in all righteous and loving
thoughts and motions of the heart, tending to the greatest good which we may
procure unto them, joined also with the denial of our selves, and all that
self-love and pride which through the corruption of nature abounds in us.

But concerning the parts of the answer somewhat more at large. For the first
point, let us consider that this last Commandment is (as one may not unfitly
compare it) the Sabbath of the second Table of the Law; seeing it requires
such an absolute ceassing of all hatred, yea, of all unkindness against our
neighbor, that we may from the perfect ground of love and tender regard of
him, only intend to do him the greatest good which possibly we may. Consider
of this further, from the doctrine of contentment, 1. Timothy 6.6. and Hebrews
chapter 13.5. and from the doctrine of the right manner of using this world and
the things thereof, both profits and pleasures, 1. Corint. 7. verses
29.30.31.32. And likewise from the example of the Apostle, in an excellent
measure, through the grace of God, though not in full perfection, Phil.
4.11.12.13. I have learned (says the holy Apostle) in what estate soever I am,
to be therewithal content. I can be abased, and I can abound, and to be full
and to hungry, to abound and to have want. I am able to do all things through
the help of Christ, who strengthens me.

For the second point, read 1. These. 5.7.8.9. and 1. Pet. 1.22.

For the third point, consider the nature of true love, that it is far from
minding evil against a man's neighbor, (as 1. Cor. 13.5. Love thinks not
evil) that it deuiseth how to do good, Isaiah 32.7.8. The liberal man will
devise of liberal things. The contrary is severely reproved, 1. John. 3.17.18.
and James 2.8.9.14. etc. Read the places.

For the fourth point, read Romans 13.15.16. Rejoice with them that rejoice, and
weep with them that weep. Be of like affection one to another.

Naturally every man aspireth to be his own, as entir and whole in himself as
may be, that he may stand in need of none, nor be combered with the care of
any, etc.

This is the natural study and corrupt desire of us all. But the Apostle Paul
guided by the holy Spirit of God, teaches us all, both by doctrine and by
example another manner of lesson: he counting himself a detter to all men,
both Jew and Gentile, Romans 1.14. So ought we likewise to account our selves,
according to our gift, place, and calling. Consider also the example of the
same Apostle in his excellent measure, 1. Cor. 10.33. and 1. Cor. 7.13. etc.
chap. 11.28 29. and 1. These. 2.8. Consider also the example of Nehemiah chap.
1. verses 1.2.3.4. etc. and chap. 2.3. etc.

For the last point, consider the example of the Apostle Paul, Romans 7.24. O
wretched man that I am. Read also Acts 8.22.

Hitherto what is forbidden, and contrariwise what the Lord God commands in
this his tenth Commandment.

The equity is next to be considered.

How may that be discerned of us?

The equity of this Commandment may be discerned two vvayes.

First, in respect of God.

Secondly, in respect of our selves.

Show therefore in the first place how it may be discerned in respect of God?

In so much as the Lord our God is the sovereign judge, The Equity.
not only of men's actions and determinate purposes, but also of their unsettled
thoughts and motions: yea, seeing he is the Creator of man's person and nature
it self (which also he made very good and perfectly well disposed in the
beginning of the creation) it is very equal and meet, that he should both
forbid and also condemn the most secret corruption of nature, with all
immediate fruits thereof, as well as the outward actions, seeing the one as
well as the other do proceed from the Devil, through man's own default: and
also that he should on the contrary require and command all that original
righteousness and perfect disposition of nature, and of all the powers
thereof, which he had at the first most graciously given.

It must needs be acknowledged most just and equal indeed. For what reason can
there be, that the righteousness of God should give place to the lusts of the
Devil, and to the corrupt will of man: such as are all the lusts and motions
of sin, according to the reproof of our Savior Christ, John. 8.44. Ye are
of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do.

The Law also must be agreeable to the nature of the giver. He therefore being
most spiritual yea spirit it self, must needs in all equity give a most
spiritual Law, binding the most secret motions and powers of the souls and
spirits of all his subjects. His Law in all equity, must in this respect exceed
all humane Laws, of the most wise and just Law-giuers whosoever. For they can
take no further knowledge of difobedience, but from the disloyal actions or
speeches of their subjects: otherwise they have no ground to proceed against
them for the secret intents and motions of their minds, how dangerous and
traitorous soever they be.

Neither indeed is any creature in his own right Lord over the souls and
spirits of men. This sovereignty belongs only unto God.

Show therefore in the next place, how the equity of this Commandment may be
discerned in respect of our selves?

If we should not begin our obedience to God from our inward thoughts and
motions: yea, even from a renewed inclination of the very spirit of our mind,
we could not possibly perform either any true obedience unto him, or any true
love or duty toward our neighbor.

It is true: it should be only an hypocritical and pharisaicall obedience and
a dissembling love, which he can take no pleasure in. God loves truth in the
inward parts, Psalm. 51. He requires the heart especially, Prou. 4.23. Neither
can he abide that it should be withheld from him, Matthew. 15.7.8.9.

Read also Romans 12.9. Let love be without dissimulation. And 1. Peter. 1.22.
We must love brotherly without faining, and with a pure heart fervently.

It is a singular benefit to have a most subtle and dangerous enemy discovered
unto one. Such an enemy is this wicked lust, Ephesians. 4.22. 1. Pet. 2.11. James
4.1. 2. Tim. 2.22.

And beside the most prosperous fight and encounter against sin, is in the
first thought and motion of it: for otherwise it gathers strength, and is
according to the proceedings of it, so much the more hardly vanquished
afterward.

The special equity of this Commandment justifies the special curses of
God threatened against the transgression of it.

These curses are now to be considered.

Show what you have been taught concerning this point?

Like as the transgression of this Commandment is the root and cherisher of
all sin, and the extinguisher, or rather as the bar of a strong fortress,
utterly to let and hinder all goodness and love toward our neighbor, and
therewithal likewise all love and good duty to God, (for as the Apostle John
says in the first Epistle chapter 4.20. How can he that loves not his
brother whom he has seen, love God whom he has not seen) so it opens a
passage for the curses of God against all the sins forbidden in the whole
Law, to enter in and to ouerflow all, like to the increase and gathering
together of many waters, till they grow to a mighty and raging flood: such a
one whereof we read in the holy Proverb, that it leaves no fooode.

A good reason, answerable to the nature of this sin: the which as it grows
in offense, so it procures the increase of the punishment against it self:
The Curses.
according to that gradation which the Apostle James uses, chapter. 1.15. When
lust has conceived it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished
brings forth death.

And that this sin is the mother-sinne and breed of all the rest, read Romans
7.5. The motions of sins which are by the Law (to wit through the corruption
of the flesh) they find force in our members, to bring forth fruit unto
death. In which respect also it is said, that the old Testament, (as the
Apostle speaks allegorically) is Agar of Mount Sinai, which gendreth unto
bondage, Gal. 4.24.

That the same sin also quenches, yea, without the greater grace, utterly
hinders all goodness and virtue, read Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to
the other, so that ye cannot do the same things that ye would. Read also the
places alleged after the former answer, 2. Tim. 2.22. James 4.1. and 1. Pet.
2.11. Wherefore not without cause in respect of this sin especially, does the
Apostle cry out, bewailing himself as being in the estate of a miserable man
subject to death, yea, to eternal death without Christ, as we have seen
before.

This evil of coveting is of it self a miserable punishment: for it makes us
more restless and unquiet in every want and trouble, then are the brute beasts.

It blinds our eyes, so that having many blessings, it is with us as though
we enjoyed none at all. Yea it turns blessing it self to be a curse unto us,
by reason of our unthankfulness.

By reason of this secret evil, it comes also to pass, that there be many
great judgments of God in the world, and those also upon diverse particular
persons, whereof we can see no reason.

For a man may be in outward show, of commendable carriage among men, and yet
before God who sees the heart and tries the reins, the same person may
justly be odious before God, because of his hypocrisy and dissimulation, or
desire of vainglory and praise, etc. Yea, a man may think himself worthy
to be preferred before many of his neighbors, and yet be rejected of God
because of his deceiptfull heart. So we read Prou. 16.2. Ier. 17.9. and Luke
16.15. Read also Prou. 15.26. and Zach. 8.17. compared with Prou. 28.6. Better
is the poor that walks in his uprightness, then he that peruerteth his
ways though he be rich.

Thus therefore we may generally see the transgression of this Commandment to
be highly displeasing in the sight of God, and that it is the original sping
as it were of infinite curses: yea, that it is a grievous curse, and a very
bitter punishment in it self, if we could rightly discern of it.

But show if you can something more particularly, what is the proper curse of
God against the transgression of it. And show it also by some more particular
and express testimony.

Whereas it is a very heavy curse and plague of God, for any to be given over
to sin, and so to have one sin punished by many other; as our Savior
Christ gives us to understand, in that he teaches us to pray, Lead us not
into temptation: this most heavy curse and punishment does especially belong to
the transgression of this Commandment, upon all those that make no conscience
to resist the first thoughts and motions of sin.

It is very true: they which resist them not, must needs be led captives,
seeing they that strive earnestly cannot without some difficulty, nor
altogether without some foil prevail and overcome.

But I speak as touching inward foil and captivity of thoughts at unawares for
a time, according to that of the holy Apostle, Romans 7.23. and 2. Cor. 12.7.8.9.

Nevertheless as in the same places it appears: God in mercy, both pardons
and assisteth the weakness of those that do unfeignedly resist. Only he
accurseth and punishes them that dissolutely give place to their lust, and
suffer themselves to be misled by it.

What proof have you of this?

In the 106. Psalm. verses 14.15.16. it is written of the Israelites, that
they lusted with concupiscence in the wilderness, and tempted God in the
desert. Then he gave them their desire, but he sent leanness into their souls.

And in the beginning of the 2. chapter* of Micah. The Blessings.
Woe to them (says the holy Prophet) that imagine iniquity, and work
wickedness upon their beds: when the morning is light, they practice it,
because their hand has power.

And they covet fields, and take them by violence, and houses and take them
away: so they oppress a man and his house, even man and his heritage.

Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold against this family have I devised a
plague, whereout ye shall not pluck your necks, and ye shall not go so
proudly: for this time is evil. And Isa. chap. 57.17. For his wicked
covetousness I am angry with him, and have smitten him (says the Lord) I hid
me and was angry, yet he went away, and turned after the way of his own heart.

Read also Habbak 29.10.11. And the heavy imprecation of the Apostle Peter
against Simon the sorcerer of Samaria. He shows there, that some great
judgment did hang over his head, for that he gave place to his wicked thought,
imagining that the gift of God might be obtained with money, Acts chap. 8.
verses 18.19.20.21.22.23.24.

And generally concerning the evil thoughts of the wicked, we read Psalm.
94.11. The thoughts of man are vanity, and Psalm. 146.4. The thoughts of the
wicked shall perish.

Thus much of the curse against the transgression. The blessing of obedience to
it comes now to be examined.

What is the blessing which God has promised to the obedience of it?

If in stead of wishing and coveting from our neighbors any thing which is
theirs, we would inure and acquaint our hearts to bless God for that portion of
his good blessings which we do enjoy our selves; and for every good and
comfortable commodity wherewith God of his mercy has blessed them: it should
surely come to pass, that (beside singular inward peace which would from thence
arise to our conscience) we should find the like open blessing from the hand of
God, which God has promised to secret prayer, that is to say, he would reward
us openly.

Yea, no doubt he would bless us both openly and secretly, with outward
blessings and spiritual blessings, with the good things both of this life and
also of the life to come. For God who has promised all things to godliness,
1. Tim. 4.8. will not deny any thing to that good and holy disposition of the
mind, which by the work of his grace is as the ground of godliness in us, and
from the which true godliness cannot be separated.

As evil thoughts and motions make way for all curses to enter in, as was
answered before: so does inward sincerity, uprightness, and purity of heart,
holy thoughts, meditations, counsels, desires, and purposes; they through the
mercies of God do open the windows of heaven (as it were a key) to cause all
blessings to descend down upon the heads of all the true servants of God:
according to that we read Prou. 10.6. Blessings are upon the head of the
righteous. And there are many places of the holy Scriptures, the testimonies
whereof tend to this purpose, as you have been further instructed.

I would have you make rehearsal of some of those testimonies, for the
confirmation of this point.

Which may those testimonies be?

He that loves pureness of heart (says king Solomon) for the grace of his
lips the king shall be his friend, Prou. 22.11. Yea, the king of heaven shall
bless him, as it follows in the next verse. The eyes of the Lord preserve
knowledge, etc. And as we read Psa. 24. ver. 4.5. He that has a pure heart,
and has not lifted up his mind to vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall
receive a blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his
salvation.

And our Savior Christ Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God.

Moreover Psalm. 1. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the
wicked, etc.

But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day
and night.

For he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of waters, that will give
forth her fruit in due season, whose leaf shall not fade: so whatsoever he
shall do shall prosper. And Psalm. 32.2. Blessed is the man in whose spirit
there is no guile.

Likewise Prou. 28.10. The upright shall inherit good things. And verse 18. He
that walks uprightly shall be saved.

Finally, Proverbs 14.22. To them that think on good things, shall be mercy
and truth.

And chap. 22.5. The thoughts of the diligent do surely bring abundance.

These places of holy Scripture and the like, do indeed confirm that God has
promised all kind of blessing to the obedience of this Commandment. For
although pureness of heart, uprightness, inward delight, meditation, and good
thoughts last mentioned, do belong to the duties of all the Commandments: yet
they have as it were their mansion place and residence in this Commandment
after a special manner.

And let us mark I pray you, how God honors upright, pure, and holy
thoughts, with the blessing of the actions and duties themselves: because from
thence, as from the original all the actions of life do proceed, according to
that Prou. 4.23. which sentence was alleged not long before. So on the
contrary, the holy Apostle Saint Paul charge his wicked nature with action
of sin, by reason of the evil thoughts and motions thereof, though he
labored against them, and gave them no hearty consent, Romans 7.19. I do not the
good (says he) which I would, but the evil which I would not, that do I.

And yet again on the other side, Phil. 4.8.9. Think on these things (says
he) that is, think of them earnestly, and with a care to practice them.

And the God of peace shall be with you, yea, to give that peace which passes
all understanding, whereof he had written before in the 7. verse of the same
chapter.

Thus then we see how great a part of our blessing, yea, how the ground of man's
whole blessing in a manner, rests in the obedience of this Commandment, if
happily we could be free from the evil coveting forbidden in it; and if we had
such pure, upright, and godly hearts as we ought to have, both in love to God
and to our neighbor.

But that we may now at the last come to the use of this Commandment,
according as we have seen the use of all the rest.

Have you perfectly obeyed this Commandment, which is as the sealing up of all
perfect obedience, Every one of us is a damnable transgressor.
that thereby you may escape the curse, and be partaker of the blessing of it?

I am so far from the perfect obedience of it, that I do more infinitely sin
against it, then against any other Commandment of this second Table, according
as my vain and flitting thoughts and motions are more then either my settled
consent or performed actions.

Yea, my disobedience against this last Commandment, is the cause why I do
disobey all the rest.

Finally, when as the other Comandeme^ts show me to be a sinner in the words,
actions, and purposes of my life; this conuinceth me to be out of measure
sinful, even in my very nature and person.

These things which you have answered, are not only true concerning your
self, and every one of us, and all the children of men, while yet we lie
altogether in our natural ignorance and vanity, and in the lust of the flesh
and of the mind: but they are also true concerning all that be regenerate by
the Spirit of God, though in them the secret lusts of the flesh do not prevail
and get dominion over them, as they do over the children of this world.

Touching the vngenerate, we need not stand to use much proof. It is evident,
Genesis 6.5. Ier. 17.9. and chap. 18.18. Psa. 36.3.4. Prou. 4.16. and chap. 16.30.
and Romans 8.7 In the best things they do, they are inwardly altogether corrupt,
and therefore the Lord rejects all their hearing of his word, their prayers
and their sacrifices, Isa. 58.2. etc. Ezekiel. 33.31. Prou. 15.18. and cha 21.27.
and chap. 28.9. Isa. chap. 1.

That the same natural corruption remains still inherent in the regenerate,
though not in the same measure, read Gal. 5.17. and 2. Cor. 3.5 Heb. 12.1. But
most plentifully this matter i^ laid forth, Romans chap. 7. and namely ver.
14.18.21.23.25. ^eade also the example of David, a man likewise of singular
holiness, yet was he not free from this home-dwelling sin, Psalm. 39.1.2.3.4.
etc. 9. The place is notable to this purpose.

But what need we any other proofs then our own experience: For are not our
thoughts very vain and wandering, and our affections always inclining to
unlawful lusting and coveting? Verily, if we shall but a little mark our
selves, we shall find cause why we should be ashamed of our selves, Our Savior
Christ's perfect obedience for us.
and why we should lift up our hearts with our tongue unto God, to say with the
Apostle: O wretched that I am, etc.

Behold therefore the most excellent use of this last Commandment, in the
discovering or drawing out, as it were by the ears, this our most secret and
dangerous sin: the disobedience whereof is more infinite then against any of
the Commandments of this second Table, as was answered. Whence also it is,
that this Commandment does in like special manner discover the heavy curse
and damnation which is due unto us for the same, unless our Savior Christ had
dyed even for our natural corruption, and the most secret lust thereof, and
unless he had perfectly obeyed this Commandment on our behalf, moreover and
beside his obedience to the rest of this second Table.

It is to singular purpose therefore, that we be specially persuaded that our
Savior Christ has fulfilled it for us:

What proof have you hereof?

That our Savior Christ has perfectly obeyed this Commandment, both in
freedom from all sinful concupiscence, and the least thought or motion
thereof to the hurt of any man, and also in perfect disposition of mind and
affection to do good to all: with all full and settled contentment always with
his own estate, according to the scope of this last Commandment, though he
was touching the world in a poor condition, and full of affliction and
trouble, even as from the very heart root and all the powers thereof, he did
perfectly love and serve God according to the first Commandment.

It is hence most surely to be proved, in that albeit he was the natural seed
of man: yet he was not immediately begotten by the corrupt and sinful
generation of man, but by the most gracious virtue and divine power of the holy
Ghost, who most perfectly sanctified the same his humane nature, even from the
first moment of his conception, and thenceforth also inseparably united it to
the divine nature, so to continue for ever in one most holy and divine person,
of a perfect Mediator and Savior.

This is a most sure and undoubted proof indeed. For as that which is borne of
the flesh, is flesh: that is to say, corrupt and sinful, (for how should he be
clean that is borne of a woman? Job chap. 15.14. to wit in the usual course
of man's propagation) so that which is borne of the Spirit, is Spirit: that is,
he is spiritual, one washed, cleansed, and sanctified by the Spirit, John.
chap. 3.6. But in most singular manner was our Savior Christ spiritual, as is
evident in that he was most admirably and extraordinarily conceived by the holy
Ghost, and borne of a virgin, to the end he might be most perfectly holy, and
true, etc.

And beside, seeing there is no fellowship betwixt righteousness and
unrighteousness, 2. Corinthians. 6.14. how could the divine nature be joined so
nearely and unseparably with the humane nature of Christ in one person for
ever, unless it had been free from all sin; yea, unless it had been most
perfectly sanctified? He is also called undefiled, etc.

We may boldly conclude therefore, that our Savior Christ was most pure and
holy, both in nature and will, even from his very birth and conception; though
all other both men and women are naturally conceived and borne in sin.

Nevertheless, seeing some peradventure will object, that albeit our Savior
Christ was thus perfect by conception and birth, as Adam was at the beginning
by creation; yet as Adam was tempted, and by temptation fell; so in so much as
our Savior Christ was also tempted by the Devil, and that not only in those
forty days together, whereof we read, Matthew. chap. 4. but at sundry times
all the days of his life, even so often as the Devil might think himself to
have any advantage against him, (for the Devil left our Savior Christ at the
end of the forty days temptation, but for a season, as we read, Luke 14.15.)
it may be therefore (as we began to say) that some will object, that it may be*
that our Savior Christ also did one time or other fall away by temptation. We
are therefore to confirm our selves to believe, that howsoever Adam a glorious
creature was soon seduced and perverted; yet our Savior Christ was never by
any temptation corrupted, or one hair breadth turned out of the way.

What proof can you allege for this?

In so much as we have express testimony in the holy Scriptures, that our
Savior Christ vanquished the Devil in the most mighty and dangerous
assaults that ever he made; we have no reason to doubt of his victory at all
times else: according to that which our Savior himself assures unto us, John
chap. 14. ver. 30. saying, The Prince of this world comes, and has naught in
me.

It is doubtless a very sound and sure confirmation. Now therefore, touching
the Devils principal temptations, whereby he labored mightily with all his
craft and subtlety he could to have found something in our Savior Christ,
whereby he might have taken advantage and prevailed against him, and so to have
hindered both his and our salvation: we know they were either that temptation of
forty days, in his entrance upon the open execution of his office of
mediatorship; or that wherewith he set upon him a little before his death, and
at his death upon the cross, which he yields himself unto for the ransom
of our sins.

And well may all the temptations of the Devil be comprehended under these.
For the Devil always tempts either by deceitful and alluring temptations,
or by those that be more violent and terrible, according as he imagines he may
take his best advantage, and according to the uttermost of that permission or
commission which the Lord in his wisdom and justice grants unto him. The
former temptations therefore, wherewith the Devil assaulted our Savior Christ,
were in most flattering and deceitful manner.

The latter was by terrible impulsion, when he saw our Savior Christ in his
most bitter agonies, if possibly by all his force he could have wrung out any
impatience or murmuring, or blasphemy and cursed speech, either against God,
who was for the time in the person of an aduersarrie or angry and terrible
judge: or against men, who were the most busy, and provoking instruments of
the Devil that might be, to have put him beside patience, and to have extorted
some unseemly speech and behavior from him: yea if they could, to have driven
him to utter despair of Gods love and mercy toward him. For this was the
drift of the Devil no doubt, and to this end and purpose did he enrage his
instruments of all sorts of men, both Jews and Gentiles, at that time which
our Savior Christ found to be the very hour and power of darkness, Luke
chap. 21.53. even the time wherein the Devil was let loose, as it were without
limitation to execute his full malice and to do his very worst: but at neither
of these times, either former or latter, or last of all, could he by the one
means or by the other, either by flattery or by force, or by both of them
together, prevail: but in either of these principal incounters, and specially
at the last, when the Devil was let loose in his full strength, yea when all
the Devils in hell (as we may say) were bent against him, our Savior Christ
did most gloriously triumph, according to that most comfortable testimony of
the holy Apostle, Col. 2.15. where he affirms, that our Savior Christ by his
most perfect faith, and love, and patience, and prayer, and all invincible
virtues, did royally spoil principalities and powers, and that he made a show
of them openly, and triumphed over them on the cross. For notwithstanding all
those most mighty prouocations to the contrary, he continued faithful to
God, and called upon him as upon his God in his most extreme discomfort; and
he continued also in perfect love to men, as a most merciful high Priest and
shepherd to his flock, and prayed for them, yea even for such of them, as for
the present were among his chief adversaries.

Wherefore we may resolve our selves, that above all question or doubt, our
Savior Christ prevailed always against all the Devils temptations, and never
fell the least jot that might be, from his most pure and perfect obedience, no
nothing in any the least thought, but abode firmly in his steadfastness to the
end, and remaining for ever a perfect and princely high Priest according to the
order of Melchisedech, who was both a King and a Priest, as we read in the
holy Scriptures, Psalm 110. and often repeated in the Epistle to the Hebrews.
And beside, we have often heard from the testimony of many Scriptures, that he
knew no sin, and that he is the Lord our righteousness, etc.

Perfect therefore is our redemption by our Prince and Savior Christ, whereby
he has delivered us from all our vain thoughts and motions, and from the
very original corruption and sinful contagion of our nature, as well as from
all our actual transgressions and rebellions against every Commandment of
the most holy and righteous Law of the Lord our God: seeing he continued in all
things that are written in the book of the Law to do them. To him therefore
together with the same God who is by Christ our heavenly Father, and to the
holy Ghost, three persons, one God, most wise, holy, righteous, and merciful,
be all honor and glory both now and for evermore.

But are we so discharged by our Savior Christ, that we need not to make any
reckening of the original corruption of our nature, and the immediate fruits
thereof; that is, of our vain thoughts, and loose and wandering motions and
lusts, so far forth at the least, as we give no consent to be led by them,
and to commit the outward actions thereof?

Nothing less: for although, through the mercies of God, and because of that
reconciliation which our Savior Christ has made by his blood, they shall not
be imputed unto us: we must nevertheless be vvatchfull in striving against
them, we must instantly sigh up unto God from the secrets of our souls, and
pray alvvaies for the forgiveness of them, and for his grace to suppress
them: and finally, we must most tenderly cherish all contrary good motions,
thoughts and meditations, which God by his holy Spirit and by the ministry
of his word shall put into our hearts.

It is very true: our hearts ought to be as nimble and ready through the grace
of God, to resist all secret temptations and lusts, as our nature is rife and
lavish to cause them suddenly to arise and start up. We should be as ready
always to pray to God against them, as they are pressed and ready to solicit
us to withdraw our hearts from God. This evil lust and concupiscence of ours,
must be watched and fought against continually, after the example of the
Apostle Paul, Romans 7, even so long as we carry about us this corrupt nature of
ours, as against a monster of many heads.

Always evil thoughts and motions will have the first foot in every matter.

The Lord in the beginning cursed the Serpent, because it was the Devils
instrument, to bring sin into the world, when as before there was no evil
lust in man's pure nature. How we are to repent and obey this Commandment.
Wherefore seeing, ever since the entrance of evil lust, this has been, and
is the Devils secret means to entice and draw us unto all sin, it ought to
be more odious unto us then any serpent can be. I would hear yet one thing
more of you: What thoughts and motions do you mean by vain thoughts, and
wandering lusts and motions?

All thoughts, motions and lusts whatsoever they are, they are all of them
vain and sinful, which be not agreeable to the word and will of God, and
which tend not to the right ends; that is, to the glory of God: and to the
benefit of his Church and people.

It is true: for as the Apostle says, Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever
ye do, do all to the glory of God. 1. Cor. 10.31. So we may say, whatsoever ye
think, mind, or devise, let it be to the glory of God.

But seeing by the means of the contrary vanity and evil coveting which is
in us, our minds are most feeble and fickle in themselves touching all good
thoughts and meditations, that we cannot stay our hearts in them; we may see
from hence most lively, how great and urgent cause we have, always to lift up
our eyes to our Savior Christ, who was and is still lifted up unto us, like
unto that healing serpent which was lifted up by Moses in the wilderness, that
by faith in him we may obtain help, even a sovereign counterpoison against
the stingings of this venomous serpent, who has so deeply and so deadly
conveyed his poison into us.

We may see also, what great cause we have to be continual in prayer to God,
that it would please him to sanctify our hearts, that the thoughts and
meditations thereof may be acceptable unto him, according to the prayer of
David, in the 19. Psalm.

We may perceive likewise, what great cause we have to acquaint our selves
with the holy Sacraments, and to make due use from these sensible assurances of
Gods love, that thereby we may the rather have power against the vanity of our
minds, etc. Let us learn to make the Lord our portion. And let Christ our
Savior be in stead of al couetable or desirable things unto us: according to
the doctrine which we have heard out of the 16. Psalm. and as we read Song of
songs, chap. 5.16. that Christ is to the Church in stead of all sweet things,
It leads us back to the first Commandment, and thence through all the
Commandments.
yea wholly delectable, that is, according to the Hebrew word there used, all
whatsoever is worthy to be coueted or desired.

And thus, this 10. Commandment which is as it were the period and full point
of the Law of God, and the end as one may say, of the race or gole of humane
charity, it directs us back again to the first Commandment, and even to
God himself, the only true fountain of all love, and the most worthy to be
loved of all; and for whose sake also, we should according to this Commandment
perfectly love every neighbor, according to that which we read, 1. Tim. 1.5.
The end of the Commandment is love out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned. The Law of God therefore, as also the
obedience thereof, may be compared to a circular course, the end whereof is as
one may say the beginning of the same: or to a golden chain, the linkes
whereof are so fastened together, that no one can be sundred from the whole, by
reason of their mutual connection and knitting together: in the which also, the
last is always next to that which soever a man shall reckon for the first.

It is also so large a circuit, that no man can ever make his walk out of the
compass or command of it.

Finally, in so much as love ought both to begin, continue, and end in the Lord,
and for his sake, it is manifest that although we are to love all unfeignedly,
yet by how much any among the rest, do more lively resemble the image of God in
that true righteousness and holiness which the Law commands, so much the
more dearly are we to regard and love them, as the more honorable members of
the household of God. The least also of such ought to be always more regarded
and loved of us, then the greatest and most glorious of the profane and
ungodly children of this wicked and malignant evil world, according to the
doctrine of the 3. verse of the 16. Psalm mentioned a little before.

Now therefore, to God only wise, most holy, righteous and merciful, the most
worthy of all love, fear, honor, and glory, for this his great mercy in
giving us so holy, righteous, and perfect a Law, for the discovering and
disclosing of our sin and misery, and for the guiding of us to Christ Jesus
the only mediator of our eternal happiness and salvation, be all honor and
glory, and praise both now and for ever. Amen.

The last exercise for conclusion of this first part of Christian Catechism,
and instruction, concerning the holy Laws and Commandments of Almighty God.
Ye may remember, that for the conclusion and shutting up of this part of our
Catechism, diverse proofs were rehearsed, to show the general perfection of
the whole Law, both for the wisdom, and also the righteousness of it.

Likewise diverse proofs were rehearsed, for the general equity of the whole
Law; and for the curses which God has generally threatened against the
transgression of it; and for the blessing which he has generally promised to
the obedience of the same.

Moreover, diverse proofs have been alleged for our general disobedience,
and that therefore of our selves, we have not only no interest in any of the
blessings, but that all the curses are due unto us.

Likewise diverse proofs for the perfect obedience of our Savior Christ, by
whose death and perfect obedience only, we are delivered from every curse,
and made partakers of all blessings.

Last of all, from that which follows in the 20. chapter of Exodus, from the
18. verse to the 21. we have seen both to what ends and purposes, the Lord God
did in most fearful manner publish his Law unto his people, and also what
effects it wrought in the hearts of the people of Israel, to whom it was in
that fearful manner published.

And so from thence, to what ends the Lord will have the same his most holy and
righteous Law, to be preached from time to time unto his people: and what uses
we our selves (who through the goodness of God have now lately heard it so fully
opened unto us) ought to make of it. The general perfection of the whole Law


These things let us briefly call to remembrance, and so end this part of our
Catechism concerning the Law of God.

First therefore, what proof do you remember concerning the general
perfection of the wisdom and righteousness of the Law of God?

One principal proof was alleged out of the 4. chapter of Deuteronomy. the 5.6.7.
and 8. verses, in these words: Behold (says Moses to the people of Israel) I
have taught you ordinances and laws, as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye
should do even so within the land whither ye go to possess it. Keep them
therefore and do them: for that is your wisdom and your understanding in the
sight of the people, which shall hear all these ordinances and say, only this
people is wise, and of understanding, and a great nation.

For what great nation is there, unto whom the Gods come so near unto them, as
the Lord our God is near unto us in all that we call unto him for?

And what great nation is there, that has ordinances and laws so righteous,
as all this Law which I set before you this day?

This was one principal proof alleged indeed, which as we see, evidently
commends the excellency and perfection of the Law of God, with all the
appertenances; such as are the holy rites and ceremonies thereof, yea even from
the testimony of the heathen themselves, etc.

Read also Psalm. 19. from the 7. verse, and Psalm. 119. in many places, and
Psalm. 147. the last two verses.

This excellent commendation of the Law of God, is to singular end and purpose.
For the knowledge of it is a necessary introduction to all obedience, as on
the contrary, the base account of it is the high way to all sin. But leaving
this point:

What proof do you remember to have been alleged, to show the general
meaning of God in his Law, both on the negative part, and also on the
affirmative part of the same?

To this purpose was alleged the saying of the Lord by his Prophet Isaiah,
chap. 1. verse 16. and the beginning of the 17. Wash you, make you clean: take
away the evil of your works from before mine eyes, The general meaning of the
Law.
cease to do evil: learn to do well. And again, that which the Apostle
vvriteth, Romans 12.9. Abhor that which is evil, and cleave unto that which
is good.

These places do as briefly as may be comprehend the whole sum and contents
of the Law, wherein God forbids all that is evil, and commands all
whatsoever is good for man to think, speak, or do.

Our Savior Christ also, as has been answered before, comprehends all
obedience to the Law, under the perfect love of God, and the perfect love of
our neighbor.

In the 3. chapter of the 1. Epistle of John, all sin which is the
transgression of the Law, is called unrighteousness, and all obedience is
noted by the name of righteousness.

Show now what proof was alleged for the general equity of the Law of God?

The contents of the whole 18. chapter of the Prophet Ezekiell was to this
end briefly opened, wherein God himself pleads at large for the justifying
of his proceedings which were according to the equity of this his Law,
contrary to the unequal cauals of the vvickeder sort among the Israelites.

We may to this purpose call again to mind that which was alleged, Deuteronomy. 4.8.
Read also Romans 6.19. Isa. chap. 5. verse. 3.4. and Micah. chap. 6.1.2.3. Note
that in this respect the Commandments of God are called judgments, Psalm.
19. and Psalm. 119. All are given with most holy and perfect ad^^isement.

We are now come to the general curse against the transgression of the Law,
and to the general blessing promised to the whole and entire obedience of it:
What general proofs were rehearsed for these points?

Some of them did more jointly lay forth both the curse and blessing: Other did
the same severally and apart.

Which are those proofs which do jointly lay forth both the blessing and the
curse?

Most briefly are both the curse and the blessing comprehended in the 13. chap.
of the Prou. the 13. verse: He that despises the word shall be destroyed: but
he that fears the Commandment shall be revvarded. And chap. 19. verse 16. He
that keeps the Commandment keeps his own soul: The g^ bless^^ curse of
(...) Law.
but he that despises his ways shall dye. And again, chap. 29.18. Where
there is no vision the people decay: but he that keeps the Law is blessed.
And Isa. chapter 1. verse. 19.20. If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good
things of the land: but if ye refuse and be rebellious, ye shall be devoured
with the svvord: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Read also the like, Job. 36.11.12. And again Isa. chap. 3. verse. 10.11. and
Psalm. 58.11. Read also Genes. 4.7. In these and such like sentences are both
the curse and the blessing most briefly comprehended, that every one might
easily remember them. Read Joshua 22.18.20. and Deuteronomy. 27. the last verse. The
curse is briefly noted apart.

More largely the same are laid forth together, Deuteronomy. 11. verse. 26.27. etc.
and chapter 30. from the 8. verse to the end. Read also Job chap. 22. verse.
15.16. etc. to the end. And Psalm. 50. the whole Psalm. and Ier. chap. 7. And
Romans 2.5.6.7. etc. 16.

In these and such like places of holy Scripture the more large declaration of
the curse and blessing is contained.

But as you may remember, there were some other places and proofs to this
purpose recited, wherein the general curses and blessings are most largely
described.

Which places and proofs were they?

They are the whole 26. chap. of Leuiticus, and likewise the whole 28.
chapter of Deuteronomie.

These whole chapters indeed being very large chapters, are replenished with
recital of the manifold blessings which God assures to all that will obey his
Law, and of all kind of curses theatened against the disobedient and rebellious.

But beside these kinds of testimonies there were other proofs alleged, which
did set forth the general curse apart by it self, and likewise the general
blessing.

Such as are concerning the curse, Hosh. 4.1.2.3. and Heb 2.2.

And concerning the blessing, Psalm. 19.11. and Luke chap ^^ 28. And Hebr. 11 6.
Read also Philip. 4.8.9.

After this manifold declaration of the curse and blessing we came to the
proof of our general corruption and disobedience, whereby we have made our
selves void of the blessing, and justly subject to the curse. Man's general
corruption and disobedience to the Law.


What proofs were they?

They are such as we read, Psalm. 14. and Romans chapter 3. verse. 9. and so
forth to the 21. verse, and verse 23. There is no difference: all have sinned,
and are deprived of the glory of God. And Ephesians. chapter 2. verse. 3. All are by
nature the children of wrath.

To this purpose also was rehearsed a declaration of the speeches, which
usually all such as be not renewed and sanctified by Gods grace, do cast forth,
both generally and particularly, in contradiction to the righteousness of the
whole Law, and of every Commandment of it.

When obedience to the Law of God is generally urged, why say some, do ye
think that none shall be saved, but such as shall live so holily as you would
make us believe we must? I warrant you there shall be but a few saved then, etc.

We are no Angels say some: I am no Saint says another: I cannot live so
straight a life says the third: I should die quickly if I should want my merry
pastims, my pleasant copesmates, etc.

And I warrant you say many, if all were known, they that are thought to live
so holily, are as bad as the worst, etc.

The like are the particular contradictions which were recited concerning
wicked speeches against the righteousness and obedience of every
Commandment.

After these things did follow on the contrary, the general proofs of the
perfect obedience of our Savior Christ, whereby all that do truly believe in
him, and repent of their sins, be delivered from the curses, and made
partakers of the blessings: can you now call to mind which they were?

Diverse proofs for the confirmation of this point were alleged out of the
Gospel written by the Evangelist John, as namely, out of the 4. chap. verse.
34. where our Savior Christ professes of himself, that it was his meat to
do the will of him that sent him (that is, of his heavenly Father) and to
finish his work.

And chap. 8.29. I do always those things that please him. And verse 46. in
the same chap. Which of you (says he to the malignant Jews) can rebuke me of
sin? And verse. 55. I know my father, and do keep his word. And chapter 12.
verses 49.50. I have not spoken of my self, but the Father which sent me, he
gave me a Commandment what I should say, The glorious and fearful manner of
the publishing of the Law.
and what I should speak. And I know that his commandment is life
everlasting: the things therefore that I speak, I speak them so as the Father
said unto me. And chap. 14.31. As the Father has commanded me, so I do.

Hereof God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ himself gives a most solemn
testimony at his Baptism from heaven saying, This is my beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased. Matthew. 3.17. and again chap. 17.5. at his transfiguration.
And the same 2. Pet. 1.17.18. Read also the testimony of John the Evangelist,
1. Epist. 3.5. and of the Apostle Peter, 1. Epist. 2.22. and of the Apostle
Paul, 2. Cor. 5.21. and in the Epistle to the Hebr. chap. 7.26. Finally, it is
in many places testified, as we have already seen, that he is called the Lord
our righteousness: yea even in his childhood he says to his mother and
Joseph, Knew ye not that I must be about my fathers business? Luke 2.49. And at
his Baptism: It becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, Matthew. chap. 3.15.
We are now come to call to remembrance that which was delivered from our text,
as it follows after the words of the Law, from the 18. verse of our 20. chap.
of Exodus to the 21. verse of the same.

But first of all, I would have you make rehearsal of the words of the text:
Which are they?

Immediately after the publishing of the words of the Law, it follows thus in
our text:

And all the people saw the thunders, and the lightenings, and the sound of the
trumpet, and the mountain smoking, and when the people saw it they fled and
stood a far off.

And they said unto Moses, Talk thou with us, and we will hear: but let not
God talk with us lest we dye.

Then Moses said unto the people, fear ye not: for God is come to prove you,
and that his fear might be before you, that ye sin not. So the people stood
a far off, but Moses drew near unto the darkness where God was.

What were you taught to observe and mark from these words?

We were taught to observe these three things.

First, in how glorious and fearful a manner God pronounced and published
his most wise, righteous, and holy Law.

Secondly, what effects followed hereupon by God his more imm^diate working in
the hearts of all the people of Israel, who both heard and savv the same.

Thirdly, to what end and purpose God gave his Law in so fearefu^^ manner
according to that instruction which Moses (guided by the holy Ghost)
delivers unto them, according to the occasion which God himself had given
by that former work of his in the hearts of all the people.

The first of these is plainly expressed in the former part of the 18. verse.

The second follows in the latter part of the same verse, and in the 19.
verse next following.

The third is contained in the 20. verse.

Moreover, in the 21. verse the conclusion of this most reverend and solemn
action is set down. For the people go to their tents, as we may perceive by
that which we read, Deuteronomy. chap. 5. verse 30. But Moses draws near, and
abides with God in the mount forty days and forty nights, to receive the
Law written in the tables of the Covenant, and to be perfectly instructed in
all the ordinances of God, as it follows in the 31. verse of the same fifth
chapter, and as we read again in the same book of Moses, chap. 9. verses
9.10.11.12.

And finally, from the consideration of all these things, the general uses
which we our selves are to make of our hearing of the doctrine of the Law were
opened unto us.

These things, let us now as briefly as we can call to our remembrance, and so
will we conclude.

First therefore, why did the Lord publish his Law in so glorious and fearful
a manner: that is to say, with terrible thunder and lightening, etc. according
as it is more fully set down in the 19. chapter of Exodus?

The Lord savv it to be necessary, partly because of the stubburnnesse and
pride of man's nature, wherein it is to be humbled: and partly because of the
sluggish drovvsinesse of the same: in respect whereof, the conscience is to be
rovvzed up, and avvakened to attend to the hearing of the Law and doctrine of
God.

It is very true: for this is generally the natural corrupt condition, not
only of the Israelites, but also of all mankind, both Jews and Gentiles at
all times, whosoever they, or we, Why God gave his Law in so glorious and
fearful manner.
or any other be, or have been, ever since the first fall of man: we are either
stubburne, proud, and presumptuous to do evil: or if by some servile restraint
we be not so audacious and bold, then are we sottish as it were, and altogether
careless to mind or work any thing that is good.

Now therefore the Lord in his excellent wisdom, chose the fittest means that
might be in either respect: even the same already mentioned, which do most
lively and effectually declare the glorious power and reverend majesty of God,
and that he is one most perfectly armed and furnished from heaven to take
vengeance upon the whole world, and every one therein, whosoever shall despise
and tread under foot the least of his Commandments, which he gives with
sovereign charge to be perfectly obeyed of all men, according to that we
read, 2. Corinthians. 3.7. etc.

This is the first point.

In the second place, what effects followed hereupon in the hearts of all the
people of Israel, by the Lords own immediate ordering of the matter? For (as
it is said) all the people did behold this fearful sight, and heard both the
words of the Law, and also the voice of the thunder and sound of the trumpet.
It was a thing done before all the thousands of Israel, even before those six
hundredth and three thousand and five hundred and fifty, which were from
twenty years of age and upward, Numbers 1.45.46. beside those eight thousand
five hundred and fourscore of the tribe of Leui, which were numbered from
thirty years of age and above, Numb. chap. 4.48. and beside all that were
under these ages, both men-children and men-seruants: and beside all the
women-kind, even so many as were of age to make use of the sight and hearing
of these things. For these also were gathered together as it is like, in places
further removed: according as afterward they are commanded, both men, women,
and children, and strangers also among Israel, to come together every
seventh year at the feast of Tabernacles, to hear the reading of the Law,
Deuteronomy. 31.10.11.12.13. The practice whereof, we read Nehem. chap. 8.1.2.3. etc.

The effects of the publishing of the Law in the hearing of the Israelites.
What effects therefore I say, followed upon this so reverend and solemn an
action by the Lords own more immediate ordering of the matter?

These effects were three.

First, they were upon the sudden utterly astonished and amazed with a very
terrible fear, as is declared by their flying away far off from the
mountain.

Secondly, upon aduisement and counsel when they had recovered themselves,
they with one consent acknovvledging the necessity of instruction, but
finding themselves unable to learn from such a fearful manner of teaching
from the mouth of the Lord, whereby they were terrified rather then taught;
they do by their Elders make their suit unto Moses, that he would be a means
that God would no more speak to them after that sort, but that he would
teach them by his ministry, which they had found by former experience to be
more comfortable and fit for them, because of their weakness.

Thirdly, they promise vvilling obedience to Moses, in all things, which it
should please God to speak unto them by him, even as if God should speak
himself.

The first of these three effects is mentioned in the latter part of the 18.
verse, in these words: When the people saw it, they fled and stood a far off.

Concerning the second point, we see the whole declaration of it in the 5.
chap. of Deuteronomy. from the 23. verse, etc. to the 30. wherein is set forth unto
us, a notable ground for the institution of the holy ministry of the word by
men, as of that which is come in stead of Gods speaking by his own voice,
according to that which our Savior Christ says: He that hears you hears
me. And on the contrary, he that despises you despises me, and he that
despises me, despises him that sent me. Luke 10.16.

And concerning the third point, as it is the last, so it is as the sealing up
of the rest.

For it were to little fruit, either for Israel, or for England, or any of us,
to see our ignorance and necessity of instruction, and also to desire to enjoy
the preaching of the word, unless we should have grace to obey it.

Thus having seen what effects followed the Lords fearful publishing of his
Law, Moses teaches the Israelites what uses they ought to make of the Law.
according to his own immediate working in the hearts of his people; it
remains that we return to the last point of the first answer, that we may
more particularly consider from the instruction of Moses, to what ends and
purposes it pleased God to give his Law in so fearful a manner.

What are those ends and purposes?

Moses comforting the people against their excessive fear, lets them to
understand, that God did not mind by that his dealing to exanimate and amaze
them, but rather first of all to examine or try and prove them, that is, to
show them by sensible and plain demonstration from their own experience, how
frail and sinful creatures they were in and of themselves, without his mercy
and grace.

Secondly, he tells them that Gods meaning was by that means to settle his
true reverence and fear in the hearts of their posterity for ever, Deuteronomy. chap.
4.10. and chap. 31.11.12.13.

Thirdly, that as a fruit of the same his true fear and reverence, they
(having the knowledge of his Law and will) might be nourtured and preserved
from all witting and willing sinning against him.

This is indeed a true and short interpretation of the speech of Moses to the
people of Israel. Concerning every of these points, sundry things were
delivered for a more full instruction, the which time will not serve to repeat.

Let us therefore come to the general uses which we are to make of our own
hearing of the same Law of God, unless we will be unprofitable hearers of it:
yea, unless we will hear it to our curse and condemnation, and not to our
blessing and salvation.

Show you which those uses are?

There are some which we may call the former uses: and there be other which we
may call the latter.

Which are they which we may call the former?

They are these which follow.

First, the Law of God makes known unto us the infinite greatness of our
natural corruption and sin.

What uses all Christians ought to make of the Law.
Secondly, it shows us the infinite greatness of that wrath and misery,
which is due to us from the justice of God, because of the same.

Thirdly, it is as a Schoole-maister to bring us to Christ, that we might be
made righteous by faith, through the forgiveness of our sins, and by the
imputation of his righteousness: and that being delivered from all wrath and
misery, yea, from every discomfort, whith either the Law or our own sin and
corruption offers, we may be heirs of blessing here, and of life everlasting
in the kingdom of heaven.

These are the former uses of the Law, concerning the which we are to
understand, that as in the bodily sickness, so in the sickness of the soul
and cure thereof, these three things are necessary.

First, that the sickness with the causes thereof, be rightly discerned and
known.

Secondly, that a meet and convenient medicine be sought out.

And thirdly, that the medicine being found out, it be speedily used and
applied.

First therefore, that the Law of God makes known our sin, which is both the
sickness and also the cause of the sickness of the soul, read Gal. 3.19.
and Romans 3.19.20. and chap. 17.7. and verse 13. Read also how our Savior
Christ himself consents by the work of his Spirit, with this use of the
Law, John chap. 7. verse 7. and chap. 16. verses 8.9.

Touching the second use, it is most answerable to the justice of God, that the
same Law which is the means of discovering sin, should also make known the
penalty and punishment of the same. Read Romans 4.15. and 2. Cor. 3.7 9. Read
also Deuteronomy. 27. and Gal. 3.10.11.12. Read also Psalm. 45.6.7. Ier. 5.9. and
verse 30. and chap. 9.9. and chap. 7.19. Ezekiel. 22.13.14. and 1. Cor. 20.22.
Heb. 2.2. and chap. 10.28.29.30.31. Read also Psalm. 76.7.8. and Psalm. 130.3.
and Amos 3.8.

Concerning the third use, which is the last of the former, and the most
excellent use of them, as that whereunto the other do serve, for the benefit of
all the elect children of God, read Gal. 3.24. and Romans 10.4. For the opening
of the which point, you may remember how it was declared unto you, that the
faithful do find in Christ all sufficient comfort against every discomfort
which the Law confirms against us: seeing we do by faith find in him both
purity of nature, and righteousness of life, and satisfaction for sin, and
intercession with God on our behalf, and therewithal power against sin, and
grace to live righteously in some measure of true obedience to God: and finally
everlasting life and glory, through the most free and infinite mercies of God.
To him therefore be all praise and honor and glory for evermore, Amen.

Now let us come to those which were called the latter uses of the Law.

Which are they?

The first use of the Law, after that we are brought by it to our Savior
Christ, is that henceforth it is unto all the servants of God, a most perfect
rule to teach and admonish us how we are to amend our former wicked ways, and
to order and frame our lives anew, in all the duties of true righteousness and
holiness, to the glorifying of the name of God, to the assuring unto our
selves the truth of our faith, for the peace of our own consciences, and to
the good example and profit one of another.

Secondly, it serves as a continual watchman and admonitor, to tell us of
our faults, that by the rebukes thereof we may be more and more humbled in the
sight of God: and likewise, to show us the imperfection, and manifold failings
of our obedience, yea, even in the best things which we do; that so it may be a
preservative against all false opinion of the worthiness and merit of our own
works, and as a spur to stir us up to the care of better proceedings, as
having been hitherto unprofitable servants unto God.

Thirdly, it is a perpetual remembrance unto us, how great our deliverance
has been by our Savior Christ, who has freed us from infinite sins, and
from the most horrible damnation due to the same, to the end that by the same
continual remembrance, we do provoke our own hearts to love Christ more and
more dearly all the days of our lives: and therewithal also, to put us in
mind how infinite the danger is, if at any time we should fall away from him.

Concerning the first of these latter uses of the Law, read 1. Tim.
1.5.6.7.8.9.

In this respect also, does our Savior Christ return all that are brought to
him by the Law for their redemption, justification, and salvation, back again
to the Law, for the direction of their life, in all the duties of love both to
God and their neighbor, as to the end of their redemption. And so also do his
holy Apostles. Read Ioh. chap. 13.34. and 1. Epist. 2.7.8.9.10.11. Romans
13.8.9.10. Gal. 5.14. and James chap. 2.8.9.10.11. Luke 1.74.75. Neither is
there any other knowledge of God, faith, fear, love, etc. commanded in the
Gospel to any Christian and true believer, which was not before commanded in
the Law of God, to every faithful and believing Jew.

And that the duties of Gods moral Law are the same duties, from whence the
truth of our faith is to be manifested to the glory of God, etc. read again
James chap. 2.14 15.16. etc. and John 3.17.18.19.20.21.22. and Matthew.
5.16.17.18.19. etc. Read also Ier. 31.33. compared with Heb. 7.10. and
chapter. 10.15.16.

Concerning the second of these latter uses of the Law, that it serves in
stead of a continual watch, etc. call to mind that which we read, Psalm.
19.11. Moreover by them is thy servant made circumspect. Read also Psalm.
119.98. and verse 205. and Prou. 6.23. And touching our unprofitableness,
read Luke chap. 17.7.8.9.10. And against trust in our own works, chap.
18.9.10.11.12.13.14. and verse 18.19. etc. 23.24.25.

Now concerning the last of the latter uses of the Law, it is evident to be so,
in that it does always rebuke the least sin, and in the own nature
continually calls for perfect obedience, under pain of the curse and
damnation. Whereby it awaketh the conscience to the continual sight of the
guiltiness of sin, etc. whence also we cannot but be put in mind continually
of our deliverance by our Savior Christ, and consequently of that love and
duty which we owe him.

Thus then we see that the Law is of manifold use, both before and after that
we are brought unto Christ.

But against the latter uses, some man will peradventure object that which the
Apostle Paul seems to write to the contrary, even there where he teaches,
that the Law is our Schoole-maister to bring us to Christ: for he adds these
words by and by in the very next verse, Gal. 3.25. But after that faith is come
(says he) we are no longer under a Schoole-maister. And chap. 4.7. Thou art no
more a servant but a son and verse 24. The Law gendreth unto bondage: and 1.
Tim. 1.9. The Law is not given to a righteous man.

To these places we answer by a true interpretation of the Apostles meaning,
that they make nothing against any of the uses of the Law by us mentioned. For
his meaning is only to show, that as the Law is opposed to Christ and the
covenant of grace, and as it brings with it the burden of ceremonies, and as
it is armed with the curse against the least transgression of it: so are not
the faithful (who are redeemed by Christ, and do truly endeavor to live
righteously) under the Law, but under grace. But to be under the Law for the
direction of our lives, how we should serve and please God; this is so far
from a bondage, that it is a singular ease and benefit, that we have so short
and perfect an abridgement of the whole will of God as his Law is.

This is the love of God (says the Apostle John 1. Epistle chap. 5.3.) that we
keep his Commandemens; and his Commandments are not grievous, that is, they
are not ouer-burthensome unto true and faithful Christians. Like as our Savior
Christ had said before: My yoke is easy, and my burden is light, Math.
11.30. The reason is, because in Christ, and through the redemption which he
has paid for our sins, to appease the wrath of God, both the Law and the
Gospel are reconciled, and they consent together as in a most friendly league,
teaching one and the same doctrine of faith and godliness, to the glory of
God, and the salvation of all his elect people. And thus the Law as well as the
Gospel is said to convert the soul, to give wisdom to the simple, to
rejoice the heart, etc. as we read in the 19. Psalm. And thus also the
righteousness of God, though it be made manifest without the Law, yet it has
witness of the Law, and of the Prophets. Neither does the Gospel make the Law
of no effect, but confirms and establishes it, as the Apostle Paul
teaches, Romans 3. verse 21. and 31. and Gal. 3.21. Is the Law against the
promise of God? God forbid.

Wherefore we keeping our selves far from the heresy of those that are
called Antinomians, because they utterly reject the Law, yea, even the moral
Commandments of the Law of God: let us in the fear of God, and with all
thanks to his divine Majesty, for so great a blessing as his Law is (it being
rightly and lawfully used, as the same Apostle teaches, 1. Tim. 1.8.) Let us I
say, embrace and practice every good use of it: that is, that we being truly
humbled and brought to our Savior Christ by it, and through him being
delivered from every curse of it, we may again by our Savior Christ be so
lifted up with the joy of his salvation, and so sanctified and enabled by his
grace, that walking in obedience to it, we may be partakers of all the
blessings which God of his infinite mercy though Jesus Christ has promised to
the obedience of the same; yea, even to the sincere, though imperfect obedience
of all such as are redeemed, justified, and sanctified, through faith in the
same our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus his son. The which graces God of the
same his infinite mercy, grant unto us and to all his elect children, both now
and henceforth for evermore, Amen. (...).

FINIS.
An index for correction of the Errata.
Page 2. in the margent, for preparation read pattern. page 3. line 10. for
them. read him. and in the margent Scheninah. page 6. line 29. read, gives
any an. page 19. line 27. that, for the page 27. line 24. set the comma after
parts. page 30. line 15. read benefit. page 33. lin. penult. read Bethauen.
page 42. lin. 5. for all read ^l. page 49. line 15. read, not only mutually
page 50. line 11. read more bound. page 51 in the margent read Thahhaudem.
page 52. line penult. for contain read conceive. page 53 and 54. read rites
for rights. page 63. last line, for fasting read feasting. page 74 line 16.
time. is for tune. page 75. line 19. read hunting. page 84. line 21. for
slowly, read loosely. page 87 line 22. put out and. page 89. line 29. heavenly
for heavy. page 98. line. 6. read, God was, call, etc. page 100 line 13. put
out the word this. page 101. line 21. read others, from which, etc. page 103.
line 8. read we ought. page 106. line 16. read, or Sabbath thereunto, etc.
page 113. line 12 sell for set. page 116. line 12. read the Apostles of our
Savior Christ, etc. page 121. line 12. read to give them all good, etc. page
122. line 5. or for as. page 131. line 21. read or of all his creatures. page
133. line 31. ^e for In. page 135. line 1. read lightness and inconstancy.
page 139. line 13. for our read their. page 140. line 5. reprocheth: and line
12. Ecclesiastes. page 145. line 13. dye as a, etc. page 147. line 10. put out
the last repetition, Come up thou bald-head. page 149. line 33. read blessed
course. page 53. line 21. for else, read less. page 163. line 33. read
fore-possessed. page 194. line 5. read brings. page 195. line 16. read
provided. page 206. line 23. read, and from antiquity. page 238. line vlt.
read, work and further all his works. page 239. line 14. for inordinate,
read ordinary. page 251. line 2. read, with God, but also the, etc. and line
12 for we as, read as we. page 265. line 27. for many, read may any. page
269. for arises, read arising. page 274. line 10. for in, read of.


