A POST WITH a packet of mad Letters.

The second part.



LONDON. Printed by R. B. for John Brown, and John Smethicke, and are to be
sold in S. Dunstones churhyard* 1606.

TO THE READER.
READER I know not what you are, and therefore I cannot well tell What to say
to you: only this at adventure, if you be wise, you will not play the fool
in scoffing at that, which perhaps may deserve a better countenance: if you
be not wise, I can but pray for your better understanding: howsouer you be,
I will hope the best of you, that you will think of my work as it deserves,
which is as much as I desire* if you get any good by it, thank me for it: if
hurt, thank your self, for your abuse of that might serve you better: this
is all I can, and will at this time say unto you: my intent was to pleasure
many, and you may be one of them: and to hurt none at all, and therefore not
you. So leaving my book to your liking, as it falls out, I rest as I have
reason;

Your friend, Nich. Breton.

A Post with a Packet of mad letters. The second part.
The letter between the Knight R.M. and the Lady E. R.
SWeet should be that spirit, which through the instinct of love understands
the silence of truth whose tongue is the heart, whose words are sighs, in which
are hidden the secret fruits of those trees, that only grow in the paradise
of reason; vouchsafe then fair eye, more brighte then the sunny beams, with
one fair glaunce, of ^our gracious favor to bless this rude and unworthy
paper, the which if it have made you any offense, in the fire consume it; but
if thorough the power of the fates, or the effect of your kindenes, it may do
you the least pleasure, Let him be Metamorphosed to worse then nothing, that
would be any thing, but that letter, during your reading, or ever any other
thing, then your will in your service: for that under heaven, having no cause
of comfort, but in my concealed hope of your grace, let all worlds sweet be as
bitterness to my thought* that shall seek sweetness in other sense: so looking
for no felicity but in the nest of the Phaenix, in the admiration of honor,
in the humility of love I rest.

Yours devoted to be commanded*

Her Answer.
Wisdom might well appear in that heart, which could pearce into the
conceipte of that spirit, that with the figures of love, deceiues the sense of
Simplicity: which not suspecting evil, finds seldom other substance: O
poor truth how is thy Title made a shadow of deceit, while in seeking of
paradise, folly falls into hell: yet, not to wrong any Creature, happy may
that live, that makes faith his felicitye, and pardoned be that paper, that
does but his masters message: let then sighs be buried in the depth of
forgetfullnes, while silence understands that virtue speaks: and in the
fire of that flame, whose heat is more felt then seen, be that letter burned
that offendes me with pleasure: so assuring my self, that if from the nest of
the Phaenix you pass without a fether, either the figure will be a Cipher, or
the fancy affection: so leaving your best thought to a blessed Issue, I rest
Affectionately*

Yours in what I may. E; R.

His Reply.
Unworthy should that heart be of the least of loves happiness, that can have
power to give place, to the poison of deceeite: and more then miserable were
the life, that to hell makes such a passage: Oh blessed creature, do not think
the world to be the Cave of the accursed, nor do a wrong to love, in the
suspicion of truth; Simple faith has no fear, and true love cannot feign;
but, if Silence be the only Answer of the expectation o^ comfort, hope in
obscurenesse m^st seek the happiness of desire: but let not fancy be Cipher,
when faith knows no fiction, but let your favor be the fether in the neste
of my honors Phoenix: which till I may kindly receive, I shall in the sun
beams of your beauty, consume to the ashes of discomfort: in which commending
the sum of my life to the true and honorable service of love, I rest*

Yours what mine own. R. M.

Her answer.
Ungracious is that spirit, that thorough suspicion of deceipte, does Injury
to love: and blessed is that fancy, that lives only by faith: sweet is the
war, where kindness ends the quarrel, and little the hurt, where hope is a
most present and ready help: in brief, they are blind trauailers that in
seeking to find heaven, go to hell, and if love be himself, he has life in
Assurance: let it then suffice you, to find the due of desert, where desire
exceedes not the limits of Reason: so, in the nature of that honor, that gives
virtue her best Grace, commending the comfort of your care to the condition of
your conceipte, I rest: as I have occasion to equal honor in true affection.

Yours as I find cause. E. R.

A merry letter from a conceited friend to his like familiar.
Honesty, I hope I am in the right, except the great wind have blown
clean awa^e your best wit, give me leave, spite of your teeth, to tell
you that I love you, and lea^t I should grow deaf I would be glad to hear
of you: for though I am ^ot blind, yet I cannot see you* and therefore having
a lit messenger, I thought it not amiss to write to you, not for any thing
that I have to say to you, but that while I think on you, you should see I
do not forgot you: for though complimentes are but idle, yet they make words
in steed of better matter, and so forth: now to the purpose, you shall
understand, that at the writing hereof a sudden occasion of business made me
make an end, ere I had begone, and thereore intending to write I know not what,
to abridge my conceit I know not how: but hoping that you are wise enough to
think what you lift, I will only pray for you, that being in as good health,
as I lea^t you, as soon as conveniently you can, I may meet with you, (...),
and where it shall please you for as you know, I am for you, in all kindness to
quite you* and so to him that made you, ever to bless and keep you, with my
hearts commendation I leave you.

Yours what mine own, B.

An Answer to the same.
WAgge-pasty, I am sure I am not in the wrong, except the Sun have dried up
your brains since, I left you: Let me, for I will tell you that, in my love, I
outleape you, and will not be so idle, as not to answer you, that my senses
do not so fail me, but that I understand you, and having no better company
would be glad to be troubled with you: for you have not a kind thought wherein
I do not quarrel with you, whether is more force in the nature of true
friendship: which because, fortune favors few fools this year, we must
carry longer to play our game: but never too late to go to an ill Bargain,
for now we do but talk our purses take no hurt, but when the term comes that
we may join issue in our cases, I fear the kings head in fish^treet will ^^nd
us tw^ good clients: but, all is well that ends well; except it were bad in
the beginning, as I think be this my letter, for, being troubled with I not
tell you what, least it should make you think I care not what, I have
written what you may read, and do as you see cause, either to reply upon
imperfection, or let it rest with a no^ plus: and so not doubting you to be
your self, and to put me in the number of your second self: I rest to your
self as my self.

One always yours. H. W.

A reply to the last letter.
IF you were as wise, as I could wish you, I could take a little pains to
write unto you, and yet for that you understand your self, I care not if I
trouble you with a little idleness: In the parish of Saint Ass, at the sign of
the hobby horse, maid Marian, and the fool, fell together by the Ears with
the Piper: so y^ had not the good man of y^ pewter candlestick, set in for the
Moris dance, the Maiegame had been quite spoiled* but when the game had gone
round and the brains were well warmed, the legs grew so nimble that their
heels went higher then their heads: but in all this cold sweat, while lu^^iguts
and his best beloved, were casting sheep eyes at a Cods-head, hue and cry
came thorough the street, that the fox had killed a tame goose, at the
sudden noise where of the multitude were so skarde that all the moris Dauncers
were divided, and the fool ran home to your town: but because we have some
miss of him in our parish, I pray you keep him not too long with you, and so
for lack of better present occurrents, content your self, with such news as
the time affoordes you: he^reafter you may have better, til when and always,
I rest as you know:

Yours. T. R.

An Answer.
IF you were not more then half mad, you would not have dau^ced such a
trenchmor* with your little wits: but, yet, since I guess it is about the full
of moon, I will hope shortly of your amendment: in the mean^ time, let me
advise you, to take patience with your understanding, to direct you in a better
course: for when you waked out of your dream, you saw no body, but the man
that you thought was tun to our town, and he was putting you on a coat of 4
elboes: for Maid-marian she I think is troubled with you in her cream pot:
but, for the hobby horse, alas he has forgot your turn: and therefore you
should do well to make your repair to our market, I think it will be a Saints
day, when if a naughty bird do not cross the Nightingale, you shall hear
some strange music about our Medowe plot: at the least you shall hear the
old song that you were wont to like well of, song by the black brows, with
the cherry cheeks, under the side of the pied Cow: come live with me and be
my love: you know the rest, and so I rest,

Thine what mine. N. R.

An other Reply.
O Brave Oliver, leave me not behind you you play ye Merchant all the week and
make al whole upon the holy day; you would be angry, if you could tell how*
and yet, having y^ cards in your hand, you cannot choose but turn up n^^dy* but
the matter (...) great, the tailer that sitted my Coat has made ^ou many a
^^cket, where if it were not for displeasing of Jack an Apes, ^ could make him
fall ^ut with his workman, for acquainting you with his invention* but let
this pass and to a better purpose; my neighbor and your good friend has a
welcome in store for you, and his eldest daughter would make you both a
husband, and a brother, her wort^ you know, and his wealth will do no hurt: I
should be glad of your good fortune, and you, I think, should play well at be
you pleased; and so much for the coniunc^io^ c^pulatiue: new, for news, I
bear none of late, but that the Bailiffe of our hundredth, has had a
mischaunce, his wife taking a blow^ that never smarted he has a pain in his
head, that cannot be cured: for having no other pla^ster but patience, is
resolved to make good cheer with his friends, and finding him self alone, is
content to make merry, with good fellows: this is all for this time; and so in
have I end,

Yours. N. B.

An Answer.
WHen wits go a wool gathering, the thread of it may be fine, if it be well
spunne: I see you have little to do, that have so much leisure to play your
leripups, if I could meet you right, I would fit you a penny worth: but though
I cannot pay you, your due, I will not die in your debt, and though I play at
Noddy, I will not take the card out of your hand^ for, I know not how you can
spare him: but leaving gamsters to their Tricks, and Jack an apes to his
monkie, let me tell you, that for your neighbor, you are so near him, that I
need not t^ trouble him and ^or his w^lth and her worth, you know well enough
what to do with them: for my self I love not to shake hands with your constable
in the company of kind fellowship, but yet not wronging an honest wench, I will
wish her better fortune, then my Affl^ction: and so commending thy self, I
will assist thee with my good prayers, that the Bailiffe of the hundredth may
find thee o^e among a thousand, I mean to shake hands, but not heads with and
so* in some little occasion, of sudden business I will here conclude for this
time, and always rest:

Thine R.M,

To my Honorable good Lord my Lord Morafi.
RIght honorable, to express unto your good Lordship, the humble duty of my
affection, I cannot better do it, then by this Bearer: whom for many good
parts, fitting your honors pleasure, I can well commend to your favorable
entertainme^t: for, as such masters are like black Swans: so, such servants
are choys creaturs: for a little matter of small moment, will hoyse up folly
above the clouds, while wisdom runs a course, of a more careful te^per:
such I hope shall I find your servant, whose wit and conscience take such
counsel in all his actions, that the judgments of good experience hold him
worthy good account: for my self, least I may be partial, I willeaue his praise
to your proo^e: and in hope of your contentment; only entreat your
entertainment; shortly I hope to see you: till when, persuaded that his service
shall gain him more praise then my pen, I will leave his qualities to your
trial, and his service to your favor; and so in infragible love rest, during
life.

Yours assured in true affection. R.B.

To my loving Cosen, master T. VV. Justice of peace.
Sir, I would be glad to write you news of the dispatch of your business, but
yet it will not be: for Lawyers b^ing full of Clyents, cannot answer al men at
once: and therefore considering your matter is in a case of more conscience
then gain, I must attend the leisure of your Counselor, who as he is wi^e, I
doubt not but will prove honest: an^ then a little time will be well (...)
with, that brings a good hour at the last: your adversary is full of money,
and trudgeth up and down like a fox, but I hope in s^eed of a goose, he will
be choked with a feather: have you no fear nor care of it, for I doubt not
to effect it to your content: and so much for your law business. Now for other
matters, the occurrents of this time, are either so frivolous, or dangerous,
that I think silence better blamed, then babbling: for though there be few
Partridges, yet there are many setters here in this town, who listen for
speeches, intercept letters, accuse the simple, and undo the foolish: and
therefore I had rather be silent with the Nightingale til May, then prate like
a Cuckoe out of season: yet for that you shall not think me fearful of
sparrow blasting, I will write you a little news. Tobacco is like to grow a
great commodity, for there is not an Ostler, nor a Tapster, but will be at his
whiffe or two, and use it as a shooing-horn to draw on a pot of Beer.
^ottell Ale, is more common then good, and yet dear enough, it is so taken up
with the drunken true. Thieves are well weeded, and yet besides shoue-groate
Testers, there are some lookers now and then. Painting was never s^ common, and
pretty cheap. And for women, some go like Antickes; some like maskers; some
proudly sober, and some like careless Resolution, but some few like angels:
but they are too high for men: and therefore I leave them to higher powers. Now
men are as in times past, if young, hardly wise, though witty: if aged wise: if
wealthy, served and honored: if poor, at least scorned, if not worse used: If
wise, perhaps employed: if folish, baffled; this I say for the most part: for
sometime, for some cause both youth and age, and poverty and folly, are l^^ely
borne withal: but for that this is rather an old observation, then any new
matter, I will end my long letter: with never ending love: And so in hope of
your health* commit you to the Almighty.

Your very loving Cosen* VV. R,

To the right honorable his very good lord, the Lord. VV. H.
Right honorable, your nobleness never ceasing to bind my service to your
kindness* has made me at this instant to presume a little upon your good
favor: So it is my good Lord, that I am shortly to bestow a daughter of mine
in marriage upon a gentleman of some worth, and according to our custom,
friends must be feasted, when a Pa^^y of Uenison is a grace to the whole
service: your honor shall much pleasure me, and as often heretofore, give
me no little cause to be thankeful: my state is not great, but my love so
far assured, as wherein I may deserve, that I cannot requite, I will fail
of my hope, but I will discharge some part of my debte: And so not doubting
your honorable favor to this my suit for a Bucke, beseeching God to add
happiness to your good health, I humbly take my leave.

Your honors in all humblenes R.S.

To his dear friend, M. F. R. at his lodging in the Temple.
YOu wrote of late unto me, for my opinion of your intent, and abuse for your
course: which two points I will touch as truly and fitly, as I can. Your
intent is to leave your study, and first to Court and then to Arms: but what
has altered your intent in study, to fall upon an intent to strange courses*
For your Books peaceably entreat of those things, which you may find
disquiet in passing through. For, touching your first course, is it not bett^r
to read of Princes, then to carry their crowns? you cannot feel their
burdens, except you had their cares. How full of perils are their pleasures?
yea, how many instruments of mischief does the devil send into the world,
to cross the courses of good Princes, that are leading their people to
Heaven? and if they be Woolues to their own flocks, how safe is it to be
far from their Courts? Now, leaving good Princes to Gods blessing, and
other to his amendment, go a little to his counsel. Oh how great are the
weight of the charges? and how many the natures of their troubles: who, if
they all be of one mind, and as if were one body of many members, yet
sometime a toe, and a finger, a hand, or an arm, a tooth or an eye, a tongue
or an ^are, may perhaps be out of temper, and so that all the body may be
out of frame* say their wits are great thorough experience of place: and
their pleasures great in the authority of power: and their powers great, in
the virtue of favor: yet with all, when experience is put to a new study,
providence must ^rie the power of wit, with no little trouble: and when
pleasures hold in power, love has no place in seruilitie: and when power
restes upon favor, what is the fear of fortune? And further ^is not the care
of a common wealth, a continual toil of wit? power, a dangerous s^eppe to
pride; hateful in the highest eye: and fortune unfaithful in all her
favors? rather read then, the laudable carriage of their courses, in the
service of kings, then seek in court to see their kingly courses: for God only
knows their consciences, themselves only their cares, and thou can not
know their crosses: But leaving the^ to their honorable proceedings, go yet a
little lower to the Ladies, and what shall thou see? either a creature like an
Angel, if virtuous: or worse then a woman, if vicious: perhaps thou shall see,
painting spoil a good complexion, or deceive a simple ^ie-sight: heat out of a
five presence, a fond spirit speak idlelie, and perhaps an idle wit play the
wanton, Now what art thou benefitted by all this* a^^se thine eye with a
picture, offend thine ^are wish fol^y, or loose thy time a idleness. Were it
not better for thee to read ye ^iction of Venus, then to be servant unto
vanity? and to laugh at a fancy, then to follow folly? ^et, far there be a
Phaenix among birds, if her nest be too high take heed of climing, for fea^e of
a fall: take heed of the object, that makes an abject of a subject: but look
a side at the attendants, what shall you see? Cost and courtesy, long service,
painful duty, hope of favor, with fear of displeasure, a great harvest,
many laborers, and ^ewe gains, and must be so, for desires are many, but
deserts fewer, and therefore they hope little. In sum, a Prince thou can
never be, a Counselor never think to be: Ladies are lowly, but beauty is
costly; and the charge of attendance, may bring hope for assurance. In mine
opinion therefore, thy intent is not good, and thy proceeding will be worse, in
thy humor of Courting. Now, for arms, Is it not better to read of the noble
acts of Conquerours, then to try the misery of the conquered, and to suffice
nature with a little, then to starve for want of food? Oh the danger of death,
the doubt of victory, the cross of valor, the terror of a sigh, sack of a
city, the defense of a battle, the sight of blood, the cares of the
sorrowful, and the consideration of conscience: oh these, with many other i^
banquets, bitter storms, deadly wounds, cold lodging, hard fare, stinking
drink, and louzy rags: and who knows how long: these things I say, with what
else I say not, are sufficient I hope to dissuade thee from so desperate a
course: rather read of true valor, and upon good cause, and fit time:
adventure life for honor, for thy country, thy religion, or thy life:
otherwise under ye show of seeking honor, go^ not like a hired butcher to
kill beasts: like a bloody tyrant, to kill men for money: remember what thou
have read: Blessed are the peacemakers: seek peace and ensue it: for God will
bless it, if he make it. Yet if needs thou will go to the field, begin not
with the court, least dainty fare, ease, and idleness, make thee unfit to
adventure the hard course to honor: but though in regard of the great
travails, and pe^ills in those passages, the tittles of honor, do most
truly belong to the well deseruers, while valor shown in mercy, does grace
noblenes in goodness, yet, for that I think thy body not answerable to thy
spirit, out of my love I have written thee my advise. hoping that it will take
effect, though not as I with, yet such as may be to thy good: and so knowing
thy judgment sufficient to determine of thy best course, I leave thee with it,
to ye direction of the Almighty, whom I beseech ever so to bles thee that I may
always hear well of thee, and rejoice to see thee: from my lodging in the
little College, this tenth of August, 1605.

Thine more then spoken. N. B.

A letter of a Batchelar, to a rich widdowe.
Widow, if you would not be sour, I would call you sweet: for though you know I
love you, yet you will say I flatter you: but yet be it how it will, this is
truth, believe it as you will: your eyes have caught my heart, who has sworn
me a servant to your will* I cannot with eloquence court you* but I can truly
love you, and think my self blessed, if I might enioie you: for as your
presence may please the wisest, so your wisdom may command the honest: for
your wealth, be it more or less then is reported, your self being of more
worth then you can have, I wish your self rather then what is yours you fear
perhaps youths inconstancy, it is trial that proves truth: and for my love,
it shall end with my life: but what are words vnbeleeued? or hopes not firmly
grounded? like the vision of a dream, which awake proves nothing: yet good
widow, if you be kind pity me: and if pitiful, favor me: and if gracious,
love me: God will reward you, love will be true to you, and I will dye ere I
will deceive you: you may increase your coin, and decrease your comfort: when
a coughing sung at midnighte, may make you weep before day: but venture a
little and have much: what I am, or have, you shall have all my love, my
service, my life, and what can you have more? a little more drink to make the
cup run over: and perhaps mar the drink that was good before: A little more
coin to fill the the other bag, and perhaps fall out to prove a piece of false
money: when commended by a Coistrel, that will serve for nothing but a C^ckold;
or kirbd by a Gub, that will grate you to the bones for an old groat: you will
curse your treasure that was the cause of your destruction. No no, good widow,
be good to thy self, in being kind to me: hear me, believe me, love me, and
take me: for I will be a servant to thy will, a companion to thy kindness, and
as a steward of thy substance: this, as I live, and hope of thy love, thou
shall find: for my heart has auowed it, and I will not be a villain to mine
own soul. In which, paying for thy health, and to be made happy in thy
kindness, to say Amen to my prayers: I rest,

Thine auowed, howsoever regarded. T.M.

To my loving friend. VV. D. at his fathers house in Couentrie.
HOnest Will, I hear by your mother, that you are going to the University,
where no doubt, but with good care and diligence, you may do your self much
good: but for that I have passed the place yt you are going to^, and have tried
the natures of those studies, and the profit to be made of them, let me tell
thee mine opinion of them, and which I think best for thee to follow for thy
good: first, for the b^tter blessing of whatsoever thou followest, bestow some
labor in the reading of the divine love: that done, note what I tell thee for
the increase of thy stock, when thou shall come to have any dealings in the
world: for thy better instructions in such courses, as may be for thy
commodity, observe ye rules that I will read thee: first for Grammar, it is
every Ushers of petty schools, common ^lai^e. Logic is but for the
University: for music, it brings more crotchets then crowns: for Astronomy,
it goes too high above the clouds, to do any good on the earth: Cosmography
is good for a trauailer, and Astrology for a Seaman: but for him that means
to gather wealth, and grow rich, let him be perfect in Arithmetic, to be sure
of his numbers: it will be a mean to gather wealth many ways, for if you
keep a merchants book, you shall learn his accounts, the prices of his
wares, and the gains of them, as well by great as by retaile: as well outward,
as homeward: and this is a sure way to wealth: again, if thou be advanced to
place of office, to keep account of the number of the people, the duties,
tributes, and what paiments so ever to be made by them, for Subsidies,
Fifteens, customs, and what else soever. Arithmetic is most necessary for thy
speedy dispatch of all those businesses: for howsoever honor may be sought or
bought by them that have enough, seek thou wealth, and that will bring thee
what the world can give thee: for if thou fall into want, and impairing or
spending thy stock, be forced to take some mean course for thy maintenance,
I will tell thee what thou shall find true: the honest will only pity thee, and
say thou may keep a school, it is an honest trade, when a churl will grudg at
his groat, for a shillings worth of labor, in beating quick sense into a dull
wit: who, if he be not capable of a good understanding* yet shall the fault
of his imperfection be imputed to thy negligence, and thou undeserved, receive
either a frown or a foul word for thy labor: now the proud Peacock that
has a little more money the^ wit, will perhaps entertain thee to a blew coat,
and forty shillings which, how gracious it will be to a good spirit, thou shall
find, and I shall be sorry to hear: Believe me, if thou have all the sciences, be
furnished with many languages, and art acquainted with honorable courses, and
have a heart as honest as can live; yet if thou lack wealth to grace all the
rest, thou shall have a fool come over thee, and a knave abuse thee. and he
whose wit goes no further then his trade, so play upon thy misery, with
sca^ning thy course of life, that thou will wish rather never to be borne, then
to be borne down with unhappiness: yea for necessities sake thou shall be
enforced to bestow thy study in fictions and follies, and to spend thy spirit
in vain, yea I may say, vile inventions, to commend an unworthy person, to the
wound of thine own conscience, who though he love to hear himself flattered,
yet perhaps when he has very miserably rewarded thee* yet will he lie of his
bounty, which is little better then beggary: Oh what a plague is it to a noble
spirit, through mere want, to present an Ass, with a burden of wit, or a base
spirit with a tract of honor? Oh dear Will, the wealthy that have but a
little wit, will grow rich with making a benefit of thy labors: while thou not
waying thy lack of judgment, in the first directing of thy course, wilt pine
away with sorrow to think of thy mistaken fortune: in brief therefore follow
my counsel, study all the Arts superficially, but chiefly Arithmetique, for
it is the assured way to wealth: be not ignorant in Divinity, for it is the
souls comfort: and take heed of Poetry, least it run away with thy wit:
for it has commonly one of these three properties, belibelling the wicked,
abusing the honest, or pleasing the foolish: and therefore though some excellent
man may have an excellent humor, do thou rather read in an evening, then
make thy days work in the study of idleness: give them praise that deserve
it, but do not thou bend thy delight toward it: for in a word, it is more
full of pleasure then profit. Thus have I writ thee a tedious letter, hoping
that if thou will follow my advise, it will do thee no harm: and if so much
good as I desire, I shall be glad to see it: in the mean time, leaving thy
courses with thy self, to the guiding and tuition of the almighty, I rest:

Thine in much affection, R. P.

To his most honored Lady Madam, Izabella Tarina.
Honorable Madame, how my unworthiness may hope of your goodness, I cannot
find: but in the notes of your nobleness, which, as it may well challenge the
height of your Title, so does it bind a world of servants to your good favor:
among whom, my self more desirous then able to deserve the least of your good
countenance, am yet presumptuous to trouble you with an humble suit. I have a
sister of years sufficient, to understand betwixt good and evil: and of
disposition, I thank God, not a miss: her bringing up has been chiefly at
her book and needle, but yet is she not unfurnished of other parts fit for a
servant of her place: which if it might so stand with your good pleasure,
should be to attend your honor in your chamber: her truth I will
undertake, for her diligence I will not doubt of; her kind nature I can
speak of, and her affection unto your Ladishippe, I know is not a little: if
therefore in all these, she may be pleasing to your entertainemente, I shall
be bound to your good favor in the honor of her preferment; which being
the highest advancement, that her duty can deserve, I leave her service with
mine own, to your honorable emploiment. So craving pardon to my boldness,
with favor to my suit, I humbly take my leave.

Your Ladyships in all humbleness, F. W.

To my most beloved Godfather, T. H.
Godfather, at the Font you gave me a name, and as I have heard, and read of
others, you undertook to see me brought up in learning, and in the fear of
GOD: I do not remember that ever I yet received penny from you, toward the
charge thereof; and you having neither charge of wife nor children, might do
well to bestow your blessing upon me, in somewhat better then a bare hand,
which will buie nothing: is it possible. that having one foot in the grave, the
other should be so far off? am I your nearest in nature, and shall I be
furthest off in love? I know not the cause, but what ever it be misconceiued in
unkindness, let me entreat you, to believe my love, and I desire no more; for
when you are weary of the flattery of those that feed upon you, among the
great showers of your kindness, that you daily rain down upon their
fields, you will I hope bestow one drop of grace upon my ground: I will
^ege nothing but your will, and will love you more then they which tell you
more: be not covetous to gather for them that gape for your goods: and be not
fast handed to him, who loves you more then al you have: and the good that you
will do, let it be in your life, that you may see your contentme^t in the
issue of your kindness: loath I am to weary you with words, and therefore in the
love of a true heart, which daily prays for your health and hearts ease,
hoping that God will move you for my good, whosoever is a mean of my hurt, I
cease further at this time to trouble you, but rest always in the duty of
mine humble love.

Your affectionate god son. T, B.

To my dearest beloved friend on earth, H. W.
HOnest Harry, out of the troubled spirit of a tormented heart I write to thee,
and therefore bear with my skill if it be not in the pleasing nature of so
good an humor as I could wish, and thou art worthy of: but as I know thee able
to judge of colors, better then the blind eyes of beetel heads, and of that
true kindness, that can and does rather comfort the afflicted, then increase
the sorrows of the distressed: let me imparte to thee some part of my
passion, that patience in thy pity, may the better play her part in my
spirit: what shall I say? I live as without life, pleasuring in nothing,
crossed in all hopes, put in many fears, languishing in many sorrows, and
troubled with the grief of a wounded conscience: not with the horror of
murder, the fear of treason, nor delight of sin: but with the cruelty of
fortune, the unkindness of friends, and the breach of my credit: and most of
all, with them whom I most love. Oh God, my heart aketh, and blame it not: and
my spirit mourns, and reprove it not: for though patience be a virtue that
makes men divine, yet there is but one Christ, and men are no Angels: and let
me tell thee true, the misery of my life is intolerable in the sense of
nature: for compare the afflictions of the most patient, with the causes of my
passions, and provide a world of pity, to behold the map of my miseries:
has one man been wealthy, and become poor? so am I: has another suffered
wrong? so do I another buried his parents, children, and dear friends? so
have I: another travailed far in hope of gain, and return with loss? so
have I: another been wounded in the wars, fared hard, lain in a cold bed,
many a bitter storm, and been at many a hard banquet? all these have I:
another imprisoned, so have I: another long been sick? so have I: another
plagued with an unquiet wife? so am I: another indebted to his hearts grief,
and feign would pay and cannot? so am I: another in love? so am I; another out
of love with himself? so am I; in sum, when any of these crosses, are able
to kill the heart of a kind spirit, and all these lie at once so heavy upon
mine heart, as nothing but the hand of God can remove, besides my continual
toil, for the reward of unquietness; while that which should be my comfort,
is my corrosiue, imagine how, with all this, I can live; and think what a death
it is thus to live. Oh the scorn of the proud, the abuse of the ungracious, the
scoff of the foolish, and the scanning of the unkind: the company of the
discontentiue, and the want of the most affected; the disgrace of learning, the
loss of time, and the misery of want. If there be a Hell on the earth, it
cannot be far from this cave of my discomforte; where I am sure, the devil
seeing my desire to serve God, lays all the bars he can in the way of my
best comfort: but I de^^^ him, and hope in Christ that my living and loving
God, who has tried my soul in adversities, will one day in his mercy, so look
upon me, that the devil shall be driven back from his purpose, and the tears of
my sorrow wipt away, I shall rejoice in such a joy, as all my griefs clean
forgotten, my heart and soul, shall in the joy of all my sense, in the
heavenly harmony of a holy himne, sing a new song of praise, to the glory of
my Savior: for the hastening whereof, in my deliverance from my torments, and
comforts in his mercies, I will frame my daily prayers, and be assured of thy
Amen: but I fear I am too tedious, and therefore will thus end: God continue my
patience, but not my sorrows, give me deliverance from my miseries, and make
me thankful for his blessings: and bless thee with as much happiness, as thou
know I want; so leaving my hopes to his mercies, and us both to his tuition:
I rest; with as little rest, as I think any man can rest,

Thine, or not mine own. N.R.

To his fair Mistress and hearts honor, Mistress A. T.
Lady, I have been so ill a scholar to love, that I never yet learned the
courting of beauty, neither would I willingly use Act to abuse virtue: and
therefore if plain truth may have grace, I will use no Atturneie in this case:
which being to be judged in your kindness, I will only crave audience, and
stand to your arbitrament: my case being mine own lawyer, thus I plead: your
eyes have stolen my heart: now I must either be accessarie to mine own hurt,
or accuse you of the fellonie, but rather willing to loose my heart in your
eyes, then keep them to look on other light, I will only appeal to your
self, what to do in this passion: If I love, you must know it, for your eyes
have my heart: and if I loose my heart, you must have it, for your eyes are
well worthy of it; but now you have it, preserve it for your service, let it
not die in displeasure* that has no life but in your love: of it could speak,
it would tell you how dearly, highly, and only it honors you, and if you
will believe it, you shall quickly find it: for it is dedicated to your
service, and has no care, but of your favor; keep it then to your use, use
it to your pleasure, and let it dye in other comfort. In sum, not to dwell
upon ceremonies, it is nothing mine, but al yours: and if it may live in your
eyes, it seeks no other heaven in this world: drive it not then from you that
has no life but in you: and take it wholly to you, that is as nothing without
you: so leaving it with my self, to the honor of your only service, I take
my leave for this time: but will rest ever.

Yours ^^^wed and devoted. R. S.

To his very good friend, Master* R. B. at his house in Coll.
Sir, I know you love no long letters, and my suit being t^ most men so
unpleasing, I would be loath to be tedious: I have purchased a piece of land,
and laid out al my money; now upon the sudden, an unexpected occasion puts me
to an extraordinary charge: for the furnishing whereof, I am constrained to try
my good frinds: among which presuming of your kind promise upon any urgent
occasion to stand me in steed, I am to entreat you by this bearer, to help me
to forty pounds. wherein you shall so much pleasure me, as so much may do,
and as I can requi^e it, I will not forget it: I would have it for six months:
my day I will not break, I will take it kindly, and deserve it thankfully:
my servant is trusty, and therefore I pray you send it by him: and as you will
be assured of m^ love, feed me not with delays nor excuse: for I know you
have it, and you know I will pa^e it. Thus loath to use you like a broker, to
send you a pawn, as an honest neighbor. let me be beholding to your
kindness, in which you shall give me cause in the like, or a greater matter to
rest upon, at as short a warning.

Your assured friend to use, R. H.

To the Right worshipful my very good master, Sir Thomas Ward Knight, at his
house in Padow.
Sir, after mine humble duty: I have talked wit^ diverse of those parties, to
who^ you directed me, touching ye benefit to be made of the sat, which you
have in hand, whose opinions I fi^de diverse: yet all agreeing in this, that if
you can procure it irreuocable, the money will be adventured: otherwise, they
are loath to engage their states and credits, too far upon bare hopes for lives
are uncertain, and in the change of times, diverse things fall out contrary to
expectation: you shall therefore do well before you trouble any of them in it,
to make sure of the matter, in such sort as may be best for your profit: for
the suit being effected to good purpose, leave to me to deal in it to your
content: there is much muttering that you are like to be crossed in it, I would
therefore wish you to try your strength in it, and not to slip time, for it is
precious in a good course: bear with me I beseech you, if I move your patience,
in urging your speed: for it is for your own good: against your coming to
town, I will have some what else for you to set on foot, for he that will work,
must not have the fire without an iron: but not knowing your business, I will
forbear at this time to trouble you with idle news: and only praying for your
health and hearts ease, commit the consideration of your own causes, to the
mannaging of your good discretion: and so humbly take my leave for this time,
and rest always,

Your Worships humble servant, I. T.

To my assured loving friend. T. B. with speed,
NOne payment of debts, is not only a crack in credit, but a loss of friends:
upon your letter I furnished your want: and fortune having been your friend, a
large conscience me thinks does not well: your excuse I yet know not, no^ can
well devise it: but acquaint me with it, that I may not wrong your disposition:
for a seeled affection, expects the like measure in kindness: the money you had
of me is not much, but if it have done you pleasure, I am glad of it: and if
you can well spare it, by this bearer, I pray you return it, or the cause why
you detain it: I have lately bought sheep to store a pasture that I have
taken to farm, and my money being short, I am boul^ to write to you for mine
own, which if it come, shall be welcome, if not, so that I know how it may
steed you, I will forbear it: and for the conference betwixt your son, and my
daughter, I think they are more ready for us, then we for them: your mind I
know, and am contented with it. for as I see their proceedings, we will soon
fall upon agreement: and to be plain with you, I think I were best rather to
provide you more money, then demand any more that you have, and therefore making
your excuse, in this only point of affection, entreating pardon for my plain
manner of writing, assuring you, that if this matter go forward, (as it is no
other like) as their lo^es, so shall our purses be one: and thus hoping of your
health as mine own, with commendations to your kind son, your, self, and
your* good Shrew, I commit you to the Almighty: Caunterbury this fourth of
August. 1604.

Your very loving friend. N.T.

To a Judge in the behalf of an offender.
MY good Lord, your honorable care of Justice* I hope is seasoned with the
charitable weight of mercy: for though the law cutteth off offense by sharp
punishment, yet death takes away repentance, and where there is sorrow, there is
sign of grace: the best Judge of true Justice, Christ Jesus pardoned the
great sinner, and with the gentle rebuke of sin no more, called her to great
grace: now shall Justice, upon the first fact, use an other course upon an
offender? I know it is your oath to do justice, yet may you give time of
repentance, in reprieuing this poor man, whose pardon will be easily
attained. Your honor shall do a good deed, God in imitating his course in
justice, will surely regard and reward you, the penitent offender shall be
bound ever to pray for you* my self with all his friends, will truly honor
you, and no doubt but our King, who is full of mercy, when his Majesty* shall
hear of it will comme^d you: beseeching therefore your honor to stay the
sentence of his death until the next A^^ise, or to grant him a reprieue til
the said time: leaving the poor man's life to a word of your mouth, with my
humble and bounden service to your ho^orable commandment, in prayer for your
good health and all other happiness: I humbly take my leave.

Your honors in all humblenes, D. H.

A Letter of complements, To my very good friend master H. W. at his house in
Kelton.
Sir, if I could have let pass so fit a messenger without some thankful
remembrance, I were unworthy of so good a friend; but your kindness being
such, as will ever work in a good mind, I pray you let me salute you with this
little toke^ of my love* The runlet is of suc^ sack, as Bristowe has no
better, and the suger-lofe for your good Lady, I assure you is right Barbary,
which at this time, is bear of some price, but upon the c^^sing of the troubles
there, I hope we shall have it cheap here: in the mean time, howsoever it be,
what you need* command in that or what else may be in my power to accomplish:
and so wishing I were with you at the killing of one of your fat Buck^, with my
hearty commendations to your self and your good bedfellow, and many thanks
to you both for my great good cheer and most kind entertainment* hoping to see
you at my house, at your coming to town, where you shall make your own
welcome, I commit you to the almighty: London, this xx. of Iulie, 1604.

Your very loving and assured friend, C. R.

To his assured friend master Tho. Rise, at his house in the Strand.
AGainst this time of my atte^dance upon the Judge of this circuit, I shall
have occasion to use many things, whereof I am now unfurnished: your skill in
choosing the best, and knowing the prices, I know long since, by your kindness
in the like trouble: and therefore entreat you once more to take a little
pains with this bearer my servant in helping him, in the laying out of his
money, upon such parcels, as in my note for mine use, I have set down: your
travel nor kindness shall not be unthankfully forgotten, and wherein I may in
this country or elsewhere pleasure you, you shall not fail of my best means:
If you have any news, I pray you acquaint me with them, and if the shippers
be come from the Indies, what good success they have had: but some earnest
business makes me briefer then I otherwise would be; and therefore hoping of
your health, and not doubting of your kindness, with hearty commendations, I
commit you to the Almighty: Salop, this twelfth of June 1606.

Your assured friend, T. M.

To his very good friend, Master S. B. at his house in Ferill.
Sir, where you wrote unto me, touching the Sale of your Lorshippe of Bar, I
cannot answer you for two causes: the one, of price is too high: the other,
your have of money is too great: for touching your price, the land you know is
much impaired since the death of your father, the woods are low and very
backward, by cutting it before their full growth, and your trees are so wasted,
that thee is scarce a piece of timber worth the felling: your Moor is shrewdly
spoiled for lack of draining and your pastures are so ouergrowne with bushes,
that it will ask great cost in stubbing, before it be brought to any good
pass: yet not withstanding, for that we have been upon speech for it, and that
you seem willing to deal with me, if you will pitch a reasonable price, your
money shall not be long deferred: I pray you therefore, ^f I may have it as I
told you, if it be a hundredth pounds more, I care not, but further indeed, I
will not go a penny: let me know your mind by this bearer, out of hand, for I
am offered, (I think) a better bargain: but for my Records sake, and the
rather to be your neighbor, that we may now and then have a game or two at
Bowls, hoping of your good health and your bedfellowes, I commit you to the
Almighty: From my house, this 13. of June. 1604.

Your very loving friend, E. F.

A letter to a proud Mistress.
How beauty will make a fool proud, I would your plaster work did not
witness: but had you wit to help wickedness, you would put a Parrat out of
countenance: your countenance is made after your conceit, as full of merrye
tricks as a Monkey, and for your foot pace, I think you have sore heels, you
walk so nicely as upon Eg-shels: your hair is none of your own, and for your
steeple tire it is like the gaude of a Maide-Marian, so that had you a fool by
the hand, you might walk where you would in a Morice dance: Oh fine come to
it, how it fiddles like a Hackney that would tire at half a mile: Well your
Tobacco breath, with your tooth less chappes, will be shor^ly such bad ware,
that you will stand in the Market, and no man bid a penny for you: but what
do I mean to spoil paper with such matter? and therefore I will hear
abruptly end: wash your face, scour your hands, put on a clean smock, get
you to your prayers, repent your wickedness, and mourn to death for your
souls sake, for your carcass is not worth the carrying to the earth: and so
hoping that in a good humor you will do somewhat better then hang your self:
I leave you to his mishappe, that finds you for the most filthy creature on
this earth; till you be never more seen in the world.

Your poor friend at a pinch. B.T.

A vile answer of a perilous wench.
BEtwixt a railing Knave and a Rascal, what is the difference? and from a
nitty Rogue, what can be looked for but a Lowse? Oh devil incarnate: who ever
knew such a villain? Your hair I will not meddle with, for fear of a fall,
but I wonder the Iewellers do not deal with you for a face, where a pin can
scarce stand betwixt a pearl and a Rubie: Oh, the french Rewme bids you keep
out of the wind, for fear your suel stakes scarce hold up a rotten carcass:
now in steed of a morice dance, you know the hey up Holborn; where the
Hangman at the Gallows stays to learn you a new turn: but thou wretched
worm, unworthy the name of a man, get thee to thy knees, ask forgiveness of
all the world, make thy confession in the Cart, and commend thy soul to the
Lord, for thy flesh the dogs will not meddle with: and so in have hoping my
letter may come to thee before the last cast; I end in have.

Thy charitable friend, B. C.

A letter of Challenge to a Swaggerer.
SYrra, your swaggering is so foolish, that children laugh at you where you
go: and for your valor, if your father be away your sworn will do no
hurt: your tossing of pots fear none but flies, and for you brave words,
they are nothing but wind* but least I do you some pleasure, in telling you
of your faults, let this suffice to make an end of al matters: Tomorrow in the
morning you shall have me by eight of the clock* in the field, beyond your
lodging, near unto the pool^* where if you dare come alone, you shall find me
without company, ready to do more the I will speak: till when, expecting no
other answer then your self, I rest,

Your auowed enemy, I. T.

A dogged Answer.
DO you imagine me a Philistian, that you begin to play Goliath in a
Letter? I assure you, if your deeds be like your words, my father will not
abide the wind of you: but for my sword it has a point, and therefore cares
not a point for you* if you be not drunk, I muse what madness does possess
you? but the best is, I hope, now you have spoken, you have done: for I will
be there where you appoint, but I think will not perform: but as you tell me
of my faults, I hope to whip you for yours: and so sorry to have lost so much
time about idleness, I end,

Yours as I have reason, F. R.

To my very good cosen M I.D. at his house in Swandes.
COsen, I understand you are determined to put your younger son apprentise to
a Merchant: believe me, I allow of your resolution herein, for I that have
travailed far. and seen much, can speak somewhat of them, and their noble
profession. I could well give it a higher title, for a right Merchant is a
royal fellow, he is desirous to see much, to trauail much, and sometime to
gain a little, does adventure much: though sometime for a little adventure he
does gain much* but what are the sundry natures of perils, as well at Sea, as
at land, as well of his goods, as his person, none knows but himself, or
like himself: but having travailed far, and finished his voyage, after his
safe return, having given God thanks, note what is the course of his life: to
observe a comely order in the city* and enrich many poor men by the retailing
of his goods, who sit at ease, and sell in their sh^ps, that he with great
^oil, and danger fetched out of far Countries. Now, say his gain be great,
let it be answered, (...) ye desert of his travail, shall a fair or a fine
horse, brought out of Barbary, be here finely kept, well fed, and neatly
dressed, and richly attyred: and shall not a Merchant, that has travailed many
Miles beyond Barbary, not be thought worthy of a fine house, good land,
dainty fair, and an honorable title, for the resolution of his adventure, and
the toil of his travail? shall a Lute or a Citerne, brought out of Italy, be
put in a case of velvet, and laced with g^ld for well sounding? and shall not a
Merchant that fetched that Lute, and went far further then that country for
better commodities, not be thought worthy of his gain, and honored for his
mind? shall the Lawyer f^ll breath at an high rate? and shall the merchant be
grudged his price for his wares? what shall I say? who vp-holdes the state of a
City? or the honor of a state under the King, but the Merchant: who
beautifieth a Court with Jewels, and outward ornaments, but the travail of the
merchant? who be autifies the Gardens with sundry sorts of fruits and flowers,
but the travailing merchant? he may well be called the merchant, the
Sea-singer, or the maker of the Sea to sing: the Sea-singer, when he has
fair wind and good weather, and makes the Sea to sing, when she sees the
goodly houses that floate upon her waves, and cast anchor in her Sands. But
let me leave the Sea, and come to the land, consider of the sweet and civil
man^er of their lives, whose houses more neat? whose wives more modest? whose
apparel more comely? whose diet more dainty? and whose carriage more
commendable? valiant without quarrels, merry without madness, bountiful in
their gifts, and coy in all their banquets? whose children are better nurtured?
whose servants better governed? whose house better stuffed and maintained?
Furthermore, what comfort have the distressed found beyond the Seas? and how
many poor do they relieve at home? what Colleges? what Hospitals? what alms
houses have they builded? and in effect what Cities have they enlarged, and
what Countries have they enritched? how few Lawyers can say so? if that be al
true, which much more might be said in their honor: give them their right, say
the Merchant is a royal fellow, and go forwards with your intent, if you
will ever have your son see any thing, know any thing, do any thing, or be
worth any thing, put him to a Merchant, and give with him such a portion as out
of his years may set up his trade or traffic: doubt not he will do well,
and think not he can almost do better: so beseeching God to bles him in all his
courses, without which will be worse then nothing, I pray you do as I wish you,
charge him to serve God, and so turn him to the world: and thus having truly
written you my opinion touching your purpose, wishing health and honor, and
all happiness, to all worthy true Merchants, in hope of your health I commit
you to the Almighty. London, this twentieth of August, 1604.

Your very loving cosen* N. B.

A Letter of Love to a most sweet and wise creature.
SWeet, were that spirit that by the instinct of love does understand the
silence of truth: whose tongue is his heart, and whose wor^es are sighs, in
which are hidden those secret fruits of comfort, that only grow in the
ground of your grace: Uouchsafe therefore fair sweet, with the sunne-bright
eyes of your beauty, to cast one look upon the rude Lines of this poor
Letter: which if it have been so unhappy as to move your displeasure, let the
fire be the reward of his presumption: but if through the favor of the faults
or the virtue of your gracious pity it has been worthy the reading, let me
be metamorphosed to worse then nothing, if I desire to be any other thing then
that may pleese you in all ceremonies and circumstances, or in affection: and
therefore, leaving, my service to your command, and my love to the life of
your favor, wishing to die like the Phoenix, to receive in the beams of your
beauty, I rest full of unrest, til I may fully rest,

Yours as you may of you will; R. E.

The Ladies answer.
WIse were that heart which could pierce into the conceit of that spirit,
which with the art of love, seeks to inchaunt the trust of simplicity: which,
for not suspecting of euill-falls upon the point of much misery: Oh poor
truth, how art thou made a veil or cover for decet? when under the shadow of
paradise, is sought the way to hell. Oh cursed trees that carry such fruit:
but not to wrong any creature: Happy may that heart live, which in faith only
seeks his felicity: and pardoned be that paper that does but his duty. Let
then all sighs be drowned in the deepth of oblivion, while Silence
understands that Virtue speaks. Now for the nest of the Phoenix, if you can
clime so high and carry away never a feather with you, then it is but a
fiction, or virtue unhappy, but to wait the issue of honors hope, to the
bliss of virtues favor, I rest, when I further understand you, as I think
good to answer you: and till then, and always rest,

Yours as falls, as I well may; A.B.

A reply to the answer.
Unworthy were that mind of the thought of love, which could give place to
the treason of betraying of trust: and more then miserable were that life, that
toward hell could make such a passage. Oh Angel-like creature, think not the
world the habitation only of the accursed: nor do wrong to love, in suspicion
of truth: You say, happy be that life that seeks happiness in faithfulness:
but what do you say to love? A simple conceit cannot descend into suspicion,
and the thought of deceit is hateful to love: Be not then incredulous where
love is virtuous, and for the fiction of the Phoenix, make the substance true in
your self, whose least thougte of favor, shall be worth all the feathers of
the fairest bird that flies. So reposing hopes comfort on the honor of your
kindness, bese^ching you to understand nothing of me more then all yours, I
rest in that only rest, ever to rest.

Yours only and all, E. A.

An Answer to the same.
Unhappy be that soul, which in suspicion of truth, should wrong the virtue
of love; and blessed be that heart, which in hate of treason, makes faith his
felicity. Silence is a language that conceit is only acquainted with, and
gentle is that war, which gives no deadly wound: fear not then the pain
that a breath will blow away, when the hope of comfort will cure the disease:
but what need more figures? fly the way to hell, and find the way to heaven,
Let thy heart go with thy tongue and the Echo will give a happy sound. Till
when, not doubting the divine nature of love to be free from the devilish
poison of deceit: I rest as I find reason.

Yours in a^fection, though not assuring, M. I,

To his dearest, fairest, and worthiest of love, honor, and service, Mistress
E. T.
IF I should commend you above the Moon, and compare you with the Sun, you
would put me in the clouds for a flatterer: but knowing your own worth, and
finding the substance of my truth, you cannot blame, in admiration, to speak
truth of your perfection, which of what power it is in drawing the service of
reason, if you would believe, love would quickly tell you: but the course of
inconstancy in the unwise: breeds distrust of truth in the most faithful:
but all birds are not of one feather, nor all men of one mind. In brief not to
make a long harvest of a little torn, which being ripe, would be gathered in
good time: let truth be my spokes-man, and belief my comfort: the hope
whereof, as my only worlds happiness, referring only to the care of your
kindness, in the faith of true affection, I rest.

Yours auowed and assured. R. N.

A letter to a friend to borrow a piece of money.
SIr, as nothing more tries a friend then calamity, so is there nothing more
grievous then to be beholding: In kindness therefore, if I may become your
debtor for five pounds, it is not much yet will it pleasure me more then a
little: your appointed day I will not break with you, and wherein I may
thankfully require you, you shall find no forgetfulness of your kindness: but
time is precious, and therefore entreating your speedy answer, in hope of no
denial, I rest.

Your assured friend to command. T. W.

The Answer,
I Would be as glad to pleasure you as any man, but truth cannot be blamed: for
more then for my necessary use, that I cannot spate, I am not presently
furnished: I pray you therefore take not a denial unkindly: for i^ my credit
will pleasure you, I will not fail my best to do you good: if otherwise you
would urge me, it will ^^e to little purpose: and therefore sorry that I am not
in tune to satisfy your expectation, I must leave patience to your kind
discretion, which as you know me, shall command me: for I am, and will be to
the uttermost of my power.

Your assured friend. D. S.

To my best beloved Cosen mistrisse H.C. at her house in pe. Chest.
MY good Cosen, I remember at my last being with you, we had some conference
about consideration: believe me, when I consider the world, and what I have
seen in it, and the best things of it, and that all if it effect, is as
nothing or rather worse, if any thing at all, I wonder how men, who have so
much judgment of good from evil: will show so little understanding of good,
in following of evil: how can those me^ that know the in certain time of
death, live as though they thought never to die? h^we can he that reads, or
hears the word of god and believes the truth of it, be so careless of it,
and so disobedient to it? will men be sick, that may be whole ^or dye, that
may live? what shall I say? but as Paul said to the Corinthians: O ye
foolish people: who has bewitched ye? it is the word of God, that
transgression is as the sin of witch-crafte: and surely, if men were not
bewitched with sin, they could not so delight in wickedness: being the
cross and bar to all their happiness: could the thief consider the doom of
the law, or the misery of the dispoyled, surely he would not steal: if the
adulterer did consider the filthiness of his action, and the shame of his folly,
surely he would turn honest: if the murderer did consider the horror of
death, and the terror of sin, he would never kill: In brief, if any sinner
would look into the foul nature of sin, he would be out of love with
it, and if ^ee did consider the power of Gods wrath, he would be afraid of
it: Nay, could or would man consider the goodness of God toward him, in
commanding and forbidding nothing but that which is good for him, how could
he be so forgetful of his own good, in offending the Author of all
goodness: If the vnthrif^ could consider the misery of wan^, sure he would
not be careless of his esta^e: if the covetous could consider the misery of
the poor, he would be more charitable: if the Swaggerer could consider the
comelines of sobriety, and the shame of immodesty, surely he would be more
civil. If the magistrate did consider the misery of the poor, he would not
be so careless of their torment, put them to such sorrow, but remember that
justice without mercy, is to near a tuch of Tira^ny. If the offendant did
consider the grief and shame of punishment, he* would contain himself within
the compass of a better course. If ^ee that preaches the word, and follows
it not, could consider the heaviness of Gods judgment, and the shame of his
folly, he would doubtless be more careful of his soul, and more kind to
his flock: If the lawyer could consider the law of god* he would never grieve
his clyent, nor speak against a known truth: but as I said before, to leave
tediousness, it is the only lack of consideration, that makes the heedlesse
will of man to run the way of error, to the ruin of his best comfort, and
therefore entreat you, notwithstanding my allowance of your judgment touching
the heavenly providence, and power in the motion of al good actions: yet so to
allow of my opinion, touching consideration, that it is a great, and one of the
greatest causes of the confusion of reason, by the corruption of nature: and
knowing that the care of your consideration is such as does and may well give
example to the most expert, to follow the rules of your directions in the whole
course of your life, wishing my self so happy, as to enjoy the company of so
good a friend, till I see you and ever: I rest in fast settled affection.

Your very loving friend. N. V.

To my sweet love mistress E. P.
SWeet Love, if absence could breed forgetfulness, then fortune should do
much harm to affection: but when the eye of the mind looks into the joy of
the heart, the sentence may well be spoken. As in silence you may hear me, so
in absence you may see me: for love is not an hours humor, nor a shadow of
light, but it is a light of the spirit, and a continuing passion: think not
therefore, I do or can forget thee, or love my sefe, but for thee: shortly I
hope to see thee, and in the mean time, though not with thee, yet not from
thee, nor well at rest with my self, til I may rest only with thee, I rest
always to rest.

Thine only and all. ^. VV.

Her Answer.
MY dear, if delays were not a death to love, excuse were current in the
construction of kingdoms: but sentences are better spoken then understood, and
a pleasing presence, is better then an excused absence: remembrance is good,
but possession better, and love holds memory, but a kind of melancholy. Let
your self therefore be your messenger rather of your love, then your letters,
least fortune in a mad fit be a cross to your best comfort, not in respect of
my constancy, but my parents unkindness, This is all I will write at this
time, but wishing a happy time, to the beginning of a never ending, I rest til
that time, and at all times on the same:

Yours as you know. E. P.

An old man's letter to a young widow.
Widow, I have neither a smooth face nor a filed tongue, to cheat your eyes,
nor abuse your ears withal: but a true heart, and a constant mind, that
does inwardly love you, and will n^uer deceive you: fickle heads, and
unbridled wills, know not where, nor how to bestow themselves, when their wits
go a woolgathering among shrewes, that have bad ^^e^ces: they may be kind, but
not constant, and love loves no out-lookers: besides, light heads have no
stayed heels and a little wealth soon spent, who knows the woe of want can
tell you the difference betwixt an old man's darling, and a young man's warling:
Why? how can they love, that scarce know how to like? I know you have many
suitors of worth: but none that I think worthy: for none can love you so much,
nor esteem you so well: for I have known the world, and care not for it, nor
for any thing but you. If therefore all I have may please you, and my self, to
love and honor you, make my comfort your contentment, and I will seek no
other paradise in this world. Thus hoping that reason in your favor, will
effect the hope of my affection, leaving to your self, to be your self: I
rest,

Yours, or not his own. T.P.

SIr, if I could ever see yo^, but in a Letter, I should delight much in your
presence, but contraries are not corresponde^t: a gr^y b^ad and a green mind
fit not, your persuasions were forcible, were not your self of too much
weakness* but, though for your good will. I thank you, yet for nothing will I
be indebted to you: not for a world would I be troubled with you: for, as your
years, so I fear our fancies will be different: and then patience moving,
choler may breed coffeehouse: when to be an old man's d^rling is a kind of
curse to nature: you say well, who can love, that knows not how to like? and
the se^ces incapable of their comfort, what is imagination but a dream? a
blind man can judge no colors, a deaf man has no skill in music, a dumb
man no eloquence, and an old man little feeling in loves passion^ for my suitors
they suit my time, and serve their own, and for their worth. I shall judge of
the most worthy: now for their wits, if they lose not their own fleeces, let
them gather wool where they can, but for your love, I will not venture on it,
least being too old, it be not sweet, and for my young suitors, I hope I shall
take heed of shadowed soreness: and for fortune, while virtue gouernes
affection, I will not fear my felicity: so hoping your own reason will
persuade you to have patience with your passion, and leave me to my better
comfort: meaning to be as you wish me, my self: and none other: I rest,

Not yours, if mine own. P. M.

A letter of a young man to his sweet heart.
MY love, if I could have as good passage as my Letters, I would be a better
messenger of my thoughts, then my words can express: but as the secret of my
heart is sealed up in my letter, so is the secret of my love sealed up in my
heart: which none can see, but your eyes, nor shall know, but your kindness,
Let me not then languish in the lingering hope of my desires, but hasten my
comfort in the only answer of your content: you know the hour of the first
meeeting of our fantasies, the true continuance of our irremoueable affections,
and why will you not appoint the conclusion of our comfort? Trial cannot let
you doubt my love: and love will be sworn for the security of my truth: both
which thus far plead for me in your favor: give truth the reward of trial,
and love the regard of truth, and desire not the sentence of justice to let me
live or die in your judgment: for imprisoned I am in your beauty, bound in
(...) ^ands of your service, and live but in the hope of your favor, in which
I rest ever and only, to rest happy in this world.

Yours, though not yours, R. E.

An answer to this letter.
MY sweet, I rather wish your self, the^ your letter, though in the have of
your desire, your presence had been to little purpose: for deeds are in a good
way, that are subscribed and sealed; but till the delivery be made, the matter
is not fully finished, have therefore patience for a time, for it is soon
enough, that is well enough: and yet I confess in kindness, delaie is little
comfort: yet stay for a fair day though it be almost at noon, be persuaded of
my affection, and let faith fear no fortune, for love can be no changeling,
and so imagine of my self: when you offend, I will punish you, and when you
^oe please, I will pra^se you* so assuring truth belief, and love comfort, I
rest so soon as I well may, to give the reason of your best rest: and till then
and ^uer will rest.

Yours as I may. M. I.

A merry letter of news to a friend,
RIght Troi^^, I know thou love no complement, nor carest for any tricks,
but as a good fellow, and a friend, woulde^t hea^e how the world goes: with all the world I am not acquainted with, and therefore I know not what to say to
it, but for the little part of it, the petty place, or parish where I dwell,
and some few miles about it, I will tell you, there is a fall of Connies: for
there is such a world of them every day in the market, that except they be
young and fat, there is little money bidden for them: ^ackenie Iades are ^^arce
worth their meat; and every house has such a dog, that not a beggar ^are
come near a door: and not a mouse at a cheese but a catte is at her heels:
Maide-marion of late was got with child in her sleep, and the Hobbyhorse was
half mad, that the fool should be the father of it: a great talk there is of
setting up of a new ^auerne, but Tobacco is the thing that will vent the old
sack: there is spoken so much gibb^ng, that we have almost forgot our mother
tongue: for every boy in our school has latin at his fing^s ends* marry it is
in a book, for all his wit is in his copy for in capite he has little: our
free school is n^w painted with wisdom over the gate: for within, except some
unhappy wag, there is no more wit then is necessary: uowe for other news I
will tell you, wet weather frights us with a hard har^est, and usurers are half
mad, for lack of v^terance of their money: Law was never more in use, nor men
more out of money: and for women they are strange creatures, for some of them
have three faces: and so fine in proud paces, that if they carry it as they
do, they will put many men out of countenance: for other ordinary matters,
they are as you left them, a pot of ale to worth a penny, a Bawd will have
brave clothes, the man in the moon is above the clouds, and the knave of
Clubbes will still make one in the stock: other things there are, that I am
shortly to acquaint you with: in the mean time write unto me how thou do,
and how the mind blows on your side, and so sorry I have no good thing to
send thee, with the love of my heart I commit thee to the almighty,

Thine to the end. M.R.

An Answer.
THou mad villain, what has walk about thy brains, to put thy wits in such
atemper? a tale of a tubbe, and the bottom out: well, to quite your kindness,
you shall know somewhat of our world. So it is, that the Fox has made a hand
with most of our fat Geese, the Woolfe meets with our Lambs before they can
welgoe from the damme, and the water-rat has so spoiled our sish-pools* that
if he had not been caught with a trap, we might have gone to ye Sea for a red
herring: Our Ba^^^ffes Bull runs through all the Rye in our parish, and the
Tanners dog has worried a wild Sow. The Bail^ffe of our hundredth takes upon
him like a Justice, and since the new Alehouse was set up, the constable is
much troubled: but though oats be rank, and rye be ripe, wheat is but thin,
and Barlie short, good fellowship goes down the wind, and yet wenches are
right bred, our Piper is fallen sick of an Ale surfeit, and old ^uddle got a
blow at midnighte, that makes him straddle all day: Parnell shall have her
sweet heart, in spite of Tom. Tinker, and there is w^ndring in the town, that
thou art not in the jail before the Sessions: but be thou of^ good cheer,
there is time enough for a good turn, and come when thou will, thou shalt
make thine own welcome. Oh mad staue, let me be merry with thee a little, for
thou know I love thee: thy Gransire is going to his grave, and has
bequeathed thee, a knaves portion: the Bell has gone for him, but so soon as he
is past, I will se^d thee word in post, that for grief of his death thou may
drink to all christen souls, thy sister is where she was, and swears thou
art honester then thy father. I will say no more, but thou haste friends that
thou know not, and therefore come when thou will, we will have a health ere
we part: and so in have farewell.

Thine to the proof: R. S.

To a young man going to travel beyond the Sea.
GOod Cosen, I find by your last letter, your present intent to travel, I
pray God it fall out for your good* for though in respect of your years, your
body be in good state to endure some hardness, yet there is difference in
the natures of countries, both in the air, and the diet: but above these
things, there are many things to be observed, that negligently regarded, may be
greatly to your hurt: as first, for your religion, have a great care that your
eyes lead not your heart after the horror of Idolatry, serve God sincerely, not
fondly: not in show, but in truth of zeal: and for all your comfort in all
your course* that you trust in him and none else: now secondly, for your
carcass, take heed of too much following the feminine set and pray for
continency, it is a blessed virtue: I speak not this, for the common or base
sort, for I hope your spirit is too high to stoop to such game, but as the
Sirenes, whose faces are bewitching objects, and whose voices, as Enchanting
music if these be in the way of your ear or your eye, have you from them,
least too late you find it too true, that you will hardly escape drowning when
you are over head and ears: such weeds will hang on your heels, as will so
hinder your swimming yt you will hardly overcome it in health, if you hap to
escape with your life: furthermore, if you meet with some chaste Penilasse whose
beauty walks e^e^ with her virtue: let not a chaste eye in her, beget an
unchaste thought in you; I speak not this in fear of any thing but your
youth, ye^ though I know you well disposed in many ways, I doubt you are not
right in all* and this being a thing that I know most necessary, I thought
in my love to give you^punc; a note of: now for your purse, let it be private
to your own knowledge, least it be an occasion of your unhappiness, and
breed you more partakers then for your profit: Now for your tongue, let it
follow your wit, and typpe it with truth, that it may abide al ^utch: and for
your diet, let it be sparing: for better leave with an appetite, then go to
Physic for a surfeit: now for your conversation, choose the wise, and rather
hear them, then trouble them, and against all fortunes, take patience in all
your passage: so serving God, and observing the word, no doubt but you shall
make a benefit of your voyage, and I shall be joyful of your return, and thus
loath to tier you with a long tale, when I know in a little you will understand
much: in prayer for your good success and sa^e return, I commit you to the
Almighty.

Your affectionate kinesman and assured friend. N.B.

To his friend G.T. in his time of sickness, and sorrow for a great misfortune.
Dear George, knowing the cause, though not the condition of thy sickness, I
am bold a little to advise thee for the better recovery of thy health: Thou
know that there is nothing passes neither under nor above the heavens, but
either by the direction or permission of the wisdom of the Almighty: there is
no day but has his night, no Eleme^t but has his contrary, nor comfort on
the earth without a cross: thou art sorry to see the cruelty of fortune, but
turn thine eyes to a better light, and thou shall see it a trial of Gods love:
for if nature be accursed for sin, thou must find it in this world or
another: and the second death is worse then the first. If sickness make^ thee
feel the hand of God, shall not patience make thee try his mercy? and health
make thee know his love? if losses make thee poor, were thou not beteer with
patience be Gods beggar, then in pride the worlds king? grieve not then at thy
fortune, but live by thy faith: ^e rather Job then a Saul, for there is no
spurning against so sharp a prick as Gods purpose: I am sorry for thy
sickness, but more for the cause, for to mourn to no end is mee^e folly, and a
pi^ing sickness is a sign, of more passion then patience: Christ suffered for
thee, suffer thou for thy self, lay away thy too much melancholy, for sighing
is womanish, and weeping is babish: be wise therefore for thy self, and be good
to thy sefe, pluck up thy spirits, and put thy self only upon God, live not
like a dead man, but die like a living man, let not fortune be a messenger of
death, nor impatience a prejudice to thy health, take thy horse and ride over
to me, and take the time as it falls: if fair the fewer clothes: if foul,
take a cloak, but defer not the time, for thought pearceth apace, and for the
mind there is no physic, but patience and mirth: bring the first with thee,
and the last I will provide for thee: til when, wishing thee once out of thy
solemn Celi, and to take my house for thy better comfort, till I see thee and
always, I rest.

Th^^e in all mine own. D.R.

An answer to the same.
HOw easily the healthful can give counsel to the sick, and how hardly they
can take it, I would I were not in case to prove, but I see patience need not
be persuaded, for where pain is, ^hee will be entertained, I know there is no
re^^sting of Gods power, nor muttering against it: but yet think that flesh and
blood in many things has much ado to bear it: and though fortune be a
fiction, yet it troubles many fine wits, and the trial of patience, puts the
best spirits to a hard point: never to have had, is little woe to want, but to
loese, hopeles of recovery, will sting the heart of a good mind: a sorrow is
sooner taken then put off, and death is comfortable to the afflicted: fools
cannot take thought, and knaves will not: but ye honest and careful understand
the plague of misery: if death be this way ordained me, I cannot avoid it, and
if hell come unlooked for, I shall be glad of it, but I am too weak, too rude,
and too full of grief to go: but if you will take the pains to make me try the
comfort of your company, my cell shall have some ^^ome to entertain a friend
for such a need: and knowing your love, can account no less* I pray you
therefore without further ceremonies, let me see you very shortly, if I live
you shall know my kindness, if I dye you shall find my love, so drawing toward
a fevers fit, I am forced thus to conclude: in the spite of fortune, in the
grace of god I will digest what I can, and pray for patience for the rest, and
so hoping speedily to see you, till then and always I rest.

In sickness and in health, thine what mine, R.H.

An younger brother to his elder, fallen unhappily on a little wealth, and
suddenly grown fondly proud.
GOod brother, as I am glad to hear of your health, so am I sorry to hear of
your ill carriage, it is told me by them that I can believe, yt your wealth
which should make you gracious, makes you in a manner odious: Why, it is
wonderful that you can so suddenly metamorphose your mind from wit to folly: it
grieueth me to hear^ your description of almost as ma^y as know you, it is
said you look over the moon, walk as upon stilts, speak as it were for
charity, and with a swelling conceit of your wealth, make your face like one
of the four winds: in your apparel you are womannish, your Ruffes set so in
print, your bearde so starched, and your countenance so set, that you are
rather meet for a prologue before a Comedy, then to give example of civility:
formalitie is a kind of folly, when he that walks upright like a Rabbot, is
like a Boy that should say grace: they say you are seldom without a flower
in your mouth, I would it were fitly perfumed, to the desert of your folly:
you wear your cloak always abroad, that one may see your silken outside: and
your garters beneath your knee are ready to weep for a rose: all these notes
are taken of you, and with all, that to mainetain this pride you are as
covetous as the devil: for* as I here, you are both an Usurer and a Broker:
and have more cunning tricks in your trade, then an honest heart could away
withal: truly this is not well: for your estate needs it not, your education
does teach it, let me therefore entreat you, to turn a new leaf: sing a new
song: be courteous, but not covetous: kind, but not proud: and have a
conscience in all your courses: for there must be an end of all your matters;
and repentance will be the best payment of your ill taken accounts: believe it,
for you shall find it at last, I wish not too late: and so, out of the sincere
love of a true heart that holds you as dear as his own life, rather desirous
to tell you, what I find amiss in you, then to sooth you in what I find
grievous in you, to his grace that may amend you, with my prayer for you, I
leave you.

your true loving brother. R. B.

To a fair proud T^t.
Fair Mistress, why should you turn that to a curse, which was given you for
a blessing? I mean your beauty, which should have made you gracious, but has
filled you so full of pride, that you mar your color with an ill
countenance, and when you speak, you counterfaite such a kind of lisping, that
you cannot bring out a wise word: your bodies are made so straight, and your
Fardingale so great, that in steed of a woman, you make an Antic of your
self: I am plain, but tell you troath, I think you are best in your quoiting
coat: for your tricking and your tyring takes away all your proportion: so
that the Painter and the Tasler, have put nature out of countenance: but since
it is the fashion, for fools to wear a cockes-combe, let them wear feathers
that list, I will not blow them away: but as a good friend let me tell you,
that tell you but for your good, be honest and be hangd'e, and let knavery go
to the devil: stand unt leering in your door, nor devise lies to make fools,
nor use tricks to pick pockets, for in the end all will be naught: for the
pox, or the gallows, or the devil, will be the reward of plain leacherie, if
in the way you escape beggary: and therefore follow my counsel, give over
betimes, before it give over you: and since I have turned my coat, turn your
old gown, and we will joy together, to go both in a livery: for say the
word, and I am for thee: and so til I hear from thee, I commend me to thee.

Thine if thou vvilt, D.H.

Her Answer.
YOu wicked villain, haste thou plaide the Jew so long, that thou art weary
of thy self? and now come to me for a companion? soft snatch, your trick
is an Ace out, and of all the cards I love not a knave: my beauty is not for
bleere eyes, nor shall pretended honesty cheat my folly: have thou had three
occupatio^s, and none thrive? a Peddler? a Parasite? and a Pander? and now
would be a Cony-catcher? Sir, I have no game for your ferit: and therefore
hunt further: Now for my leers and my looks, and my tricks and my toys* if
they fit not your humor, I am not for you: but for the pore, and the
gallows, and the devil and the ale house, keep you from them and I will keep
me from you: and if I thought I might trust thee, I could put thee into
fools paradise: but if thou art not afraid of sparrow blasting, come home and
take a birdes-nest: which if it be better then a woodcock, thank the heavens
for thy good Fortune, and me for my good will; and so till I see thy liuerie,
I leave thee to thy self.

Thine, if I like. M.T.

A kind Sister, to her loving Brother.
MY dear Brother, as you know our love began almost in our Cradles, so I
pray you let it continue to our graves, I have had a bad husband, and you no
good wife, and yet with patience we have lived to see the strange chaunges of
times: but we must one day walk after our friends, and therefore in the
mean time, let us make much one of another: write unto me, how you do in
body and mind, and when I shall be so happy as to enioie your good
company: for being alone, you may be as a husband and a Brother to control
my servants, and comfort my self: believe me, I long to see you: and in the
mean time to hear from you, and therefore I pray you let no Messenger pass
without some few lines of your kind love, which are as dear to me as my
life, this I pray you let me not fail off. And so with my hearty
Commendations and most ^inde Love, in my daily prayers for thy health, I leave
thee to the Almighty.

Thy very loving Sister. A.N.

His Answer.
Sweet Sister, I have received your kind letter, for which I return you
many kind thanks: my body I thank God is in good health, but my mind
somewhat out of temper, for I see three things that do much grieve me, A
Fool rich, a Wise man wicked, and an Honest man poor for the first, either
Prodigally waste himself, or like a dog in a benchehole, hoords up his
mon^e he knows not for whom: the second turns wit to an evil course, that
might compass better matter: and the third, lives in grief, that he cannot
show the virtue of his condition. But, when I consider again, that here is
no paradise, the Aungells live in Heaven, and Hell is too near unto the
Earth, I am glad I can fall to prayer, to shun the trappes of the
deceiptfull: And since I cannot go from the course of Fates, to take my
fortune as patiently as I can. You say well, we have lived to see much, and
yet must die when we have seen all: you are tidde of a trouble, and I well
freed of a tormente: yet are there crosses enough, to try the care of a good
Conscience: in which I doubt not your wisdom, nor shall you of my will: but
as patience is the salve of misery, so is Love the joy of Nature: in which as
we are neerelie lincked, so let v^ live inseperable: shortly I hope to see
you, and til then, and ever will love you: The Lord of heaven bless you, and
in his good mercy keep you: So with my hearts love to you, to the Lords tuition,
I leave you,

Your very loving Brtother, E. B.

A young man to his first Love.
Sweet Love, since first I saw you, I have seen none like you, nor like
any, but only you: my reason is drawn out of many grounds, and all in your
graces, For first, your Beauty being such as exceeds my commendation,
your wit too high for my reason to reach, and your demeanure so discreet, as
drives me only to wonder: believe my affection, to be untouched with
untruth, and requi^e my love, with some token of your good liking: for being
the first star that has made me study Astronomy, let me not live in the
clouds of your discomforte: least in a mist of misery, I fall to the lowest of
Fortune; Leaving therefore my life to your favor, or my death to your frown,
I rest restless, til I may rest.

Yours only, and all. T.P

Her Answer.
If your heart were in your eyes, and your words were all truth, I should
believe a strange tale of the great force of fa^sie, but I must entreat your
pardon to pawse upon my judgment of your opinion: I would I were as you writ
me, though I did not requite you as you wish me: for though I would not be
unkind, yet will I not be vncarefull. Astronomy is too high a study for my
capacity, and the clouds are fittest dwellings for them that are so high
minded, that the earth cannot hold the^: In brief therefore, build no castles
in the air, least they happen to fall on your neck: distrust not your fortune
where your affection is faithful, nor put your life to loves passion, least it
try your patience too much: howsoever it be, carry reason in all your courses,
and your care will have the more comfort: to which, I wish you as much hope as
a true heart may deserve, and so not knowing your rest, will trouble you no
further, but rest as I have reason.

Yours in good will. A.M.

A Trauailer beyond the Sea, to his wife in England.
Dear wife, the misery of my fortune is more then can eastlie be borne, and
yet the most of grief is to be absent from thee, and my little ones: but as a
Den to her Chickens, be kind to them till I see thee, and pray for my
success as I do for thy health: from many dangers, God has delivered me:
and I hope will after many storms, send me a fair day to do me good, and a
fair wind to bring me home: in the mean time I will have patience, and
entreat thee the like, for love so long settled I know cannot loose his nature:
and therefore not doubting thy constancy, I commend me to thy kindness kiss
my babes for me, and kindly receive for thy self and them such tokens as by
this bearer I send thee, for thee and them: and thus hoping of thy health, as
my hearts greatest happiness in this world, in prayer for the same, and thee,
and thine evermore, I rest: Amsterdam, this 20. of August. 1604.

Thy dear loving husband. T.M.

SWeet heart, let me entreat thee to be as merry as thou can in spite of
fortune and all her fury: for if thou have but life to bring home, yet love
shall bid thee welcome, my prayer and thy little ones is daily for thee, we al
long to see thee, and think it long to be so long without thee, but knowing thy
intent for our good, we will have patience til thy coming, and pray for the
speed of it, with good success of thy trauail: the posts have is great and
therefore I must end, for thy kind letters and tokens I thank thee so mewhat
by this bearer I have sent thee, my notes in my letter, will tell you what, with
my hearts love, which can hold nothing from you, but auoweth al I am and have,
ready for you: so with my babes kisses and my own, in prayer for thy health
and hearts-ease I commit thee to the Almighty, London, This 23, of September,
1604.

Thy very loving wife. E.A.

To his friend that was in love,
HOnest VVilkin, I cannot but mourn for thee, to see thee in such a taking, as
I thought never to have taken thee in. I hear sait thou art in love, is it
possible to be true, that the spirit of error could ever have taken such
possession of thy wit, to make a saint of an Idol, and loose thy self in a
maze? why? first, the thing love, is another world then this, and has little
business with such creatures as thou keep too: I am sorry to hear how
thou windest thy self, into such a net, that thou can no way get loose: fit
upon folly, leave thy fa^sy, least thou be sorry too late, and then no man will
pity there: what^ have both eyes, and be stark blind? ears, and have heard
nothing? a nose, and can smell nothing? a wit and can perceive nothing? and a
heart that can feel nothing, to put thee from this new-nothing, which thou
have met with, called love? Why? let me tell thee what it is: simply, I cannot
tell thee: but what are the qualities of it, as I have heard and read of it, I
will deliver thee: It will Cuckold age, and befoole youth: betray beauty, and
wast wealth: dishonor virtue, and work villainy: this kind of love I mean,
that makes thee dance trenchmore without a pipe: it will not let one sleep,
nor eat, nor drink, nor stand, nor sit in quiet: it will teach a fool to
flatter, a knave to lie, a wench to dance, and a scholar to be a Poet, before
he can hitte the right way of a kind verse, it will make a Soldier lazy, a
Courtier wanton, a Lawyeridle, a Merchant poor, and a poor man a beggar: it
will make a wise man a fool, and a fool quite out of his wits: it will make a
man womanish, and a woman, Apish: To be short, there is so much ill to be said
of it, that he is happy who has not to do with it. If therefore thou be not
too far gone, come back again, if thou can lea^e thy study, lay away
thy book, and think of other matter, the^ the mouth of Venus, least Mars be
angry, or Vulcan play the villane, when Cupid shall be whipped for shooting away
of his arrows: In fine, give over thy humor, for it is no bettter the^ a
fancy: and live with me but a day, and thou will be in hate with it all
night: for the desire is fleshly, and the delight is filthy: the suit is
costly, and the fruit of it but folly: Leave beauty to the painter, to help
him in his Art: wit to the Scholar, to help the weakness of his memory,
and wealth to the Merchant, to increase his stock: Cases to the Lawyer, to help
his pleading, honor to the Soldier, to put forth his valor: and so let thy
mistress be divided among them, and when they are all together by the ears,
come thou away to me, and live with me: and credit me, thou will in the end
thank me^, for dealing thus truly and plainly with thee, In the mean time;
let me hear from thee, what I shall hope of thee: for as thou know, I love
thee, so in my love have I written to thee, what I know is good for thee, and
what I wish may do good with thee. And thus till I see thee, in hearty
prayer for thee, and like commendations to thee, to the Lord of heaven I leave
thee.

Thine as thou know. L.E.

Her Answer.
GOod Goose eat no more hay: what a noise haste thou made with keaking at
nothing? Thou have heard, thou know not what, and talkest thou know not
how: take a woodcocke in a spring, and touch not me with these terms: now for
thy mourning, let it be for the loss of thy wit, for I have no fear of had I
wist: Love (quoth he) yes, never knew what it is, and yet speak so much of it:
either you wrong it or your self, that you no better understand it: for let me
tell you, you are mistaken in it: it is the light of beauty, the blis of
nature, the honor of reason, and the joy of time: the comfort of age, and the
life of youth: it is the tongue of truth, the stay of wit, and the rule of
understanding: it is the bridle of will, and the grace of sense: it makes a man
kind, and a woman constant: and while fools and Apes, play bo-peep for a
pudding, Lovers have a life, that they would not leave for a mountain. Now for
Mars and Venus, they are studies for schole boys, and he that fears Vulcan,
let him be whipped for Cupid. To be short, thou art strangely out of tune, to
write me such a piece of music: for were I but in the way, shall I turn back
to thy whistle? no, thou know not what it is, and therefore talk no more of
it: for had thou but once kindly had a taste of it, thou would die ere thou
would leave it: believe it, I know it, and therefore for thy derision of my
mistrisse, I will take it as a dream, and be sorry, that awake thou had no
more wit then to write it: but let all unkindness pass, it may be I will
shortly see thee: and then make thee glad to yield to me, that thou art in a
foul error to wish me leave my love, to live with thee; but since I know thy
kindness, I will bear with thy weakness, and in the faith of an old friend,
hearken to thee in an other matter: and so wishing thee no more to envy so much
against a matter of so excellent virtue, I will leave thee for this time, and
rest always,

Thine as mine own, R.P.

To his only and all beloved, E. S.
Truly sweet heart, I am so out of order with my self, with the extremity
of love that I bear you, that my heart is even at my mouth, to say sweet heart,
when I think on you: and if I but hear your name, it makes me start as though I
should see you, and when I look on my handkerchiffe that you wrought me, I
thank you, with couentry blew: oh how I lift up mine eyes to heaven, and say
to my self, oh there is a wench in the world: well go to, but when ^ see my
iet ring that you sent me by your brother Will, I do so kiss it, as if you
were even within it. Oh Nell, it is not to be s^oken, ye affection that I bear
thee: why I fereted all night for the Rabbot I sent ^h^e, and have been in the
wood all day, to seek a fine birds nest for ^hee: my mother is m^king of a
cheese-cake, and she has promis^d ^t me for thee; well, believe me? love thee,
and my (...) shoes come home on Saturday, ^le see thee on Sunda^e and we will
drink togeth^r that's once, ^or indeed I to love thee: Why my heart is never
from thee, for over and besides that. I think on thee al day, I ^oe so dream
on thee al night, that our folks say in my sleep, I call thee sweee heart, and
when I am awake and remember my dream, I sigh and say nothing, but I would I
wotte what, but it is no matter, it shall be* and that sooner then some think:
for though the old trust my father, and old ^ramme my mother will not come out
with their Crowns, I care not, I am all their Sons, and therefore I shall
have all the Land^, and therefore having a good Farm, we shall make shifte for
money: And therefore sweet heart, for so I well dare call thee, I pray thee be
of good cheer: wash thy face, and put on the Glou^s that I gave thee: for we
are full askte next Sunday, and the Sunday after you know what: for I have
your fathers good will, and you have my Mothers: and therefore: if Buckle and
Thonge hold, we will load our Packes together: I would have said somewhat else
to you, but it was out of my head, and our Schoolmaister was so busy with his
boys, that he would scarce write thus much for me. But farewell, and
remember Sunday.

Thine own, from all the world. T. P.

To her heart of Gold, and best beloved.
NOwne Love, and kind soul, I thank thee for thy sweet letter, a thousand
times, I warrant thee it has been read, and read over again, oftener then I
have fingers and toes: every night, I get up our man into my Chamber, and
there by my beds side he sittes and reads it to me: still, still, til I am
almost asl^epe, but when he reads, so often sweet heart, and I love thee, Oh
say I, you do lie, and he swears no: and then I say, I thank you T^^, no
love lost: for I am no changeling: and when he comes to dream and wake, and
wish, I will not tell you what I think yet, but one day I will tell you more:
in the mean time, be content, and trust me I have a band in hand for thee,
that shall be done before the time: and let our friends do their wills, we
will not hang after their humors: No, I am thine, and thou art mine, and that
not for a day, but for ever and ever: My mother has stolen a whole peck of
flower for a Bryde-Cake, and our man has sworn, he will steal me a brave
Rose-marie bush: I have spoken for ^le, that will make a Catte speak: and the
Youth of our Parish have sworn to bring the blind fiddler: well be of good
cheer, on Sunday I will be at Church, and if there be any dancing, I hope
to have about with you. And til then, and the Sondaie after, and every day
after that, God be with you. Written by our man, at my beds side at
midnighte, when the folks were all asleep.

Your true loving in heart, till Death us depart. E. S.

An angry letter, by a young Lover in the Country, to his Love. M.N,
MArgerie, the truth is, you do not use me well: what do I get by you to
loose my days work, and sit on a style blowing my fingers in the cold, in
hope to meet you a milking, and you send an other in your room, and go to
market an other way: well, if I be not your sweet heart, much good do you
with your choice: I hope my fathers son is worthy of your mothers daughter;
Your Pricking in a cloute is not so good as a plough: and for your portion, I
can have your betters: but it is no matter, he is curste in his Cradle, that
trustes any of your words, and therefore since it is as it is, let it be as it will:
I will not put at my heart, that you hang at your heels. Well to be short,
take it for a wa^^ing, for I am angry: if you serve me so^ again, you shall
serve me so no more, that is once: and therefore either be, as you should
be, or be as you list, for I will not disgeste more then I can, that is the
truth: other folk see it as well as I, what a fool you make of me, but it is
no matter, I may live to be meet with you: but yet, if you will give over
your gadding, and be ruled by your friends counsel, I can be content to
forget all that is past, and to be as good friends as ere we were. And so hoping
to hear better of you, then some folks think of you, meaning to be at your
town, the next market day, if you will meet me at the Rose, we will have a
Cake, and a cup of Ale, and may hap be merry ere we part: and so
farewell.

Your Friend, as you use me* B. D.

BArnaby, you are much too bl^me to fall out with your self, for want of
better company: If you be angry, turn the buckle of your girdle behind
you: for I know no Body is in love with you. What Is here to do with my
Fathers horse and your mothers mare? Why, I wonder what you ayle, is the Moon
in the Eclipse, that you are so out of Temper? Now truth, it is pity a fool
cannot have a little wit, but he will spend it all in a few words: Alas
the day, it will be night by and by, and if you be so peevish to put pepper
in the Nose, if you can s^^ese both ways, you are in no danger of Death.
Well, to be plain, care for your self if you will: for in truth, I will take
no charge of you: For if you will hold on your course, you may walk whither
you will, and no body look after you: for my self, I will forgette your
Name, and proper person, I hope there is none so mad as to be in love
withal. In conclusion, come not to me till I send for you, nor look after
me, till I bid you, I will drink no Bottle ale with such a bottle nose, nor
desire to come to market to meet such a companion: and so glad to have this
occasion to try your patience, the foreman of fools be your woodcocke father,
and teach you better how to use your wit if you have any: And so in as
little love as I can, saving my charity: In hearty good will, I leave you as I
found you: and so rest,

Your f^iend as you see, M. A.

To her more friendly, then believed faithful, M. Tho. Jewel.
A Bitter sweet is like a Physical potion, if I be so to your thoughts, I
hope I shall purge your head of ill humors: and then faming fancy, that would
deceive plain simplicity, will abuse neither of us: and if your flattery
were not gross in my complexion, I should have no suspect of your condition:
with how far it is from your protested truth, I leave to the secret
confession of your little affection: words follow thoughts at the heels, and
thoughts keep the head* not the heart: where the brains a little troubled, it
puts the wit much out of temper: and therefore wishing you to leave honor to
the noble, and service to the wealthy, give me leave to like of equality, and
to settle my affection in discretion: which hating to disgrace the well
deserving, cannot but daily favor y^ faithful: distrust is a kind of
jealousy: which if I could love, I should perhaps be acquainted with: but
solitariness b^ing so sweet a life, why should I seek my hurt in a worse
course: yet am I not borne for my self, and therefore will harken to reason,
and yet no further then to know the worth of a Iewei before I pay too dear for
the wearing of it: and therefore let this suffice you, that no heaven being in
this wo^lde, take heed of a ^ell of your own makin^: and putting away the
clouds of idle humors, look into the height of that love, that by the
direction of virtue, may bring you to honor: to which, if my help may avail.
I will say Amen to such prayers, as may be made in a good mind: In which,
hoping you will labor to rest in, I leave you to your best rest: and so rest,

Your friend, as far as I may not be mine own enemy. S. P.

FINIS.

