AN APOLOGY AND TRVE DECLARATION OF THE INSTItution and endeauours of two
English Colleges, the one in Rome, the other now resident in Rhemes: against
certain sinister informations given up against the same.

1. Pet. 3. Sanctify our Lord Christ in your hearts, ready always to satisfy
every one that asks you an accoumpt of that hope which is in you, but with
modesty and fear, having a good consience, that in that which they speak il
of you, they may be confounded which calumniate your Good conversation in
Christ. For it is better to suffer as doing well (if the will of God will have it
so) then doing il. Printed at Mounts in Henault. 1581.

The contents of this Apology.
THE preface of the authors intention herein. Chap.1. The reason of our absence
and living out of our native Country. 2 Of our resorting sometimes to the
city and court of Rome. 3 The meaning and purpose of the institution of the
Seminaries. 4 That we live not in them against the laws of God and our
Country: with a duetiful exhortation to the Queens Majesty. 5 That the
Students thereof be not trained up in erroneous doctrine. 6 Of Priests and
Jesuits, and for what cause they are sent into England. 7 An admonition and
comfort to the afflicted Catholics.
AN APOLOGY AND TRVE DECLARATION OF THE INSTItution and endeauours of two
English Colleges, the one in Rome, the other now resident in Rhemes: against
certain sinister informations given up against the same.
Derely beloved countriemen in Christ Jesus:
ALthough for our selves, our own consciences give us sufficient satisfaction
and testimony of innocence in all those things vvherof we be accused, and God
himself not only at the general judgment in the face of the whole world,
but at the particular days of every of our deaths, what side, sort, or
condition so ever we be, shall discern our cause and justify our intentions
against al our adversaries: Yet for that we be warned by the Apostle, to make
our actions allowable not to God alone, 3. Augustine.
but to men also, and a great Clerk tells us that it were great cruelty so
to rest in the confidence of our conscience, that we regard not our fame, the
one being as necessary for our neighbors as the other for our selves: We
mean by Gods grace and your favors, sincerely and truly as in the sight of
our Savior, and yet most humbly and te^perately for the due respect of our
Sovereign and Superiors, to make clear and defend our misco^strued good
purposes and needeful offices toward our native Country in these many heavy
years of our coacted absence from the same. Trusting that so our Lord may alter
the minds of many that mistake our doings, and may turn the Q. Majesty's and
her honorable Councels ears from our calumniators, her hand of indignation
from our afflicted brethren, and her heart to wonted mercy and cleme^cie
toward her own Catholic subjects.

Neither needed our defense to be long, nor could be hard or doubtful, if it
were to be made either before the whole Church of God in any age, which both
of old in the like cases heretofore, and of late in our own, by her highest
Courts of Councels and Seats Apostolic (the grauest, surest, and to our
causes the most proper Tribunals in earth) has given sentence for our faith
and doctrine and al our endeavors agreeable thereunto: Or before al other
Christian countries, States, or Universities wheresoever we havue lived, al
which by their manifold mercies, comfortes, encouragements, and by diverse
honorable attestations (which shall be extant to the posterity) do approve and
praise our studies and scholastical travails proper to our trade, for the
reclaiming and succourse of the poor deceived souls of our nation: Or before
any of all the old Christian kings her Highness most noble progenitors, in any of
their honorable Courts of Parliament, Synodes or Consistories of famous
Prelates, Congregations of the learned in either their renowned Universities,
from the first faith of our country til this our od miserable age: al their
laws, decrees, definitions, statutes, al their works, vvritings, actions,
life and death, approving our doings, and condemning the contrary. Neither can
we mistrust (though the sight and certainty thereof be in God alone) but our
posterity recovering it self from this present blast of doctrine and peculiar
tempest of this time (which kind of malady, as experience and records of
other ages teach us, seaseth lightly on Countries by startes and seasons only)
both the simple and wise, that at the first for great allurements vvorldly,
grateful novelty and alteration, would not bevvare, now by a fevv years
proof easily vvaxing vvearie of the same, will like, allow, and justify our
duetiful service to God and the Church of England.

Having then the whole Church of Christ for us, the nations abroad with us,
al our country beforetime assuredly, and (as we trust) al after our days
agreeable unto us: our defense before God and man must needs be most easy,
acceptable, and reasonable.

The difficulty now only remains in the prejudice and partiality of the
present condition and sway of time, which by authority, force, and fear of
laws, favor of the Prince, domestical educatio^, plausible preaching and
persuasion of profit, peace, and pleasure, does sometimes alter and infect the
very judgment and reason of the inward man, and much oftener does byas and
pervert the external actions of many vvorldings even against their own
natural inclination, knowledge, and conscience: of which sort there be no
doubt in our Country innumerable, not only of those whose constrainte is
evident, but even of such as seem principal promotors of the one part and
persecutors of the other. Who because they be wise, can not be Protestants 23
years, that is to say, any long time together: but yet because they be also
vvorldly, can not or vvil not confess their former fall to their disua^tage in
this life, which they prefer before eternal glory: Vvitte and experience
being enough oftentimes to discover falshod, but not sufficient without Gods
grace (which many have not because they vvil not) to retire to the Church and
truth again. These men's exterior assent shall in deed hardly be obtained for
the approbation of our actions, be our defense never so open and evident.

But our confidence being in God, into whose hand the hearts and doings of all
Princes and peoples be put, who can at every moment forcibly touch and incline
them to acknovvledge the equity of our cause, as to his glory and wisdoms
shall be best, and who has already given us (eternal honor be to his name) the
hearts and souls of so many thousands of our dear Countriemen: We may
adventure with al hope, joy, and comfort, to speak in our defense, and
discover without al disloyalty loyalty to her Majesty or any her Highness
Ministers, the vvrong informations that certain enemies of the Catholic
Church have given up against us and our brethren, as to our great grief we
perreiue by some late proclamations published in Iulie and January last, and
otherwise. Wherein because we would not in any wise oppose our selves to
public authority, or give occasion of further offense, specially in these
days and sects so prone to despise Domination, we durst not presume to
direct the words of our defense to her Majesty or Council particularly
(though S. Iustine, S. Hilarie, and other holy fathers have done the like to
their Princes) but to al indifferent readers generally: Praiyng nevertheless to
God upon our knees that he vvil incline her Graces and her honorable Councels
hearts, with mercy and equity to read the same. We require it with tears
even for the passion of our Savior, and for their souls sake.

Our coming beyond the seas and living out of our native Country. CHAP. 1.
FIrst, vvheras we be closely charged in the Edict of the 15 of Iulie 1580,
that we be fled into foreign parts and refuse to live in our natural
Country: We protest to all the world that it is not for any vnduetiful
affection, alienation or estranging our hearts and likings from the same, as
our daily prayers and sacrifices to God, our continual sighs and tears both
public and private, our sundry duetiful attempts and hazards of our persons,
and the blood and lives of our brethren yielded in Apostolic and peaceable sort
for the weal and saftie thereof, do abundantly testify: Nor for that by
unkind affection we prefer any Country or Commonwealth before our own,
be the commodities in them selves never so many, or their courtesies to us
never so great (as in deed through Gods goodness, to whose honor it specially
pertains and for whose cause they be done, the favors every where shevved
us are worthy immortal memory and thanks) vvherof our often sorovvful
bevvailing before God and complaints one to an other do bear us witness.
Which we now willingly disclose also to the world, concerning the hard
state of our long banishment: which, be it never so much eased by Christian
contentation and manifold graces of the people with whom we converse, yet
never wants the ordinary difficulties and displeasant accide^ts that follow
strangers in every place.

Thou know, Good Lord, how often we have lamented together, that for our
sins we should be constrained to spend either al or most of our serviceable
years out of our natural Country, to which they are most due, and to which
in all ages past they should have been grateful: that our offices should be
acceptable and our lives and service agreeable to strangers and not to our
dearest at home. Thou know how earnestely we have together desired thee
to incline our Princes heart to admit us to our Country into what state so
ever, so that we might there in poverty and penance never so extreme, serve
the poor souls to their salvation, voiding our cogitations of all the honors,
commodities, preferments, that our forefathers and the Realm yielded and gave
to such functions, acquitting them for our own parts to the present
possessioners and incumbents or to whom so ever God shall permit. Thou
know how justly we have bevvailed our heavy case, that so many strange
nations having their Churches with freedom to serve God after there manner in
our Country, No liberty of Catholic Religion in England.
only Catholics (which in our fathers days had all, and for whom and by
whom al Churches and Christianity arose) can by no intercession of foreign
Potentates, nor no sighs nor sorrows of innumerable most loyal subjects,
obtain one place in the whole land to serve their Lord God after the rites of
al other good Christian Princes, Priests, and people of the world: That no
Jew, no Turk, no Pagan can by the law of God, nature, or nations, be forced
from the manner and persuasion of his own Sect and Service, to any other
which by promis or profession he or his progenitors never received: only we
(that neither in our own persons nor in our forefathers, ever gave consent to
any other faith or worship of God, but have in precise terms by protestation
and promis bound our selves in Baptism to the Religion, faith, and Service
Catholic alone) are against divine and humane laws, and against the
Protestants own doctrine in other nations, not only bereued of our Christian
due in this behalf, but are forced by manifold coactions to those rites which
we never knevv nor gave our assent unto.

Wherein our grief of heart is much increased, either when we look into
other States and Countries, as Germany, Suitzerland, Suetia, Polonia, Boemia,
and the like, where though there have been great alterations in religion these
late years, yet lightly none be forced so but if they can not have the exercise
of their profession in one territory, Canton, town, Church, or Parish, yet
they may have it near them in an other, as also in all the Provinces and
kingdoms subject either to the Persian or the Turk at this day, the old
Christians be permitted to use freely their devotions: or when we look back
to the like distresses of Catholics in old time when certain Emperors were
chief fautors of Arianisme and other Sects, who yet were often induced of
their natural benignity to yield certain Churches or at least Oratories in
Churcheyardes and other places adjoining, for the Catholic service in their
dominions. Socr. Ec. hist. lib. 2. cap. 18. and li. 4. ca. 12. 16.
So did Constantius the Arian Emperor and Valens grant to S. Athanasius and
his folovvers in Alexandria: Niceph. li. 11. c 49. 50.
which Valens God plaged afterward because he would not suffer the same at
Antioche. Li. 5. de Bas. trad.
Valentinian also the younger proffered the like to S. Ambrose in Millan.

Which only grace of our Prince if we might have obtained, no pleasure,
profit, or preferment that the world beside yeldeth in any part of
Christendom, should have kept us out of our dearly beloved Country so long,
for whose salvation, and so much liberty of conscience as is mentioned, we
have often wished diverse of our persons in perpetual prison, for pledge and
vvarrant of the peaceable and loyal demeanor of our brethren the Catholics,
and for security of the state, vvherof her wise Counselers have alvvaies in
such cases greatest regard. But neither this durst our Catholic brethren
demand in their manifold fears, doubts, and disgraces at home, nor we in
such suspicion and misconstruction of al our actions, could ever with hope
attempt it abroad.

And alas much less then the grant of public places for exercise of our
ancient religion, would have given infinite contentment to the Catholics
within, and have called home most of them abroad, when both sorts would
have counted it a singular grace, during the distress of these days, to have
had by permission, pardon, conniuence, their soul rightes (without which men
perish doubtless everlastingly) in their private houses and chambers, yea in
prisons, in the closes and lest offen fensiue manner in the world: as the
Apostles and Confessors did often in the primitive Church, Cyprian ^p. 5.
and S. Cyprian testifies that some did in his time, and S. Athanasius him
self did with the Catholics in Antioche. Niceph. li. 9. c. 23.
From al which, being by rigor of penal statutes, dilligent enquiry of temporal
Officers, vvatchfulnes of Ministers, spies, and promotors, continually
restrained, and by them often chased from their houses, spoiled of their goods,
disgraced and discouraged in all their affairs, many thousands yea the far
greater part of her Ma.ties subjects languish away in sorrow and sadness
irremediable.

Neither be such men miserable only by so long lack of things necessary to
salvation, but much more for that they be enforced to things which assuredly
procure damnation. In which case, very lamentable it is to think upon all the
distressed consciences that through out the Realm repine with inconsolable
sighs and groans against their receiving, hearing, and using of the pretended
Sacraments, Service, Sermons, and other actions, whereunto they be
inuoluntarily and against their vvil drawn, and specially for the oath of the
Queens soueraintie in spiritual regiment, The oath of the Supremacy.
a thing improbable, unreasonable, unnatural, impossible: and yet the form
thereof so conceived in stature, and so tendered, that the takers must swear
upon the Euangolistes (how so ever they think in deed) that they
acknovvledge even in their conscience that, which never learned man of any
sort or sect did ever think to be true, and which they know every Catholic
man to condemn in heart, and which the chief makers of the same, by exe^pting
them selves from it by a special prouiso, have judged either damnable or very
dangerous. Which oath therefore to exact of most Officers in the
Commonwealth, of every one that is preferred in the Universities, or
otherwise almost throughout the Realm, and namely of al such as they suspect
think it untrue, is nothing else, but vvittingly to drive men to pitiful
torment of mind, remorse, and utter desperation.

Which thing if her Ma.tie did know, she would never of her natural
cleme^cie, for a title and claim that never King (much less Queen) Christian
nor Heathen, Catholic nor Heretic, in her own dominions or in all the world
beside before our age, did challenge or accept, suffer her poor subjects to be
so inwardly and deeply afflicted in their souls, but would no doubt have
compassion of their coacted miseries, that her self also may find mercy at the
day of her departure, vvherof the greater she is in this life, the more she
shall have need in the next, where she must answer not only for the things
done by her commandment and knowledge, but for what so ever is done
unjustly by her name or authority, though she never know thereof: as it is
verily hoped that of these calamities aforesaid her Ma.tie has no
intelligence. And the Kings of the world shall find their countes large and
intricate enough at their judgment day, of their temporal gouernements only,
though they trouble not them selves with the spiritual regiment also.

The universal lack then of the sovereign Sacrifice and Sacraments catholikely
ministered, without which the soul of man dies, as the body does without
corporal food: this co^strainte to the contrary services, whereby men perish
everlastingly: this intolerable oath repugnant to God, the Church, her Ma.ties
honor, and al men's consciences: and the daily dangers disgraces, vexations,
fears, imprisonments, empouerishments, despites, which they must suffer: and
the railings and blasphemies against Gods Sacraments, Saints, Ministers, and
al holies, which they are forced to hear in our Country: are the only
causes, most dear Sirs, or (if we may be so bold and if our Lord permit
this declaration to come to her M.ties reading) most gracious Sovereign, why
so many of us are departed out of our natural Country, and do absent our
selves so long from that place where we had our being, birth, and bringing up
through God, and which we desire to serve with all the offices of our life
and death: only craving correspondence of the same, as true and natural
children of their parents.

From which we are not fugitives, as sometimes discourteously we are called,
nor are fled for following any factions or differences of noble families, nor
for any crimes or disloyalties done against the Prince or Commonwealth, nor
for any disorder in our lives, or vvorldly coffeehouse or disagrement with
the present civil state and polity, or for mislike of any her Ma.ties
ministers, whose persons, vvisedoms, moderation and prudence in government,
and manifold graces, we do honor with al our heart in all things: excepting
matters incident to Religion, wherein their honors can not be offended, if
we prefer the judgment of Gods Church before their humane counsel.
Acknovvledging that her Ma.ties reign and their regiment had been most
glorious and renowned to the world abroad, and most secure and happy to the
subjects at home, if it had not been contaminated by the fatal calamities (so
to call Gods provident justice for our sins) of alteration in Religion and
the things thereon depending. Which not consisting (as we have declared)
with any Christian Catholic man's conscience, such as we profess our selves
to be, nor with liberty of mind, nor saftie of body, we were constrained
to flee and forsake our Country, parents, friends, and what so ever by nature
is there dear unto us, by the vvarrant and example of Christ, his Apostles, S.
Athanasius, S. Hilarie, and other our forefathers in faith, in the like
persecutions.

Therefore certain men, otherwise of good credit and degree in England, and
coming over for public affairs, have done us sometimes great injury, in that
they gave out to diverse strangers marueling to see so many us abroad out of our
native Country (which every man affects, and of al other, as they think,
the English) that her M.tie was desirous to have al come home, and that being
otherwise quiet and contented subjects, none were nor should be molested for
their conscience: which many in foraine parts have so mistake^, that they
verily thought we might have the exercise of our religion, and freedom of
conscience from co^strainte to any other contrary unto our profession. For
which only grace, that it might be common to al Catholics in the Realm,
would God we had given our lives. Which can be no longer nor otherwise
grateful unto us, then we have hope to serve her Highness and our beloved
Country, when it shall please Christ to give them the mind to require or
admit the same.

Our repairing sometimes to the City and Court of Rome. CHAP. II.
CERTAIN young fellows, fugitives form their Masters on thisside, being
deprehended in diverse cosinages, counterfaiting of letters, and plain theftes
(by which kind of men Athanasius and the chief Catholics in the Arians days
were maruelously plaged) joining to them others of il disposition that
sometimes thrust themselves secretly into such companies living together as
we do, to take and give notice of men's doings and demeanor, whom men call
commouly spies or intelligencers, we by the Scriptures word name them
Falsebrethren: have done very il offices of late, not to us only, whom of
malice, hope of impunitie and lucre, they have traitorously slaundered, but to
some of the honorable Counsel also, who thought such conditioned men not
unworthy to be heard and trusted, against men (to say the least) of faith and
honesty, and worthy also to be used and preferred: for further affliction of
poor Catholic men, through the whole Realm. by whom and other like lost
companions, they have had such a pitiful fit these later months, as never
before. Which to us that be absent, gives unspeakable grief, for that our
dear brethren, innocent in them selves, should be so heavily chastifed for our
defaultes, and them not true, but only surmised: excepting alvvaies our
scholastical attempts, for the conversion of our Country and reconcilement of
our brethren to the Catholic Church, which we everlastingly profess and
vvil endeavor until death.

Therefore touching some of our late repairing to the city of Rome this year
past, vvhervvith we are charged: the principal of that viage does protest,
that he neither joined with rebel, nor traitor, nor any one or other, against
the Queen or Realm, or traitorously sought or practiced to irritate any
Prince or Potentate to hostility against the same. Further inuocating upon his
soul, that he never knevv, savv, nor heard, duri^g his abode in the Court
there, of any such vvritings as are mentioned in the said Proclamation of
Iulie, containing certain articles of co^federation of the Pope, King of
Spain, and other Princes, for the invasion of the Realm: nor ever afterward
gave counsel to publish any such thing, though he were in Rome at the day of
the date that some of those copies, which afterward he savv when they were
common to all the world, do bear. Being also most assured that no other
English Catholic would or could be the author thereof, nor (as it may be
thought) any other of those Princes, or their ministers, that are pretended to
be of the foresaid league: being neither wisdoms nor policy, if any such
thing were intended (as we verily think there was not) much less if it
were never meant, to publish any such libelles, to give the Realm warning
purposely to provide for it, specially all the world knovving, that the
pinching of the poor Catholics at home (a lamentable case) is their fense and
repay for all adverse accidents abroad. And it verily may be thought (and so it
is certain that some of the principal ministers of the forenamed Princes have
ausvvered, being demanded thereof) that the Protestans having exercised skill
and audacitie in such practices and counterpractises (of which France,
Flanders, Scotland, and other countries have had so lamentable experience) did
contriue them, to alter her Majesty's accustomed benignity and mercy toward
the Catholics, into such rigor of justice as in the said Edict is theatened.

How so ever it be, and from whence so ever they came, Christ knovveth our
going to Rome did neither fetch, Causes of going to Rome.
cause, nor procure any such matter, nor was for any treaty or counsel
against our Country, but much more for the adua^ceme^t of the same, and for
the necessary relief of our fellow students in banishment, as other men's
going to other Princes Courts we doubt not to be for the like purpose: though
we can not so precisely vvarrant the actions of other men, vvhervvith we be
not so well acquainted, as our own.

Once, our own Country by the fear of one sort, and alienation of an other,
not yelding us necessary liuelihod: reason and nature force us to seek for
succor at such Prelates and Princes hands, as of old have had compassion upon
our forefathers in such like cases of distress: the courtesy and custom of al
Kings and nations inclining them to the favor, help and protection of
strangers and desolate persons, namely when their miseries fall unto them for
religion and the same faith that them selves be of, the honorablest quarrel
either to do or suffer for, in the world.

And for us of the School and Clergy, vvhither should we rather flee for
relief either of body or soul, Hiero. ep. 16.
then to the head or (as S. Rome always the city of refuge and recourse of al
Christians out of al Nations.
Hierom speaks) to the most secure part of our Catholic Communion, to the
rock of refuge in doubtful days and doctrines, to the chief Pastor and
Bishop of our souls in earth, to the Vicar general of Christ, out of the
compass of whose fold and family no banishment can bring us: to him, that by
office and unction has received the grace of love, mercy, pity and
compassion: to him, that counts no Christian nor domestical of faith, a
stranger to him, whose city and Seat is the native home of al true beleuers,
and the pattern of al Bishoply hospitality and benignity: to him, Bid li. 1.
hist. Ang.
whose predecessors gave us our first faith in the time of the Britannes,
restored it afterward in the days of the English, recovered us from
Paganism, from Arianisme, from Pelagianisme, from Zuinglianisme, often
received, harbored, and relieved diverse blessed Bishops and Priests of our
Nations as well in the times of their pros peritie as persecution, and who
have received again of all our Princes, Prelates, and people, all dutiful and
correspondent honors and good offices for so many hundred years together,
when they and their dominions flourished in much glory and felicity, and
were dreadful to Gods enemies, the Churches, and their own: (among whom,
her Ma.ties father, for his worthy vvritings and doings against the Luthera^s,
received the glorious and eternal title, of Defender of the faith:) to him, of
whose predecessors all the famous fathers called for aid, comfort, and counsel
in their like distresses, Cyprian of Cornelius and Stephanus, Athanasius of
Julius and Marcus, Chrysostom and Augustine of Innocentius, Basil of Liberius,
Felix, and other Bishops of Italy, Hierom and Miletius of Damasus, Theodorete
of Leo the Great, and all the rest, of other holy Popes, as time and necessity
required: to him, Li. 4. c. 22. hist Ec.
whose Seat (as Eusebius reports out of S. Denis of Corinth) did alvvaies
send relief to all the Christians persecuted and condemned to metalles, and
refreshed all the faithful coming unto it, as the parent the children: to him,
who as he Canonically succedeth al these in Seat, doctrine, and dignity, so
is inferior to none, far passes many, and resembles most S. Gregory the
Great, our Apostle, in all Charity, hospitality, zeal, and tenderness of heart
and affection tovvard the desolate, namely of our nation: for the spiritual
calamity vvherof the writer of this has seen him vveepeful heartily, and has
heard him say that the goods of that holy Seat, vvherof he had the
dispensation, were for the poor afflicted domesticals of faith. Finally,
vvhither could we with more hope have recourse, then to him, by whose
bounteous goodness so many Patriarchs, Bishops, Learned, Gentlemen, and
Christians of al sorts, English, Scottish, Irish, Almans, Hungarians, Syrians,
Armenians, Cyprians, and al other under the Turk, or any way for Christ's
sake oppressed or empouerished, have been and shall be relieved?

If we be further in particular demanded of the causes of some of our late
resort thither: to temper al men's ielousy as much as we may, in faith and
truth they were none other, but to make humble suit for the establishme^t and
perpetual foundation of the College or Seminary, which his Holiness had not
long before instituted in place of the Hospital of our Nation there, as a thing
much more proper to this time, and more fruitful to our Country, then it was,
adding of his own much then, and a great deal sithence, to the old
provision, The Seminary at Rome founded.
and now in January last fully founding and accomplishing the same: this was
one thing. An other was, that the Governors of that College in Rome above,
and of this other now resident in the city of Rhemes beneath, might give and
take mutual direction, for correspondence in regiment, discipline, and
education most agreeable to our Countrimens natures, and for prevention of al
disorders that youth and companies of scholars (namely in banishment) are
subject unto.

Wherein we thank God of all that pains and endeavors, for that it pertained
excedingly to the general good and honor of our Nation, that we may
perpetually have a number of the most pregnant vvittes brought up in the
principal Seat, place, and fountain of our Christianity. Vvhither what so
ever is learned, wise, virtuous, of all the most famous Universities,
Monasteries, Societies, and Colleges through the world, is recuiled as to a
continual mart of al kind of doctrine and prudence: Hiero. praef. li. 2. comm.
in ep. ad Gal. Calvin.
S. Hierom calling it the place of greatest faith and devotion, and the
Adversary him self confessing, that the great resort thither heretofore was,
for that the best learned and vvisest men of the world were there: besides
the experience of the Universal Churches practice: where there is daily
intercourse betwixt al Princes, Prelates, and peoples Christened, in causes of
conscience, religion, and other spiritual affairs: and where they may see and
vvonder at Gods promis and proprouidence in the continual preservation of that
state and regiment, in persecution in prosperity, in wealth in poverty, in
good life in il life, the Heretics (as S. De vtilit. cred. c. 17.
Augustine speaks) in vain barking about it: That the Arians, Macedonians,
Pelagians, Donatistes, Nestorians, and al other Sectaries, that stood at the
bay with this Seat, are al buried in infamy: that these present Protestants,
Anabaptists, Puritans, Trinitaries, and other wolves of what hear so ever,
(that ball against the Pastor, the sooner to sease upon the flock, Ep. 55. nu.
3.
as S. Cyprian speaks) daily decay and discover their own malice and folly:
that al Empires, Kingdoms, and States, be by certain seasons either decayed or
manifoldly altered, and this Seat to stand immovable and to be as firm and
flourishing in this disordered revolt of many peoples from it, as ever before.

These and such other high experime^ts, with innumerable examples of virtue
and devotion, shall this Roman institution give to our Countriemen, under the
famousest teachers and governors of youth in our age or some worlds before.
Who otherwise would admire their pety Masters at home, the cause of al
error and ignorance.

To do this service then to our Commonwealth, for which if ever it come to it
self again, it vvil thank the doers as much as now it blames them, was
that viage taken specially: And then, to make like humble suit for the
augmentation of the monthly provision of this other College, for that (the
number and necesitie thereof daily increasing) it was not sufficient. Which
suit his Holiness also of his incomparable love to our Nation, benignely heard.

These lo God knovveth were our last dealings, and these are our treasons and
sins, and none other, that we contriue at Rome against our natural Country.

The meaning and purpose of the institution of the Seminaries. CHAP. III.
AND concerning his Holiness intentions, if they be any other in the institution
and entertainment of these Seminaries, the^ ours are, they be unknown to us,
none being so presumptuous to search further into his secrets, the^ stands
with his good pleasure and wisdom to utter of him self, nor any having just
cause to deem worse or otherwise of his doings, then is agreeable to his holy
high calling, approved good affection to our Country, his great virtue, and
the evidence of the thing.

This is a clear case, that the persons which first put them selves together
in the University of Duay the year 1568, The beginning of the Seminary at
Duay.
yelding to Collegial form of study and discipline under one President
(which after some years and good proof of their profitable endeavors, by Gods
goodness obtained his Holiness protection and monthly exhibition) had these
intentions: first, to dravv diverse youths, who then for their conscience lived
in the lovv Countries, from sole, several, and voluntary study, to a more
exact method and course of common conference and public exercise, to be
pursued by their Superiors appointment rather then their own choice: that
they might be more apt to serve their Country, when it should please God
mercifully to reduce the^ home again.

Secondly, doubting the time of our chastisement might be so long as to wear
out either by age, emprisonme^t, or other miseries, the elder sort of the
learned Catholics both at home and abroad, it was thought a necessary duty
for the posterity, to provide for a perpetual seed and supply of Catholics,
namely of the Clergy: nothing mistrusting but the times and opportunities
would come (were they near, were they far of) when they might take
advantage for restitutio^ of religion, no Sect ever being liked long, nor
permane^t without entercha^ge, as we see in Arianisme the pattern of al
other: Which though it troubled the world some hundred years together, yet it
changed places, had lucida interualla, gave seasons of calm and rest to holy
Bishops, Priests, and faithful persons according as the Emperors were
diuersely affected tovvard the Sect, or more or less given to rigor or
clemency. Which is the providence of God for the perpetuity of the Catholic
faith, which no heresy that ever was or shall be, can wholy exclude, by no
vvitte or violence of man: according to the saying of S. Augustine: Nemo delet
de coelo constitutionem Dei, Ep. 162.
Nemo delet de terra Ecclesiam Dei.

Thirdly, their purpose was, for their better furnishing of meet men to the
end aforesaid, and for disaduantaging the adversary part therein, to dravv
into this College the best vvittes out of England, University men and other
coming to the Seminary.
that were either Catholikly bent, or desirous of more exact education then is
these days in either of the Universities (where, through the delicacie of
that Sect, there is no art, holy or profane, thoroughly studied, and some not
touched at all:) or that had scruple of conscience to take the oath of the
Queens Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, (which gave us diverse, not only
Catholics but others, out of both the Universities, where it is specially
exacted, and torme^teth the consciences of many that seem pure Protestants:)
or that misliked to be forced to the Ministry, as the use is in diverse
Colleges, a calling co^temptible even in their own conceit, and very damnable
in the judgment of others, (the due consideration vvherof has yielded to us
many, yea some scores, partly before, and partly after their entera^ce to that
trade:) or that were doubtful whether of the two religions were true,
wherein to take trial of none but the one which the sway of the Country
forcibly drives unto, when they might have proof of the other so near at
hand in a College of their own, without great cost or trauail, seemed to
many much shame and inexcusable negligence in cause of salvation, which is the
iustest cause to trauail (as S. De vtil. cred. c. 7.
Augustine tells Honoratus) in the world. Which has driven diverse over, to
their great satisfaction and admiration of the evidence of our part.

Grammar Schools also from al parts of the Realm have yielded us many
youths, which having their whole and full trayning in Catholic Colleges
here, prove no less serviceable for their Country then the others.

And the rest brought up in the Universities there, do easily here by
comparison perceive the great corruption in the same, specially of life and
manners: sin, liberty, and licentiousnes daily more and more shevving them
selves to be companio^s of this new doctrine. Which doctrine who so ever
attempteth to amend, let him know by our experience, that the place affected
is custom and pleasure in sin, and shame and lothsomnes to confess and
amend: Which being cured, there remains no difficulty.

These youths (Gentlemen's sons specially) are much propense in our Country
(God be thanked for it, as also for that it gives exceeding hope of better
times) to the Catholic faith, and many adventure over to us without their
parents consent, and sometimes much against their vvilles: Who though they
could be content to have their children better brought up then they can be at
home, yet for fear of disfavor of the world, wherein they be more entangled
then their sons, they refuse often to give them any relief at all, fear
sometimes ouerpaising their natural affection, and God takes the care of their
dear pledges, and keeps them here for their Country.

And because one College could not be sufficient for so great store of al
sorts as is said, and for that this beneath might be subject to diverse
disturbances, by fine practices of the adversary, The Seminary invited to
return to Duay.
vvherof our remove from Duay gave us good experience (notvvithstanding the
Catholic and honorable Magistrate sithence by their letters instantly inuiting
us thither again) therefore God moved the heart of the Popes Holiness, The
beginning of the Seminary at Rome.
to erect that other also in Rome, a place not commonly subject to the like
hazards: that so these two Colleges might be more plentiful Nourceries for the
Church of our Country, and jointly work together for the benefit of the
same.

The first intended and most certain fruit thereof (over and above the
provision for the time to come) being, to save so many souls, as not only
were any one time in both the Colleges, or in other Schools in these parts,
expecting rooms in the same, but al othets that in diverse times and seasons
have been or shall be brought up in them, during the schism: the number of
whom (which is already exceeding great) and the rest which are to come
hereafter, Christ only knovveth: besides many trauailers, that intending not
precisely any matter of religion, have yet by Gods careful providence, that
ouerreacheth man's purposes to his salvation, been happily by them converted to
Christian faith and life, to their great and inexpected joy. Al which, if they
had tarried in the English Universities, or thervvise had followed the manner of
our Country, had perished everlastingly without al question, though by the
erroneous judgment and persuasion of the Protestants, many fear not their
damnable state.

The second and further fruit of the said Colleges is, to instruct men in all
Cases of conscience and Controversies, and to breed in them zeal and desire
to be Priests, even in these days specially, when they can look for no
vvorldly honor, lucre, preferment or promotion thereby, Priests of the
Seminaries.
but manifold dangers, disgraces, persecution, vexations: only by prayers, and
Sacrifice (the special office of that holy Order, and an act that makes the
most forcible clamor to God for mercy of al others) to make intercession for
our desolate friends at home: and to adventure into England, there to serve
them, whose hearts God shall touch to admit spiritual comforts, and to
prefer salvation before worldly commodities: and to minister unto them al
Sacraments necessary for the life and grace of their souls.

Which duty, through love that is stronger then death, very great numbers of
both the Colleges (besides other virtuous and learned Priests) have godly and
happily done, to the benefit and unspeakable solace of infinite persons, great
alteration of minds throughout the whole Realm, and wonderful increase of
courage in all sorts, not only to think well in heart, but openly and (as
Christian Catholics are bound to do) boldly to profess their faith and
religion, and to refuse all acts contrary to the same. Which was thought a
hard thing to the worldly at the beginning, but now they would not be in
their former case for all the goods the Realm yeldeth: acknovvledging it to be
an extreme misery, that the greatest part of the Country should be Catholics
in their hearts, and in their mouths and actions, Protestants.

And this they have done only by the power of Priesthod, in spiritual,
silent, and peaceable manner, and not with riottes, tumults, or warlike
concourse: they have done it, as the Apostles and other holy men did in the
primitive Church, by trauails, watchings, fastings, perils at the ports,
perils in the sea, perils on the land, perils of open enemies, perils of false
brethren, fears of the laws, fears of hurting their friends, fears for
scandalizing the vveake: by contumelies, disgraces, poverty, prisonments,
fetters, dungeons, rackes, deaths. And this the omnipote^t God, because it is
his own work enterprised by order and authority of his chief Minister in
earth, has prospered excedingly: though it seemed at the beginning a thing
hard or impossible, the Adversaries having so many years the laws, the
svvord, the pulpits, and al humane helps for them.

But the entrance to this spiritual attempt and traffike was well opened
before, by books written from these parts, and by sundry letters of the
virtuous youths to their parents and friends, whom they besought to regard
their souls, and not to damn them selves upon pretense of saving their lands
and goods to the profit of them, their children and posterity: desiring no
other inheritance then their salvation and company in heaven, the lack
vvherof should be to them more then al mortal sorrows.

To this, the fruits of the Protestants doctrine, their profane life and
manners, their restles contentions, debates, and dissentions among them selves,
their scandals mo in those fevv days of their felicity, then was given of
the true Clergy in a thousand years before (though all the Adversaries
slanderous reports of them were Gospel, as many of them be more false then
Esops fables:) these things, and the great vvearines that the world, and
specially wise men that easily forsee the event of their pretended spiritual
government, have of that religion, did give great success to the former good
endeavors.

Yea even the very severity of the laws made against the Catholics and
these attempts, and the popular pulpit-mens perpetual balling and railing
against the Pope, caused many one that otherwise should never have heard or
thought of him, to enquire further what that Pope is, in whom they perceived
by the vehement contradiction and choler of their preachers, that there lay
some great moment in these causes of religion: and so happily admonished, and
looking back to the antiquity, they find that it was the property of all
Sects, and that it is as sure a sign of rebellion against Christ and his
Church, as to rail upon the Sovereign temporal, is to rebel against the
Commonwealth.

These things now we have thus openly, particularly, and plainly set down
of the end and actions of our Seminaries, perhaps more following equity and
sincerity, then policy, in discovering our doings to some disadvantage of the
cause which we seek so much to prefer, though we trust in Christ Jesus,
who has hitherto turned al humane impediments to the advantage of his name
and truth, that our plain dealing shall neither offend our Adversaries, not
hurt our friends, nor hinder our good meanings.

As for the Popes Holiness, who of his great benignity has instituted and
endevved the said Seminaries, no man can by reason reprehe^d his doings, being
most agreeable to his Apostolic careful solicitude of al Churches and Christian
Nations, to the desire he has to seek and reduce (with what cost or pain
so ever) the lost sheep of his fold, to his special love of our Country: The
Popes affection and love toward our Nation.
which (notvvithsta^ding their unkind revolt from the fellowship of his faith
and authority, which they entered into at their first conversion:
notvvithsta^ding the uncivil laws made against him in more exquisite terms
then against any enemy or Turk, whose messengers they would not generally
repel as they do his: novvithstanding their perpetual prayers, speeches,
preachings, and proclamations against the whole order) he tenderly affects
and pitieth still, and for the honor and salvation of our people, and for no
other vvorldly respect or commodity, he has of his own charges (besides
other munifice^ce bestovved on sundry persons) erected these two Colleges,
that by them in most svveete, peaceable, and Apostolic manner, he might revoke
our Prince and Country to the honorable society of al Christian Catholic
kings and Countries.

These be his cogitations touching the Seminaries, what so ever other
speculatiue and suspicious men do surmise otherwise.

They might see that it is Gregory the Thirtenths proper glory and gift of
God, The Popes Seminaries of other Nations.
to institute such Nourceries for the help of al Nations: and our special
blessing, that he doubleth his grace and favor, toward us in that kind.

He has made a Seminary for the Hebrews that vvil convert from their
Iudaisme: he has made for the Greeks and Hungarians infected with Turcisme
and other errors and heresies: he has endevved the College of Germans so
largely, that it receives Polonians, Suetians, and other near Nations,
travailed specially with Lutheranisme: he has made one for the Dalmatians: he
gives great succourse to the Seminary of the Roman Clergy, and other
Colleges of the most famous Society of the name of Jesus, whose labors it
pleases him to use in the government of most of these Colleges, to the
eternal good of al people. He contributeth to the Seminaries of Prage and
Vienna, and has relieved the famous University of Louan distressed by the
rebellion of Orange: with many other in far parts, vvherof we have not
knowledge: finally, he helps in this kind, Scotland our next neighbor, that
has lately be gonne in Paris a Seminary for the same end that ours and others
were begone.

Which Nation has been these many years most pitifully plunged in many
calamities by the Sects of this time, but now begins to have hope (as al
Christendom has) of their noble young Prince. The young Prince of Scotland.
Whose graces, gifts, and tovvardlines in all kingly qualities, are said to be
exceeding rare in that age, and therefore no doubt he vvil shortly see the late
calamities that his Realm has sustained by the Caluinists, their horrible
infamous murdering of his Highness father, and more then barbarous vilany and
misuse of his dearest mother vvhiles she was among them, and the sundry
detestable treasons contrived against his Royal person when he was yet in his
mothers vvo^be, and often since, as well otherwise by vnvvonted treacheries,
as by infecting (as much as in them lay) his tender age, both with that
damnable heresy, and with ill affection toward his dearest parents.

Whose infelicitie, procured only by the fine practices of Heretics (the
bane of al Kings and Commonvveales) may give his Highness and his wise
Counselers warning to take heed betimes, and to adioyne him self and the
Realm, to the noble and secure society of Christ's Catholic Church, and the
most high and mighty Princes of the same, agreably to al his honorable
Progenitors both of England and Scotland: and to use the service of sundry his
Catholic and excellent learned subjects abroad in diverse parts of
Christendom, and at home in his own Realm, for the reducing of his state to
the old ancient glory and prosperity again, and to inform his Ma.tie (as
far as his age can bear) how necessary the fatherly care, counsel, and
affection of the Popes Holiness, the father and Pastor of al Princes, shall be
for his Country and people: engraffing these grave words of holy S. Hierom
in his heart yet innocent, for a preservative against the poison of these days.
Ep. 8. ad Demetriadem.
This one thing I think good of charitable piety and affection to forwarne
thee, that thou hold fast the faith of holy Innocentius, who is successor and
son of the Apostolic chair and of the forenamed Anastasius, and that thou
receive not a strange doctrine, though thou seem unto thy self never so wise
and subtle.

Which notable lesson is now in like manner to be inculcated and often
commended concerning the faith of Gregory the xiij their successor and son
in Seat and belief. Who has (as is shevved, and as it is clear by the
institution of the said Seminaries) an unspeakable affection to al Christ's
flock and the weal of every Kingdom. For which his affection and Pastoral
offices, not to thank him most humbly, is great unkindness: but to blame him or
misconstrue his beneficial and benign actions, that is intolerable.

He does the like things for almost every other Nation in distress, and none
is so il, so suspicious, or so ungrateful, as to mistrust his benefits to be
their destruction, not the Germa^s, not the Hu^garians, not the Greeks, not
any other Provinces, for all which his Holiness has erected Colleges even as
for our Country. Of which though al take not so much good as they might do,
yet none fear hurt nor make laws against his holy and charitable actions but
we.

The best is that we have to do with a most benign father, that vvil
struggle no otherwise with our unnatural affections but by continual
benefits, not doubting but he shall gain that in heaven of God, which his
immortal merits do deserve, and of our posterity (which shall be void of these
prejudicial humors) perpetual memory, prayer, and benediction.

And this much by occasion of a certain clause in the Proclamation of
January, concerning the erection of the said Seminaries in foreign parts.

That we live not in them against the laws of God and our Country: with a
duetiful exhortation to the Q Majesty. CHAP. IIII.
AND vvheras in the same Proclamation we be charged to live contrary to the
laws of God and the Realm: if it were meant in matters of our life and
conversation (as we trust it is not) our purgation might easily be made,
having so many vvitnesses of our demeanor both for common and private,
wheresoever we have lived, and vvanting not public testimony of diverse
Princes and cities for the same, which shall be forth coming as need requires.
But meaning (as it is like they do) of our regiment, and behavior, in
doctrine, religion, and subjection to the laws of our Country: we desire in
this point if ever else (most benign Readers) both for your own sake and
ours, that favorable attention and indifferency, which the weight of the
cause touching both parties so near, does challenge and require.

We answer then, that if the laws of God and the laws of the Realm did
alvvaies consent and concur in deed, Gods laws and man's sometimes repugnant.
as in this clause and other common vvtitings and speeches proceeding from
authority, they be lightly in words couched together against us: hardly
could we defend our doctrines and doings from error and vndutiefulnes
toward our Prince. But seeing the laws of kings and Countries are not ever
consonant but may be contrary to Gods commaundeme^ts, we may justly mislike
the one without disloyalty to the other. Ep. 166.
When Emperors (says S. Augustine) be in error, they make laws for their
error against the truth, by which just men are tried and crowned, for not
doing that which they command, because God forbid death it.

If our Prince or Realm had the promis that their faith should not fail, Luc.
22.
that Hell gates should not prevail against the^, Mat. 16. 28. 18.
that Christ would be with them to the end of the world, that when so ever
they meet together in consultations, him self would be in the mids of them:
Io. 14. 16.
that the holy Spirit should perpetually direct them into al truth, Esa. 59.
that he would be in their mouth, and the mouth of their children, and the
mouth of their childrens children everlastingly: Deuteronomy. 17. Malach. 2
if in doubts of doctrine we were by the Scriptures referred to them, Luc.
10.
if the States there assembled might justly use this clause of ancient
Councels, Act. 15.
It has pleased the holy Ghost and us: then should our Statutelavves ever
co^curre with Gods laws, and the breach of one sort should condemn us of
tra^sgression of both. Vvherof now we need not fear, knovving that no
temporal king, nor Commonwealth, has such privileges of Gods protection,
being the special prerogatives of the Churches tribunals: whose laws
therefore never svvarue from Christ's commandments, as our Parliaments have
done (by our Adversaries judgment) al these worlds past together, and we
are sure that these later have done, and that al other presuming to determine
of matters Ecclesiastical, must needs do.

And it were the pitifullest hazard, and uncertainty of our faith and
salvation, Religion altering with the Prince.
that could be, so to hang on the Princes will, or the laws (commonly wholy
thereon depending) that there could be imagined no nearer way to religion,
then to believe what our temporal Lord and Master list. And it is the
turpitude of our Nation through the whole world, vvhereat we blush before
strangers that sometimes fall into discourse of such things, that in one man's
memory and since this strange mutation began, we have had to our Prince, a
man, who abolished the Popes authority by his laws, and yet in other
points kept the faith of his fathers: we have had a child, who by the like
laws abolished together with the Papacy, the whole ancient religion: we
had a woman, who restored both again, and sharply punished Protestants: and
lastly her Ma.tie that now is, who by the like laws has long since
abolished both again, and now severely punishes Catholics, as the other did
Protestants: and al these strange differences within the compass of about 30
years.

Neither may we look for more security or rest in religion in the times to
come, so long as our souls salvation and damnation depend upon our temporal
laws and Princes. Who if they should for the peoples sins, either by
error in judgment, or for any vantage and advancement of their state, which
often leads such men's consciences, fall to Arianisme or apostasy (as great
Emperors have done, and Princes are in no less peril of such miseries, but
much more then others be:) with as great facility may they force their
subjects to follow them, and provide laws for them (which alvvaies in such
cases must be counted Gods mere word) as they have done in points aforesaid:
specially when the resistance of the whole Clergy both superior and inferior
shall not be therein any whit regarded, as late experience in the first
Parliament of the Q. Highness reign teaches us.

In which Parliament, The first Parliament of this Queen.
the determination, decision, and definition of truths, or of heresies and
errors, of the true worship of God and the false, is attributed to that Court
of the States no less, or rather more, then to the four first or any other
general Counsel: to which the deciding of such things is there granted with
this limitation, so far as they can vvarrant their doings by the express
words of Canonical Scriptures, and no further: but to the Parliament
absolutely, decreing at the same time, that nothing there determined should be
counted heresy, error, or schism, what order, decree, sentence,
constitution, or law so ever were to the contrary, the holy Scriptures them
selves not excepted.

All this that Parliament did, and vvithal abolished all the rites of the
Catholic Church, and the right use of ministering the holy Sacraments and
Sacrifice, prescribing a new form, in most things agreing with
Zuinglianisme, in some with Lutheranisme: all the Bishops of the Realm, most
grave, learned, and honorable Prelates, present (as having principal place and
voice by the laws of our Country in the same) dissenting, and dissuading
with al their power possible: the inferior Clergy then also gathered in
Convocation, by most humble remonstrance opposing it self thereunto: as also
many wise men both of the said Parliament and abroad, did signify their much
mislike of the same.

Thus yet did the sentence of the Laity consisting only of Noblemen,
Ge^tlemen, citizens, and some artificers, prevail (a monstrous case) and that
in cause of religion, not only against all the Bishops of the Universal Church
besides, Li 4. c. 43.
which have (as S. Ireneus says) received with their Episcopal succesio^,
the grace and gift of understanding the truth: but even against their own
Prelates and Pastors: who (to say the least) must needs both by their great
wisdom, learning, godly life, and by their vocation, be more like to know the
truth and give true sentence in matters belonging to their own profession,
and were with more reason to be heard then those, who neither for age,
learning, nor divinity, were comparable to them, and to whom all the said
persons by Gods law and man's did owe (specially in these cases of religion)
al subjection and obedience, as to the proper Pastors of their souls.

Above all this, they moreover at the same time caused a form of oath to be
conceived concerning the Queens spiritual Souerainty, The oath of Supremacy.
which should be offered to al Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical
persons, specially whom they knevv by their former declaration and
Protestation against it, could not in conscience take it, nor would against
their conscience receive it: that upon refusal thereof, they might be deposed,
to vvitte, the Pastors and parents even by their sheep and children: Certain
hungry companions from Geneua, shaped into sheepeskinnes, waiting in the
mean time to enter upon their flocks, as afterward they did: the said
Prelates honorably and gladly sustaining deprivation, and ever since
emprisonment for confession of their faith, whereby and by tracte of time,
most of them be happily and gloriously deceased.

These strange and unnatural dealings, these procedings dishonorable to her
Ma.tie and the Realm, these laws against Gods express commandments which
prescribe obedience and subjection to our Prelates, these decrees that limite
Gods constant and permanent truth to the mutabilitie of temporal statutes, to
mortal men's vvilles and fancies: these are the laws of the Realm (and not
the Civil ordinances of our Prince) that we refuse to obey: and which not
only in our life and doctrine, but unto death and yelding our blood, we trust
to vvithstand: vvishing that so at the least God vvil have mercy on our
Country, and wipe away the ignominy of such violent disorders, which to
all our posterity must needs breed shame and rebuke, and to us Gods
indignation.

We live not then here in this our absence from our Country, any whit
contrary to Gods laws, as we be charged, but against man's laws so far, as
it is evident that they be repugnant to the laws of God, the Church, and
nature: as by the premises is plain, and as we are able further to prove
against any Protestant Divine in the world.

Yea we avouch further, that as no Protestant Divine in Christendom, can prove
we live against Gods laws, so no Protestant Lawyer of the Realm (for the
Catholics of neither science vvil stand against us in this point) can convince
us, that we live contrary to the laws of our Counrrie. Which we affirm,
not for that only, that such laws be unjust, and therefore lightly bind not
in conscience: nor for that, that pertaining to religion they passed with out
the consent of any of the Clergy: nor for that, that being repugnant to the
dignity and privileges of the Church, they are against the oath of the makers
and of al Christian Princes in due order consecrated: but for that they be not
in deed any laws at al, the makers lacking competent power, authority and
jurisdiction to proceed iudicially and authentically, to hear, determine,
define, or give sentence in any such things as be mere Ecclesiastical.

The Parliament is a mere temporal Court, The court of Parliament.
the Bishops them selves having voice there no otherwise but as Barons of the
Realm, nor having authority thereby or in that respect, to treat or define of
any matters, other then pertain to the civil regiment of the state: all the
power that they or others there have, being derived from the Prince and
Commonwealth civil, unto whom neither by the law of God, nor of nature, the
defining of such matters do belong. And it is an evident error, reproueable by all humane and divine learning, The Ecclesiastical souerainty, and the temporal.
that the souerainty or supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical is by nature or by
Christian laws implied in the right or title of a temporal King: or that it
ever was due or can be due to any temporal governor, Heathen or Christian, in
the world.

Not to the crown of a Heathen Prince can it belong (whose Emperial, Kingly,
or Princely power over their peoples, was notvvithstanding lavvful and true
soueraintie, and agreeable to the law of nature and Gods ordinance, of which
States the Apostles spoke, when they charged the Christians to pray for them
and to be subject and obedient to them, generally through their Epistles: as
our Savior also did in the Gospel, concerning the payment of tribute)
forasmuch as for some hundred years after, there were not many Princes
converted to Christ, and yet all that while the Church had her several
regiment. Not to Pagan Emperors then did it belong (though they were no less
Emperial and Kingly then now) neither was it challenged of them: for, the
principal Apostles ruled the Church in Rome, when Nero reigned: likewise
where the Kingdoms are revolted again (as in all the Turks dominion) needs
must the Church there have a spiritual regiment, without any dependence of the
Heathen Kings: whom yet in temporal matters they obey and serve. And therefore
all that the Protestants allege out of Scriptures, make no more for the claim
of a Christian Prince, then for the right of the Heathen.

Again, not to the crown of Kings or kingdoms, in that they be Christian:
for then the Church, which is Christ's mystical body or Commonwealth,
matching and meeting with a terrene or earthly state, should forsake her
proper regiment, jurisdiction, and form of government received immediately of
Christ, and yield the same and it self to the earthly power which the Apostle
calls humanam creaturam. 1. Pet. 2.
By which means, when so ever a king or Country is converted, the Church
should come and submit to them, and not they to Christ and his Church, which
must needs be most absurd: Princes and peoples converted, alvvaies submitting
them selves to Christ and his laws, not dravving the Governors of the Church
or any person thereof to more subjection then they were before their
Christianity, yea often rather rem^ting some of that for Christ's honor. And
therefore the holy Scriptures inform us by evident speeches, that converted
Kingdo^s must serve the Church. The Kingdom and Nation, Esa. 60.
says the Prophet, that serves not thee (meaning the Church) shall perish.
Ep. 169.
And S. Augustine, Our Lord, says he, will not sail to defend his Church, who
has made al earthly kingdoms subject to his yoke within her lap spread
through out the whole world.

Kings by receiving Christ's religion are not become Christ's Masters, or
Lords over the Church as it is his spiritual and mystical Commonwealth, but
are called by the Prophet her foster fathers, Es. 49. 60.
as Queens be also named her nources: because it belongs to the earthly
power that God has given them, to defend the laws of the Church, to cause
them to be executed, and to punish rebels and transgressors of the same.

The Church then, live she among the Heathens, live she with the Christians,
must have and hold that form of regiment and Commonwealth which Christ
immediately instituted, and was not chosen, made, or created by the peoples
ordinance and consent (which is the origin of al other humane states and
forms of Polity) the holy Ghost perpetually assisting, protecting, and
propagating the said spiritual regiment in all degrees and functions, as in
Apostles, Bishops, Priests and the rest, to the end of the world. And to these
the Apostle said, Act. 20.
Attend to your self and to your whole flock, over which the holy Ghost has
put you to rule the Church. Of these he said to us, Heb. 13.
Obey your Rulers and be subject to them, for they watch as being to give
accoumpt for your souls.

This regiment is not the right of any earthly crown, Prince, or State: they
al, if they be Christians, ovving subjection to the Pastors of their souls and
unto the Church of Christ. The Church never yielded it, nor can yield it unto
them. It is not agreeable to them by nature, as we see in the Heathen: it can
not be challenged by their Christianity, by which them selves are bound to
obey the Church and may not command it: no earthly Commonwealth can give or
confer it to their Prince, because they can not give that which they have
not by any natural faculty. The Prince therefore neither taking it of the
people, nor having it by birth or otherwise, can not communicate it to
Parliament, and consequently can not possibly make laws, hear or determine
by him self, Parliament, or any other Court in such sort subjected unto him, of
the Churches regiment.

And strange it is (specially in that first assembly of the States) how they
could attempt to bring the Churches spiritual and proper regiment into
consultation, judicial cognition, and deliberation, before the Prince or them
selves were found lavvful judges in such cases: no statute then that stood in
force, granting them any such power, nor no such thing any way lavvful
otherwise then by the false presupposition of the Princes Ecclestastical
supremacy, which yet was not by laws (nor in truth by nature could be)
agnised before the determination thereof in Parliament. Which having no legal
means to deliberate of the matter, could much less give sentence for it.

But such knottes when they ca^ not be loosed, Knottes broken not loosed.
the^ they are bold to break the^, as they did an other like insoluble, in the
next Parliament, about creating their Bishops. Which being deficient in the
foundation, can hardly be amended.

In truth the Prince or Court of Parliament has no more lavvful means to give
order to the Church and Clergy in these things, then they have to make laws
for the hierarchies of Angels in heaven. To bring in these novelties many a
hard shift is sought, God knovveth: and of al absurdities this paradoxe of the
Supremacy passes, the Lutherans flatly controvvling it in general, Magdeburg.
in praef. Ce^t. 7.
and Calvin him self with all the Purita^s at the least, Calu in 7 ca. Amos.
much misliking and reprehending the first grant thereof to King Harrie. for it
is al one to be head of the Church, and to be chief Governor in causes
Ecclesiastical. And it may be thought, that it is for some such quidditie, that
their B. of Canterbury has been restrained. The truth is, now after they
have flattered the Prince there with sufficiently, for the establishing of
their religion, they would gladly have the spiritual souerainty the^ selves,
the better to establish other new devises of their own: wherein if they
might do as they list, square should have been round long since, and of al
days in the year, sunday were like to be fasting day. But how so ever such
give or deny the same to the Prince, it is plain against al reason and nature,
The absurdities of a temporal Princes Ecclesiastical souerainty.
and that much more in a woman then a man, which is not capable thereof by her
sex. It gives power to the Queen to confer that to others (as to the
Priests and Bishops, to preach, minister Sacraments, have cure of souls, and
such like) which she neither has, nor can have, nor do, her self. It gives
her that may neither preach nor speak in public of matters of religion, 1.
Cor. 14.
to do that which is much more, 1. Tim. 2.
even to prescribe by her self or her deputes or laws authorized only by
her, to the preachers what to preach, which way to worship and serve God,
how and in what form to minister the Sacraments, to punish and deprive,
teach and correct them, and generally to prescribe and appoint which way she
vvil be governed in soul.

It makes the body above the soul, the temporal regiment above the spiritual,
the earthly Kingdom above Christ's body mystical. It makes the sheep above
the Pastor: It gives her power to command them, whom and wherein she is
bound to obey: It gives power to the subject to be judge of the Judges, Ep.
55. nu. 2.
yea and of God him self, as S. Cypria^ speaks: It makes her free from
Ecclesiastical discipline, from which no true child of gods family is
exe^pted.

It derogateth from Christ's Priesthod, which both in his own person, and in
the Church, is above his Kingly dignity. It deuideth (which is a matter of
much importance) the state of the Catholic Church and the holy communion or
society of al Christian men in the same, Aug. li. 2. cont. 2. ep. Gaud. c. 25.
into as many parts not communicant one with an other nor holding one of an
other, as there be worldly Kingdoms differing by customs, laws, and manners,
each from other: which is of most pernicious sequel, and against the very
native quality of the most perfect conjunction, society, unity, and
intercourse of the whole Church and every Province and person thereof together.
It opens the gappe to al kind of divisions, schisms, sects, and disorders.

It makes al Christian Bishops, Priests, and what other so ever borne out of
the Realm, forainers and usurpers in all jurisdiction Ecclesiastical toward
us: and that there can be no jurisdiction over English men's souls, but
proceeding and depending of her sovereign right therein. Which is directly
against Christ's express commandment and commission given to Peter first,
and then to all the Apostles, of preaching, baptizing, remitting, retaining,
binding and loosing, over all the world, without difference of temporal state,
or dependence of any mortal Prince therein.

It keeps the Realm from obedience to general Councels, which have been or
shall be gathered in foreign Countries: It takes away al convenient means of
gathering, holding, or executing any such Councels and their decrees, as
appeared by refusing to come to the late Council of Trent, notvvithstanding the
Popes Messengers, and letters of other great Princes, which requested and
invited the^ to the same. When a realm or Prince is in error, it takes
away al means of reducing them to the truth again: no subjection being
acknowledged to Councels or Tribunals abroad, al other Bishops, Patriarchs,
Apostles, Christ and al (because they were and be forrainers) not having
jurisdiction or sufficient authority to define against English Sectaries and
errors. Finally if this jurisdiction spiritual be alvvaies of right a sequel
of the crown and scepter of al Kings, assuredly Christ nor none of his
Apostles could otherwise enter to convert Countries, preach, and exercise
jurisdiction spiritual, without Caesar's and others the kings of the Countries
license and delegation.

To conclude then, these are the laws of the Realm (if we may so call such
violences) to which we cannot conform our selves in conscience, except we
like to perish everlastingly.

Wherein though we may seem to have said enough for our defense, yet we
vvil lay before al our dearest Countrie-men some brief speeches of the
principal persons of Gods Church, The ancient fathers against the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of temporal Princes.
to give them a taste of their judgment, concerning such usurpation of
spiritual Soueraintie by some Emperors of old time: that they may see this
case to be already ruled unto all that have faith and the fear of God.

S. Athanasius the Great, Ep. ad solit. vit. degentes.
one used to such storms as this, says of Constantius the Arian Emperor:
What has he left for Antichrist? for yet again in place of Ecclesiastical
cognition he has appointed his palace the judicial seat of such causes, and
made him self the chief judge and arbiter of our controversies. And who seeing
him to make him self the ruler of Bishops, and president of spiritual
judgments, would not justly deem him to be that very abominatio^ of
desolation foretold by Daniel? And in an other place of the same work: When
was it ever heard of since the beginning, that the Churches judgment did
depend of the Emperors authority? or who ever accepted that for lawful
judgment?

The renowned Osius vvriteth to the same Emperor: Cited of S. Athanasi^us in
the ep. aforesaid.
Meddle not o Emperor in causes Ecclesiastical, nor do thou command us in
this kind, but leave such things to us rather. God has given thee the Empire,
but to us the Church. At the same time, and to the same Emperor, Suidas in
verbo Leontius.
thus says Leontius the Martyr: I marvel that thy vocation being for other
things, thou meddlest with these matters. Thy charge is of Civil and Martial
affairs only, and yet thou will needs be President of Ecclesiastical causes.
Saint Hilarie also to the same Emperor vvriteth thus: we beseech thy Clemency
to provide, Li. imperf. 2. ad Constantium.
that charge be given to al judges of Provinces, that hereafter they presume
not, nor usurp the hearing of Ecclesiastical causes.

S. Ambrose to the younger Valentinian the Emperor thus ausvvereth: Vex not
thy self so far, Ep. 33. ad sororem.
o Emperor, to think that thy Emperial right pertains to Divine things,
exalt not thy self above thy measure. For it is written, Give to Caesar that
which is Caesar's, and to God that which belongs to God. the Palace for the
Emperor, but the Churches are for the Priest. Again the same holy Doctor:
Ibidem.
When did thou ever hear, most clement Prince, that lay men have judged
Bishops? shall we bend by flattery so far, that forgetting the right of our
Priesthod, we should yield up to others that which God has commended to us?
And recounting the whole course of holy Scriptures and al times past, who can
deny but that in the cause of faith, in the cause of faith I say, Bishops have
judged of Emperors, and not Emperors of Bishops?

S. Gregory Nazianzene also vvriting to his citizens, Orat. ad ciu. Nazianz.
thus turns his speech to the Emperor his Prince: You also has Christ's law
subjected to my Tribunal. for we have a Soueraintie and that more excellent and
perfect. unless the spirit should submit it self to the flesh, and the heavenly
things yield to earthly. Which my liberty of speech I fear not but thou will
allow, seeing thou art an holy sheep of my sacred fold, and a pupil of the
great Pastor, and well instructed by the holy Ghost from thine infancy.

And to this purpose S. Chrysostom most expressly gives warning, that
spiritual government and woman sex are not co^patible. for thus he vvriteth:
Why did our Lord shead his blood? Li. 2. de Sacerdotio.
truly to redeem those sheep, the cure of which he committed both to Peter
and also to his successors. And a little after, when it comes to the
government of the Church and committing the charge of so many souls, al
woma^kind must needs wholy give place to the burden and greatness thereof, and
a great number of men also.

Thus al these highly virtuous and learned fathers write, thus they believed,
thus they behaved them selves tovvard their Princes, and yet they were not
traitors, they lived not contrary to Gods laws, nor any just laws of man.
We believe no otherwise, we teach no otherwise, we behave our selves no
otherwise, we live against Gods and our Countries laws no otherwise, then
these noble Clerks did, now so glorious in heaven and earth. An exhortation
to the Q. Majesty.


And it comes here to our cogitations (as often else in our prayers to
almighty God) that it would please him to touch our Princes heart before he
call her to his dreadful judgment, to admit into her grave consideration our
former reasons so assuredly grounded on the Scriptures and law of Nature, of
the indecencie, incongruitie, impossibility, that temporal Princes (specially
women) should rule and command the Church, Bishops, and Pastors of their
own souls, and that in things merely concerning the soul.

But what should we desire that her Ma.tie may vouchsafe to hear us poor
worms and vvretches? The Bishops and Clergy of England emprisoned.
At least (alas) that she would not contemn the whole consent of all the
learned Bishops and Priests of her Realm, testifying this truth once in
Parliament, and afterward by their continual emprisonment and death in the
same: that she would conceive deliberatly of so much holy blood meekely yielded
for the testimony of this truth, specially of that noble pair, famous Fisher
B. of Rochester, B. Fisher, S. Tho.
the best learned of all the Clergy of that Realm for many ages, More, the
Carthusians, and others.
and renowned More the greatest Clerk of all the Laity: such a coople as any
other Christian Nation would have bought with millions, but thought unworthy
to live by the laws of ours: that she would vouchsafe to look back to al
holy Bishops, learned Divines, wise Lawyers, and the faithful Princes her
Highness noble predecessors of al ages past, none of them ever knovving or
admitting any such title of Supremacy, reigning without it in all glory,
security, and felicity: No Crown or Kingdom ever less mighty, sure, and
honorable, for joining with or living under the Churches compass and
regiment, but many one perishing by forsaking the same.

Or if domestical testimonies be in this kind suspicious, yet that the sayings
of these ancient fathers void of affection, fear, flattery, partiality, may
find place in so generous a mind. They also so many worlds past, have given
sentence against that strange claim of spiritual jurisdiction, with your
Bishops imprisoned, your poor subjects banished, your Catholic Priests and
people afflicted, with al your ancestors. O Lord Christ, o Madam my Liege:
should Chrysostom, Ambrose, Gregory, Hilarie, Leontius, Osius, Athanasius and
the rest, not be heard in your Parliament be deposed, be emprisoned, be
executed? No, it would not agree with your good nature, wisdom, and
clemency. Hear them then for your souls sake, without the salvation
vvherof, al these mortal joys, titles, crowns and Kingdoms shall turn you
(which God of his infinite mercy forbid) to immortal misery.

The very duty of our Priesthod, the zeal of God, and the honor and respect
of your Princely state, move us in all loyal humility to vvarne your Ma.tie of
that, which being necessary to your own, and the whole Realms eternal
good, may not, nor can not (in that preeminent height of dignity and contrary
laws) be told your Ma.tie at home: most humbly upon our knees desiring pardon
for our plainness and sincerity, for his sake, of whom you also and al
earthly Princes must ask pardon for your sins.

Though your Ma.tie in younger years, your judgment, knowledge, and
experience, not then so mature as afterward, and at the beginning of your
reign, when the sense and feeling of some rigor tovvard your noble person in
the former government, was yet fresh, and had somevvhat alienated your
Highness mind from the Church and state Catholic, and much more by the forcible
motions of others, persuading you to alteration, upon opinion of better
security of your scepter, which was an untrue and an undutiful suggestion:
though your Ma.tie were then in manner by importunity induced to change (for
we have been credibly informed, that of your own inclination you were not
desirous, but very loath to admit, being a woman and the only woman that ever
did, the title of the Churches government:) Yet now, Madam, after so many
years of prosperous regiment, your seat established in long peace and
security, your mind endued with more mature knowledge and experience, your
days dravving you nearer and nearer your death, judgment, and accoumpt,
which be necessary cogitatio^s for Princes, no less, but rather somevvhat
more, then for poor men: Consider deeply, how to reduce your self, and your
Realm, to the Catholic society of so many noble Prelates and Princes, present
and past: how your Ma.tie may give solace to innumerable oppressed souls your
loyal subjects, that out of banishments, prisonments, chains, and dungeons,
lift up their hands and hearts to God and your Ma.tie for the same.

Your Highness noble father (as of worthy and wise me^ we have heard) was
fully determined to give over the title of Supremacy, and unite him self and
his Realm to the Sea and Church Apostolic again: but being prevented by
death, could not accomplish his most necessary and honorable designement, and
therefore may be both an example and a warning to your Ma.tie the last of al
his dearest Children, to accomplish that thing, which to his great wisdom, at
the very going out of this life, was thought so necessary for his soul, his
people and posterity. Which diverse Princes and Provinces begin now to think
upon more seriously then before (as of Polonia, Suetia, Transyluania) knovving
why and of whom S. Hierom said, Qui tecum non colligit, Ep. 57. ad ^amasum
Papam.
spargit: and finding it the honorablest condition to join to that Catholic
Queen, to whom God has given the whole world for dourie, as one of the
fathers speaks.

Incline your heart for Christ's love, gracious Lady, to our humble suit, made
for your own soul: and be not offended with your poor subjects, for moving
your Ma.tie in so plain terms, in Gods and the Churches cause. Wherein if
our Lord of his secret judgment permit us not to be heard, yet in doing so
dutiful and endeavor, we can not loose our labors, for which we must be
alvvaies ready (as God shall please) to loose our lives.

In the mean time, not repugning nor resisting any your Ma.ties or the Realms
temporal laws, we trust no reasonable man can reprove us, if we refuse to
be obedient to the pretended laws of religion, which we think in
conscience, and can prove, to be against the laws of God, and not consonant
to any just and truly called laws of our Country.

That the Students of the said Seminaries be not trained up in erroneous
doctrine. CHAP. V.
FOR our living against Gods laws and the Realms, we have given our
accou^pt. And now concerning the doctrine wherein we train our scholars,
we are charged that it is false and erroneous, grounded on fancies and vain
traditions of men, and not Gods mere word. Which accusations, phrases, and
fashion of speech, are proceeded from the new pulpits, which borovved them of
old Sects. For they are common to al such sorts, in every age and diversity
of opinions repugnant to the Catholic truth and Church.

And that the old Masters of errors did so speak, Al Heretics vaunt of
Scriptures.
we give this example out of S. Augustine, who reports Maximinus the Arian
Bishopsvvordes unto him thus: Co^t. Maximinu^ li. 1. in principio.
If thou allege any thing of the Sctiptures which is common to us al, we must
needs hear it: but these sayings that be not in the Sctiptures, have no
weight with us in any case: seeing the Lord admonishes us and says, without
cause they serve me, teaching the commandments and precepts of men. And
again in the same book: I wish and pray always to be a scholar of the holy
Scriptures: if thou allege any where that which is written, we will be
disciples of holy writ.

This fellow (you see) after the ordinary of Heretics, was bold to compare
him self to no less Clerk then Saint Augustine, and to offer him the combat
also, with this pretty prouiso, that he would be urged with nothing but
Scriptures, which now a days is called the mere word of God, making
exception against al other things that Catholic men use to allege for the
true meaning of the holy Scriptures, as against the fancies, precepts, and
traditions of men. Which vulgar flight, rather then fight, of such fellows
the said Doctor contemns, not vouchsauing it an answer, but calling his
adversary to the matter: telling him, that these and such like vain and void
florishes be common to al sorts and sides, as they be in deed: not only
Catholics (to whom as well the possession, custody, and use of the
Scriptures as the true sense and interpretation of the same do properly and
only appertain) justly chalenging them, but al Sects of Heretics, be their
opinions never so improbable, and learning never so small, making claim that
way, and presumptuously contemning and co^demning all the learning and the
wisdom of the world or Church, for folly and fantasy.

There is not the poorest artificer of all the Anabaptists in Holland, or of
the Puritans, Brethren of love, and Protestants in England, nor the youngest
Grammarian, or Logician in the Universities or schools of Sectaries: but he
vvil oppose him self boldly against all the Church, with this pretext alvvaies,
that Gods mere word (so they call their Bible falsely, corruptly, and
deceitfully translated, together with as foul, fantastical, and false
suppositions deduced out of the same) must be followed before al men's doctrines
and inventions.

And generally al Sectmaisters, to abuse the people (them selves shamefully
deceived before) make the state of the controversy betwixt them and the
Catholics their adversaries to be this: Whether they grounding their doctrine
on Gods mere word, are to be believed rather then their adversaries, founding
theirs upon man's traditions and fantasies. Where that is not the point of the
doubt, but this: whether (the word and written letter being read,
acknowledged, and common to both) they have the true sense and understanding
of it, rather then we: and, whether they follow fancy, that be led by
their own private spirit, or we, that lean to the Spirit of the Church.

Now then al men must know, Heretics follow their own private sense of
Scriptures, Catholics the Churches judgment and consent of ancient fathers.
that as it is the property of the Protestants and such others, to call the
sense that them selves of pride and ignorance make choice of, Gods mere word:
so also, to term the holy Churches sense or interpretation, man's fancy or
invention. Vvheras ever the private, singular, new and particular spirit, is
fancy: and the common, universal, old and Catholic interpretation, is the
true and mere word of God: whereupon our doctrine and trayning up the Stude^ts
in these Catholic Colleges are grounded.

And the very drift of Catholic schools in these days must be, to dravv men
from fantasy, private imagination, and liking of their own judgment, to
the trusting of all the learned fathers of al ages, to the belief of the
Catholic Church, according to a Christians profession: to obey in doubts of
doctrine the holy Councels and other authentical Judgments, which Christ has
left in his Church for that purpose. to which end we do swear all that take
degree (according to the ordinance of the holy Council of Trent) that they
shall, Sess. 4.
during their life, in all their preaching, teaching, disputing, vvriting, and
otherwise, expound the holy Scriptures as near as they can, secundum vnanimem
consensum Patrum, according to the uniform and agreeable sense of the Fathers.

This is not to bring up men according to fancies, Io. 14. 16.
but according to the promised Spirit of truth. This is to avoid the particular
presumption of Heretics, who are wholy so carried away with the private
spirit of pride and contention, that they frame to them selves certain
platformes of doctrine, according to every of their particular Sects, which
they call their analogy of faith, and dravv Gods word unto it, making it to
sovvnd and say whatsoever they dream of. Li. 32. c. 9. co^t. Faust.
And therefore S. Augustine noted this to be the property of Faustus the
Manichee and the like, so to handle the matter by much talking of Scriptures,
that all the authority thereof might be subject to them selves, and yield no
other meaning then their fancy allowed of.

To avoid therefore these partial spirits, we imitate in our learning and
teaching (as near as the time and opportunity of things do suffer us) holy S.
Basil and S. Gregory Nazianzene, of whom thus Ruffinus vvriteth: Ec. hist.
li. 2. c. 9.
For the space of thirtene years they studied only the books of holy
Scripture, and the understanding of the same they followed not of their own
presumption, but of the vvritings and anthoritie of their forefathers, who
also them selves were well known to have received the rule of understanding
by succession from the Apostles.

We teach and learn humility and obedience to our Prelates: we teach all
ours, to know and keep those traditions which the Apostle commends to his
flocks, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
both written and vnvvritte^: those precepts of the Ancients, and the like of
our Superiors, Act. 15. 16.
that the faithful in the Acts were commanded to observe, according to the
difference of things and times, prescribed by the governors of our souls: In all doubts we resolve our selves by the definition of holy Doctors, Councels,
and See Apostolic, to which Christ has given the Spirit of truth, the right
sense of holy Scriptures, and the grace of discerning the false private spirits
of error, from the true common Spirit of Christian Catholic people.

We teach them, that such precepts and traditions as be in Scriptures
commended unto us, and al other holy Churches decrees, are untruly called the
traditions or commandments of men, in the sense of Heretics: for that they
be the Ordinances of the holy Ghost, who continually assisteth our lavvful
Pastor in the due regiment of our souls. We teach them, that the Scriptures
be hard, and high, and many ways misconstrued to damnation: that Manes,
Arius, Macedonius, Eutyches, Sabellius, Pelagius, though they read the
Scriptutes, and as much vaunted the^ selves thereof, as the Caluinists now do,
yet erred and misconstrued them shamefully, and that the Protestants therefore
may so do, and in deed do, following the like particular, contentious, and
disobedient spirits, as they did.

We tell the^ of S. Augustines experience, Li. de ago. christ. c. 16.
That Heretics by daily contentions and fightes, raise up mistes and smoke
unto them selves, that they can not conceive the truth, which is hardly seen
eue^ of a still and quiet mind. And again, Ib. c. 4.
Heretics piking out such sentences and chapters of Scripture as simple men
understand not, by them do deceive the ignorant souls, which by curiosity are
easily misledde: because every unlearned soul is curious. But he that has well
learned the Catholic faith spread throughout the whole world, and is armed
with good manners and true piety, can not be deceived.

We teach our Scholars, The ancient fathers more like to understand the
Scriptures, the^ the new preachers.
that the ancient fathers of al ages agreing together, are more like to
understand the Scriptures, then the Protestants: and that if humility make any
thing in this case (as it does al) they were more humble then the Protestants:
if study and diligence be required, they pass them: if great knowledge in all
sciences, our good fellows be not comparable: if the tongues, diverse had the
chief of them naturally, vvherof ours get but a small taste by art: if much
exercise of reading, conferring, comparing, expounding the Scriptures, help to
understand them, how far they excel our delicate Doctors, their works and
infinite treatises do witness: if prayer serve any thing for attaining truth,
and Gods spirit (without which no such verities ca^ be known:) surely to
compare only their devotions, watchings, fastes, sacrifices, to these
companions endeavors, were a great injury and ridiculous: if to be void of
worldly distractions, to live single and chaste (which to the only study of
Philosophy was of old thought convenient) profit to the knowledge of
Divinity, the Protestants have no great advantage: if Gods great graces and
virtues, even to the works of miracles, and sustaining Martyrdom, and so high
holiness of life that they are believed of al Catholic men (and not denied of
Heretics) to be in heaven, help to the understanding of Gods word, that
preeminence above Protestants they have also. Finally, if the time of their
living in this world, was by much more then a thousand years, in diverse of
them, nearer to Christ then ours is, and thereby they might very easily trace
out the Apostles doctrine, by the report of not many ages before them, in these
things now doubted of, that advantage also they had beyond the Protestants. Al
these things, with what other prescriptions so ever any Catholics have had
against Heretics in all age, we have against the Protestants in the most
evident sort that can be. So that we may very fitly say as S. Li. 2. cont.
Julian. in ^ine.
Augustine did by the like comparison, only changing the Heretics names: Has
long time so confounded heaven and earth, light and darkness, that Luther,
Calvin, Zuinglius, Bucer, Beza do see: and Hilarie, Gregory, Ambrose, Hierom,
Chrysostom, and the rest are blind?

Therefore if either grace, common sense, divine or humane probability vvil
serve, our Schools carry al with them against the Adversaries: if the express
words of Scriptures may preuail, we have them a thousand times more clear
for us, then the Adversaries have for them: if the sense must be sought for,
we have as many helps of nature, of learning, and of grace (honor and thanks
be to God) as they have, to find it out: the sentence is given for us, and
against our Adversaries, in all the Tribunals of Gods Church. Al Universities,
al Colleges, al Churches, al Bishoprics, al Monasteries, al monuments of
Christianity were made by and for Catholics, and for Protestants none: All the souls of our Christian fathers, all the Saints in heaven, al their actions,
works, vvritings, lives and deaths profess for us. Therefore if our doctrine
be erroneous, there is no truth, nor can be, no God, Christ, religion, nor
salvation. Which Atheism is the end of al these unhappy reuolts from the
unity of Gods people.

And for the particular points of our doctrine Catholic, we have, and diverse
other learned in banishment have before us, by sundry books in our vulgar
tongue, defended them with al manner of learning and proofs, that the
Protestants them selves required, and have refuted the contrary inuincibly. By
which combat in vvriting books, though they were the chalengers, M. Iuel.
and promised for the entertaineme^t thereof, or at least wished in show of
words, al freedom and impunitie, yet afterward they were driven to forbid
the entering, having, or reading of al our works. Whereupon mad I. Pace
meeting one day with M. Iuel (called the B. of Salisburie, but not secundum
vsum Saru^) the Protestants cha^pion, saluted his L. courtly, and said, Now my
Lord, quod he, you may be at rest with these fellows, for you are quit by
Proclamation.

Nevertheless the Adversaries have not ceased to make show of answer to diverse
of the said Catholics vvritings, but with such il grace in the sight of al
wise men, that they have rather furthered our cause, then their own. For
their answer is nothing else but a plain running away, like unto some
covvardly dogs, that fleing from the fight, yet in running away look back,
and bark, and bay at their enemy or the game: which any man of judgment may
sone epsy.

Allege them Scriptures, Their euasions and foul shifts in answering the
Catholics.
it is not Canonical: allege that which them selves acknovvledge to be
Canonical, they corrupt it with false translation, deceitful alteration,
fantastical glosing, such as never came to any wise faithful ma^s mind before.
Allege them Doctors, they deny the books: allege others, or their books
confessed, they say they were in a blind age: of some, that they followed the
errors of the Gentility: of al together, that they were men. Allege sacred
Councels, they vvil not believe them without express Scriptures. When we
reply, yea but why believe you not these men, and Saints, and judicial means
of trial of the true sense of Scriptures, seeing you are but men also your
selves, and a little worse men then they? then at length they come to the
spirit of God, which they arrogate to the^ selves, and deny it to Gods Church,
Priests, and Councels, to whom it was promised.

And being at this exigent, they flee from the question of doctrine, to lives
and manners of Popes, Prelates, and Priests: as though there were any creature
living more profane and impure, then the preacher Protestant: or al were true,
which the deep hatred and malice of Heretics feine against Gods Priests: or
the vulgar vices of humane frailety, were the fruits by which false teachers
be tried: or we for the condemmation of the Protestants doctrine, charged them
only or specially with the sins incident to men's infirmity of every sort,
and not rather with such crimes as be natural to Heretics, namely of this
sect.

We charge them with rebellion against Christ's Church, laws, and
ordinances: with disobedience to their lavvful Pastors, with contempt of holy
Councels, fathers and Doctors: with falsifying, corrupting, denying diverse
books and places of holy Scripture: with contention and dissension among them
selves, disturbances of Kingdoms and Countries, desire of liberty and nouelty,
inconstance and daily change of their opinions, presumptuous arrogance and
vaunting of their knowledge above al antiquity: with singularity, sacrilege,
apostasy, incestuous marriages of vowed persons, spoil of Churches,
profanation of al holy things, preaching and teaching altogether to the
disgracing of fasting, watching, virginity, continency, voluntary poverty,
al good works, and many other points directly tending to the corruption of
good life in all states: finally, with blasphemy against Christ's Sacrifice,
Sacraments, Saints, and such like their enormities: which are faults properly
proceeding from their doctrine, and therefore far unlike to those (proceeding
only of humane infirmity and man's frailety) with which they either falsely
or truly charge the Clergy, and specially the Popes and See Apostolic, even
as the Nouatians and Donatistes did before them. Which offenses do so little
prejudice the truth and doctrine of the same Seat, that S. Augustine avouches,
if some Judas or traitor were in that office, as there was one in the College
of the Apostles, that it could not be prejudicial to the doctrine of that See,
or the peoples obedience to the same. Our heavenly Master, Ep. 166. in fine.
says he, concerning naughty Governors of the Church, has made the people
secure and void of care, that for them the Chair of holesom doctrine be not
forsaken, in which even the evil them selves are compelled to speak good
things. For it is not their own that they speak, but Gods, who in the chair
of unity, has put the doctrine of verity. And S. Ep. 69. nu. 1.
Cyprian gives warning to all faithful people, not to marvel, Let N. the
Minister mark this, that fled out of England for impunity of his disorders,
afterward abiured his heresies in Rome voluntarily, and now is fallen in
relapse at home.
nor in any wise to trust an Heretic (specially one fallen into relapse)
when he raileth on Gods Priests. With the fallen and profane, says he, and
such as are out of the Church, out of whose breasts the holy Ghost is
departed, there can be nothing else, but a wicked or perverse mind, and
deceitful tongue, and venomous hatred, and sacrilegious lies. Whom whosoever
does credit and believe, he must needs be found with them, when the day of
judgment comes.

But, as for the most part they make these foul and open shifts, by disgracing
and discrediting (as much as in them lies) the Church, and Councels, and
chief Pastors, because of the scandals and faults of a fevv: so sometimes they
do it more closely, and therefore more deceitfully: which their dealing is also
much vvorth the noting.

For when Sectaries pretend to trust and obey the four first or any other
Counsel general, Their crafty and hypocritical pretenses.
with this clause of exception, so far as they determine according to express
Scriptures Canonical: there is a double deceit in their meaning. First, they
would make the people believe that they reverence Councels: secondly, that
they do the chief honor to the Scriptures: where in deed they dishonor
both, and make them selves judges of both. For, to credit the Councels so far
as they bring express Scriptures, is no more but to trust the Scriptures,
which if the simplest person in earth do evidently allege, he must be
believed: but whether the Scriptures alleged by the Councels, make for the
purpose, or convince that for which they are cited, that them selves vvil
judge, no less, then if the poorest tinkar in England had alleged them.
Which is no more (as is plain) but to make them selves judges of the
Councels, which the simple people thought they had respected much, by so
solemn mention and promises made of them.

Again they purposely in naming the Scriptures, add Canonical, that if an
evident place be alleged against them out of the holy Bible, they may at their
pleasure deny the book to be Canonical, and so escape. Where also they
seeming to do honor to the Scriptures, do in deed make the^ selves judges of
the Scriptures, deciding which be Canonical Scriptures, and not granting so
much authority to the Councels and Church, which have determined such things
already to their hands. So they bring al to their private fancy, from the
general truth and spirit of Gods Church.

An other way they use also of like deceit, to bring al to their private
judgment, when they pretend sometimes, rather to be tried by Councels, and
Popes, or Priests past many hundred years sithence, then by the Councels, See
Apostolic, and other judgments of their own days: pretending that they
vvil yield to the four first Councels, or See Apostolic, and Popes, when they
were good: with an exception yet for their more security, so far as they
agree with Gods word: for that they know, that the Popes and Councels of
old, dealt not directly with their opinions (though when any came obiter in
their ways, they condemned them of heresies) but with other Sects and false
Prophets, proper to those times. Whereas in deed the old Councels and their
decrees, are rather instructions and records to us, and to the Councels in
these days, the^ judgments or judges of our actions or persons, toward
whom they proceeded not directly nor iudicially: but the Sea Apostolic,
Prelates, and Councils of our time, under whose power and jurisdiction al
Christian men are, be our judges, and may resolve, define, and determine
iudicially in our cases of Controversy, and we are bound to obey these, Deuteronomy.
17.
as the former Christians, those in times past: God in the Scriptures plainly
commanding, in doubtful cases, to go to the Priesta^d Judge for the time
being: and we are warned to obey the Church present, Mat. 18.
not only past: the old fathers, Popes, and Councels being records of truth,
but the other being judges of our causes and having jurisdiction of our
persons. Which to avoid, they feine an appellation to the former only,
esteeming in deed of both alike, as of men deceived, as of humane traditions,
and so forth, as in their vvritings is most evident, where from Peter's time
dovvnevvard, Beza in 2. These. 2.
they make the cheifest fathers, Retentiue Page 248.
the ministers and furtherers of Antichrist. All this is no more but, both to
bark and flee at once, for answers be they none.

Let them object any thing against us, we say to it roundly, this must needs
be the sense, by comparing other Scriptures to the same: thus such and such a
Doctor expound it, thus the fathers interpret it, thus such and such a
general Council understand it. If they object against praying for the dead,
we give them S. Aug. Fnchiri. 110. haer. 53.
Augustines answer to Aerius, and his whole book de cura pro mottuis: if
they argue against the honoring of holy Relikes, and Pilgrimage, we answer
with S. Hieroms words against Vigilantius: if they dispute against the
invocation of Saints, or worshipping the holy Cross and other memories of
Christ or his Martyrs, we give them S. Cyril. Co^t. Julian. li. 6.
Cyrils solution against Julian the Apostata: if they dispute against the holy
Sacrifice: we appoint them to S. Chrysostom. in c. 10. ad Hebr.
Chrysostoms solution upon the Epistle to the Hebues: Ambros. Primas. ibidem.
if they contend against the corporal presence of Christ's body and blood in
the Sacrament, we refer the^ to Lateran Council against Berengarius, and to
the judgment of al antiquity: if they allege against sacred Images, we lay
down unto them the answer and resolution of the second Council of Nice, of
S. Grego. li. 7. ind. 2. ep. 109. and ep. 53. in fine.
Gregory to Serenus, of S. Damascene in his 3 books of that argument: if they
stand with us against the power of Priesthod to remitte sins, we answer
them, Ambros. lib. 1. de poenit. c. 2. and deinceps.
as S. Ambrose and others did the Nouatians: and so forth in all cases.

And yet they vvil not yield, but flee from al Councels and Fathers to their
own imaginary sense of Scriptures, pretending to be tried only by them, and
by conferring the sense which likes the^, to the like sense of other places,
conceived alike in their own imagination. Wherein they are like to the
forgers of false coins, that would not have their money tried by the
touchstone, but by some other pieces, either of true and fine metals, or of
some such like forged vvare as their own.

So that it falls out betwixt us and the Protestants, in such things, as it
did (by Plutarchs report) about two famous vvrestlers in the games of Olympus:
of which, the one being both stronger and nimbler then the other, did often
and easily give his fellow a fair fall, but yet being laid on the ground, he
would never confess that it was a fall, but by words, gestures, and
shuffling to and fro, so dasled the senses of the standers by, that the victor
could not get sentence of his side. and therefore he used to say that he could
easily overthrow his companion, but not stop his mouth, or cause him to
confess so much. Even so we can easily (thanks be to God) overthrow the
Protestants, but we can not tie their tongues. Of which kind of men S. Dial.
co^t. Lucif. in fine.
Hierom also had this experience, Facilius eos vinci posse, quam persuaderi:
that they may more easily be overcome, then persuaded. And again, Ibid. c. 5.
cum disputare nescia^t, litigare tamen no^ desinunt: when they can not
dispute, yet they cease not to vvrangle. They were overcome in Aerius,
Vigilantius, Iouinian, Imagebreakers, Berengarius, and others, by many judicial
sentences, and by plain learning refuted before our days: they are condemned
by the like means in our time, yield they will not, til God miraculously
confound their chief preachers.

And for further trial of our doctrine, would God it might please our Prince,
to command some of us her Catholic subjects abroad, or of them which be at
home, either in prison or at liberty, to appear before her Ma.tie The
Protestants are challenged to a disputation.
or any indifferent judges, in scholastical co^bat with any one, or any number
of Protestants of her dominions, or any other part of the world. Which men
though they durst not show their faces in the late General Council (which is
the proper place of such disputes) upon trifling and unworthy pretenses
refusing the same, blaspheming that holy assembly, and barking at it in books
a far of, when they durst not come near it, as the Heretics condemned in the
first four great Councels, did also tovvard the same: yet their causes of
fear or exception would cease in this case, if it pleased her Highness, by her
wisdom and cleme^cie to give order for the liberty and saftie of both parts
therein. Neither need our Adversaries be curious in the case, the personal
fear or danger being on our side, but the shame and confusion (we trust in
God) shall be on theirs.

Once there was a conference in deed, but without al order and
indiffere^cie, and at that time when there was such a greedly desire of
nouelty and change, that vvil and affection forcibly ouerruled all the matter.
Now so many years, having both well cooled the inordinate heat that the people
lightly have in such cases, and given good experience of the Sect, we doubt
not but God would prosper the matter, to the great good of the Realm, and
contentme^t of her Ma.ties and al doubtful consciences.

For though such disputes with the Catholic Churches Adversaries, out of
Councels and fit places, be not in them selves alvvaies so allowable nor
profitable, yet oftentines they have done good, and have been thought
necessary both of late and of old: as we see by the diverse conferences of S.
Augustine and others with the Manichees, Arians, and Donatistes in Afrike: and
some in France, and Germany, with the Caluinists, and Protestants. And that
this we also might do with our Superiors liking, we most heartily desire:
trusting that our doctrine, which now is condemned of fancy and humane
tradition, should then be inuincibly proved to be most agreeable to Gods sacred
word and holy Scriptures.

Thus also further being bold, and of duty to his Holiness (who also is
charged to have instituted these Colleges to train us up in erroneous
doctrine) bound to say, as the truth is, that in these his Colleges there be
used as many means to attain to the knowledge of the Scriptures, and Gods
truth reserved in them and his holy Church, as in many mo of theirs.

Our vvittes be of God as theirs are, and alloted to us by his goodness, in as
plentiful measure as theirs; our absence from our Country, the adversity and
poverty incident to the same (being not excessive) is as fit for study, as the
more plentiful and delicate state of our English Universities at home, being
otherwise for that thing, and for all vvorldly splendor, the noblest Schools
in Christendom: Our foundation in all kind of faculties requisite for the study
of Divinity, is as deeply laid as theirs: our diligence rather more then
less: our time both of age and study more complete then theirs commonly can
be, that are for the most part in our days so timely called out of the
Schools to pulpits and promotions: Our order, method, Our exercises in
Divinity, and specially the study of Scriptures.
and course of Divinity kept and ruled by obedience and the Superiors
prescription, much more profitable then theirs that is mere voluntary.

We have mo disputations, lessons, conferences, examinations, repetitions,
instructions, Catechizings, resolutions of cases both of conscience and
controversies, methodes and manners to proceed in the conversion of the
deceived, and such like exercises (specially for daily practice in the
Scriptures, wherein the Protestants vainly pretend their chief praises to
consist, because they can promptly allege the leaf and the line of their
book) in our two Colleges, then are in their two Universities co^teining
near hand 30 goodly Colleges.

And as concerning Sermons, no Sunday nor Holy day in the year wants one,
and twice a week besides, for the exercise of young preachers, declamations
in matters of Divinity. For the tongues also (notvvithstanding so many their
public and private lessons and great vaunting of the same) I would we might
have opportunity to show, whether they or we have more commodity of them,
either to the knowledge of Divinity, or to the advantage of our cause.

As for the Masters and Professors of our Colleges, specially the Roman
Readers (of whom we may with better reason and respect of our shamefastnes
speak, then of our own here, whom yet I trust our Adversaries shall find
sufficient, when God shall put them to the proof) we may be bold to say, they
be in all kind, the most choice and cunning men in Christendo^, for virtue,
learning, government, and al education of youth: vvherof would God our Nation
at home might once take trial.

Now for that part of education which pertains to Christian life and
manners: Exercises of religion and devotion.
because knowledge and learning be obtained specially by prayer and godly
behavior (impure persons being not so apt to receive and obey the faith) our
chief endeavor is in both the Colleges, to breed in our Scholars the fear of
God, devotion, and desire of salvation: Which is done by diverse spiritual
exercises, as, daily examinations of their consciences, often Communicating or
Receiving the B. Sacrament, often confessing, much praying, continual hearing
and meditation of holy things, deep conceiving and compassion of their
Countries state, and danger of their dearest friends souls. Al which things
to tell in particular, were to long.

Neither this much would we have said of such matters, had not our necessary
defense driven us thereunto. For which, and principally for the honor of God,
and his Holiness eternal commendation, we have touched the manner of that
education, which our Adversaries have persuaded her Highness Council, to be
disagreable to Gods word: Humbly thanking our Lord God, that for our further
vvarrant therein, he has given to these endeavors such effect, that many have
found eternal good thereby in our Country: and that he never suffered any (as
far as we could perceive, and do remember) vouchsauing to confer with us
one month, to go hence not persuaded and contended in conscience: though many
yearly resort to both the Seminaries, either wholy doubtful, or plain
Protestants.

Whereby we find it certain, that many a good soul perishes in our Nation,
only for lack of hearing and seeing the Catholic faith and practice thereof.
The sensible comfort vvherof is so unspeakable to all that truly do taste it,
that our poverty here, is Paradise to the good folks that have so long lacked
such spiritual consolation, and been tied from the truth, lamenting their
friends miseries at home with these words of S. Augustine and the like: O
custom of sin, o cecitie of heart, the companion and punishment of sin. Aug
li. de duab. animab. c. 14.
You once auerted us from the consideration of so manifest things, but you did
hurt us when we had no feeling: Now you torment us feeling, in our familiars
that have not yet the sense thereof them selves. But give ear and attention to
your salvation, most dear friends, whose wits and capacity we well know: and
to you we promise, that if you esteem of us your friends as men of any
conscience, reason, or common sense, these things be much more certain, then
those which we there at home seemed to learn, or rather by force were
compelled to believe. De vtil. cred. c. 8.
And again with the words of the same holy Doctor to Honoratus his deceived
friend, If you think your selves sufficiently tossed and troubled, and will
have an end of these travails, follow the way of the Catholic discipline,
which descended from Christ him self by the Apostles even unto us, and from
hence shall descend to the posterity.

Of Priests and Jesuits, and for what cause they be sent into England. CHAP.
VI.
THE last and most odious informatio^ given up, not aginst us only, but his
Holiness, is, that Priests and Jesuits be by his, and his delegates special
direction, sent into the Realm out of the Seminaries, not only to deal with
the Subjects in matters of religion and conscience, but to withdraw them from
their obedience, and to move them to attempt somevvhat against the state.

Vvherof that her Ma.tie and honorable Counselors have good care, it is most
laudable and agreeable to their lottes and high callings: but to have fear and
doubt, that such holy, peaceable, and svveete endeavors of most orderly and
humble persons, should tend further then to the good of the peoples souls,
that comes of the Adversaries untrue suggestion. against which, our simple,
sincere, and true declaration, grounded on most certain knowledge of the
writer hereof, and upon authe^tical records, which he has in his hand to
show when need shall require, for full justification of his own and his
brethrens actions and attempts herein, shall (we trust) preuail with al men of
equity and indifferency.

Therefore we protest, The commission of the Jesuits and Priests in England.
that neither the R. Fathers of the Society of the holy name of Jesus, whom
the people call Jesuits, (an express clause being in the instructions of
their mission into England, that they deal not in matters of state, which is
to be shevved, signed with their late Generals hand of worthy memory)
neither the Priests, either of the Seminaries or others, have any commission,
direction, instruction or insinuation, from his Holiness, or any other their
Superior, either in Religion or of the Colleges, to move sedition or to deal
against the state or temporal government: but only by their Priesthod and the
functions thereof, to do such duties as be requisite for Christian men's souls,
which consist in preaching, teaching, catechizing, ministering the Sacraments,
and the like.

Neither does the Pope co^ferre or communicate any exterior jurisdiction to
Jesuit or Priest, either in the Realm, or to be sent thither, but only
gives authority or jurisdiction in foro conscientie, in Court of conscience,
to absolve the penitent people from their sins of what sort so ever, not
schism and heresy excepted. Which power of absoluing from sin, can not
proceed, by the law of God or nature, from the Queen, but must needs depend
of the holy order of Priesthod, and must be holden in Capite (so to speak in
this kind) of him, Cypt. ep. 55. ad Cor. nel. nu. 6. Leo ep. 89.
to whom Christ gave the first and most absolute power to bind and loose in all the earth, without exception of either England or Ireland, and without
dependence of either King or Queen in the world, and in whom he founded the
Church and the Priesthod of the same, and of whom al Prestly and Spiritual
function after a sort is holden: though neither our Priests sent into England
have, or other alvvaies need to have, express vvritings or commission special
from him, to execute these holy acts of their order.

Neither do we suppose that any Priest sent from either of the Colleges, or
from the Society, has any such special Bull from his Holiness, not so much
as to absolve: though they may do it, and ought to do it, by their order, and
by due authority taken of their Superiors, and holden of the Pope as the
supreme Power spiritual in the world.

But whether they execute those spiritual offices by a special Commission
written or unwritten, or no, this is certain, that no such Commission, or
any act executed by the same, contains or implies, directly or indirectly,
any commandment or condition, that the parties absolved should forsake their
obedience in Temporal causes to the Queen, as the matter seems to be
mistaken, both in the Proclamation of January, and in the second chapter of
the acts of Parliament holden the 13. year of her Ma.ties reign. In which,
though there be diverse pretended laws, such as never Christian co^monvvealth
before has made (the dangers and transgressions vvherof it is hard for any
Catholic man to escape, live he never so orderly and obediently, except he
would, to obey man, forsake God) yet if under the name Foreign jurisdiction
there abolished, the interior power of the tribunal of God and conscience be
implied also, which kind perchance in the Temporal law, is not properly
termed Jurisdiction, but if that be implied also, it is a thing, in the face of
God and his Church, more intolerable, and most disagreable to the Scriptures,
made to dravv matters of mere religion and conscience, Matters of religion
called and made treason.
to cases treasonable as they now speak: and the duties done to God, to be
vnduetifulnes and disobedience to the Prince.

Which is no nevves to Gods Church and people, against whom all the
persecutions that have been raised in what age so ever, were so colored. The
case of Christ's own death, and of his Apostles, as before of his Prophets,
and afterward of al his Martyrs almost, was for pretended treasons,
seditions, disturbances, disobedie^ces, and vnduetifulnes to the Emperors,
Kings, and States temporal of the world: though in deed they committed
nothing against the state or right of any Price or Country, but suffered for
mere religion, which is not repugnant to any lavvful earthly Polity.

Therefore what statutes so ever they make, so to dravv our actions tending
directly and only to the advancement of true religion in peaceable and
Priestly sort: we protest before God, who shall discern our cause, that they
do us the greatest vvrong and violence that can be: and that to make such
things treasons, or punishable as treasons, which have no affinity in nature
and condition, by the law of God or Nations, Christian or Heathen, to the
crime of Laesa Maiestas, or the Commonvvealths disturba^ce, is but to seek
means to have the blood of innocent men, that never committed treasons nor
trespasses against any Prince or Commonwealth: it is to make our lives and
deaths odious, and the true causes thereof unknown to the world, baptizing
that by the name of treason and sedition, which is mere matter of religion,
soul, and conscience.

What has Mass, Matins, Confession, Absolution, beads, Agnusdeies, and
other consecrated tokens of our communion with all the Churches of Christ
through al ages, what affinity have they in nature with treason? Stand they
not in all Nations round about you with the high duty and loyalty that
belongs to Princes? is there any definition or description of that trespass,
which can of reason include the premises, or prove them treasons? And though
the laws may make things treason, which before were not, yet in making them
so, consideration is alvvaies had of the quality and condition of the faults
and offenses. For, as to make the saying of Divine service after the rites of
the Catholic Church, to be Simonie, usury, felony, or aduoutrie, were
ridiculous and impossible: so it is impossible to make these matters of mere
religion, in true and proper fense, the offense of treason or disloyalty to
the Prince or Commonwealth.

Neither does every commandment of the Sovereign (though in things lavvful)
not fulfilled, make the offense treasonable: much less, either when it
concerns matters, merely repugnant to Gods word and our duties to the
Divine Majesty, as it did in Daniels and the Three childrens case: Dan. 3.
or in causes not truly subject to any temporal King or his laws. For, if
such a Prince should make the like law that Darius did, Dan. 6.
That no man should pray to any God, other then him self, for certain days:
all the laws in the world can not make the refusant a traitor, nor bound to
obey, more then Daniel was then: not only because laws evidently unjust and
against God, may not be obeyed: but for that the prayer to the true God, and
serving him, is not repugnant to any duty that the subject owes to his
Sovereign, by Gods law or nature: and therefore can not be made treason in true
and proper speech. The Churches holy Sacrifice, Service, and Sacraments, and
consecration or blessing of creatures by the word of God and prayer, have no
quality or condition of treason or crime against the majesty of the Prince,
or the repose of the people.

But if in making such factes treason, the meaning be nothing else, but to make
them punishable by death and otherwise, as treasons by the statutes of the
Realm are and ought to be: then have we the pitifullest injury in the
world, that being no traitors in deed, yet we must suffer the ignominy and
pains of treason: and so much the greater, that it is done by pretense of
laws, and public authority, then if it were done (as it has been in
Holland, Zeland, and some part of France) by barbarous cruelty of Heretics,
the Prince and Commonwealth not agreing thereunto.

For it is a grievous sin, and dishonorable, when a whole State agrees upon
any iniquity. And we think verily, God would have taken vengeance upon our
poor Country, if her Ma.tie of great clemency had not stayed the execution
of so unjust and intolerable disorders: though diverse mo then her Highness
knovveth of, have fealt the extreme smart thereof in most cruel sort: God turn
his just ire from us for the same.

But seeing a staff is easily found to beat a dog, and with lions, ears be
often horns, and such cases of religion and conscience must needs be so
extremely punished: Why do they reduce our offense rather to Treason, then to
Heresy? If our doctrine be wicked, our actions superstitious, our worship of
God sacrilegious, idololatrical, or anyvvise untrue or unlawful:why are we
not condemned of such crimes, rather then of treason or vnduetifulnes to our
Prince? for if they be faults, they are directly against Gods honor, and but
indirectly and consequently against the Prince.

But for the better entrance into Caluinisme, and entertaining the same, the
old laws peradventure for punishing Heretics, were repelled: or because
they can not so easily determine, whether we be Heretics, or our
Adversaries, who have been dubbed with that name so long by the laws both
spiritual and temporal of al Christian countries, which also yield us (the
Protestants making no great claim thereunto) both the name of Catholic,
which with S. Cont. ep. Fund. c. 4.
Augustine weighed so much, and all the properties and prescriptions of truth
thereunto belonging: therefore they thought it a nearer way to make us
traitors, then Heretics, and to punish us for pretensed fedition and
conspiracy, then for error in doctrine, or heresy. Wherein, though they
have given authority to the Court of Parliament, to determine together with
their Convocation of the Clergy, what is an error or an heresy:yet it is
not like they vvil agree of any such thing shortly.

This also being a common thing in times of error and disorder, to make the
fault committed, or said to be committed against the Prince, greater and more
punishable, then the offense done directly against God: against the Common.
wealth, the^ against the Church: against the body, the^ against the soul: more
a do about Caesar's tribute, then Gods due: as both in all other things, and in
the very title of Supremacy is plain. Where the superiority Temporal has
the first place and preemine^ce, and the Spiritual is but accessorie, wholy
vpholden and directed by the other, as well for the right of the thing, as for
the exercise of jurisdiction agreeable thereunto.

And in that case it must needs so be: the crown being not a spiritual
dignity, but a temporal: the person of a Prince not spiritual, but temporal:
the Realm not a spiritual Commo^vvealth, but a temporal: the Parliament not a
spiritual Court, but a temporal* the statutes not spiritual laws, but
temporal: Or if not al these wholy and soly temporal, yet al these more
temporal then spiritual: which our Adversaries them selves can not with any
reason deny.

So that in such Countries and laws, we can expect no other, but that al our
spiritual endeavors misliked of the State, must needs, against Gods laws and
man's, be violently drawn to treasons and trespasses temporal (which, be they
lavvful or unlawful, be evidently mere spiritual) first to be condemned by
their Clergy, of error, or heresy, and then to be punished by the temporal
laws, if they had any standing in force against such offenses.

Therefore in all these cases pretended treasonable, we for our selves and our
brethren, by S. Act. 24.
Paul's example (who being charged before the civil Magistrate, of conspiracy
and il demeanor toward his Country, protested that he was judged
concerning the Resurrection, a question in religion, and not for sedition or
concourse in tumultes) do cry to God and al Christian people, The Catholics
of England suffer for Religion.
which behold our afflictions and sufferings: that it is for religion, for our
fathers faith and spiritual inheritance, for the serving of God in the manner of
al Catholic Provinces, and not for treason, or disobedience to her Ma.ties
temporal laws, or the Realms.

We have not committed any other treasons, neither have the Fathers or Priests
serving God in our Country, done any other trespasses tovvard the Realm or
Prince, then are done by the same endeavors, in any other Nation either
Christian or Heathen. No commission have they or authority to absolve
(whatsoever it be, or in what form so ever, written, or by word of mouth)
that implies any more special clauses of treason to the Prince there, then
they do in all other through the world, granted or used in the like cases.

Our holy Apostle S. S. Augustine our Apostle had his commission also from
Rome, and from Pope Gregory.
Augustine came to our Country (then wholy in manner heathen) with the like,
and no less authority, to convert the Prince and people to the faith: with
order, there to preach the same doctrine that the Catholic fathers and Priests
now do, no whit altered since then, until this day: to minister the
Sacraments in the same sort as they do, as by the record of S. Bed. hist. li.
1. c. 25.
Bedes history and other, appears: Who entered in with Cross, Christ's
image, and Litanies, much more openly then ours do now: professed to come from
Pope Gregory the first, to a Pagan people, which is now so heinous a matter
for us to do, from Gregory the xiij, Hallowed tokens.
to a Christian Country: brought gifts from him to our King and Queen,
Grego. li. 9. ep. 60.
even such like consecrated tokens, Bed. hist. li. 1. c. 22.
as now ca^ not be had, or brought in, without death and treason.

Which consecrated creatures, Augu. and Paulin. ep. 31. 34. 35.
or the like, Leo ep. 72.
though they were in use in all antiquity (not only among the simple people,
Grego. li. 2. ep. 72. 86. li. 3. ep. 30. li. 5. ep. 6. li. 7. ep. 53. 126. ind.
2.
as the Adversaries would make the world think, but with the best learned)
and are great helps to devotion, and special badges of our Catholic communion
one with an other: Let the good Readers that understand latin, see these
places here quoted.
yet not being so necessary as to incur the extreme rigor of laws
therefore, or to bring our Catholic friends into peril for them, we have
tempered the affection and zeal of some Priests and young gentlemen (otherwise
most commendable) all that we could possibly, requiring them to carry rarely
and sparingly such things with them: that the forces of our patience and
sufferance may be entiere and whole for such brunts as may fall unto us and
our brethren, in matters of greater importance for our faith and salvation:
though he be happy that dies for the lest moment of our Catholic religion.

But to pass that point, such things were sent from S. Gregory the Great,
the famous Doctor, to our Princes and people then: such authority from him had
S. Augustine then: in such sort he preached and ministered the Sacraments, as
we do now: it was no treason, it was no seditious practice: it had a
blessed, honorable, and gracious effect in us: it was the beginning of our
Christianity, even the same Christianity which is of al Nations, and which
has bredde and brought forth al our Princes, Priests, and people, and all this
goodly form of Commonwealth, which our forefathers left us.

This same commission, The Jesuits commission and trauail for the co^uerting
of Countries.
end, and intentions, have the fathers of the Society in all other Countries
vvhither they be sent by their Superiors, through the whole world. By which
they have (our Lord Jesus giving grace and force of word, work, and miracle,
to their godly and heroical endeavors) in the zeal of Gods house, and
incomparable love of souls, for which our Savior gave his precious blood,
entered into the extreme parts of the world, almost through all the East
Indes, and most barbarous Countries, and have converted diverse mighty Princes,
with their provinces and peoples, and innumerable persons in other Kingdoms
besides (where the whole state yet yeldeth not) unto the faith of Christ,
even the same Catholic, Apostolic, Roman faith, that we and al Nations are
named Christians by.

In the like spirit have they passed into the west Indes, to the gain of
millions of souls, with infinite perils of the journey, both by sea and land,
most long and dangerous:diverse of the^ intercepted by Heretics, by the
Heathen, by Pirates, and many martyred, many brought to captivity, many
languishing away by the unacquainted savage diet, or disagreing of the air,
and many, by other accidents.

To those places they go yearly with the same obedience, the same commission,
the same intention, that they come now to England: they never committed
reason, nor disquieted the state where they come:the preaching of the
Catholic religion, and ministering the holy Sacraments, being not coumpted of
any of those peoples, seditious atte^pts, as being done without concourse of
people:no, nor when it is with co^course of peaceable, poor, simple,
unlearned men and women, serving God in Christian manner.

They be sent to diverse Provinces and cities throughout al Germany, Bohemia,
Austria, Polonia, Transsyluania, Suetia, Dalmatia, and many other Countries
diversely affected in religion, no less then ours, with no other charge,
purpose, or commission, then they are come to England: none of al those states
(though by the endeavors of Protestants, the good fathers have bee^ enda^gered,
and molested many ways) fearing their endeavors to be pernicious, but finding
them daily more and more, to be most profitable, beneficial, and agreeable to
the preservation of their Commonvvealths and Countries.

And they are received not only into these parts aforesaid, Their teaching of
al good learning, and other great been fires to the Church, Princes, and
Co^monvveales.
for reclaimi^g the deceived souls from Paganism and heresy, to the unity
of Christ's catholic Churh again: but also for their exe^plar life, and
virtue, for their exceeding exercise, diligence, and dexterity in the education
of youth, both in piety and knowledge, for their great learning, and
discretion, and for other their rare graces of Gods spirit, they are used to
the marvelous benefit of the Church, as well by his Holiness, as other
greatest Princes of Christendom, for their preachers, confessors, spiritual
counselers, professors in their Universities, reformers of the decated manners
of al sorts, and most exquisite Masters of al religion, devotion, and true
worship of God.

These men's order in deed, and rule of life, is new, but their faith and
doctrine, is the same that our forefathers and all the Church had, and has.
They are hated of Heretics, Ep. 80 ad D. Augu.
which S. Hierom coumpteth a singular glory. for, those holy fathers which
were raised of God to co^bate with Heretics of old, were hated as these be
now, sent to repair the ruins of Luther, and Calvin, and the rest. But
would God our people were so happy, as to have full proof of their gifts
and qualities: that so they might see and feel, that they are sent to bring
salvation, rest and peace of conscience, and not disquietnes to their Country.

Alas poor men, these same fevv that you there have, might as well have been
sent to the Indes, or to any part of Turkey or Heathenesse, if it had been their
lotte, and their Superiors commandment, as well as to you. For thither they
go with no more danger then to England, and every way with like good vvil,
and hourly expectation of death. Which, for the gain of one soul, they
coumpt the greatest vantage in earth. They are sent to the Heathen, to tell
them, there is no salvation without Christ: they are sent to the English, to
tell them, there is no salvation without the Catholic Church. Whether they
die for the one, or for the other, al is one matter to them.

This work then have they to do, and must not cease from the same for any
fear of mortal man, no danger of death, or what distress so ever may fall:
which they coumpt in such a case, the next revvard to heaven it self, and most
joyfully choose to accept it, though for to do their duties the longer, they
will not vvilfully run upon it.

We therefore, seeing both before, and now these late days, some even of our
Country sent to the Indes: motion was made to their Superiors, that those of
our Nation might rather be employed upon their own Country: where unto
after good deliberation they did most charitably co^descend, much moved by the
example and profitable endeavors of the Priests of both the Colleges, and other
learned men at home and in banishment, whom they knevv so willingly to
sustain both prisonme^ts and death for the same, with unspeakable alteration
in fevv years of wonderful numbers to the liking and embracing of the
Catholic faith.

And to tell you al, The zeal of the Jesuits strangers, and their desire to
be sent into England.
when it was once secretly bruted among the Fathers (whom men call Jesuits)
that hereafter some of the Order were like to be deputed in times and seasons,
for England, it is incredible to tell (but before Christ it is true) how it
was sued and sought for, of diverse principal learned men, strangers, no less
then of our own, upon their knees, with tears and affection exceeding
extraordinary: that they might have the lotte, either to dispute with the
Protestants in their Universities, or to die for the profession and preaching
of their faith, in so noble a Country, which they pitied to see deceived
with so improbable and barbarous heresy.

Yea diverse learned men strangers, neither Jesuits nor Priests, seeing also at
the same time, The zeal of other learned strangers for the conversion of
England.
the Scholars of the English Colleges give their promis and profession so
promptly and zelously, to suffer whatsoever, for their poor Countries and
parents salvation, and for the same, to be made Priests, with out expectation
of worldly preferme^t or honor (given heretofore, and now alvvaies due to
that order, in all good Commonvveales) but with certain knowledge of hatred,
disgrace, rebuke, and perhaps death thereby: hereupon (I say) the said
strangers were much inflamed to hazard their person in the same spiritual
adventure, and made great sure to certain that had the doing in those matter,
with manifold persuasions that so it might be. And being told, that the
dealing in England (in such cases specially) for strangers was much harder,
then in the Heathen Countries, where there were no such exquisite laws
against religion, as in the Countries revolted: they replied, that they had no
fear of dangers, nor deaths, nor miseries whatsoever, but that they would
sell their own persons to any servitude, and for what work so ever: either
in Universities, that they so might deal with scholars, or otherwise to
learn the language, thereby to practice with the people for their salvation
for, having had that intention of long, either tovvard Turkey, or other Pagan
places, now our minds, said they, are excedingly set upon English souls,
whom S. Gregory so many hundred years ago pitied with like compassion.

But having so many of our own Nation inflamed with the like holy desires,
not only in the two Colleges wholy bent and ordained thereunto, but in the
Society aforesaid, and in diverse Universities, where there be many learned of
our Nation in banishment ready to help us in this harvest, besides the great
numbers that already are within the Realm: it was not thought needful nor
meet, easily to admit the said strangers, for this time: but rather to
employ our own, of the said Colleges specially, and of the Society of Jesus.

Into which order, Many English men enter into the Society of Jesus.
because it is most agreeable to the Churches and our Countries service in this
time, diverse of our Nation of al sorts have yielded them selves, and now the
rather, for that they trust to be rather employed upon their own Country,
then upon the Indes or other Nations in like distress. Trusting that so these
companies, with the help of our zealous Countriemen in many places both at home
and abroad, shall be able to supply al wants that may fall in England from time
to time, by the deaths, executio^s, or enprisonme^ts, of such as now be, or
hereafter shall be, by what extremity so ever, restrained from the work of
our Lord.

For, these late terrors (thanks be to God) trouble them so little, Priests
sue to be sent into England, and other to be made Priests, notwithstanding al
terrors.
that diverse straight upon the arriual here in Rhemes of the late Proclamation
of January, came to their Superiors, to desire leave to go in: and being
ansvvered that the times were not seasonable, they said, it was no Godamercie
for a Priest to enter in at other times, but that they were brought up and
made specially for such days: and nineteen persons, the same week
following, took holy Orders. Such is their desire: but for their going in,
they shall be moderated as reason requires.

The principal point is, that they be not (God be praised) much afraid of death
or danger in so happy and honorable a quarrel, and many desire Martyrdo^, if
god shall so dispose: by which we ever gain more to Gods Church, then by any
office of our life: and blood voluntarily yielded, cries forcibly for mercy
tovvard our Country. Thus the Church stood and increased in most places of the
world, for some hundred years after Christ together, Ezech. 16.
the Prophet forvvarning it, that it should live in blood.

If our Country yield us no succor for fear of man's laws, God that has
fed us these 20 years, vvil not forsake us. If friends and parents must give
us no relief, Ep. 56. ad Apron.
we say with S. Hierom, It is better to beg bread, then to leese faith. And
being the Churches orphans, Luc. 9.
we shall live of the twelve baskets of the broken meats, remaining of the
loaves and fishes miraculously multiplied by Christ, to feed his folovvers
into the desert. For, these fragments are not yet spent, but dure to the
worlds end, for the sustenance of the desolate that depend upon our Lord.
Dravv from us whatsoever they can or vvil, our affections and offices
toward them shall be doubled. If houses must not receive us, dens, and
deserts, and grottes shall be our harbor. If we can not make our abode in
certain places, we will not be ashamed to be, or so to be called of our
Adversaries, vagarant persons: seeing of our betters in the like case the
Apostle says, Heb. 11.
They had trial of mockeries and stripes, of bands also and prisons: they were
stoned, they were hewed, they were tempted, they died in the slaughter of the
sword, they went about in sheepeskinnes, in goats kinnes, needy, in distress,
afflicted, of whom the world was not worthy, wandering in deserts, in
mountains and dens, and caves of the earth. And the Apostles them selves
esteemed it no reproach to say, 1. Cor. 4.
Until this hour we do both hunger, and thirst, and are vagarants.

Howbeit we doubt not (though thus the enemy would have it, Mark this al
ye blessed folk, that entertain and relieve Gods Priests.
and this we hope patiently to bear for the salvation of our dearest
Countriemen) but there vvil be left many thousands, whose hearts, bowels, and
doors shall be open to us in our Lord, notvvithstanding what laws of man so
ever: there vvil be alvvaies that vvil rather hazard their lives and goods
with holy Tobie, Tob. 1.
then see their innocent brethren vnharboured, or unburied.

Some good Sunamite vvil prepare a poor chamber, 4. Reg. 4.
bed, stool, and candelsticke, for the travailed Priests of God. Some vvil
rather harken to our Saviors admonition saying, Mat. 10.
He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, a just man in the name
of a just man, and (as S. Mark speaks) Because he is Christ's, Marc. 9.
shall receive a revvard accordingly, the^ to man's edictes, against the
receiving of the faithful afflicted. And if death be threatened by man, to such
as receive and succor them: our Lord on the otherside, Mat. 10.
denounces his vae and vengeance to the refusers of them, Luc. 10.
in as large wise as to the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha

Some good Onesiphorus vvil refresh us, 2. Tim. 1.
and embrace our chains, to obtain mercy of our Lord for him self, his
family and posterity after him. Act. 16.
God vvil move the keepers of our persons in prison, as he did often in the
like times of old. England can not lack Albans, whose Protomartyr being of
that name (that famous S. Bed. hist. Angl. li. 1.c.7.
Alban, blessed in heaven and earth therefore for ever) suffered, and offered
him self to the persecutors, to save his Christian guest a Clergy man, that
lay secret in his house.

We can not fear, we need not doubt: it sounds in every Catholics care
now night and day, Luc. 12.
Fear not them that kill the body, and further are not able to do: but fear ye
him, who after he has killed, has power to cast both body and soul into hell
fire. Thousands daily lying on their death beds, and departing, in our
Country, can not be afraid of man's offense or indignation, that must within
fevv'vveekes, days, or hours, be cited before Gods throne, and be exempted
from these mortal fears: such vvil be glad of necessary Sacraments and
comforts of conscience, for which they would give all the lands in the world.

Yea the lay people of al sorts, learned and unlearned, noble and mean, rich
and poor man and woman, are as ready often to suffer for Christ and his
Church, as the Priest or Bishop, everlasting thanks and praise be to God: who
also vvil continually through the prayers of the faithful (as we verily trust)
indue her Ma.ties heart with pity and compassion of her own subjects
afflicted, for no treasons or unlawful atte^pts, but merely for their faith
and conscience, which comes unto them by so good vvarrant and authority,
that they can not put it of by no earthly fear, force, or persuasion.

Much less vvil any Catholic (we hope) be ashamed of the rebukes and
contumelies which we suffer for the same, the cause being Christ's, who
suffered many mo before us. And because one special reproach given us,
pertains not to our persons, but to the whole order of Priesthod: we may be
bold to add a word or two for our defense, specially concerning that term,
Massing Priests. Massing Priests.
whereby the new pulpits (the very chaires of the skorneful) merrily or
mockingly often call us and our brethren. Ps. 1.


Which name yet, given us also in public vvriting of authority, is not
doubtless of skornefulnes, which must needs be far from the enditers of such
things: but, as we take it, for distinction and difference betwixt us
Catholic and in deed only Priests, and the other of the new creation, whom
the people, for some resemblance of their actions in the ministry, to the
wonted celebration of divine things, often call Priests. though the
Protestants list not so to be called, as in deed the Ministers can not of
right have any such calling, having no more power, right, or authority to
minister any Sacrament (other then Baptism, which in some cases women also
may do) then they have to make a new moon or an other sun. The Apostles
the^ selves, and ancient fathers of al ages, were Mass Priests.


The Church of God knovveth no other Priests, neither has Christ instituted
any other order of Priests, Iren. li c. 32. Cyp ep. 63. ad Cae^^l.
but of these whom contemptuously they call Mass Priests. It is that sort,
and none other, Chry. ho. 12. in ep. ad Heb. Amb^. in p^. 38 post med.
to which our Savior gave power to consecrate his body and blood, and offer
the same, which is, to say Mass.

The first holy Council of Nice, Cap. 14.
to which our Protestants would seem to attribute something, knevv none but
such offerers, or sacrificing, that is, Massing Priests. S. Hierom, himself
also of the same order, honored no other, nor knevv no other, but
Mass Priests, whose special functio^s he makes even these two, which our
Priests namely seek to exercise to the salvation of their brethren, and
which two be specially forbidden, and most punishable by the late laws of
the Realm. Ep. 1. ad Heliod.
God forbid, says he, I should speak any thing amiss of rhem, When Leo the
Great (ep. 81. c. 2.) took order, for saying mo Masses then one, in a day, in
one Church: were they not Mass Priests, that said those Masses?
who succeding into the Apostles degree, with sacred mouth make our Lords
body, by whom we also are Christians: who having the keys of the kingdom of
heaven* judge after a sort before the day of judgment.

These lo are your Mass Priests, whose harboring is so dangerous, whose
absolution is so traitorous, whose sacred joints, without respect of honor
dew to the order, or to degree of learning, or gentry, are racked sometimes
almost to death.

Li. 5. ep. 33.
S. Ambrose was a Mass Priest, testifying of him self, that he offered
Sacrifice and said Mass, even in that plain term. Ep. 5.
S. Cyprian acknowledges the Priests of his time to have offered or
sacrificed, yea even in prisons, in times of persecution: which is a great
comfort and vvarrant for us in these miseries, to do the like, as long as God
shall suffer it. He was a Mass priest, De ciu. li. 22. c. 8.
that S. Augustine sent to do sacrifice in a house infested with evil spirits.
Li 10. Confess. c. 12. 13.
They were Mass priests, that did sacrifice at the burial of his mother, and
the rest whom he desires to remember his fathers and mothers souls at the
holy alter. They were Mass priests, of whom Eusebius vvriteth, In vit.
Constable. li. 4. c. 45.
That they pacified the divine Majesty with vnblouddy sacrifices and mystical
co^secratio^s. The high dignity of Priesthod set forth in the noble work of
the same title, Chrysoft. De sacerdotio.
by S. Chrysostom, is specially there commended for those two points, for
which ours now is condemned: that is, for the high supereminent power of
doing the vnblouddy sacrifice upon the alter, and for the authority of
remitting sins. See his notable places for the same, and thou shall not doubt
but that Priests with him, were no other then Mass Priests.

To be short, he and all the other fathers, both Greek and Latin, were Mass
priests, none being ever made but for that purpose principally: In 1. Tim. 4.
S. Ambrose testifying, that to take the order of Priesthod, which he calls
with the Apostle, Imposition of hands, is to receive authority to offer
sacrifice to God in our Lords steed.

And as for S. Gregory the Great, Greg li. 2. ep. 9. 93. li. 7. ep. 63. ind.
2. li. 11. ep. 17. Ad. 3, interrog. August.
who knovveth not that he was a Mass Priest, who has the very word, the
manner, and the parts thereof so expressly in his Epistles: who sent al holy
furniture and ornaments for the same to our B. Bed. li. 1. hist c. 26. 29.
Apostle S. Augustine, him self also without controversy a Mass Priest? Such
were our Countriemen, Venerable Bede, and before him Gildas surnamed the
Wise, and whoso ever else in all our Churches stories, of that calling, al
were Mass priests: as, the honorable Prelates, founders of so many goodly
Colleges, the authors of so many noble works, Counselers to so many her
Ma.ties noble progenitors: breefely all the ancient fathers of our faith, were
Mass Priests.

And when this, sometime so honorable and so general, is now turned into
contumely, and made punishable by laws: vvo be to our sins, and Christ
have mercy on their miseries that see not their own damnable condition. for
whom the Priests sacrifice, and prayers are so much more necessary, the less
sense them selves have of their own pitiful state.

And a thousand times happy be they, that either are so bold and zealous of
their souls health and their dearest, to seek or accept the necessary
offices of this Priesthod, with what worldly danger so ever: or that feel
the lack thereof, Want of Priests a lamentable thing.
and express their sorrows for want thereof, in such words or sense as the
people of Afrike once did, when their Bishops and Priests were carried away
from them into banishment, in the persecution of the Arians, as Victor vvriteth
Li. 2. de va^s* pers.
To whom, say they, do you leave us desolate? Who shall now baptize these poor
babes? who shall loose us of our sins by pardon and reconciliation? Who shall
prescribe us penance for our offenses past? For to you it was said, whatsoever
you loose in earth, shall be likewise loosed tn heaven. Who shall bury us when
we die, with solemn prayers? Who shall exhibit the accustomed tite of the
divine Sacrifice?

S. Ep. 180
Augustine also does lively describe the miserable desolation and distresses of
faithful people, by the absence of their Priests, both for want of other
needeful duties, and specially of the consecration and communication of our
Lords body, and reconcilement by penance and absolution.

Without which later, because none can come to salvation that is fallen after
Baptism, he says, the sorrow of their friends being sure to lack their
company in heaven, must needs be exceeding great, and therefore notably
discourses of the cases, that Priests and Pastors may not forsake their
flocks for what danger so ever, vvherof we need not speak at this time.

It is enough, that the good Reader sees, what kind of Priests they be, that
now be perfecuted, contemned, and condemned: and into what miserable ter. mes
we be fallen, that that should now be coumpted seditious, traitorous, and
pernicious to Christian peoples and states, that once, and alvvaies before our
days, was deemed of al good men, and learned, and wise, and by the laws of
al Christian Nations, so sovereign, holy, and needeful.

But they vvil say unto us, how so ever the matter be in it self, or was
judged in old time, now the case is altered: such men and such doings can not
stand with our state. But (alas) who has brought the state and form of our
Co^monvvealth into these straites, that it can not sta^ with that Priesthod,
with that service of God, with that faith, with that regiment, that al our
ancestors, al Catholic Countries, al Princes and peoples have passed in,
with grace and glory, so many worlds together?

Were we the doers, the causers, the mouers? If there be any perils feared or
foreseen by the wise, in the mids of the greatest calm that our Country
has had these many ages: which way, and by whom come they? Is our doctrine
seditious? be Catholics by nature or profession, unquiet persons? are they
desirous of disorder, change, and novelty: or vvearie of peace, order, and
antiquity? are they libertines, despisers of authority, seekers of spoil,
sack, and garboil? are they given to sacrilege, to irreligiositie, Epicurisme,
Sadducisme, or Atheism?

Look what manner of people, Catholics, peaceable and orderly:
and what conditioned men follow the other sects, so many, Ptotesta^ts
lice^tious, feditious, and rebellious, out of measure.
and so strange, as both our Country and other places have lately brought
forth: and compare their life, their lightness, their inconstancy, their
promptness to disorder, disobedience, licentiousnes, novelty, mutabilitie,
and havoc of the world: compare them (I say) to the constancy, gravity,
patience, peaceable, civil, and svveete behavior of such as be inclined to the
Catholic religion in every Country. See, I pray thee, benign Reader, take
pains to look about thee these thirty years compass only, both at home and
abroad, whether Protestants, or Catholics, have oftener attempted, by arms
or other forcible ways, such alterations as they have desired: whether sort,
either by preaching, vvriting, or persuasion, have oftener stirred the people
to mutinies, murmurations, and commotions, against their Prince or State.

That mortal men (and specially Communities) should for discontentments and
manifold accidents of humane infirmity, and great variety of humors, minds,
and manners, sometimes fall to mutinies, no man can marvel, reading the stories
not only of the Heathen, but even of the people of God, vvhiles they were
guided by Moses and Aaron through the wilderness, as afterward often, when
they were come to rest in their promised land: and of the Catholic Christian
people, These, for some one of their Pastors, and because they would not yield
to the Emperor so much as one Chur.
that sometimes by force and tumults have sought to defend their faith, and
their Bishops, namely S. Athanasius, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, and others:
which the said fathers had much a do to repress.

That the Catholic part of England (to say the least) equal, ch in the whole
city of Mila^, for the Arians: (Ambr. li. 5. ep. 33).
excepting the Princely authority, to the other, being in their conscience,
goods, estimation, and liberty, which ours did not, for all their Bishops
taken from them at once, nor for all the Churches in the Realm, delivered to
the Protestants in one day.
so much in deed, or in their own co^ceites, distressed for religion, should
(not al neither, but some fevv Noblemen and Gentlemen, not al for religion
neither, though al pretended it) once take arms these 23 years, in the most
seditious days that ever the Christian world had: and Ireland likewise once,
where this new Sect has ever in manner wholy stood against the stream: can
it be to any man marvelous, or could it be to wise men unlooked for? or were
it possible that so many years could have passed with so little contradiction
or opposition of Protestants, if the state had been against them, and they of
such numbers and callings, as the Catholics were and are in the said
Dominions?

Compare to these two commotious, the furious attempts of most barbarous
rebellions of Caluinists or Protestants, in Scotland, Their rebellio^s in
France, Flanders, Scorland, England.
Flanders, and France, against their natural Princes, to the ruin and
desolation of the greatest parts of those noble Countries. Yea, if you list
not go from home, call at the least to your remembrances, into what hazards
the scepter and crown of Queen Marie, and consequently of her Ma.tie that
now is, came by the Protestants, both in the said Queens reign, and
specially upon the death of King Edward the sixth: when they attempted by
arms unnaturally to have thrust out of the Regal throne, both the one and the
other, Zuinglia^ Bishops and Clergy convicted of treason.
their Zuinglian Bishops and Clergy not only subscribing to the treasons, but
preaching diverse traitorous and seditious sermons at London, and in the
Universities, and other famous places of the Realm, against both their royal
persons, and contributing and setting out souldiars to the maintenance of the
same rebellion: for which, some of the chief of them were convicted by the
high Court of Parliament, of treason: and the principal of that conspiracy
(otherwise a right vvorthie and noble Gentleman) being afterward executed for
the same, confessed at the hour of his death, that all that, and other late
mischeefes and miseries of the Real me, proceeded of heresy and forsaking the
unity of the Catholic Church this they did then.

And afterward, their fellows being fled to Geneua and other places, ceased
not to move hostility both abroad and at home, against the Realm, as short a
while as they were absent, Their traitorous and seditious books.
sundry ways: and caused, by the allowing and consent of Calvin and Knokes
(the two fannes of sedition and calamity of France and Scotland) an
abominable treatise to be published, against the regiment of women: at once to
defeat the Queen that then was, her sister that now is, the Q. of Scotland,
and consequently the whole raze of renowned Henry the seventh.

And what shall I speak of the Puritans late malapert and seditious book
against her Ma.ties honorable inte^tions, and against her next neighbor and
fre-end, a principal Peer of Christendom?

Or of the diverse pestilent books, set out these late years in french and
other languages, against the persons of sundry Princes and Pote^tates of
Christendom: uttering and amplifying in particular, most barbarously, their
open or secret faults, and feyning many crimes never committed, to alter
their subjects affection from them, and so to prepare their hearts to rebellion
against them: a popular practice, most common now in the world among
Protestants, as it alvvaies has been a mean to advance sedition, none ever
intending commotion or alteration, either in the Church or Commonwealth, not
using the same?

Which kind of inhumane, irreligious, and uncivil dealing, used by Heretics,
first against Popes and other principal persons of the Clergy, to induce the
people to their contempt, being not duly punished by the temporal Magistrate,
but either vvinked at, liked, or of hatred to the order and of policy
procured: is now used for like purposes toward Kings and Queens also, that
be subject to sins, and the sight of the world, and yield matter to
slanderous tongues and pens as well as Popes and Prelates do: and vvil hazard
all the Commonvvealths that suffer it.

It is no good, Slanderous reports and infamous libels against Princes and
cities, unseemly and intolerable.
grave, nor Christian government, to suffer a ribald to open in book or
pulpit, to the people whose ears itch for such sport, against Superiors of al
states, the particular faults, either feyned (as they be commonly) or taken up
by hearesy, or in deed committed, of Prelates, Princes, or peoples of other
Nations.

If there were some Italian or English fugitive, that would take upon him in
Rome to make a preach before the Prelates or citizens there, of all the sins
done in the Court, or in London, or by the Noblemen them selves, or in their
houses, or through the Realm, and not only what is in deed committed, but
what malice and impudency may forge to be done: should such a monster (trow
ye) be heard of honorable or honest men there, or escape the coarde or
galleies? No doubtless, none could be suffered so to do against any Prince,
famous city, or Nation, Catholic or Protestant, in the world, without just
correction.

And yet (alas) in our Country, men make sport, or rather a solemn act of it:
and that is thought not unworthy to be spoken in pulpits, and afterward
published, and printed, which neither the Old Comedy, nor Pasquino, nor any
ruffian or Carneuall-youth in Rome, would speak without a visard. England
much altered from our forefathers gravity, by the new preaching.
So are the ma^ners and gravity of our forefathers altered, by this new
preach, into Cha^s conditions, detraction and malediction even of Gods Priests
and the Princes of the people, Act. 23.
which the Apostle taught us by his own most humble example, ought not to be
used, no not toward such as have but the name and resemblance of true
Priests, and which S. Ep. Iudae v. 9.
Jude by the fact of S. Michael proves, should not be used to the Devil
himself.

Oh what a dis honor is it to our noble Country, that can hear and bear
such wicked slaunderers, returning home from honorable States, Cities, and
Co^monvveales, and uttering nothing, but only filthy, false, and reprochful
matter against them! And how great a shame and iniquity is it, that men borne
in a civil Country, can trauail so far, The guise or fashion of profane
Pilgrims and lewd trauailers.
and into such renowned places, Churches, and states, and find nothing, nor
bring home to their friends any thing, but filth and ribauldry.

Which kind of me^, are like unto one that should go to take the sight and
view of some Princely palace or city, and when he comes there, never
looks on the ma.tie, magnificence, beauty, commodity, order, government,
justice, or other such things: never asks for the wise, the godly, the
learned, and the like, for which the places be notorious: but only runs to
the cha^nels, sinkes, gutters, iakes, dunghils, and other stinking offices of
man's infirmities, and acquainteth him self only with the black guard, and
other of abject services, and returns with outcry, that nothing is found
there but stink and lothsomnes.

Even such in good sooth are these dishonest Pilgrims, that as soon as they
arrive in any famous city, seek not after any things of excellent fame for
virtue, learning, regiment, religion, devotion: but according to their own
taste, hunt after nothing, ask for nothing, but where the Stevves be, who
frequent them, what crimes, iniquities, or disorders have bee^ done in the^,
what vices the Princes or Priests are given to: and so partly of that they
find, partly of that they feyne, partly of that they borovv of vvanton Poets,
and partly of that which holy men have of zeal and charity reprehended, they
make up a fardel of malicious slanders and detractions of Popes and Princes,
and utter such seemly vvares in their seditious sermons. Wherein for all that,
how spitefully so'euer they speak against such persons, in effect commonly
they say nothing of importance against the^, that has any show of truth, or
just cause of blame, in the sight of any wise indifferent man.

But these be the disordered and shameful means of Protestants in these days,
to prefer their rebellions against both the spiritual and temporal
Governors: besides the horrible designements of their Caluinistical
Consistories, pretented Synodes, and Prophecyings, in diverse Countries, al
tending directly to pernicious innouations.

Compare now these factes, and other the perilous treacheries done against
the repose of al Realms round about, and you shall well perceive the atte^pts
of the other side, to be sport and pastime in any wise man's judgment, of
what religion so ever he be, to the implacable fiercenes and fury of the
other, a people by this new no religion made most brutish, conscienceles,
restles, and that vvil hazard all the Kingdoms of the world, before it be
filled with blood and spoil, except God prevent the matter with his mercy,
and reduce al men to the obedience of his Catholic Church and their Princes
again.

And for the present troubles in Ireland, Ireland.
which now namely seem to give some cause of doubt, that our brethrens
intentions may be against the state, no less then for the preferment of the
Catholic faith: most sure it is, and of certain knowledge the writer hereof
protests, that they neither were nor could be acquainted otherwise
therewith, then by the common brute of the world.

If the Pope have any part in those affairs, assure your selves, their elders
(which of reason should rather know it) neither by his Holiness mouth nor any
of his ministers, in the time of those Students being in Rome, heard so much.
And therefore to rack those poor innocent persons, and to vvreast out of them
Princes secrets, vvherof there can be no reason that they should be partakers,
is a lamentable and rare case in our Country, specially in the clement reign
of her Majesty.

Imagine ye the Italian government, and specially the Papacy, to be so
discretely menaged, that every poor Priest or scholar in the city knovveth
the Popes secrets? No no, Christ does know it, and he shall one day open their
innocence, and judge their cause and ours, who, as we shall then answer
before him, neither knevv then, nor now know any intentions of Pope or
Princes, concerning such things as are contained in the Articles of the
pretended confederacy, mentioned in the Proclamation of the 15 of Iulie, as
more largely we have declared before.

As that also, which the late relapsed Minister levvdly reported in open
pulpit and printed book, that the Excommunication of the Queen should be
published here in our College of Rhemes, and set on the posts and public
places of this city, we protest to be an impudent untruth and slander:
vvherof the whole town will bear us witness. and every wise man might
easily discover that caluminious fiction, because in the dominions of his
Ma.tie most Christian, we neither could nor durst do any such thing. So that
by this one thing so maliciously feyned, al sincere and indifferent men may
deem of the rest of his hearesaies and sightes at Rome, as of impudent lies
and slanders.

Humbly therefore we desire, for the honor of God, her Ma.ties wise and
grave Counselers, not to conceive upon such base fellows contrived
calumniations, otherwise of our doings and our brethrens, either at home or
abroad, then as of men most obediently, duetifully, and naturally affectioned
to her Ma.tie, to their Honors, and our dearest Country, so far ever, as shall
stand with our subjection to Gods laws and the Churches, to which we are
as much bound by our Baptism and religion, as to the former by nature and
birth. Being, in the behalf of God, bold this much further in like loyalty to
tell them: that the causes of what perils and dangers so ever may be tovvard
that Realm (vvherof, so God save our souls, we have no knowledge) can not
be justly attributed but to the first alteration of religion and forsaking the
society of the Catholic Church and kingdoms.

Hereof proceeds the multitude of new Sects, directly tending to the
disturbance of public repose: which for the special attentio^ given to the
doings of Catholics, are vvittingly ouerseen. More danger in forced
dissimulation, the^ in plain and open confession of faith or religion.
Which Sects in this case must needs prove more pernicious, because, by the
property of many of them (teaching their likers, by contrary acts, oaths,
and asseuerations, to cover their conscience til time require) their intentions
can hardly be discovered: and, by the common condition of al heresies, bringing
novelty, change, and liberty, which yield them many folovvers, shall hardly
be resisted.

Catholics abhorred these mutations from the beginning, because it is their
grace to love antiquity, gravity, and constancy. Whom also it is our
principal endeavor to induce to the open confession of their faith, when by
the law of God it is required, and never by contrary oaths or actions to
pretend an other religion then they bear in their breasts. Which plain
discovery of our selves, can not be disagreable or dangerous to the Polity.

And marvel it is in our eyes, that such extreme diligence should be used by all
penal laws, oaths, punishments, and persuasions, to drive the Catholics to
profess that outwardly, which is known they hate in their hearts
inwardly* as though there were imminent danger of open professed Catholics,
and none of the close dissemblers in the same kind. For I think their
vvisedoms do not imagine, that their oaths and statutes do change their
meanings, though they alter their countenances, nor that fear can long or
surely keep his master.

How so ever it be, alteration of religion is the cause of al inconveniences,
though a fevv years worldly prosperity cover from the simple, that very first
surge of our misery and perplexity: and to return to Gods Church again, is
the only right remedy, out of which al Kingdoms are sure to perish
assuredly. Which not acknowledged, makes many a plaster and preservative to
be vvrongly applied.

Against our Lord no force nor counsel can prevail, who has used (as their
wisdoms must needs know) the rod of his ire against al those great Kingdoms,
once most flourishing in Christian faith and liberty, now under the tyranny
of the Turk and other Heathens, specially for sin, schism, and heresy.

Let not their Honors contemn the voice and admonition of a poor creature,
To the honorable Counselers.
whose speech may be the instrument of Gods provident care over that poor
afflicted people, under her Ma.ties and their government.

But if the restitution of the Realm to the Catholic Church, can not stand
with their consciences, as being persuaded, their own religion to be true:
or at least not with their vvisedoms, for that, being thus far gone, the
retiring back might be dangerous to the state: yet for Christ's love we ask
it, let their Honors have some care and consideration of our consciences also,
and of other innumerable in the Realm, no less timorous, and as well
informed, as theirs, or any men's can be in this case: that for our satisfaction
before God, and for the peril that may fall, through his offense and
indignation, to them and to the whole state, if so just a request so humbly
asked in his name should be contemned, it would please their goodness, to
withdraw their heavy hand from the poor Catholics, and rather procure them
license of her Ma.tie, to serve God after the manner of al their Christian
forefathers, then to afflict the^ in body and mind so pitifully: that so both
the Seminaries might cease, and their Honors might have Gods Priests and all
Catholics pray for them, rather as their patrons, then as their persecutors.

Trusting, that they and all the wise of the Realm be persuaded, that the
Kingdom of God first sought, Mar. 6.
is the way to the peace, felicity and security of al worldly weal: which
not only their own piety and prudence may teach them, but also the example
of the Hebrews, who for fear of endamaging their temporal state, for sooke
their promised Lord and Savior. Of whom therefore S. Augustine vvriteth this
sentence, worthy to be emprinted in the hearts of al such as have the rule and
charge of kingdoms. Tract. 49. in loan.
Temporalia perdere timuerunt, and vitam aeternam non cogitauerunt, and sic
vtrunque amiserunt.

An admonition and comfort to the afflicted Catholics. CHAP. VII.
NOW having sincerely set forth to the world our intentions, we may turn
our talk, for conclusion of this Defense, to you our fathers, friends, and
brethren in Christ, being either in the furnace of Gods probation, or in the
burden and broile of that hot harvest of our Lord, or by sure treading,
threshing, and vvinovving, laid up for well tried wheat in the barne-floore of
Christ's Church, to you we say: Be humble, wise, meek, peaceable, patient,
and constant, in all your cogitations, words, answers, doings, and
sufferings: that Christ Jesus whom you serve, may bless and prosper your
endeavors, move her Ma.ties heart to have compassion, open her grave Counselers
eyes to see your innocence, alter the enemies and il informers malice and
malediction, unto love and good affection toward you, stir up the minds
of al men, inwardly and in conscience to consider the cause of your
afflictions, and give them such sense, reason, and religion, that they may
acknovvledge your undeserved calamities.

For, your life and behavior agreeable to your faith and calling, and formed in
all piety, discretion, and modesty, after the demeanor of all old Martyrs,
and according to the pattern of those glorious Confessors our true fathers,
Pastors, and Masters, that have by their sacred persons sanctified your
prisons by two and twenty years durance, shall defend your Christian intents
and ours, more then all the words that we can make. In the mean time, both
you and we, with all our loving brethren the Catholics, must rest upon God,
and the equity of the cause so well known and approved to the vvisest in
the world, and our own well informed conscience.

For as the cause, Aug. ep. ^1.
and not the pain or persecution (vvherof only Heretics do vaunt them selves)
justifies us, so Christ and our conscience testify, that we are not
acquainted with any conspiracies against our Prince and Country, nor do
suffer for rebellion or treason attempted against man, but for that we will
not conspire with Core and his accomplices, Number. 16.
against Moses and Aaron, Peter and Paul, which the holy Scriptures call
rebellion against God: and for that we cry upon our dearest Countriemen, that
the revolt from the Catholic Church is a greater fault by manifold, then
defection from any earthly king or Co^monvvealth: fire once sent from heaven,
and the earth opening and svvalovving such offenders alive down to Hell, for
our warning, and for Gods revenge of so grievous a crime.

For this (in truth) and none other matter, do you and we suffer. It is for
the honor, peace, and unity of the Church: it is for the saving of our own
souls, and the souls of our beloved parents and friends: it is for the
defense of Christ's Priesthod and souerainty in earth: it is for his eternal
Sacrifice and Sacraments: it is for the custody of that doctrine and truth, 1.
Tim. 6.
which was laid up as depositum in the hands of S. 2. Tim. 1.
Timothee and other Bishops and Priests, to be preserved from al corruption and
alteration coming by heresy and novelty: it is for the good garding of the
holy Scriptures, and the native sense thereof set down by Gods Church and all the holy Doctors, from heretical adulteration and deprauation: it is for our
inheritance left us by S. Gregory and S. Augustine our first Apostles, which
we may not betray for a thousand deaths: finally it is for all our Christian
fathers faith, honor, and memory, to us most dear and blessed.

The defense of any one article of the Catholic faith, of any one point of
Christian doctrine, any title of our Lords law, any one Sacrament, the saving
of any one soul (being the price of better blood then ours) is cause just and
great enough, willingly and patiently to sustain al mortal pains: but, for
so many parts of our belief impugned, for so many holies profaned, for
millions of souls hazarded, for the salvation of our Prince otherwise so
gracious, our Country, our parents, and our posterity, not to suffer, were
against al duty of nature, charity, and religion.

Such is then your cause, dear Sirs, as never Martyrs nor Confessors since
Christ's time, had any more worthy, more clear, or more glorious: Which to
forsake for any fear of man or flattery of this world, should be our eternal
ignominy, both here in this life, and before God and his Angels in the next.

The manner of your suffering, confession, and Martyrdom (for, blessed be God,
some of our brethren have gladly and honorably persisted even to death, and
many mo are ready by his grace for the same) resembles also the old proceeding
in that kind, which has not been commonly used since Kings were Christened.
For, as the persecution of Priests and Bishops (vvherof S. Li* cont.
Hilarie complains against Co^stantius the Arian Emperor) is oftentimes so
covertly and craftily conveyed, Constant. vita defunctum.
that being in deed great and perilous, yet it can not appear to the due
commendation of the sufferers, or good example of the seers: so both of old and
of late, almost in every Country (as by the Arians and Circuncellions in
Afrike and Italy, and by the Caluinistes in France, Holland, and Zeland)
Priests and Catholics have been persecuted more often, and more cruelly
tormented and massakred, then with us, thanks be to God: but yet neither so
much to the merit of the sufferers, before God, nor to the edification and
advancement of the peoples faith and hope in him, as with us: where the
matter passes with deliberatio^, and in form of law and order.

When Christian Catholic men are barbarously assailed, and suddenly slain, no
question made of their faith or holy order, no promis given of life or
promotion, if they list to deny their profession, no deliberation nor time to
consult, nor former terrors shevved, no tedious nor lingering pains of
prisonment, of famine, of infamy, of friends or adversaries solicitation, of
loss of lands, goods, and life, or care of wife, children, and family: in
this case, though they be holy and happy Martyrs also, yet such suffering is
not that which is called after holy Scriptures speech, Confession of Christ
before men until death or temporal torment what so ever. Which kind is almost
proper to our Country in these days: at the least it is in no other place else
so evident and usual.

There you are conuented before Officers, The manner of proceeding against
Catholics, in England.
you are examined of your Priesthod, of saying or hearing Mass, of absoluing
or taking absolution: you are called traitors and seditious persons, you are
prisoned in dungeons among thieves, and some of your chaste virgins (as of old
the blessed Martyrs S. Bridewel.
Agnes and S. Lucie) thrust into infamous places: the lodgings sometime of
murderers and malefactors, are now filled with men of God, Christian innocent
people of every state and sex: you are tempted by fair promises on the one
side, and fearful threatenings on the other, to yield though it be never so
little: not relenting, you languish there in perpetual prison, or be condemned
to die, and are executed in manner of traitors.

Which last extremity that no mo of you be put unto (though so many be most
ready) we attribute to God first, and then to her Ma.ties clemency, that has
ever been hardly drawn to give consent to the execution of such unjust laws
against her Catholic and faithful subjects. But when our Lord permits it
for his glory, it proceeds in all respects after the manner of old Martyrdom.

And this is it that gives us so great hope of the conversion of our Country,
knovving by the Apostle, that it is a great perfection and accomplishment of
our Christian charity and duty, to resist not only unto the loss of
Country, wife, children, parents, goods, lands, liberty, Heb. 12.
honor, but vsque ad sanguinem, even to the loss of blood and lives.

Blood so yielded makes the forciblest mean to procure mercy that can be.
Every time that you confess Christ's name, every vvrinche of any joint for it,
every opprobrious scoff and scorn given by the popular, when you be carried
in the sacred vestiments through the streates (for that also some of our
brethren there have happily borne) every vilany and sacrilege done to your
Priesthod, every of your sores, sorrows, and sighs, every of your wants and
necessities, make a stronger intercession for our Country and afflicted
Church, then any prayers lightly in the world.

This is the way, by which we hope to win our nation to God again. We
put not our trust in Princes or practices abroad, nor in arms or forces at
home. This is our fight, and for this war, the Society of Jesus and our
Seminaries were instituted. to this, by all spiritual exercises and continual
reading of the Scriptures and antiquity, our Priests and Students are trained.
This being plainly of God, can not (we trust) by any violence or prudence of
man be made frustrate. Vvherof he has given reasonable good proof already, by
the great increase of the number, and the zeal of known Catholics, gained
principally by the long confession (which is a true, though a slow Martyrdom)
of the constant and learned Prelates besides others, and afterward by the like
suffering of the younger Priests, and others, being the frye and fruit of the
former spiritual fight. Which now being come to perfection, has seed in it
self, to be sown in tears, and vvvatered (if need require) with blood.

To which sort our Lord has ever given success, The church grew and
increased by persecution.
him self no otherwise planting his law and religion, but by giving up his
blood and life, for which his Father promised him, that he should see semen
longaeuum: Esa. 53.
nor any otherwise more sustaining or furthering and promoting it in the
Apostolic and primitive state for some hundred years together, then by the
precious deaths of the preachers and faithful people: the Kings of the world
in vain using al force and most exquisite diligence to extirpate the same: and
the courage of the Christians continually (through Gods goodness) increasing by
the cruelty of their persecutors, Martyrs.
at what time whole cities and commonalties, whole legions of noble
souldiars, great troops of virgins and matrones yielded them selves to death
and torments for their faith.

As now also, a little more zeal and knowledge of Christian duty engendered
by Gods spirit, in the minds of the people, through the use of this spiritual
practice and combat, shall make whole sheeres and provinces of devout persons,
most gladly offer their lands and lives, for the love of Christ and their own
salvation. This flame and feruor of faith daily more and more enkindled in the
hearts of al sorts (which is the fire that our Lord casts into our Country,
Luc. 12.
and which he will have, as we hope, to burn) can not be extinguished,
except it be long of our selves.

Truth prevails in time, because it is Gods dereling, 3. Esd. 4.
against women, wine, or kings: and specially the truth of Christ's religion,
which rises when it is oppressed, and florisheth when it is most impugned.
It has not alvvaies an external temporal state, nor the laws alvvaies for
it, because Princes be not alvvaies subject unto it: but if it be not forsaken
by the covvardenesse of the Priests and professors, God never suffers it to
cease or fail in any Country: though it stand with trauail and blood, as it
did in Rome and al other places almost til Constantines days.

And therefore where God gives the grace of Martyrdom, Martyrdom.
it is a joyful sign of mercy, and that he will not forsake the place nor
people, which he blesses with so high and rare a benediction, but vvil
either mollify the hearts of the Prince and Magistrate, or give abundance of
grace and fortitude to suffer and hold out, til it please him of his goodness,
to send a calm, or the conversion of the whole: which we vvil expect (and
as much as in us lies, procure) other xxtie and xxtie and twice xxtie to
that, and how many mo years so ever be appointed by his providence for
chastisement of our sins.

If we stood against Gods Church and truth (as in heresies many be obstinate
at the beginning) then forcible good laws and punishments, Ep. 48.
as S. Augustine teaches by experience of his own City and Country, would
in fevv years break our endeavors, as repugnant both to Gods laws and man's.
But the Catholic Church and faith can not by any violence be expugned, where
fortitude of spirit and Apostolic due resistance is. The lack of which has
brought many great Provinces from one heresy to an other, and at length to
plain Paganism, Turcisme, or Atheism, that is, to no God nor faith at all,
the end alvvaies of these many faithes, Li. ad Co^stantium.
as S. Hilarie says. From which to save our Country and posterity, we are
bound to suffer what so ever.

Protesting to al our loving brethren the Catholics of England, Against
dissimulation and coldness in religion.
that it is not dissimulation, hiding or covering our consciences by oaths,
going to the Churches services and preachings of Protestants, nor halting on
both sides, coldness and carelessness, nor yelding to the present sway of
pretended laws, to save our lives and livings til time serve our turn: that
can deliver our souls, or ever recover the Realm to the unity of Gods Church
again.

There is nothing in the world but zeal of Gods house, and ardent love of our
Lord, and of the souls bought with his blood, that can win us this field.
Martyrdo^, a high dignity and singular blessing.
Which excellent grace of most high charity proceeding from Christ, that
gives you not only to believe in him, but to suffer for him, is the happiest
lotte that you could have in this life, brethren most dear: a benediction of
God, not to your selves only (among so many thousands full good men, that
attain not to so high dignity of Confession and Martyrdom) but to al your
Country, name, friends, and family, being blessed and protected by your
travails, in Christ for evermore: a thing sought for of many full perfect men
and saints, but not obtained: so extraordinary is your gracious hap herein.

You know the superaboundant revvard, the glorious crown, the eminent state,
the ineffable felicity of such as confess Christ before men, Apoc. 7.
and vvash their garments in the blood of the lamb. You know, the revvard so
incomparable succedeth immediately all the pains: but a moment betwixt man's
momentanie punishment, and Gods everlasting payement: betwixt the temporal
ignominy, and eternal glory. You know, within an hour afterward
everlastingly, the poorest Confessor of Christ is not only more glorious with
the Angels and Saints in heaven, but also often (as we see both in the old
and late Martyrs) of more renowned memory among men, then their persecutors.

You know, once before the throne of Christ, in the theater of heaven and
earth, these rufflers of the world shall say with many sighs and groans:
These (lo) are they of whom we made a mock, Sap. 5.
coumpting their life madness, and their death inglorious: and now woe be to us,
they are reckened among the Children of God, and their lotte among the Saints.

You know, Cypr. ep. 52.
the force of Martyrdom is such (as S. Cyprian also tells us) that without
al chastisement, pain or purgation in the next life (which S. Aug. in ps. 37.
Augustine says, is greater then any torment in this world) it delivers the
soul from all worldly infirmity, remains, relics, impurity, and debt of
former offenses, and yeldeth it immediately unto joy unspeakable. No virtue, no
act, nor office of this life so meritorious to the sufferer, so acceptable to
the revvarder, nor that so speedily, amply, and securely procures eternal
glory.

To be fellows of Christ's crown and glory, Mat. 5.
to be pronounced blessed by his own mouth, to be of that designed number of
elect persons, Apoc. 6.
for the accomplishment of whom the judgment and resurrection so desired of
Saints, Col. 1.
is differred: to contribute any drop of blood, or jot of affliction, to the
making up of the full measure of Christ's passions for his body, which is the
Church, far excedeth al humane dignity and felicity.

For this revvard then so passing, for a cause so good and glorious, for a
Master so loving, merciful and mighty, what earthly misery should we refuse
to suffer? Let us consider, that men for their Prince, friend, Country, and
home, put their lives in extreme peril: they refuse no adventure, be it never
so desperate: they put them selves before the mouth of the canon, they enter
into any breach, they sustain all the plagues, famines, fears, calamities,
that nature may endure: and they do well, for it is their duty, and the
dignity of man's condition, not to yield to these transitory afflictions, in the
services of the Commonwealth, or other honorable quarrels.

See (I pray you) the daily distresses and hazards of life, lands, and goods,
in ill causes: all which be usual among so many desperate cutters and
companions, ready for a rush to kill and be killed every moment: that for
satisfying of their inordinate lust to wine, women, dice, gorgious apparel,
or desire of revenge, contemn al dangers, gives, and gallovves. Remember how
many of the Nobility and others, in all Nations, have adventured their persons,
friends, and posterity, to advance some particular faction against their own
Countries, never achieved without infinite bloodshed and calamity.

In all these quarrels, be they just or unjust, so many of al degrees to be ready
to suffer all the extremities of death and ignominy, every man for his Prince,
many for friends, thousands for mere fantasies and falsehod: and shall none
suffer for our Savior, for the Church our mother, for our brethrens salvation?
shall we think it strange to have three or four hundred ready to die for Gods
cause, to suffer for the best and most honorable quarrel of al other that man
can have in this life? that Christ should have some souldiars of al orders,
that can be content to lose lands, goods, and life for his sake, in this
spiritual fight of patience and toleration, when the world has so many?

One town valiantly assaulted and stoutly defended, loses mo men, and
sustaineth more misery in a year, then we shall bestovv upon Christ (that died
for our sakes before, and will recompense us incomparably afterward) in the
hotest persecution that lightly can be these xxtie years. In which case, to
say nothing of noble Catholic Gentlemen, and other devout people of what sort
or sex so ever, to whom God gives even now the spirit of constancy, by the
example of S. Sebastian, S. Vincent, S. Maurice with the whole legion of
Thebes, and S. George the pattern and patron of our English knighthod, whose
courage in suffering for Christ was more glorious, the^ their fighting for
man: but to say nothing of them, nor of S. Catherine, S. Margaret, S. Agnes, S.
Lucie, and the like mirrours for our devout maidens and widow to behold:
for us that be of the Clergy, this is the only and proper kind of fight.

Our order and condition make us free from the vvarres and other perilous or
martial affairs, To the afflicted Priests.
often bringing death and danger both at home and abroad. Women have their
continual perils and miseries by bearing and bringing up their children. We
(besides our natural deaths and adversities common to al other) are subject to
no violence nor troubles, but very fevv, and very seldom, and in such measure
as God appoints or permits, and in such moderation that it may by his
grace easily be borne. If we should for fear or covvardenesse forsake our
station in Christ's field, having the example and encouragement of so many
Prophets, so many Apostles, so many Bishops and Priests, in the raze of
Martyrs, and of Christ him self, we were the vnvvorthiest Priests that ever
were. And our glorious Savior and his Church, if they had none to command
for their service and defense in this kind of combat, were in worse case then
any temporal king or Country in earth, who never want their servants and
peoples travails in their distresses.

In time of ease and wealth, our Lord has as many seruiteurs of his Clergy,
as any other state has of others: God forbid he should lack them, or his
Priests should forsake him, in the days of his persecution. He is not worthy
not fit to have honor, privilege, and wealth by him in prosperity, that
vvil not suffer ignominy, lack, and misery with him in adversity. It is
now (dear brethren) our course to serve in this sort, and a far better lotte
is it, the^ our forefathers had, that served only in rest and peace, neither
with so much security of salvation, nor so little danger of sin and damnation.

Our days can not be many, because we be men: neither can it be either godly
or vvorldly wisdom, for a remnant of three or four years, and perchance not
so many months, to hazard the loss of all eternity. They can not be good in
these evil times, much like to those vvherof S. Polycarpe complained thus:
Lord, unto what times have thou reserved us? And were they never so many or
good, to him that refuses his faith and Master, they shall never be joyful,
but deadly and doleful. Corporally die once we must every one, and but once,
and thereupon immediately judgment, where the Confessor shall be acknowledged,
and the Denyer denied again.

No Martyrdom of what length or torment so ever, can be more grievous, then a
long sickness and a languishing death* and he that departs upon the pillovv,
has as little ease as he that dies upon the gallovves, block, or bouchers
knife. And our Masters death, both for pains and ignominy, passed both
sorts, and all other kinds either of Martyrs or malefactors. Let no
tribulation then, no peril, no prison, no persecution, no life, no death
separate us from the charity of God, and the society of our svveete Saviors
passions, by and for whose love we shall have the victory in all these
conflictes.

Nevertheless, if by Gods suffering, for causes hidden unto us, any shrink
(which Christ forbid) for fear of death, torments, or tribulations, from the
fellowship of your happy confession and crowns prepared for the same, as in
the time of S. Cyprian and alvvaies diverse did, Ep. 54. and li. de lapsis.
and as one of the 40 did, Homil. 20.
whose glorious fight S. Basil describes, and the Church celebrateth the 9 of
March: be not scandalized or troubled thereat, but use such with all lenity,
taking compassion of their infirmity, considering that your selves also, or
any of us all, may be tempted and overthrown with Peter, and by Gods grace
afterward repent and rise with him again. Though it be perilous to presume
thereon, many mo following him in his fall and misery, then attayning to his
Martyrdom and mercy.

Neither be ye discouraged at the further fall of any Judas, to plain
apostasy and extreme blasphemy, or at the traitorous co^spiring of some such
with the Adversaries, by proditio^ and practice, to afflict you and all other
constant Catholics more deeply: but have this saying of S. Cyprian alvvaies in
your mind: Ep. 55. nu. 1.
Nihil interest quis tradat, aut saeuiat, cum Deus tradi permittat quos
disponit coronari. neque enim nobis ignominia est pati a fratribus, quod passus
est Christus: nec illis gloria est facere, quod fecit Judas. That is. It makes
no matter who betrayeth, or rages, whereas God permits them to be betrayed
whom he appoints to be crowned. Neither is it ignominy or dishonor for us,
to suffer that of our brethren, which Christ suffered: nor for their honor and
glory, to do that which Judas did. Ibid. nu. 3.
And a little after: It ought not to move any faithful man, and him that
remembers the Gospel, 2. Tim. 3.
and the Apostles forwarning, if in the later days certain proud and
obstinate fellows and the enemies of Gods Priests, either revolt from the
Church, or do against the Church: when both our Lord, and his Apostles have
foretold, that now there should be such. lo. 6.
When some of Christ's disciples by incredulity forsook him, he turned to his
Apostles and said, will you also be gone? Peter upon whom the Church was
builded, Mat. 16.
in the name of all, and in the voice of the whole Church answered, that he had
the words of eternal life, and therefore him they believed, and they would go
to none other: signifying and shevving, that those which revolt from Christ,
perish through their own fault, but the Church, which believes in Christ, and
holds fast that which she once has known, never to revolt from him at
all, and that they are the Church, which tarry in Gods house: the rest to be
the plant which God the father planted not, such as we see, not to have the
stedfastnes of weighty corn, but like chafe to be blovven away with the
puff of the scattering enemy: 1. lo. 2.
of whom S. John in his epistle says, They went out from us, but they were
not of us: for if they had been of us, verily they would have tarried with us.
S. Paul also vvarneth us, when evil men perish from out the Church, not to be
moved, nor to think that faith is diminished when the faithless revolt. To.
3.
For what (says he) if some of them have fallen from the faith? has their
infidelity made the faith of God frustrate? God forbid.

Therefore fear no Israriote, fear no Simon, Act. 1. 8. 6.
fear no Nicolas, fear no open persecutor, nor no secret proditor: but have
courage in Christ, our dear fellows. And as hitherto, when you were at
liberty, and alvvaies so long as you may, you have offered and vvil offer our
Lords blessed body and blood, in true Sacrifice, to procure Gods mercy to our
Country: 2. Tim. 4.
So now with S. Paul you must be ready to offer your selves to death in a
spiritual sacrifice, for the confirmation of your faith, and accomplishment of
al your Priestly actions: Which shall make a forcible cry for grace and
pardon, both for your friends and persecutors,

And what a goodly thing it were to die (if needs you must) among your
Catholic brethren and children there, as it were among your own sheep, for
that faith which you have taught them, Ep. 83.
S. Cyprians example is very notable, who chose to suffer Martyrdom in
Carthage his own Bishopric, in the sight of his flock, rather then at
Vtica or else wheresoever, hiding him self till the storm of persecution came
thither.

There is no comfort left in the world abroad (brethren) nor cause why you
should much desire either longer life, or more liberty: nothing could you
behold in our country, but the Churches calamity, distress, and desolation:
nothing could you hear, but new Orators, and (as S. Basil. ep. 69. and 70.
Basil speaks) the pulpits opened to every blasphemous tongue: which caused
all sorts of people of right judgment (as he also vvriteth in the same place)
to flee from Oratories and the houses of prayer, as schools of impiety: and
rather to make their prayers with tears, out of the Church doors, and in
wilderness. As the faithful ought now to do also, mountains, vvooddes,
lakes, prisons, and gulfes, being more fit for a Christian (as S. Li. cont.
Auxent. in fine.
Hilarie speaks) then the Churches: the Service and preaching in them, much
more altered, profaned, and blasphemous, then they were in the days of their
complaint.

Your prisons are the only schools now of true consolation, which no doubt
God gives you fully answerable unto, or rather surpassing the measure of your
afflictions, of what sort and greatness so ever they be, or seem to the
worldly, that have not the experience nor sense of such joys of consciences.
Death and dungeons be not so terrible things to Christ's souldiars, as they
seem to the unacquainted: because God gives not the taste of such his
comfortes to any, but such as are in the trauail for him.

Our Savior had in his greatest agony, Luc. 22.
an Angel sent to give him comfort: S. Steven the first Martyr after Christ,
Act. 6. 7.
for the most certain comfort of al Martyrs that should follow, savv heaven
open and the son of man standing on the right hand of God, him self in
cheereful and glorious countenance, like unto an Angel. 1. Pet. 1. 4.
S. Peter, that wills us to rejoice in our passions and sorrows suffered
for justice, Act. 12.
lacked not in his emprisonment and bands, the office of an Angel also, He and
the rest of the Apostles after whipping and reproach, Ib. c. 5. 16.
went away rejoicing in their hearts, that they were coumpted worthy so to
suffer: they sung psalms and hymns often in their prisons and chains: Dan.
3. 6. 4.
the Three children were joyful in the furnace of fire, Daniel in the lake,
S. Athanasius six years in a dry cesterne, and four months in his fathers
sepulcher: breefely, al such places were ever not only full of Divine
consolation, sufficient to the repulse of al contrary terrors and temptations
of the world, but also have been springs of spiritual joys and comforts to
others abroad. It is the prisons, that have yielded us so many godly prayers,
prophecies, letters, treatises, both of old and later years: diverse of S.
Paul's divine epistles were endited by the spirit of Confession in prison:
there were the famous books of Comfort written by Sir Thomas More, and many
mo goodly works in our time.

Therefore, dear brethren, we are to crave comfort of you, rather then to yield
any, praying you for our Lords love, that we may be partakers of your pains
and prayers, as we daily praise God, pray, and sacrifice for you, in to whose
services, sufferings, and bonds, we may by Christ's grace shortly succeed: if
it rather please not his wisdom (which we heartily and humbly with daily
tears desire) to move the Queen our Soueraines heart, to mercy and pity upon
her innocent subjects: and by his divine power to vvithhold her Royal assent
and hand from further making or executing of such laws as be against his
truth and glory, and must needs be the undoubted destruction of the Realm:
which shall be the surer way doubtless for her Ma.tie to procure both eternal
memory and commendation of cleme^cie with all the posterity, Ib. c. 5. 1
and mercy and pardon at the just, mighty, and terrible Gods hand, who takes
away the life of the Monarchs of the earth, Psalm. 75.
and calls them to dreadful judgment at his pleasure. Dan. 4.


To him first, be all honor, empire, and glory: and to his holy Israel the
Church, his peace and blessing: then tribute to Caesar, that is, all duty,
prosperity, and felicity in Christ, to our noble Prince and most dear
Country.

Psalm. 31. Viriliter agite, and confortetur cor vestrum, omnes qui speratis in
Domino. Your loving fellow and servant in Christ Jesus. WILLIAM ALLEN.

The faults in some copies escaped, let the gentle Reader amend thus.
Fo. 5. pa. 2. Perreiue, perceive. 14 form, from. 16. theatened, threatened. 18
Miletius, Meletius. 25 thervvise, otherwise. 59 for condemmation read
condemnation. 81 seditio^s, seditious. 85 unlearned, unarmed. 85 employed our
upon own their Country, employed upon their own Country. 85 upon, the
upon the. 119 Israriote Iscariote

