AN Excellent Poem, upon the longing of a blessed heart: which loathing the
world, does long to be with Christ. With an Addition, upon the definition of
love.

Compiled by Nicholas Breton, Gentleman.

Cupio dissolui, and esse cum Christo. Imprinted at London, for John Brown,
and John Deane, 1601.

To the Right Honorable, my singular good Lord, the Favorer of all good
Studies, and Lover of all virtues, the Lord North, Nicholas Breton wishes
increase of honor, continuance of health, and eternal happiness.
RIght Honorable, knowing the nature of men so different, that it is hard for
one to speak of all; and the delights of the most part of the world so far
from longing after heaven, that if the mercy of God were not the greater, the
Devil would make too great a Harvest on the Earth: sorry to see the
dispositions of the wicked, and wishing the number of the virtuous were
increased (among the which, if I might without flattery speak a truth, I
should note your Honor, for a kind of Phoenix among men) I have, upon my
knowledge of your worthynesse, in the good regard of all well disposed Spirits,
presumed, out of the humble Meditations of no worldly mind, to present your
Honor, with a little volume of the vain delights of the worldly, and the
better longinges of the godly. In which, I am persuaded, when your Honor, has
noted, what is love, and what is worth the loving, you will love me nothing the
worse, for my loves longing. But leaving to your honorable discretion, the
liking of my souls labor, and commandment of my hearts love: in the
humility of affectionate service, I rest

Your Honors, in all humble and bounden duty, Nicholas Breton.

To the Reader.
IF you love your self, or like to be loved, it were good, you did first know
what love is; where it is to be sought; and how to be had: which in this little
lesson following, you may hap to hit on. For if you mistake the matter, as
many have done, that set their wits a woll-gathering, upon the back of a
Woodcocke, in thinking love to be either nothing, or at least as little worth;
or such a kind of Riddle as is scarcely worth the reading: you may hap
either never find what it is, repent the seeking, or not care for the having
of it; or standing in your own light, be but little beloved for your lost
labor. But, if with the eye of a careful heart, you will look into the love
of the soul, there I would be glad to see you longing, and wish you (having
not to trouble you with more words then matter) the love of God, you to love me
as I do you, and God to love us all: and so I end.

Yours, in the love of charity, Nicholas Breton.

TWo hopeful Twins, joint issues of one brain,
A Ravished Soul, and longing Spirit sends
Into your bosoms high and heavenly train,
That are wits kinsemen, and the Muses friends.
Embrace them, love them, and with judgments view
Eye them. Believe me, Reader, thou shall find
Their limbs well measured, and proportions true;
No part dissenting from their perfect kind.
Only the fashion sits not on their clothes,
To make them sightly to fantastic eyes.
Pallas, not Venus, did the work dispose,
Cutting their garments from Angellicke skies.
Plain is their habit, yet Divine and sweet:
Fit for the wise, but for the wisest meet.
H. T. Gent.

Ad Librum.
Go Book, and balke those eyes,
That love but shadows sightes:
And let them gape for flies,
That make but Buzzards flights.
And tell the humble heart,
That longes in better love,
To him thou will impart
Thy spirits Turtle dove.
Whose flesh, the soul does feed,
With that eternal sweet,
Wherein hearts eyes may reed,
How life and love do meet,
To make the blessed see
The love, that longs best:
And what those longinges be,
Whose love is never blessed.
That love not misconceiu'd in thought,
May never long for that is naught.
Bretons Longing.
WHat life has he that never thinks of Love?
And what such love, but has a special liking?
And, what such liking, but will seek to prove?
The best to find, the comfort of his seeking?
But, while fond thoughts in follies pack are peeking,
Better conceited wits may easily find
The truest wealth that may enrich the mind.
But, since the difference twixt the good, and bad,
Is easily seen in notes of their delights:
And that those notes are needful to be had,
To see whose eyes are of the clearest sights:
Whose are the days, and whose may be the nights:
From the poor Crowch, unto the Princely Crown,
I will the difference, as I find, set down.
The worldly Prince longes to increase his State,
To conquer Kingdoms, and to wear their Crowns,
A foraine power, by forces to abate,
To make but foot-stooles, of their fairest Towns,
And, hates the spirits of those home-made Clownes,
That will not venture life for Victory,
But yet, forgets that God should have the glory.
The worldly Counselor does beat his brains,
How to advise his Sovereign for the best,
And in his place, does take continual pains,
To keep his Prince in such a pleasing rest,
That he may still be leaning on his breast,
Thinking his hap unto a heaven so wrought:
But yet perhaps, God is not in his thought.
The Soldier, he delights all in Arms,
To see his colors in the field displayed,
And longes to see the issue of those harms,
That may reveal an enemy dismayed,
A Fort defeated, or a Town betrayed,
And still to be in action, day and night:
But little thinks on God in all the fight.
The worldly Scholar loves a world of Books,
And spends his life in many an idle line:
Mean while his heart, to heaven but little looks,
Nor loves to think upon a thought divine:
These thoughts of ours (alas) so low incline,
We seek to know, what nature can effect:
But unto God, have small, or no respect.
The Poet, with his fictions, and his fancies,
Pleases himself with humorous inventions:
Which well considered, are a kind of franzies,
That carry little truth in their intentions:
While wit and reason, falling at contentions,
Make wisdom find, that follies strong illusion
Bringes wit and senses wholly to confusion.
The worldly Lawyer studyeth right and wrong:
But how he judges, there the question lies.
For, if you look for what his love does long,
It is the profit of his plea does rise,
There is the worldly Lawyers Paradise:
He neither longes, the right, nor wrong, to see:
But to be fingring of the golden fee.
The Cosmographer does the world survey,
The hills, and dales, the nookes and little crookes,
The woods, the plains, the high, and the by-way,
The Seas, the Rivers, and the little brooks:
All these he finds within his compast books;
And with his needle, makes his measure even:
But, all this whlie he does not think of heaven.
Th'Astronomer stands staring on the Sky,
And will not have a thought beneath a star:
But, by his speculation does epsy
A world of wonder, coming from afar;
And tells of times, and natures, peace and war:
Of Mars his sword, and Mercury his Rod:
But all this while, he little thinks on God.
The worldly Merchant ventreth far and near?
And shunnes nor Land, nor Sea to make a gain,
Thinks neither travail, care, nor cost too dear,
If that his profit counteruaile his pain,
While so his mind is on the getting vain,
That if his Ship, do safely come on shore,
Gold is his God, and he desires no more.
The worldly Courtier learnes to crouch and creep,
Speak fair, wait close, observe his time and place,
And wake, and watch and scarcely catch a sleep,
Till he have got into some favors grace,
And will all cunning in his course embrace,
That may unto Authority advance:
But if he think of God, it is a chance.
The worldly Farmer fills his Barnes with Corn,
And ploughes, and sowes, and digges, and delues, and hedges,
Looks to his Cattle, will not lose a horn,
Fels down his woods, and falls unto his wedges,
And grindes his Axes, and does mend their edges,
And dearly sels, that he good cheap has bought:
But, all the while God is not in his thought.
The Sayler, he does by his compass stand,
And weies his anchors, and does hoyse his sails,
And longes for nothing, but to get on land,
While many a storm his starting spirit quails,
And fear of Pirates, his poor heart assayles:
But once on shore, carowse and casts off fear,
Yet scarcely thinks on God that set him there.
The worldly Preacher talks of Sacrifice,
Of Sacraments, and holy Mysteries:
Mean while, he longes but for the Benefice,
That should preserve his purse from beggeries,
Because he loves no worldly miseries.
For many a Preacher, that Gods word has taught,
Shows by his life, God lives not in his thought.
The worlds Physician, that in sickness tries
The nature of the herbs and Minerals:
And, in his simples, and his compounds spies,
Which way to make the Patients funerals,
Or profit by his Cures in generals,
Longes but to see how long they may endure:
But scarcely thinks on God in all the Cure.
The worlds Musician, that does tune his voice,
Unto such notes as Musiques skill has set:
Whose heart does in the harmony rejoice,
Where pleasing Consorts are most kindly met:
But still perhaps his spirit does forget,
In all his himnes, and songs, and sweetest lays,
To think of God, or of his worthy praise.
The Politician has a world of plots,
In which his spirit has his special spies,
Ties, and unties a Thousand sundry knots,
In which the substance of his study lies:
And many tricks his close experience tryes,
How to deceive the world with many a wile:
But never thinks on God in all the while.
The Trauailer delights in the view
Of change and choice of sundry kind of creatures:
To mark the habites, and to note the hew
Of far borne people, and their sundry natures,
Their shapes, their speech, their gates, their looks, their features,
And longes abroad to make his life's abode:
Yet happ'ly never longes to be with God.
The Painter in his colors takes delight,
And near the life, to make the liuelyhood:
While only shadows do deceive the sight,
That take such pleasure in a piece of wood:
But does not long for that same living food,
Which neither eye has seen, nor heart conceived,
The God of truth, that never soul deceived.
The Lover, he, but on his Lady thinks,
And how to catch her in a kind content,
And looks, and leeres, and trowles the eye, and winketh,
And seeks how thoughts in silence may be sent,
And longes to see the end of his intent,
And thinks himself a King, to get a kiss:
But where is God, in all these thoughts of his?
Th'Artificer that has a work to do,
And bringes his hand unto his heads devise,
Longes till he see, what it will come unto,
And how his pains have profit in the price,
And having cast it over twice or thrice,
Joys in his heart: but scarcely has a thought,
To thank his God, that him the cunning taught.
The Churl, that sits and champes upon his chafe,
And will not stir a foot from his Barn flower,
Except it be, among his bags to laugh,
He can the poor so with his purse devour,
Longes but to use the poison of his power,
To Enrich himself, to bring a world to naught,
Shows, that God never dwells within his thought.
As for those beggarly conditions
Of basest trades, that like to miry hogs,
Do show their spirits dispositions,
In digging with their noses under logges,
For slime and worms: or like to ravening dogs,
Long but for that, which does the belly fill,
Most of them think on God against their will.
These are the worldlinges, and their worlds delights,
Whose longing, God knows, is not worth the loving:
These are the objects of those evil sights,
That virtue has from her fair eyes remoouing.
These are the passions of corruptions proouing:
But, they that love, and long for God his sight,
In worldly trifles never take delight.
The Prince anointed with the oil of grace,
Who sits with mercy, in the seat of peace,
Will long to see his Savior in the face,
And, all his right into his hands release,
(Whose only sight would make all sorrow cease)
And lay both Crown, and Kingdom at his feet,
But of his presence to enjoy the sweet.
The Counselor with heavenly grace inspired,
Where wisdom guides the lineaments of wit,
Although he has to honors place aspired,
His heart does show, it longes not after it:
His love desires, a higher mark to hitte:
For while he leans on his Princes breast,
His longing is, but with his God to rest.
The Courtier, that is once in God his grace,
What ever countenance in the Court he bears,
His heart aspireth to a better place:
Which humble love does long for with those tears,
Which all too naught, the pride of pleasure wears,
And never rests until his God he see,
With whom his soul in love does long to be.
The Soldier, that has fought the spirits fight,
Will put off war, and long to live in peace,
And not in discord, but concord delight,
Where gracious kindness, makes all quarrels cease,
While patience, does all passions so appease,
That, he shall find that Soldier only blessed,
Whose faith, in God, does set his soul at rest.
The Lawyer, that has read the Laws of God,
And in his heart is touched with his love:
And knows the smart of the supernall Rod,
Will one day work, for silly souls behoue.
Who have their comfort in the heavens above,
Will leave all golden fees, to see the grace,
That mercies justice shows in Jesus face.
The Scholar, that begins with Christ his cross,
And seeks good speed, but in the holy Ghost,
Finds by his book, that silver is but dross,
And all his labor, in his study lost,
Where faith, of mercy, cannot sweetly boast,
And love does long for any other bliss,
Then, what in God, and in his grace is.
And such a Poet as the Psalmist was,
Who had no mind, but on his Masters love:
Whose Muses did the world in Music pass,
That only soong but of the souls behoue,
In giving glory to the God above,
Would all worlds fictions wholly lay aside,
And only long, but with the Lord to bide.
The Cosmographer, that by rules of grace,
Surueys the City of the heavenly Saints,
Will never long for any earthly place,
That either pen prescribes, or Painter paints:
But in the faith, that never fails, nor faints,
Will long to see in heavens Jerusalem,
The gracious God of glories Diadem.
The true Astronomer, that sees the Sun,
And knows that God, from whom it takes his light,
And in the course, the Moon and stars do run,
Finds the true guider of the day and night,
Longes but to see his only blessed sight,
Who Sun, and Moon, and stars their brightness gives,
And, in whose face, all brightness glory lives.
The Mariner, that often has past the Seas,
And in his perils, seen the power of God,
Whose only mercy does the storms appease,
And bringes the Ship unto his wished Road,
Will never long, on earth to make abode:
But in the heavens, to see that blessed hand,
That, at his beck, so rules both Sea and Land.
The Merchant, that has cast within his mind,
How much the spirits gain the flesh surmounts,
And by his faith, in mercies love does find
The joyful sum of such a souls accounts,
As to salvation of the whole amounts,
Will leave the world, but on Christ's face to look,
Which all the faithful make their living Book.
The Farmer, that has felt his neighbors need,
And found, how God, and charity are one:
And knows there is a better kind of feed,
Then grass, or Corn, or flesh, or blood, or bone,
Will wish himself from his worlds treasure gone,
Upon those joys to feed in mercies bliss,
Where Christ his presence is heavens Paradise.
The true Physician that does know the natures,
And dispositions of each Element,
And knows that God created has all Creatures
Beneath, and eke above the Firmament,
And over all, has only Government,
Will only long that glorious God to know,
That gives the sickness and does cure it so.
The souls Musician, that does find the ground,
Of truest Music, but in God his grace,
Will think all singing, but an idle sound,
Where God his praise has not the highest place,
And only longes to see that blessed face,
Which makes the Virgins, Saints, and Angels sing,
An Halleluiah, to their heavenly King.
The Preacher, that does in his soul believe
The word of God, which to the world he teaches,
And in his spirit inwardly does grieve,
He cannot live so heavenly as he preaches,
While faith no further then to mercy reaches,
Would wish in soul, to leave his Benefice,
To make himself to Christ a Sacrifice.
The Politician, that has plotted much,
In worldly matters greatly to his gain,
Will find, if God do once his spirit tuch,
Zacheus heart will have another vain,
To clime aloft, and to come down again,
And leave all plots, to come but to that place,
Where he might see sweet Jesus in the face.
Th'Artificer, that has a work in hand,
And feels the grace of God within his heart:
And by the same, does surely understand,
How God alone perfecteth every part,
And only is the giver of all Art,
Will gladly leave his work, and long to be,
Where he might Christ his souls worke-maister see.
The Painter, that does paint a dainty Image,
So near the life as may be to the same,
And makes an Ass unto an Owl do homage,
While shadows bring the senses out of frame,
If God his heart, once with his love inflame,
His Pictures all will under foot be trod,
And he will long, but for the living God.
The Trauailer, that walks the world about,
And sees the glorious works of God on high,
If God his grace once kindly find him out,
And unto heaven do lift his humble eye,
His soul in faith, will such perfections spy,
That leaving all, that he on earth can see,
His love will long, but with the Lord to be.
The Churl, that never chaunc't upon a thought
Of charity, nor what belonges thereto,
If God his grace, have once his spirit brought,
To feel what good the faithful almers do,
The love of Christ will so his spirit woo,
That he will leave Barnes corn, and bags of Coin,
And land and life, with Jesus love to join.
Thus, from the Prince, unto the poorest state,
Who seems to live, as void of reasons sense,
If God once come, who never comes too late,
And touch the soul, with his sweet Quintessence
Of mercies gracious glorious patience:
His soul will leave what ever it does love,
And long to live, but with the Lord above.
Now, to the tenure of that longing time,
That loving spirits think too long will last,
The maid new married, in her pregnant prime,
Longes till the time of forty weeks be past,
And blames time, he makes no greater have,
Till in her arms, she sweetly have received,
Her Comfortes fruit within her womb conceived.
Thus forty weeks, she labors all in love,
And at the last does travail all in pain:
But, shortly after does such comfort prove,
As glads her heart, and makes all whole again:
So, in her Infants pretty smiling vain,
Pleasing her self, that all her grief is gone,
When she may have her babe to look upon.
Penelope, at her dear loves departing,
In sober kindness did conceal her care:
Though in her heart she had that inward smarting,
That times continuance after did declare:
Where constant love did show, without compare,
A perfect passion of true virtues vain,
Longing but for Ulysses home again.
How many years, the Story does set down,
In which she felt, the gall of absence grief:
When constant faith, on foul effects did frown,
Which sought to be to charity a thief,
Of natures beauty, the true honor chief:
Long languishing in absence cruel hell:
But, when she saw his presence all is well.
But, if I may in holy lines begin,
To speak of Joseph* and his longing love
Unto his brethren, but to Benjamin
To note the passion, nature did approve,
Which did such tears in his affection move,
That well from thence, the Prouetbe sweet might spring,
The love of Brethren is a blessed thing.
Well may I see the notes of natures grief,
In absence of the object of affection:
And longing for the substance of relief,
In presence find the life of loves perfection,
While eye, and heart, are led by one direction.
Yet all this while, I do not truly prove
The blessed longing of the spirits love.
When Mary Magdalene, so full of sin,
As made her heart a harbor of ill thought,
Felt once the grace of God to enter in,
And drive them out that her destruction sought:
Her soul was then to Jesus love so wrought,
As that with tears in true affect did prove
The pleasing longing of the Spirits love.
In grief she went all weeping to his grave,
Longing to see him, or alive or dead:
And would not cease until her love might have
Her longed fruit on which her spirit fed:
One blessed crumme of that sweet heavenly bread
Of Angels food, but of her Lord a sight;
Whose heavenly presence proved her souls delight.
Midas did long for nothing else bur Gold,
And he was kindly choked for his choice:
Such longing love does with too many hold,
Which only do in worldly dross rejoice.
But did they hearken to the heavenly voice,
Their Diamondes should not so for dross be sold,
And they would long for God, and not for gold.
Zacheus, too long, longed for such dross,
Till Jesus came, his spirits further joy;
And then he found his gain did yield but loss,
While sin in conscience bred the souls annoye,
And unto heaven the world was but a toye:
He left it all and climed up a tree,
To show his longing, how but Christ to see.
And well he longd that so his love received;
Who sweetly saw, and kindly called him down:
His stature low; but his love high conceived:
Who so was graced by mercies glories crown,
As, having cause upon his sins to frown,
Forgave the works that did deserve damnation,
And filled his house with glory of salvation.
A blessed longing of a blessed Love.
Would so all souls did love, and so did long:
And in their longing might so sweetly prove
The gracious ground of such a glorious song,
As kills all sin, that does the spirit wrong:
And sing with Simeon at his Saviors sight,
Oh now my soul depart in peace delight.
Oh blessed Simeon, blessed was thy love,
And thy Loves longing for thy Savior so:
Who wrought so sweetly for thy souls behoue,
As, from thy prayers would not let thee go,
Till to thy love, he did his presence show:
Which made thee sing, when sorrows all did cease;
Lord, let thy Servant now depart, in peace.
For I, according to thy word, have seen
The glorious substance of my souls salvation:
Thy word, in whom my trust has ever been,
And now has found my comforts confirmation,
Thus did he make a joyful declaration
Of that sweet sight of his sweet Saviors face,
That was the glory of his spirits grace.
How many years, he all in prayer spent,
For the beholding of his blessed love:
What was the issue of his hopes event,
And how his prayers did prevail above,
That so his God did unto mercy move,
As to his arms, to send his only Son,
The Story does all The Apostles run.
He was well called, good Simeon, for that grace,
That God had given the spirit of his love:
That love that longed, but in his Saviors face,
To see the blessing of his souls behoue:
And blessed prayer, that did truly prove,
A blessed soul, that could not prayer cease,
Till Christ his presence came to give it peace.
So should all souls, their Loves chief longing have,
All souls I mean, of every Christian heart,
That seek or hope, both heart and soul to save,
From Hell, damnation, and supernall smart:
This is the love, that in the living part,
Of mercies power, shall find that blessedness,
That is the spirits only happiness.
Nor can love look to limit out a time,
But now, and then, and evermore attend:
For he shall never to that comfort clime,
That will not all his life in prayer spend,
Until he see his Savior in the end:
In whose sweet face, does all and only rest
The heavenly joy, that makes the spirit blessed.
Blessed be the spirit, that so longs and loves
As did Zacheus and good Simeon:
And, from his faithful prayer never mooues,
Until he find his life to look upon:
And, in such love is all so over gone,
That, in such joy his heart and spirit dwells,
As, having Christ, it cares for nothing else.
Oh blessed Christ, the essence of all bliss,
All blessed souls loves longings chief delight:
What heart can think, how that soul blessed is,
That ever has his Sauiou^r in his sight?
The sunny day that never has a night.
Oh that my spirit might so ever pray,
That I might live to see that blessed day.
The day that only springs from on high,
That high day light, wherein the heavens do live:
The life that loves, but to behold that eye,
Which does the glory of all brightness give,
And from th'enlightned, does all darkness drive:
Where Saints do see, and Angels know to be
A brighter light, then Saints or Angels see.
In this lights love, Oh, let me ever live,
And let my soul have never other love,
But, all the pleasures of the world to give,
The smallest spark of such a joy to prove,
And ever pray unto my God above,
To grant my humble soul good Simeons grace,
In love to see my Savior in the face.
O face more fair, then fairness can contain:
O eye more bright then brightness can declare:
O light more pure, then passion can explain:
O life more blessed, then may with bliss compare:
O heaven of heavens, where such perfections are,
Let my soul live to love, to long, to be
Ever in prayer, but to look on thee.
But, oh unworthy eye of such a sight:
And all unworthy heart of such a love:
Unworthy love, to long for such a light:
Unworthy longing such a life to prove:
Unworthy life, so high a suit to move.
Thus, all unworthy of so high a grace,
How shall I see my Savior in the face.
All by the prayer of true penitence,
Where faith in tears attends graces time,
My Soul does hope in mercies patience,
My heart all cleansed from my sinful crime,
To see the springing of Auroras prime,
In those bright beams of that sweet blessed Sun
Of my dear God, in whom all bliss begun.
And that my soul may such a blessing see,
Let my heart pray, and praying never cease,
Till heart and soul may both together be:
Blessed in thy sight all sorrows does release:
And with good Simeon then depart in peace.
Oh then; but then, and only ever then,
Blessed be my soul, sweet Jesus say Amen.
Gloria in excelsis Deo.
What is Love.
MEn talk of love, that know not what it is.
For could we know what love may be indeed,
We would not have our minds so led amiss,
With idle toys, that wanton humors feed:
But, in the rules of higher reason read
What love may be, so from the world concealed:
Yet, all too plainly, to the world revealed.
Some one does feign, Love is a blinded God,
His blindness, him more half a Devil shows.
For Love, with blindness, never made abode:
Which all the power of wit and reason knows:
And from whose grace, the ground of knowledge grows:
But such blind eyes, that can no better see,
Shall never live to come, where love may be.
Some only think it only is a thought,
Bred in the eye, and buzzeth in the brain,
And breaks the heart, until the mind be brought,
To feed the senses, with a sortie vain,
Till wits once gone, come never home again:
And then too late, in mad conceit do prove,
Fantastic wits are ever void of love.
Some think it is a babe of beauties getting,
Nursed up by Nature, and times only breeding:
A pretty work, to set the wits a whetting,
Upon a fancy of an humors feeding;
Where reason finds but little sense in reeding.
No, no: I see, children must go to School;
Philosophy is not for every fool.
And, some again think there is no such thing*
But in conceit, a kind of coined Jest:
Which only does of idle humors spring,
Like to a Bird within a Phoenix nest;
Where never yet did any young one rest.
But let such fools take heed of blasphemy:
For love is high in his Divinity.
But to be short, to learn to find him out,
It Is not in beauties eyes, nor babyes hearts:
He must go beat another world about,
And seek for love, but in those living parts
Of reasons light, that is the life of Arts;
That will perceive, though he can never see
The perfect essence whereof love may be.
It is too clear a brightness for man's eye:
Too high a wisdom for his wits to find:
Too deep a secret for his sense to try:
And, all too heavenly, for his earthly mind*
It is a grace of such a glorious kind,
As gives the soul, a secret power to know it.
But gives no heart, nor spirit power to show it.
It is of heaven and earth the highest beauty,
The powerful hand of heavens and earths creation*
The due commander of all spirits duty,
The Deity of Angels Adoration:
The glorious substance of the souls salvation:
The light of Truth, that all perfection tries,
And life that gives the life that never dies.
It is the height of God, and hate of ill,
Triumph of Truth, and falsehoods overthrow:
The only worker of the highest will;
And only knowledge, that does knowledge know:
And only ground where it does only grow:
It is in sum the substance of all bliss,
Without whose blessing all thing nothing is.
But in it self, it self, it all contains:
And from it self, but of it self it gives:
It nothing loses, and it nothing gains,
But in the glory of it self, it lives:
A joy, which soon away all sorrow drives:
The proved truth, of all perfections story,
Our God incomprehensible in glory.
Thus, is it not a Riddle to be read:
And yet, a secret to be found in reading:
But, when the heart ioynes issue with the head,
In settled faith to seek the spirits feeding,
While in the wounds that ever fresh are bleeding,
In Christ his side, the faithful soul may see,
In perfect life, what perfect love may be.
No further seek, then for to find out love,
Then in the lives of everliving bliss,
Where careful conscience may in comfort prove,
In sacred love, that heavenly substance is,
That never guides the gracious mind amiss:
But makes the soul, to find in life's behoue,
What thing indeed, end nothing else is love?
Then make no doubt of either good or bad,
If this or that, in substance, or in thought:
And by what means, it may be sought or had:
Whereof it is, and how it may be wrought:
Let it suffice the word of truth has taught,
It is the grace, but of the living God,
Before beginning, that with him abode.
It brought forth power to work, wisdom to will,
Justice to judge, Mercy to execute,
Virtue to plant, Charity to fill,
Time to direct, Truth falsehood to confute,
Pity to plead, in pemtences suite,
Patience to bide, and peace to give the rest,
To prove how love does make the spirit blessed.
And this is God, and this same God is love.
For God, and love in charity are one:
And charity is that same God above,
In whom does live that only love alone,
Without whose grace, true love is never none.
Then seek no further, what is love to find?
But only carry God within thy mind.
Leave in the world to look for any love:
For on the earth is little faith to find;
And faithless hearts, in too much truth do prove
Love does not live, where care is so unkind:
Men in their natures differ from their kind.
Sin fills the world so full of secret evils:
Men should be Gods to men, but they are devils.
Christ loved to death, yet love did never die.
For, love, by death, did work the death of death.
Oh living love, oh heavenly Mystery,
To great a glory, for this world beneath;
The blessed breathing, of the highest breathe,
Blessed are they borne, that only find in thee,
Oh blessed God, what blessed love: nay be.
Let then the Poets leave their idle humors,
That write of love where there is no such thing:
And let the world not hearken to those rumors,
That speak of love, or whence that life does spring:
Except it be in this our blessed king,
And Lord of life, in whom our fowls may prove
The only life of everliving love.
Let wantons weep, that laughing sought for love,
Within the Gems of their mistaken joys:
And turn with tears, that perfect path to prove,
That leads the spirit, from the worlds annoyes,
Unto that treasure, that admits no toys:
But in the riches of the soul does prove
The heavenly life of blessed spirits love.
And, let the wise (if any such there be,
As God forbid, but there were many such,
That in their souls by secret wisdom see,
In the true trial of true virtues touch,
The worth that faith can not affect too much)
Confess, they find, in trueths effects alone,
That God is love, without whom there is none.
Amidde the sky, there is one only sun,
Amidde the air, one only Phoenix flies:
One only Time, by which all hours do run:
One only life, that lives and never dies:
One only eye, that every thought descries:
One only light, that shows one only love:
One only love, and that is God above.
To say yet further, what this love may be,
It is a holy heavenly excellence,
Above the power of any eye to see,
Or wit to find by worlds experience:
It is the spirit of life's Quintessence:
Whose rare effects, may partly be perceived:
But to the full, can never be conceived.
It is repentance sweet restoratiue,
The Rosa solis, the ficke soul reuiueth,
It is the faithful hearts preservative:
It is the haven, where happy grace arriueth;
It is the life, that death of power depriueth:
It is in sum, the everlasting bliss,
Where, God alone in all his glory is.
It is a joy that never comes in jest:
A comfort, that does cut off every care;
A rule, wherein the life of life does rest,
Where all the faithful find their happy fare,
A good, that does but only God declare.
A line, that his right hand does draw so even,
As leads the soul, the high way unto heaven.
If then henceforth you ask what thing is love:
In light, in life, in grace, in God, go look it:
And if in these you do not truly prove,
How, in your hearts, you may for ever book it;
Unhappy think yourselues, you have mistook it.
For why the life that death has ouer-trod,
Is but the love of Grace: and that is God.
All kind of love but this, is but mistaken:
And all conceit but this, is misconceiued:
All kind of love but this must be forsaken:
All trust, but in this truth may be deceived:
All in this love, all truth may be perceived:
All hearts belief, and all souls seal unto it,
All what is good, this love does only do it.
What shall I say? but it is beyond my saying,
To tell you all may of this love be said:
And yet, that truth be free from all betraying,
That has no more, then what she knows, bewrayed,
Let me but stay, but where as she has staid,
And say but this as I have said before,
That love is God, and I can say no more.
Solus Amor Deus.
Solus in toto laudandus Deus.
OH blessed love, the life of blessedness,
If ever thou did ^elpe a sinners heart,
Behold my tears, and in thy holiness,
Assist my spirit with thy sacred Art,
That all the world may joy to hear me sing
The holy praises of my heavenly King.
Inspire me with that understanding power,
Which may conceive, and by desert commend
The top of truth on that triumphant Tower,
Where graces dwell, and glories never end:
Let some such Angel help me in devising,
As speaks of praise in glories ever rising.
Oh love, how gracious is that beauty held,
That gives the world but shadows to behold!
But, oh what glory may thou justly yield,
Unto that life, which does thy life unfold!
And while all shadows fade, and fall away,
Is ever bright, and never can decay.
In natures beauty, all the best can be
Are shadowing colors to deceive the eye:
But in this beauty, may our spirits see
A light wherein we live, and cannot die;
A light whereby we see that most auailes us,
The comfort of our faith, that never fails us.
How bountiful is that fair hand accounted,
That of his store, a little stinte bestows!
But, how in bounty has that hand surmounted,
That ever giving, asking ouer-goeth:
And for no gift, shall in true grace be scanting,
Does give it self, to see no comfort wanting.
How wise is he, that teaches how to wielde
The world at will, by wicked wits devise!
But wiser much that finds that wit beguiled,
That never seeks the way to Paradise:
Oh blessed love, none but thy Lord of light
Does give the soul that perfect heavenly light.
How kind is he, that does his friend relieve,
In time of need, of worldly minds reputed?
But he that helps the heart, that him does grieve,
To such a mind, what praise may be imputed!
How kind is then our Christ, let his death try,
Who hated sin, yet did for sinners die.
How valiant is he held, that can subdue,
By force of hand, the fury of his foe!
But, in whose hand such valor ever grew,
As gave both death and hell their overthrow?
None but thy Lord my love, that God of light,
Who makes all powers to tremble at his sight.
How patient is that poor conceit esteemed,
That can put up a wrong, or cross, or two?
But, how more patient may our Christ be deemed,
That bare all wrongs that all the world could do!
Oh, peerless pattern of true patience power,
That conquered death, in passions dying hour!
How just is he, who as the Law does bear,
The likeliest truth his judgment does pronounce!
But, how more just, whom neither hope nor fear
Could ever move to challenge or denounce!
Sweet Jesus Christ, who never Caesar wrongeth,
And gives to God, that unto God belongs.
How gracious is that creature to be thought,
That does repent him of his wickedness!
But, how more gracious, in whom God has wrought
The perfect height of Graces holiness!
It is thy life, my love, our Lord and God,
Who by his Grace, all sin has ouer-trod.
How comfortable is esteemd that hand,
That heales the sick, although not near to death!
But, what more comfort in that power does stand,
Then to the dead can give a living breath!
My love thou know that Lazarus can tell,
When Mary's tears did please our master well.
What should I in particulars proceed?
When all and sum, that heaven and earth can show*
Are short to find how far he does exceed
The praise of praise, where highest praises go.
But, worship him in whom all Graces live,
Worthy more glory then the world can give.
And since my God and everliving Lord,
All in himself, all height of glory holds:
And to the faithful only does afford
No more to know, them mercies care unfolds:
Let my souls love but humbly fall before him,
In admiration, wholly to adore him.
For beauty, bounty, wisdom, valor, kindness,
Grace, patience, comfort, justice, truth, perfection:
In whom all these do live, what reasons blindness
Can think to reach in praises due perfection?
Where in the height, to have all glory sounded,
Both heavens and earth, and Angels are confounded.
And since far more then most that can be thought,
Lives in the light of his incomprehension:
Which never sense, that ever proudly sought,
But perished in the instant of intention:
Ler my soul sing, when all hearts strings are broken,
His praise is more, then can in praise be spoken.
Gloria in excelsis Deo.
When the Angels all are singing,
All of glory ever springing,
In the ground of high heavens graces,
Where all virtues have their places:
Oh that my poor soul were near them,
With an humble heart to hear them.
Then should faith in loves submission,
Ioying but in mercies blessing,
Where that sins are in remission,
Sing the joyful souls confessing,
Of her comforts high commending,
All in glory, never ending.
But, ah wretched sinful creature,
How should the corrupted nature
Of this wicked heart of mine,
Think upon that love divine,
That does tune the Angels voices,
While the host of heaven reioyces!
No, the song of deadly sorrow,
In the night, that has no morrow,
And their pains are never ended,
That have heavenly powers offended,
Is more fitting to the merit,
Of my foul infected spirit.
Yet while mercy is remoouing
All the sorrows of the loving,
How can faith be full of blindness?
To despair of mercies kindness,
While the hand of heaven is giving,
Comfort from the everliving.
No, my soul be no more sorry:
Look unto that life of glory,
Which the grace of faith regards,
And the tears of love rewards:
Where the soul the comfort gets,
That the Angels music sets.
There when thou art well conducted,
And by heavenly grace instructed,
How the faithful thoughts to fashion
Of a ravished lovers passion:
Sing with saints, to Angels nighest,
Halleluiah, in the highest.
Gloria in excelsis Deo.

