A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE GLORIOUS MARTYRDOM OF XII. REVEREND Priests, executed
within these twelve months for confession and defense of the CATHOLIC
FAITH. But under the false pretense of TREASON. With a note of sundry things
that befell them in their life and imprisonment: and a preface declaring their
innocence. Set forth by such as were much conversant with them in their life,
and present at their arraignement and death.

Occidistis, sed non possedistis.

that is

You have slain them, but you have not gotten possession.

1582.

THE NAMES OF THESE GLORIOUS MARTYRS WITH the day and year of their suffering.
FATHER Edmund Campion of the society of JESUS. the j. of December. 1581. M.
Raph Shervvine. the same day. M. Alexander Bryan. the same day. M. Thomas Ford.
the xxviij. of May, 1582. M. John Sherte. the same day. M. Robert Johnson. the
same day. M. William Philbee. the xxx. of May, 1582. M. Luke Kirbie. the same
day. M. Lavvrence Richardson alias Johnson, the same day. M. Thomas Cottam. the
same day. M. John Pain. the ij. of April, 1582. M. Euerard Haunse. the last of
July, 1581.
THE PREFACE TO the Reader.
IT was ever the fashion of the heathen, but much more of Apostatats and
Heretics reuoulted from the Church: when they deadly hated and persecuted the
CATHOLIC CHRISTIANS, and specially GODS PRIESTS: being the guides and Pastors
of that flock they seek to destroy, yet of purpose and policy, pretend
other causes of their punishment more hateful to the world then matter of
faith and conscience.

So did the Arrian Emperors and their Bishops accuse Holy Athanasius of
Nigromancie, Ruffin histo.
aduolterie and conspiracy. So did the president of Pontus an officer of
Valens the heretical prince, Naz. orat. De Basilio.
persecut S. Basil for his religion, but under pretense of an other crime, in
so much that to the wonder of the world, he caused his chamber which the Angels
of God (as S. Gregory Nazianzen writes) did reverence for purity, to be
sought by his officers for a woman. So did Iulianus the Apostata, Tripart.
lib. 6. c. 27.
endeavoring to extinguishe the Christian faith, and to prefer Paganism,
condemn the Clergy to death and exile: under pretense of diverse crimes, and
namely of sedition falsely forged against them So did the Vandals being
Heretics also, Victor de persecut. Vandalic.
extremely plage the Catholics in Aphrike: accusing them that they had secret
conference by messengers and letters with the Romans against them. So did the
Emperesse Theodora a vvoma^ of the Eutichian heresy, cruelly persecut Pope
Siluerius and the Clergy: saying that her counsel had intercepted their
letters whereby they called in the Goths and foreign power to invade the
City of Rome and the Empire, So thy now feign interception of letters, for the
condemnation of holy men.
when all the world knevv she persecuted them for their religion, and that they
were neue^ guilty of any such offenses.

This shamful sutteltie and too foul and broad deceit was never so
notoriously used as in the late persecutions and practices of protestants,
specially in England against the CATHOLICS: in which, such as are not skilful
in the old histories of the Church, may as in a glass behold at once all the
miseries that she has suffered in this kind of calumniation by the Arians,
the Goths, the Vandals, the Lumbards, the Donatistes, Eutichians, Mahometists,
Hussists, Hugonots, and by what other sort in times past or present so ever. I
need not put you in mind ho^ not many years sithence they arraigned to the
great shame and confusion, the most Reverend father and Confessor, The
arraignement of the Archbishop of Armakan. See the story of his death.
the Archbishop of Armakan for rape: or how the Ministers of Satan charged of
late the blessed Martyr and Priest of God M. Thomas Cottam at his execution,
with adultery committed in Fish-streat, or such like damnable fictions: which
without al free of God or shame of men, the protestants print, preach, and give
out wittingly against Priests, religious and Catholics, to beguile the poor
people most subject to such trumperie, through their simplicity.

The meani^g of the author in this treatise.
My meaning is specially by Gods help to set forth in English and lay before the
eyes of al those of our realm that were not present at the deaths or
arraignement of the late famous men and Martyrs, M. Campion and his happy
fellows: and in latin and other langages to the whole Christian world for a
spectacle of heretical cruelty and Macheuillian practices, how by coulor of
contrived treason and conspiracy (the cause in dede-being religion) the
ennemies of the Christian faith have shed their innocent blood to the infinite
shame of our Nation before men, and no less peril of destruction of our whole
common wealth, by Gods just judgment: who ever reuengeth such public
iniquity by inducing some great and common calamity: NOTE.
from which CHRIST of his mercy, save our country, for their sake (which are
innumerable) that have not consented to this iniquity, how soever it seem
otherwise to proceed from public authority.

But to the matter: after that it was agreed upon by such as God has given
power over us, that the holy Confessors whom they had in their hands should be
made away, because diverse of the^ were far better learned then any of their
sect could withstand: and al so zealous, as none could stir them from their
faith and fellowship of the CATHOLIC AND ROMAIN CHVRCH, thinking it not good
to kill them for their religion, they sought out with al art and diligence
how to find or feign handsomely any matter that coulorably might be drawn to
treason, or any capital crime, in the old sense of our laws.

The causes why they would not put them directly for their faith and conscience
to death (Notvvithstanding they had not long before made diverse laws forcible
enough for that purpose, The causes why they rather executed them for
pretended treason, the^ true religion.
whereby sundry principles and exercises of CHRISTIAN FAITH were made HIGH
TREASON, a lamentable case, that our country is fallen to) were these, partly
common to al old heretics, partly peculier to our country and present state.

of al hands to be punishable. Athiests now a days whom men call, honestly
politikes: seems not material any farther then as it pertains to the
preservation or destruction of the civil state.

Seeking the destruction of both sorts they would put at variance the
Catholics amongst the^ selves.
brings the zealous Catholics and namely Gods Priests into great hatered not
only amongst the protestants, but among others well affected in religion,
though not so strong to stand to the loss of their life and goods: whereby
they subtily seek to make a division between the two sorts of weaker and
stronger Catholics, for the easier overthrow of them both, in deed hating
and fering no less the closse dissembler, then open professor.



Upon these and such like wordly considerations they did not only pretend to
endite condemn and execute them for contrived treason against the Q. own
rial person and realm: specifying for the better couloring of the collusion,
days, places, persons and manner of executing their intents: but therevvith
denounced and protested publicly, both in open court and printed proclamation
and books, that they meant nothing in all this bloddy pursuit for any matter of
religion or conscience.

But God that straight discovered this cruel stratageme, The persecutors put to
double shame.
and easily ouer-reacheth the wisdom of the wise, speadely has met with their
humane counsails and put the persecutors, to double confusion in the sight of
the whole world. once for making them away in deed for religion, for which
they were neither arraigned nor condemned: and secondly, for killing them for
that offense which at the rack, bar, and their death, they inuincibly
shevved them selves in the sight and conscience as well of Protestants as
Catholics, to be as innocent as any Saint or Angel in heaven. Whereupon
though some fevve hot Puritans, were well contended to see them by what means
so ever out of their way: yet the more prudent of every sort marueled much at
that vnvvonted impolitique proceeding, Error in government.
being very sorovvful to see thereby her M honorable justice, and her most
grave counselors actions, so notoriously and coulorably subjected to reprofe,
as in no case in man's memory, or in the records of antiquity, has been
lightely marked the like. Whereof I could report the very words and
communication of certain principal persons of service the day of arraignement,
and actors in that bloddy tragedy, complaining after their departure thence one
to an other of the matter and of the shame of that days work.

But I may not name them, lest they should incur danger thereby: though if
any of our adversaries stand with me against the truth thereof, I will not
stick, though to their some little rebuke, to utter to Gods honor and these his
blessed Saints, who for the double confusion their persecutors have received,
By their practice the Saints of God, have received double honor.
are doubly glorified, first with the crown of Martyrdom for confession of
their faith, which was the true cause of their death: and also with the noble
renome and reward of such, as be innocent of the fault: whereof they were
executed, which was the case of Abel, and others murdered through envy or
malice of man, specially as Naboth was by false accusation, that he had spoken
words against God and the king.

Which kind of iniquity used against innocent men, makes their deaths also
precious in our Lords sight. And men also of what religion or conscience so
ever, when they see any man (howsoever he otherwise deserves) to be guiltles
of the crime for which he dies, they pity the case naturally, and condemn in
their hearts and detest, that injurious course of proceeding in place where
justice and judgment should reign.

Which also has drawn many (thanks be to God) to consider better of the
true cause of their punishment, which was the CATHOLIC RELIGION, and of the
protestants actions and conscienceles faith, Protestants conscienceles.
that can not be vpholden but by such sinful policy and patchery. Trevvly for
us that through CHRIST'S grace be Catholic, if they had not used this matter in
such an odd sort, to bring not only these men of God, They them selves have
ministered the cause of al these vvritings in defense of Gods Saints.
but the whole Catholic flock of Christ's afflicted CHVRCH in our country,
into the sclaunderous suspision and obloquie of crimes never thought of: but
only executed their new laws against them, and made them away for religion
without more a do, we should never have complained of any farther iniquity or
violence done against us, but have compted it as an act proceeding of their
erroneous conscience and unskillful zele in condemning the professors of truth,
for false teachers. But now upon this double witting and wilful iniquity, if
we should hold our peace, heaven and earth would condemn us, and we should be
partakers of the vengeance that the cry of this innocent and sacred blood
calls for at Gods hand against their persecutors.

Alas we that knevv them to the very bottom of their hearts, The testimony of
Ca^holikes with whom they lived.
with whom they conuersed so sincerely and confidently, in whose houses they
were harbored so often, what they daily talked in all familiarity and secrecy,
heard our confessions, delivered us the holy Sacraments, preached to us so
commonly, and yet never heard word nor half word of these supposed intentions
against her M. and the state: though their false accusers say it was their
proper commission to deal with us for to admit invasion of strangers, and to
with dravv our selves from our soueraines obedience: we therefore for their
clearing and our own in that case, and all the Catholics in the realm, call
God and his holy Angels to witness, that these men of God were most
injuriously, and vvilfully murdered.

And as we their friends in England acquainted with all their actions sithence
their repair into the realm, can testify this upon our own certain
knowledge: Testimony of forreiners.
and the foreign Princes whose instruments they were fained to be for inuading
the land, and the Superiors of their Society and Colleges by whose
appointement and direction they came in, can and will, if need be, give
authentical intelligence upon their honors and conscience of the truth hereof.
So may every man that was present either at their examining, racking,
arraigning or death: or that has heard of the same, or of the strange course
of proceeding toward them either before their condemnation or afterward,
clearly behold the same.

The effect of the enditement.
To prove that they practiced the Q. death at Rome and Remes, and invasion of
the realm by foreign powers in the xxij year of her M. reign, the last of
March and last of May and diverse other times, which was the effect of their
enditement: there was neither witness, confession of the parties, probable
presumptions, nor any word spoken, or evidence in the world, that was to the
point of the enditement, or that could touch any of them that were upon the
same enditement arraigned the second day.

They charged them al with one crime of conspiracy: diverse of them never
seeing one an other before they came to that bar in their lives, nor never
writing one to an other, nor proved by any testimony or presumption that ever
any two of them together, or any one alone had any such talk or ^ntention of
conspiracy.

The Q. counsel charged them with no other thing all that day long, but with
other men's fauts, They were charged only with other men's faults.
^ot being able to prove that they al, or any of them, ^uer consented unto
them: yea and with diverse things, whereof they could none of them possibly ^e
partakers. As the insurrection of the North, the Commotio^ in Irland, the Popes
excommunication ^f the Q. D. Saunders writings, D. Bristovves motives D. Allens
approving the book, letters intercepted of I can not tell whom, of what, or to
whom: with ^iphers and charecters that could not be read, but yet must needs
mean some persons, places, and ^reparations for invasion.

And when the poor innocent men cried for justice to the Q. counsel that they
would not am^lifie against them to the abusing of the Jury, These just
petitions of the innocent men, were not at al regarded.
other ^ens offenses: To the Lord chief Justice, that for ^he honor of God and
favor of innocence, he would not suffer them to be charged with matters that
neither touched them nor the enditement: To the Twelve that for discharge of
their deuties and conscience they would consider maturely whether any of these
accusations touched them, and ^ftsones desired them for the love of CHIST, when
any thing might seem to be said for evidence against them, to mark whether it
partaine ^o al or some, and to whom specially, lest al should ^e cast away
for one man's offense, or one for an other. Which might easily be done in such
con^use huddeling of purpose against them, of all the ^reasons and trespasses
committed in England or with out, for that twenty years.

Yet little ear was given of any hand to so just a demand, but still they
enlarged their accusation and evidence with other men's faults, because the
poor men them selves had committed none. Yea such art and conueiance was used
in this matte^ to make other men's offenses to seem to the Jury to be theirs,
or at lest to be true of their fellows, that they purposly took order that
some, A damnable policy.
whose pretended crimes, conspiracies and confession, were produced for
evidence, against those that were arraigned the first day, should not them
selves be present, because they could easily have ansvvered and refuted them,
but be arraigned an other day, and some, As M. Pain was.
in other places, after these should be condemned.

So M. Heart, if he had been there, could easily have reproved whatsoever they
said, he had confessed upon the rack. So if M. Richardson whose name and
person was wholly mistaken even til his death, They executed one man for an
other.
had been arraigned the former day, as he was the later, M. Campion might be
like have discharged him. But specially in the matter pretended against M.
Pain, The iniquity of the Judge.
the L. Chief Justice that should have been indifferent betwixt her M. and
these desolat persons, committed notorious partiality and injustice to suffer
evidence to be brought in, and an oath to be ministered to a witness for proof
thereof, when it concerned only one absent, and touched none of them present:
which shameful wrong was committed to make that odious matter whereof the
evidence was given, in the sight of the Jury to pertain to those that then
were arraigned: compting al guilty that there were at the bar, of what crime
soever was thereof any man absent discovered.

The most pietiful practiz that ever was heard of to sheed innocent blood by
face of public justice. Which is a thousand times before God more damnable
and punishable by his divine power, Public injury far more grievous then
private.
then if man's life were taken from him by private murder.

Moreover many of them were arraigned and condemned for a fact fained to be
committed in ^ose places (that is to say at Rome and Rhemes) ^d times, ^^^ln
the xxij of her M. reign, They were condemned for things done where they
never were.
and such day of March and of May, of which some were (...) neither place in
their life, as M. Ford and M. Col^gton: some had not been there of some years
before, as M. Sherte: some not at that time nor many ^oneths before, as M.
Brian and M. Richardson: and (...) M. Collington had not by, Gods providence
had ^e present to testify for him that he had been in ^ngland long before that
time when the conspi^cie was fained to be made, he had died as the rest. and
some of the rest being as certainly known ^o have been in England that time
and before as he ^as, yet were wickedly condemned for that fact ^en there
committed, when all the world knovveth ^at they were not there. Yea M. Brian had
witness ^ereof as well as M. Collington. (By a note sent us out ^f the regester
book of the College of Remes, we and that M. Brian departed there hence
toward ^ngland, the iij of August. 1579 which was viij ^onethes before the
sermon was made, at which ^ledd and Monday affirm M. Brian to have been) ^ut
al is one for these that were there in either of ^e places those days of this
fiction, all the world ^novveth they savv no conspiracy, but Mass, ^attins,
lectures, disputations and such exercises ^s are done every day in the year, or
if there had ^een any thing that way contrived, who is such a ^oole to think,
that this deliberation was kept among the common scholars and Priests of the
^laces pretended, and that Sledd, Monday, and such ^anel were made prive
thereunto.

What will you more, if the judgment had been ^one in Tindal, and Tiuidal for
wreke of deadly ^eude it could not have been more barbarous and ^niust.

Consider a little of the witnesses, Of the vvitnesses.
first they were ^uch as never savv, knevv, nor scarce hard tell of some of them
whom they accused and bare testimony against. Neither Sledd nor Monday ever
savv M. Campion, Bosgraue, Ford, Brian, Collington, Richardson, Shert or
Filbie, in their lives, before their troubles neither would nor could they ever
have thought of them, if they had not by chance been taken and in prison at
the same time that these fevve of the other whom they knevv, were in durance
also: but to make them al away, they were contented to swear to the
evidence indifferently against them al, as they would have done (their
conscience was so at commandment) against all the priests and Catholic men in
England if they had been required. Eliot, that was the third person and
witness in this blouddy play, never savv F. Campion but at his Mass and Sermon
the day of his betraying: upon certain words of which sermon, when he gave
evidence against the good Father, that he exhorted men to the obedience of the
POPE: he was fully confounded, Eliot found a false liar.
and found a false liar before all the bench confessing upon the Fathers reply,
that he remembered not that he spoke of the POPE in all his sermon.

But let us consider a little of the qualities of these witnesses, that you may
see what instruments the protestants are forced for lack of better to use to
the affliction of Godly men. They call Priests and Iesuists the POPES
instruments to advance his intentions: oh good God what difference is there
then betwixt the POPES instruments and these that the Heretics only use.
What are Nicols, Sledd, The quality and conditions of the vvitnesses.
Eliot, Monday, companions known to be of no religion, of every religion,
coozeners, dissemblers, espials, yea and some of them to be charged with
aduoutery, murder, and such like crimes, and therefore as well for lack of
conscience and religion, as for pardon of their faults, most fit to be
corrupted, what I say are these the offal of the world to be compared in
truth and verity against such men, most famous for lerning, virtue,
constancy, contempt of worldly things, and al worthiness, which both ennemies
and friends savv in them. And yet upon the testimony of one only of these
without any other profes or presumptio^s in the world worthy the hering, was
M. Pain against Gods laws and the realms, condemned and executed:
notvvithstanding he alleged both scriptures and acts of parliament and called
for justice in the same.

Wherein the injury was the greater that the Apostle expressly gives order
that no accusation be hard against a Priest, without tvvoe witnesses. yea and
if the glorious doctor S. Augustine might be heard, none of al these vvitnesses
nor a hundredth such more should be received against these blessed confessors.
Thus he says to Pancarius an officer, and an honorable person before whom a
certain Priest named Secundinus was accused of a great crime. Heretics are no
sufficient vvitnesses against a Catholics Priest by S. Augustins judgment.
Quod videntur obijcere presbytero non est contemnendum, tantum si Catholici
sunt qui obijciunt: nam hereticorum accusationes contra Catholicum presbyterum
admittere nec possimus nec debemus. That is, The crime vvherevvith they charge
this Priest must be looked unto, so alvvaies if those that be his accusers be
Catholics: for against a Catholic Priest we neither can nor ought to admit
the accusation of heretics. Ep. 212.

But now Gods true religion being abandoned out of our miserable country
through our sins, In this irreligious time, Priests most subject to injuries.
the honor of God and reverent respect of his sacred Priests is gone withal:
and in steed of privilege and prerogation granted to them by divine and
human laws, they are most subject to injuries, villainies, contempt and
calumnies, of al conditions and stats of the realm. One prophan Doeg, 2 Reg.
c. 22.
now being a sufficient witness to make foureskore and five most innocent
Priests traitors, and to be slain on a day.

But to sifte better the worthiness and weight of the forenamed false
witnesses as of the chief plaiers in this action. Let us count the notorious
and public lies which they have uttered for furnishing their wicked accusation
and evidence, wherein to have the more certain knowledge: I have either by
word of mouth, if the parties be in England, or by letters, if they continue
beyond the seas, had aduertisment of most things that these fellows feigned,
to make matter of treason appear, that by some plain forgeries you may see of
what past the rest are.

A heap of Notorious lies, fained by Monday and others.
As of the Martyrologe which Monday faineth to be in print in the college of
Rome, wherein the Martyrdoms of al late traitors very largely are written, as
of Felton, of Madder, of the Nortons and such other: it is known to be a flat
lie, noe such being there at al: That D. Bristovves Motives are commanded to
be read in both the colleges or seminaries of al students, most false: as the
superiors of those houses by their letters, and every scholar here in the
realm that ever was of the same, do testify, who further more affirm by
their faith, that there is not iiij. books as fare as they think in both the
houses. Of D. Allens Cathecisme, it is a like shameless lie: being well known,
that he never made book of that title or argument: of the same D. his sermon
in Rome and F. Persons speeches against the Q. sitting a mid-mong the students,
they both, the one by his own mouth, the other, by a suer means of
aduertisment: do protest upon their Christian faith and Priesthod (which
waieth more in any honest man's judgment then a world of Mundaies and such
graceles boys) that there was never no such thing. And in truth they are both
to wise to utter such matter if it were in their breasts in those places.
Neither could any such thing be done, but the ^^udents then in the college
could remember it as well as these levved fellows, but every of them as I have
met withal, upon their salvation disauoueth it. As they do al other those
horrible speeches of the Queens killing, An horrible lie.
that Monday so diuilishly deuiseth to have been uttered to him there in times
of recreation.

A like lie it is also, A palpable lie.
that every scholar in the seminary of Rome, takes an oath to obey the POPE
and to fulfill his will in what soever he commands them: for there is no such
oath, nor in the college of Remes any oath at al. And that every one that
takes holy orders is not sworn to the POPE, as the said lying companion
faineth, the very Pontifical vvil witness. It is an untruth likewise that none
can be suffered to tarry in the colleges but such as will be Priests and enter
into the same oath or obligation toward the POPE.

M. Vvodvvard a venerable virtuous Priest, who^ Monday faineth first to have
given him knowledge of an invasion as he past by Amiens: affirms upon his
salvation, that he never spoke no such word to the ungracious lad, nor could
not, because he never knevv in deed, nor heard of any such thing.

What a diuilish lie made Eliot when he gave evidence against M. Pain,
Eliots diuilish lie.
that he should report to him of a plat for killing the Q. which he had heard
of the Earl of westmerland, and D. Allen at Doway, when the one of them, he
never savv in his life, the other he could not see at his last goeing over,
being then at Rome. Add to these the lies of the Ministers, affirming that M
Pain had confessed so much to a certain lady, whom he never savv in his
life, and to his own brother which was likewise proved most false.

As for Sleds invention Sledds inventions.
of conspiracy made in D. Mortons house, was it not very like that he should
be made acquainted with the matter, being and living there as a poor knave,
taken up by D. Saunderson of alms, begging of every body, and known of no
body, and therefore trusted and used no farther of his master but in servile
things. This man of Belial has many ways uttered him self since his coming
from Rome. He confessed to a companion of his, that he had thought to have
slain good M. Johnson now executed, coming out of Italy with him: he
reported in Paris to one Hierom Vain a man of his qualities, that he was the
first brotcher of those nevves in Rome, that the Spanish Armado should be for
England, and that there to he had aduises out of England, and that of no small
babes. Whereby we may see that al these bruites of confederacies of POPE and
princes for invasion of the realm, and of other fained conspiracies, were
purposely given out by the art of heretics to take occasion thereby, to
afflict the men of God.

One spy enstructeth an other.
Yea the said Sledd gave this Vain above named goodly instructions how he
should behave him self in Rome without suspicion. This Sledd, as corrupt as
his conscience is can not deny, and by this token he may remember him self the
better that it is true, for he told the party aforsaid and an other Gentilman
(whose name for good respects I vvil not bewray) that he had been in Rome for
such purposes of policy (as he termed his spiery) thus long, but was ever il
paid or considered, of his setters on work. And as impudently as he now
boulstereth out lies, yet when he began first, which was with the
apprehension of M. Orton in Holborne, he offered the Constable iij. pounds in
money not to bring him face to face to M. Orton, for says he, it would be my
utter discredit: and thereupon having descried the party and charged the
officer with him, he crept away into a pelting Inn there by, and hid him self
under the hay, whither the Constable came and fetched him out with straw about
his ears, saying, that if he would not come forth with a good vvil, he would
bring him out upon a coulestaffe.

I could tell him of his hipocritical suit made in Remes to be a scholar of the
seminary: of the daily frequenting to his damnation, the holy Sacraments both
at Rome and afterward in Paris: when he had delivered his lying intelligences
to the Lidger there, and taking order of him to go to Remes to take further
aduertisment of their state, that he might belie them with more probability.
And here let any wise man judge, whether he will fear to swear a lie, that
fears not to receive in fiction, the very B. SACRAMENT, and that went to
confession to a godly father, even at the very time, when he was to pass into
England to play these Judas his parts.

And them selves that now use his service to our affliction, The Lieutenant
and Nortons verdict of Sledd.
know and confess him to be a VERY VILLAIN. The Lieutenant and Norton both,
have so reported of him. Nortons wife told her husband, that Sledd said once
that his son was of his complexion, and that al those of that complexion
proved wise, to which Norton ansvvered, that al Sledds wisdom did consist in
abominable knauerie: wishing his son better luck then to be like such a
treacherer in conditions. Norton was then in the Tovver for treason, in the
same chamber F. Campio^ was kept in.
The Lieutenant called him, starcke knave, because he told the Counsel, that
Nortons keeper should say, he had now a Devil in his keeping and before a
Saint, meaning by F. Campion. and after he had informed the Counsel, and
promised to prove it by two witnesses and could not: The Lieutenant said that
he had great facility in falshod and lying even from his cradel. One notable
trick Norton and he played together at this arraignement, when Norton read the
book at the bar which was pretended to be Sledds, and Sledd sworn to the
evidence.

These lo are the witnesses, such are the false sclaunders and the palpable
untruths fained by malicious practice against the servants of God. which yet if
they vere true, could not for all that touch any of the persons arraigned, none
of these false pariured persons being able to avouch, that any of them in
particular, had thus spoken, thus conspired, thus done against her M. But the
Q. Counsel at the law, could by a consequence make whatsoever was said to be
intended or done at Rome or Rhemes, Traitors by an il consequence.
to be every of their deeds there at the bar. That day it was good logic,
Poor logike.
You kissed the Popes foot, You were students of that College where such talk
was, You spoke with D. Allen, You have redd D. Bristovves book, You were at
Prage, and came by Rome and Remes into England, ergo upon every of these you
are every one, and al, guilty of the matter of the enditement.

O heaven, o earth, o Lord God, that such iniquity should be done in that
place, so once renomed for justice in all Europe. but to pass this point. This
also is a demonstration of their innocence, that at their first apprehension,
An other demonstration of their INNOCENCE.
imprisoning and racking, they were only examined of matters incident to
religion: whom they had reconciled, where they said Mass, who harbored and
relieved them, They rack Catholics for triffeling causes, vnvvou^tedly.
what they heard in confession (a barbarouse impiety) and such like. for we
may not think that they use torments, only for disclosing of great treasons or
other crimes, as they had wont to do, and that not without great occasion: but
toward Catholics and specially Gods anointed Priests, they stick not now
without pity to use al kind of torture, often, rather for a punishment of
them, or to make them by pains to forsake their faith, or of malice and
despite of the Catholic faith, then for any matter they look to be opened by
them.

So they laid M. Tomson a learned and grave Priest upon the rack before they
ever examined him: M. T. bacheler of Divinity.
a thing most cruel and disorderly, having nothing to charge him withal, but
only to what end he kept certain superaltares which were found in his
chamber. As for religion only, having no other pretense in the world, they
thrust him as is said v weeks together (after the Lieutenant had spoiled him
of v pounds) and Thomas Burschoaghe Thomas Burschoagh.
a Catholic young man and learned, a quarter of a year together into a grisely
dongeon called Vvhalesboure, without candel light and water, til by the privy
there, they were well near pestred to death.

So did they afflict John Hemslovv, John Hemslovv.
only for burying his Catholic mother in the Church yard, being cast out of
their heretical synagogue for her faith, thrusting him into a filthy vile hole
(after they had discharged him of his money, for that is medius terminus ever)
al a lent long, without light, fire, or place to ease nature in, til by his
own excrements discharged into a dongeon under him, he had like to have been
stiffiled with stinch. They rack Priests on sundaies and holydaies specially.
And which is vvorth the marking, or rather lamenting of al Christian hearts,
that for our more affliction, they profanely make choice to give the torture
to our brethren, upon sundaies and hie holydaies in Gods Church, after the old
manner of the heathen persecutors, rather then upon vvorken days. And to feed
them selves with our calamities, By what cruel means they terrify the
Catholic prisoners.
and eftsons to terrify other confessors the rather to enforce them from their
faith, they bring some new racked under their fellovv prisoners windows and
to their doors, that by hering their pitiful sighs, groans and complaints,
proceeding of infinite pains, they may be moved to relent in religon, yea
which is more inhumanitie they set some of the confessors, in bye dark
corners, when other their brethren are in tormenting.

And no less torment both of body and mind is it, to be haled and forced
against their vvilles, to their heretical church and sermons, where they must
hear blasphemy and wickedness, and if they say nothing: be rated of the
Puritans and called dombe dogs, if they reprove their Ministers: they be
offered violence and strokes. As namely once a spiteful puritan laying his
hand upon his dagger, A puritans spirit.
his teeth grinning in his head, his face enflammed with malice, came to one
of the reverend Priests and said thus: Before God if it were not for fear of
laws, I would presently stabbe my dagger to thy heart (small evidence would
serve a Ieurie of such fellows to cast away a thousand honest men) and many
dozens of these you may have good cheap in England, and this is our misery
now, that we have not only the coulor of law against us: but all the wicked
of the realm our ennemies.

M. Heart miserably handeled for his conscience.
And al these pitiful vexations, are they done unto them for any thing but
religion? when after M. Hearts, that learned reverent Bachiler of Diuinities
condemnation, yet they would not let him rest, but caused him to be conferred
with al by Rainolds and others, and when he would not yield, miserably
afflicted him by dongeon, famine and other miseries. Had they any cause then
but religion? or was it ever heard of in our realm, that one alreddy having
his judgment should be afterward so manifoldly tormented?

M. Lieutenants courtesy.
For what crime was it that the Lieutenant made a motion to D. Hammon his
fellovv commissioner, that the Priests last committed to the Tovver might be
sent to Bride-vvel to be whipped? o profane irreligious and malicious Athiest.
That was a trike of Nortons spirit who could find in his heart to have Norton
his counsel.
sent the honorable confessor M. Povvnd to Bedlem to be treated like a mad man,
and had brought the Lieutenant to promise it, before a hal al most full at his
own house, but as Gods providence has directed matters sithence, that diet
is more fit for Nortons wife.

They say the Epistle of persecution has rethorically amplified the Catholics
calamities in England: So does D. Humphrey in his unlearned pamphlet against the
Iesuists.
but our Lord JESUS who only sees through our miseries knovveth, it has not
uttered the least part of our daily distresses. And how great or grievous so
ever they be, for religion only, and for no other treasons they are: no other
causes at the first pretended, nor after, any thing generally pursued, but how
to make them rele^t in faith, releasing every body what treason soever
pretended, if they would condescend unto them in matter of religion. Yea such
as so did, though they were these men's companions at Rome, when and where these
conspiracies were pretended to be wrought, and some of them sent down in
their company and for the same end, yet were they never questioned vvithal of
any such matter, if they once would take the oath of the Q. supremacy over
the church of England: as Paschal, Nicolls, Osborne, Caddey, and such like, as
either of fear, or for preferment then or afterward yielded.

Who should never have eskaped so, if they had been acquainted with such
horrible treason: the mistrust or pretense whereof was not as then skarcely
formed in the Counsels intention, nor resolved upon until a good while after
they had apprehended, examined and racked F. Campion: The great desire they had
to make a way F. Campio^, was the cause of all this actio^.
whom they were exceeding desirous to put away by some coulorable means,
thereby to extinguishe this spiritual practice in cases of religion in our
country. Diverse had been racked before that, and nothing found or much
mistrusted concerning this pretended conspiracy: but to see their constancy
in religion, and patience in their extremest torments, that appalled the
commissioners excedingly: in so much that D. Hammon upon the racking of M.
Brian, D. Hammons speech at M. Brians tormenting.
uttered in great terror of his conscience, That if one were not very well
grounded in his faith, this gear might shake him. And when M. Heart was taken
from the rack, the commissioners talking with him after a familiar manner:
Norton asked him, M. Hearts answer to Norton.
saying, Tell truly Heart what is the meaning of the coming in, of so many
Priests into England? who ansvvered, To convert the land again to her first
Christian faith and religion, by preaching and peaceable persvvasion, after the
manner that it was first planted: Norton confesses their INNOCENCE.
to which Norton said: In my conscience Heart, I think thou say truth.

This went things then, til the superior powers were resolved for causes before
said, to seek out some treason, whereof by any coulor or seemly sequel in the
world they might be endited.

Their first pretense of treason.
First tampering about a collection that should be fained to be made by these
Priests means of the Catholics in England for relief of the Irish: which not
holding weight, they then rested rather upon the poursuit of this pretended
conspiracy of the Q. death, through the readiness of ij or iij false godles
companions, men of sin, prompt to affirm and swear, whatsoever should be
agreeable to the practice, and upon a certain ouerture given before by Nicols
in his book and sermon of recantation, The authors of Nicols books.
which the mad fellovv made not him self, but were penned by one wilkinson (if
I hit his name right) as others of his, by other of the Ministry.

Which Nicols because he might be better believed and seem to do al of
conscience, fained him self by the Lieutenants counsel (who for that purpose
brought certain Ministers to him) to be converted by conference with godly
preachers. Where he had confessed to a secret friend, that coming from Rome he
meant ever to run that race of Apostacy, Nicols intention.
and offered the Lieutenant the first night he came to the Tovver, to go to
any port of the realm to discover the Priests as they should come on land,
giving him up withal, the names of all the students in Rome: so that you see al
is a set song. Yet for the honor of the Ministry they give out in print of
him and others (relenting this year of plain practice, fear or compulsion,
and through both great threats and promises) that the godly learned preachers
have converted them. as they did by two husbandmen taken with F. Campion, who
by threats of rack and death, were brought to relent or ever preacher dealt
with them, and so to do, on named Cooper Cooper.
also, being alvvaies nedy and therefore subject to money, had twenty pounds
offered him ^y the Lieutenant. No, No, thanks be to God, Ministers have no
great grace nor power these years, to pervert any man.

But to the purpose again and to Nicols, who in truth in his books and
sermons printed and dedicated to the Q. and other her M. Ministers, uttered and
invented the very self same false matter of the ^nditement, whereof the other
his companions gave evidence and testimony, Why Nicols gave not evidence.
yet him self lest (for some causes the Counsel knevv) he should have marred
^l, and have discovered by the mutabilitie they saw in him, the whole practice,
was not produced at ^he arraignement: and perchance the miserable man had yet
some remorse to be an instrument in the casting away of so many, whom by
experience he knevv to be innocent, and of excellent qualities. sure it is,
that whether as Judas came back to the Ievvas after he had betrayed to them
his Lord, or with better repentance and conscience, this fellow came of his
own accord to M. Kirbie the holy confessor, to ask him and al his fellows
forgiveness, for the great treachery done tovvard them, protesting that al was
false and wicked that had been done or spoken against them touching these
supposed treasons, Nicols report of his companions Sledd and Monday.
and that he would go to the secretary and signify so much, affirming Sledd
and Monday their accusers, to be the falsests and vilests caitiues that ever
lived, their wicked and deuilish lives and practices being well known unto
him. whereof see M. Kirbies letter after the narration of his Martyrdom.

Eliot also that other wretched man, did never think at the beginning as him
self professed, that they would pick matter of death or quarrel of treason
toward F. Campion. for he thus spoke afterward to him. Eliots speech to F.
Campion.
Sir says he, I would not for any good have done so much, if I had thought any
further harm or trouble then imprisonment, should have happened unto you
thereby. Then repent the Eliot for Gods sake said F. Campion, F. Campions
answer.
and al will be to his glory. Then Eliot said, he was in great fear and
danger to be killed of the Catholics for his apprehension: you are deceived
said F. Campion, Catholics carry no such mind, and yet for your more
security, if you like thereof, I will send you to a Duke in Germany where you
shall be safe. Thus al things even their very accusers and persecutors
profession, prove them to have been unjustly condemned.

But above al, their own profession of innocence at their deaths, put al
men of any reason religion or indifferency, out of doubt thereof: and therein
certainly we dare and do appeal to the ennemies own conscien^e, howsoever
for the honor of justice and needful policy they pretend the contrary.

Commonly men trust every malefactors asseueration at the time of his departure
hence, touching his own or his associats culpablenes or innocence of the
fact for which he or they were condemned, though by the attestation of the
truths, they have no worldy commodity or release of the pains they have to
suffer. A clear argument of their INNOCENCE.
How much less may any man mistrust these men upon their soul and salvation
denying the fact: who might have had no less revvard for acknovvledging the
pretended crime, then grace and life, offered to the^ diverse times before they
came to execution, and most earnestly tendered and persuaded to them, yea
almost thrust upon them at the hour of their extreme agony, yea with great
promises of preferment. Can any man think that these men would lie to their
damnation, at the very going out of their breath into the judgment of God:
whose conscience was so religious, that for all the preferment proffered, and
life granted would not do or say one word against the profession of their
faith, or that which in conscience they thought not lavvful to do?

How greatly the confession of the supposed fact was desired of the counsel,
and to every one of them urged, and with what singular art they used the
last of all that was executed, to have him say some words of disagreme^t from
his fellows dead before him, that thereupon they might have carried him back
and made the people believe that he had confessed the fact and therefore
pardoned, thereupon to have disproued all the rest, it is a world to see.

Oh M. Cottam says Sheriff Martine, A shamful practice they used, to entangle
M. Cottam.
you I perceive came into the realm not as the others did, sent to move
sedition, but for your health only: and in hope of this conueiance, took him
out of the carte again, saying to him, you were happy that you meddled not in
these other perilous matters, that the rest are executed for, telling him that
the Q. would extend her mercy to him: for which he heartily thanked her M.
thinking in deed by these words, and by his loosing from the gallovves and
taking down out of the cart, they would without any more a do, have carried
him back again. At leinghth they said it was requisite he should stand up and
speak a fevv words to the people to signify that he was sent for no such il
purpose, and that he misliked much the POPES doings in those matters.

But God gave him grace to see their legierdemaine, and to stand upon the truth
and innocence, and so he was executed with more despite then the rest when I
vvrote his Martyrdom, being not so nere as to hear this communication they had
with him after he was letten down out of the carte: I could not report it,
but sithence one that did here it told me.

Now as we see the adversaries would have made much advantage of any ons
acknovvledging of him self guilty, though all the world had seen, it had been
done for hope of life: so by the constant denial of so many, so godly, so
learned and well quallified persons even to the loss of their lives here, and
pledge of their eternal salvation in the world to come. It gives us an
invincible proof of their innocence, An invincible argument of their
INNOCENCE.
and an eternal reproach to all the ennemies of Gods Church and Priesthod. Truly
said the last of the Martyrs, That among so many (if any thing had been
committed as is pretended) no one should neither for gain of his life, nor for
salvation of his soul, confess it: we were the strangest men that ever
lived.

But not now only, when al and every on severally had taken it upon their
death, but upon the like profession of the first three, all the realm almost,
and much more al foraine Nations generally, pitied the case, and where well
assured of their innocence: whereupon partly for complaint of the injury,
partly for the excellency of the persons to whom ^t was done, and specially
for the honor of God and glory of their notable Martyrdom* diverse ^ookes,
verses, pictures and such like, came forth in diverse langages. whereat the
Magistrate, that would gladly have had the fovvlnes of their fact buried with
the me^, were much enco^bered, and seeking by all humane prudence how to stop
the further spreading of the matter, they resolved by force and authority to
defend and avouch the injustice done upon them, and to punish with all extreme
rigor, whosoever should speak, print or publish the contrary.

Whereupon, Rigor used to al defenders of their INNOCENCE. Vallenger lost his
ears.
some that had written of F. Campion and his, fled the Universities and
realm: some, lost both their ears, as on Vallenger, and others otherwise
punished, so odible was this truth: and yet I am sure if all the ears in our
country and al nations, that glovv at the hearing of this fact, were cut of,
half the Christians in England and Europe should be cropped.

But the better to put al to silence and out of doubt, they caused a
proclamation A proclamation.
to be made under her M. name and authority, bering date the first of April,
and xxiiij of her highness reign: whereby they assure al subjects upon her M.
and the Counsels word and knowledge, and so command al men so to take it,
that the three first, and then already executed, were law fully endited,
arraigned and convicted, as the rest likewise, not then put to death, were,
which strange course caused men to suspect far more then, al went not well,
that was to be salued so extraordinarely: An extraordinary salve.
every body of judgment knowing right well that her M. and Counsel could know
no more by them, then was openly at the bar given in evidence, and dilated
against them on her M. part: for there was no store made that day, of any
thing that might either directly or indirectly touch them.

Al which being fully refelled both there in the sight of al men, and by their
profession at the hour of death, though we yield to authority al deutie and
allegiance, yet we can not, nor may not, because it touches Gods honor and
the glory of his Saints, in conscience acknovvledge their guilt in any of the
crimes: nor otherwise, but that they died for defense of the CATHOLIC FAITH,
without al cogitation of treason against their Prince or country.

And the rather we can not against our own certain knowledge be led so
to think in this case, for that in pledable cases of treason, her M. is a
party, and can not by her proclamation or Princely prerogative otherwise give
attestation, then as by process of law irreprouably is adjudged. and because
we are assured before God that her highness Ministers be by our ennemies wrong
informed, as in all others, so in some things uttered against our brethren even
in that same proclamation. As when they affirm that the like attempts of the
Iesuists and Seminary Priests were turned into actual rebellion in Irland,
Neither Iesuist, nor Seminary Priest in the commotion in Irland.
where as true as God lives, there was no one Jesuit nor any that ever had
been of either of the Seminaries of that action in Irland.

Making al Priests and Iesuists traitors no less then these, proves these as
guiltles as the others
But herein we may be the shorter for that by the same proclamation every man
of intelligence may understand, that there were no particular attempts made by
these blessed Fathers condemned and executed, nor no other special causes, nor
personal crimes why they should be condemned and counted traitors, then are
common to al other Iesuists and Priests of the colleges beyond the seas at
this present, Children unborn made traitors by entering after into the
colleges.
though diverse be but children: or to such as shall here after enter into any of
the said companies, though they be yet unborn. The whole order and both the
bodies, and every particular person thereof, how innocent so ever they ^e in
them selves (a marvelous inconvenience and ^bsurdity) without any law of the
realm therein ^assed, A marvelous absurdity.
are made high traitors. So it is you see for ^riginal sin, that F. Campion
and his fellows ^vere executed, and not for any of their actual and ^ropre
demerits. And if this be good law, it vvil ^ake easier evidence, then to stand
upon every ons ^articular arraignement and trial.

But these things passing thus, namely against ^e persons partly dead, and
partly condemned, ^ut yet alive and at the Q. mercy: and generally against
(...) of the Catholic societies beyond the seas, the ^reater opinion of the
men's excellency and inno^encie daily arises. And the powers of the realm
^ode still in great perplexity whether it were ^ood to execute the rest that
were condemned or (...), them selves being not cruel, The Q. merciful.
and her M. ever ^uch inclined to mercy: loath they were to put ^em al to death
knovving their innocence in the ^atters pretended better then any man else did,
and ^eling the affection of the subjects of al sorts, and ^e great mutation of
minds that the constant ^eath of so many qualified men were like to make: ^et
more loath to seem by pardoning of them without any jot relenting, Reasons,
why they follovv this course.
either touching their ^ith or their supposed fact, as it were to confess
^eir vvrongful condemnation, and their own ^rmer error, or to be ledd out of
their intended ^urse, by the out cries of the world, or complaints (...)
Catholics.

Therefore even straight after the execution of ^e first, Acknovvledging any
offense, or relenting in religion might have saved their lives.
they sent certain unto the condemned ^rsons, to move them to ask the Q.
Mercy and ^rgiuenes, and to acknovvledge only in general at they had offended
her highness: or at least to ^ent any little in religion, and they should live.
^d that they might do it with better pretense, they brought preachers to
confer with some of them, and when that would not serve, as is noted
before, thrust them into dongeons: but when after vj months they saw nothing
could be obtained of those innocent constant confessors: As M. Heart was.
they resolved plainly to execut them.

But least the last error should be worse then the first, and especially for
that there were not long before raised new brutes and muttering of vneauen
dealing in the sending away of M. Pain so fare of to be arraigned and
executed: M. Pains sending away bread new concepts.
from whose mouth as they pretended before, the rest were specially accused
and condemned. They sought their vvittes (which are in truth by long exercise
and experience very pregnant of subtle invention) how to make them away
with less offense to the world: to enduce her M. also to be vvilling they
should be put to death, which by a certain pity and natural clemency, she
is often hardly drawn unto: they devised away how to make them to seem as
well to her M as to the people vvorthie death, and in appearance plain
traitors, though they were not guilty at al of the crimes, for which they
were endited, arraigned and condemned.

A sinful policy.
Which ungodly practice of executing them in the peoples sight for causes,
whereof they were never directly endited and arraigned, and which in deed is
by law no treason at al: do prove again most evidently that of the former
offenses whereof they were accused and condemned, they were not at al guilty.

Their devise was to send unto the^ iiij lawiers, ij. of the common law, who
were the Q. Attorney and Soliciter: and two ciuilians D. Jews and D.
Hammon, To dravve out of them by vj articles or interrogatories, not what
treasons or trespasses they had committed (which was none) but what they had
in their cogitatio^s, what were to be done, what they would do, By Ifs, and
Ands, they would drive these poor men into the compass of treason.
if such a thing or such a thing should fall: and what if they had been in
Irland when the rebellion was there, what would they have done?

Whether there be any means to depose her M. or any other king? for with
these men it was not enough to answer, they al acknowledged her for their
lavvful sovereign, and that they never committed any thing in word nor deed
against her M: but they would know of them for the future time, and for their
very cogitations, heart and affection, what they thought to be done, Strange
interrogatories.
and what they meant to do for any cause hereafter: that is, for any Heresy,
Arianisme, or the like, or for Apostacy, Turcisme or Atheism, (from al which
inconvenience CHRIST JESUS defeend her M. and the realm alvvaies) whether yet,
if for any such crimes that the frailty of Princes is subject unto, she should
be deposed: what then would they counsel the people to do, or whether may she
for any such matters be deprived.

To which things being proposed unto them by the said iiij. lavviers the
xiij. of May, 1582. in form of vj. articles or demands, they ansvvered in the
fear of God and simplicity of heart, as you see set down hereafter
severally, together with the articles them selves, even as they were published
by authority. which answers, though conceived of her M. and some other her
Ministers, as though they were tokens of their il affection toward her, that
thought any cause might ever happen for which she might worthily be deprived,
and in some part, seeming at the first sight to the simple to be odious and
vndeutiful, though in deed by no law nor reason they can be drawn to any
treason, and therefore not much urged in their arraignements, though some of
them had given the same answers to the like demaundes before, as they have set
down also in the same libel.

Yet they thought good to publish them, and to make the^ more odible to the
show, they join to them certain passages of D. Saunders and D. Bristovves
vvrittings, A strong practice.
and a preface to all that, of their own making: which should thus not only
pass abroad amongst the subjects for a warning, but specially was to be redd
and spread as an other little liueret was at the death of the former, but this
now with more authority, at the place and time of execution.

Where there was appointed (the strangest thing that ever we have seen, The
second arraigneme^t and condemnation even at the gallovves.
redd, or heard of) as it were a new arraignement, whereat not now xij. men
representing the country, but the whole people should be judge: therefore at
the days of their death every one there as he was put into the cart, was
willed to confess the treason, which being denied of them, every one upon
their salvation and death: Antony Mu^day brought to the gallovvs.
then Antony Monday one of the former false accusers, was brought forth before
all the presence, called for by the Sheriff, who was ready to avouch whatsoever
you would to their faces: though of the seven executed those twoe days, he
never I think savv none beyond the seas, where the treason was fained to be
contrived, saueing only M. Kirbie, of whom in particular he could say nothing
neither.

Yet it served them for a pretty coulor, to say in the hearing of the
multitude, Lo here is one of your companions, the Popes own scholar to
aduovv it to your face. But when they found the fool in deed could say
nothing, then they went to the new evidence and new crime, set forth in the
book of their answers, a Minister ever willed to read that answer, that the
party there to be executed had made and subscribed, which if it sounded
sometimes little or nothing to the purpose, then the Minister was willed to
turn the leaffe and read the preface of the book (a shifte that passed both
al wit and folly) that thereby, A pretty sport.
or by the allegatio^s of D. Saunders and D. Bristovv at least, these poor men
might seem to the unadvised multitude, though not guilty of their former
pretended crime: uet of il affection toward her M. which was enough in their
judgment to make them away.

And a fevve of the people set on by the Ministers that use to follovv the
gallovves, gave verdit and aim to the rest that stood farther of, to cry
away with them, away with them. Though thousands went home after the sight of
so notorious a spectacle, as the constancy of the Martyrs yielded that time,
sighing, weeping and lamenting the case.

Now in all this marvelous proceeding, The adversaries have gained nothing. The
Cath. church has gained much
we will not stand to examine what the adversary have gained for their purpose,
being enough for our satisfaction, that God knovveth and now al England and a
great part of Europe sees, the innocence of these saints, that our lord is
glorified by their deaths, and his Church enriched with new Martyrs of most
excellent virtue and constancy.

Neither becomes it us to fall in consideration of the policy used in
renewing again the old sore of the excommunication, Them selves have renewed
the question of the Q. excommunication.
which has laien dead, and so might for us Catholics have been dead with
Pius quintus the author and publisher thereof for ever: if them selves by
vnvvonted driftes had not sought to call the case in question, and by vndevve
ways gone about to make us guilty or odible by that, wherevvith we were never
acquainted.

Whereupon if further occasion be given to the learned of our side to declare
the truth of Gods Church, and the opinion of the universities and learned, of
as well Protestants, as Catholics in an other special work already in hand,
concerning those vj. articles and questions by them importunly moved: they have
no reason to be offended with us, that stand only at our defense and purgatio^
in the same: wherein notwithstanding we will not descend so far as they have
provoked us, to dispute particularly of her Majesty's interest, for the duty
we owe to our Prince and sovereign: nor stand upon D. Saunders and D.
Bristovves words, Small wisdom in setting out, D. Saunders and D. Bristovvs
opinions in this matter.
which we and al wise men marvel they would discover to the people, considering
their names in schools are so famous, and so much diuulgated among men of our
nation, that it can not in deliberation but make scruple of matter in some men's
heads.

We say nothing of their open declaration of their diffide^ce toward al
Catholics, impeaching them in manner generally of their fidelity and good
affection toward their prince and country, which gives great occasion both
at home and abroad, of much discontentement and desperation. Some not well
scoled with patience, thinking it al on to be a traitor, and to be reputed for
such a one, and for men abandoned out of her M. favor and protection: of whom
the latin proverb may perhaps be found true, Quod patientia laesa saepe
vertitur in furorem.

The question of what Queen? is but madly asked.
Neither need I speak of these strange words of demand, first used by one of
great authority to F. Campion in his first examination, and afterward
commonly taken up, to ask Catholics (whom they see in all duty and humility
to speak well, to wish well, and daily pray for the Q. M.) to ask I say, Which
Queen and What Queen they mean by.

To what advantage of the state these and such like things be done and spoken
against us, we will not take upon us to discuss, but refer al to men wise
and indifferent: only of the propou^ding those vj. articles to our brethren,
and measuring their loiaultie or fidelity by their answers, Of the vj. arcles
proposed to these Martyrs.
there unto we must needs in all humble sort complain, and make brief
remonstrance of the injury, and their innocence therein also. In the other
treatise of these vj. demaundes more largely.

For the present it is enough, that all the world see our extreme calamity,
that are punished even by most cruel and ignominious death, not only for our
pretended deeds, words or any exterior acts, which only are punishable by
man's laws, Thoughts punished by death.
but for our very cogitations gathered by false suppositions and vndevve
means: yea and for the future faults which we may commit in time to come,
which far passes al Antichristian tyranny.

God him self that does above man's law punish the trespasses even of our heart,
God only, punishes men's cogitations. He punishes not future crimes, as our
men do.
which are as open and subject to his sight and judgment as external acts be
to men: yet charge no man nor searches any man for the time to come, nor for
sins that he would have committed, or might, or were like to have committed
if he had lived, or had had such occasions, prouocatio^s or tentations as other
men, or he might have had.

But now confessing the Prince to be our liege and sovereign, Unreasonable
search of men's consciences.
doing al deuties of subjection to her that the laws of God, nature, or the
Realm and al nations require, only not making her our God, yet we must be
farther demanded by authority, oath or torment, what we vvil do in such and
such cases to come, or perchance never to come. And thereupon if we answer
that for the cases contingent and to come, we can say nothing, but vvil be
subject to the laws or punishment of the laws if at that time we shall
offend, or as some ansvvered more generally, that they then would do, teach
and believe, The best answer to captious questions. Men are executed in
England for only pretended il affection without any act committed.
as the Catholic Church should resolve upon such controversies betwixt the
Prince and POPE or any other, then they are condemned of a fault or crime of
their heart and cogitation, which they call in the preface to the libel set forth
against the vij last Martyrs, il affection or il disposition to the Queen: so
that they which offered to procure their pardon for the fained fact, for which
they were condemned, yet vvil needs have them suffer for their il affection.

An other argument of their innocence.
But that is a clear demonstration of their innocence touching the heinous
pretended conspiracy, which being punishable by all laws and reason, and
without any man's offense or scandal, yet was made more pardonable then this
supposed il affection and disposition, which is not, nor can not be punishable
by any laws of the Realm.

And this only search of men's future facts or intentions whereof him self
has neither knowledge nor rule before hand, is vnnaturale, intolerable, and
to commonvvealthes exceeding perilous. To examine the wife or children or
vassals and tenants before hand, An example.
what they would do if her husband, their father, lord and Master, should
rebel against the Q. whether they would take their parts or wish well to them,
or relieve them underhand, it were pernicious, and vnvsual proceeding.

But in our matter a thousand times more unreasonable, to examine whether any
case may possibly fall wherein the subject may refuse to obey the Prince,
where neither the indirect answer, nor suspense of judgment, no, nor the
plain direct resolution any way, is either against the laws of the Realm,
or proves any il affection toward Prince in the world.

If the Catholics had been demanded in Q. Mary's days, whether if she
should fall to heresy or apostasy or infidelity, Queen MARIE.
or generally for any enormities or what cause soever, she might have been
either by the Realm deprived, or by the POPE excommunicated and deposed, and
had ansvvered as these Priests did here, had they hated the Q. for that, or
borne il affection to her? you say we love the POPE and honor him, and you say
truly, for so we are bound to do by Gods law, yet if this demand were made,
whether if the POPE, The POPE.
or this same POPE Gregory the xiij, to whom we stand in as dew obedience
for matters of soul and religion, as to this Queen Elizabeth for our civil
and temporal state, whether I say, if he fell to heresy he might be deposed by
the Church or general Counsel, a thousand divines would answer
affirmatively: yet neither the POPE him self, nor no wise man would count
them to be of il affection or disposition toward him, though perchance if he
were guilty in conscience of some such crime, such a resolution would
perhaps prick him shrevvdely.

Nay if the law might proceed upon such supposals and intentions of things to
come, The Purita^s hardly opposed.
what hearts should you find in the Puritans think you, upon this only
supposition, if the Queen should but go back to be a Papist: if they were
upon their oath demanded what they would do, or vvish in their hearts to be
done, if it should so happen, if their consciences were so good as to open
their cogitatio^s, other manner of sinister affections and dispositions you
should find, then in the Catholics. They that could not but utter in most
traitorous words and books their cankered stomakes only for a little
conference that her M. had of marriage with a Catholic Prince, what affection
would they bear to her if she reduced her self and realm to the CATHOLIC
FAITH which they so much hate. And yet these Puritans are they that are put to
sound our hearts in this kind and to afflict us upon every vain If, Upon Ifs,
an Ands we are examined.
or impertine^t supposal that they can devise.

Do they not by oaths, interrogatories, and other indevve means, purposly
drive simple plain meaning men, that never offended their laws in word, deed,
nor thought, into the compass of their treaso^s? Some that for reverence of
her M. high dignity over us, though they knevv she erred in religion, yet
would never have called her Heretic, Schismatike, or such like: have been
notvvithstanding so entangeled by their captious questioning and driftes,
brought by sequel of words to acknovvledge her in their opinion, So was M.
Nelson.
so to be, and thereupon punished by death, as if they had so called her of
malice, or by voluntary railing or opprobrious speech. This is to make traitors
and not to punish treasons.

So such quiet godly persons that would never have talked nor thought of the
Bull of Pius quintus, nor have dealt in the differences betwixt their two
superiors, were driven by course of words to confess that, So was M. Haunse.
of her deprivation, which else they had never considered of, and for the same
do execute them. Which is not to execute laws, but to make men offend the
laws. So to drink their blood.

A marvelous oversight.
They were evil advised even to the admiration of men of discretion, that they
would make any statute about calling the Q. an Heretic, Infidel, or such like:
much more those that would examine men what they thought therein, Catholics
never using no more before the law then after, any such term toward her M.
whereas this particular record of it in statute, breadeth some hard conceits
in the subjects heads, and to the posterity, a plain record and suspicion of
such a thing: as I could tell them by examples familiarly, but for the respect
of the honor of those whom I vvil not touch.

But to see the determination of such things and our general affliction, to
depend upon a fevve fantastical nouellers, or as they call them parliament men,
Parliamen^ men.
full of tongue and wit, but without al judgment and wisdoms: this is our
great torment, and vvil as we fear be the realms destruction, except God of
his grace auert it. From on parliament to an other, such fellows have nothing
to do, but to invent how they may by new statutes increase our miseries.

They say her M. person can not by former laws be sufficiently provided for
and preserved, they add new, and the next new again: one year a hundredth
Marks for a Mass, an other must double it: once xij pence for not going to
the Church, now xx pounds a month. And now Norton is busy to invent how to
clogge us, Norton is still busely occupied.
or rather bereiue us of our life, liberties and goods, in the next parliament.
He has written to one of authority, that he was sorry he put not up in the
last Session of Parliament, that the Q. was, and ought to be lavvful Queen
whatsoever she can commit, or the POPE or realm can do or hereafter may do
against her.

Again that it should be treason not to answer directly, what a man thought
in his heart, to any suppositio^ by oath or interrogatorie made or proponed.
Which law I dare say Antichrist him self would not make, because he vvil
not, nor can not, enter into men's thoughts.

This fellovv once in examination of a Catholic prisoner, tendered him an oath
to swear to all that he was to demand of him, who refusing, he said in great
rage: If thou were a good subject thou would not stick to take any oath
to do thy Prince good, a notable point of Atheism A notable point of Atheism.
and Puritanisme.

Thus they rack not our bodies only, They tender oaths to Catholics and yet
believe them not.
but our very consciences, ministering oaths for every trifle, and yet they
believe our oaths no farther then is for their service and our affliction. for
I have heard Norton him self say, that swear they never so fast, he vvil not
trust them, except they go to the Church: meaning their schismatical service.

This same man not discovered only of il affection, but justly put into the
Tovver for seditious words and plain treason (so much as would have hanged an
hundereth Catholics and honest men) yet much complained that he was so
unkindly dealt withal, M. Norton took great unkindness.
that a fevve rash words which of many wise men were not misliked of, as he
says, could not be forgiven, but with such difficulty. Specially to him that
was so necessary for their service, that neither the city of London, to which
he was a feed man: nor the parliament, wherein he did many good offices
alvvaies: nor the Prince in her commissions for religion, wherein he was much
employed, could spare him.

And M. Nortons wife, if she will be as plain to the Counsel, as she is to some
of her neighbors, can tell (if M. Secretary him self remember it not) who put
unto this same Norton, being then for the said treasons in the Tovver, and
justly in disgrace with her M. to pen matters of state, and to set down
orders and articles to be treated of against Catholics in the parliament, and
other places: the said persons can tell you perhaps, what he meant by these
words often uttered in his disgrace:

Norton his suspicious words.
WORTHY, WORTHY, Marreth al, but GRACIOUS, GRACIOUS, may make VVISER VVISER to
amend al. the rack would pick as good matter out of this, as out of any poor
Catholics breast in England. And he to whom he vvrote these words, Defend me,
and spare me not, according to the Irish proverb: can read the riddel.

The said Mistress Norton can tell also, where her husband did lay up Stubbs
book Stubbs his book.
against her M. for a secret treasure. which gear well sifted, would bewray
worse affection and intention to, then they shall ever find in Catholics
whilst they live.

This Stubbs being the Q deadly enemy and then in the Tovver for his
traitorous book, was of M. Lieutenants Counsel in all things, M. Lieutenants
frendlines toward the Q. ennemie.
far better entreated for his comfort and diet, then the earl of klanrickard,
uttering to him al examinations of Catholics and what other secresies soever,
to whom also Charke, Stubs perused Charkes book.
one that was once put to silence for puritanisme, or a worse matter, if
worse can be, sent his book against F. Campion to be perused, which things
the Lieutenant would never have done or permitted, if he had borne that good
affection to her M. as he requires in Catholics, or if he and his fellows
might be posed in their thoughts, and of the time future, and their intentions
to come.

And it may be one of these fellows devises or some other of like spirit and
invention, An other new practice and persecution.
to send the poor Catholics whom they have ruined at home, to Terra Florida,
there to exercise their religion and to have freedom of conscience, a strange
coozenage and craft, to be rid of the poor gentilmen under pretense of their
preferme^t, but most men of the realm wish rather the puritans there, as an
humor that our co^monvvealth had more need to be purged of.

Who are also better acquainted in those parts, as being once sent thither out
of Geneua by Calvin, when the french made the like attempt with as good
success as I fear these shall have, which in truth can not by the law of God
and good conscience, if I take it right, possess those parts which by former
composition and by decree of Alexander the vj, pertains to an other Prince.

It is the Catholics that have justly possessed England these thousand years,
it is no reason they should be thrust into the Indes for their dwelling. but
this is their art to weaken our side against the day of their full reueng, which
may be reckoned amongst the greatest of our persecutions, and to proceed of a
shrevvder head then Nortons.

But al these deep distresses, calamities and injuries, The conclusion of the
preface, with an exhortation and prayer.
which we suffer, not so much at her M. hands, or her grauest Counselors as
by these sinful, irreligious persons, their il enformers, we do from the
bottom of our hearts forgive, and desire God of his unspeakable mercy to turn
away his heavy hand of justice, from the Realm, and from every one, that
either procured, or consented to the deaths of these his blessed Saints, or the
trouble of his holy Israel, whose blood and death most dear in our Lords
sight, I pray CHRIST JESUS they call not for vengeance, but for mercy and grace
toward their persecutors, that they may rather with penance consider in this
life against whom they have pricked, then see and feel it to their confusion
in the next.

But whatsoever fall through this great sin or our other offenses either to
their ennemies, or to us their friends, that are yet left in this vvretched
world, in the worst days that were this thousand years, and in the heauiest
and most douteful condition of our country that was since the conversion:
these Martyrs are blessed, The bliss of these martyrs souls.
safe, free, past al mortal miseries, in the hands and guard of God, where the
torment of malice can not touch them, nor such reach them, of whom our Savior
said, Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more to
do.

They are exceeding happy certs, that live not these dooleful days, but a
thousand times more happy, that have the grace and privilege to yield any drop
of blood for the appeasing of Gods wrath, and assvvaging this public rage of
sin and heresy. Their deaths precious, their souls in glory, their
memories in benediction, their names eternal: The honor of their bodies.
yea even their bodies which were the infirm part of these noble Machabees,
though hanging on ports, pinnacles, poles and gibbets, though torn of beasts
and birds: yet rest in peace, and are more honorable, sacreed, and sovereign:
then the embaumed bodies of what worldly state soever in their regal
sepulchers.

That day and hour they stood in the carte in misery and desolation as it
seemed to the simple, yet even then were they more happy then all the multitude
that beheld them, never a wise man that there stood thought otherwise, though
the present pains and brief ignominy seemed to fools and carnal men to be
extreme misery: but al those were so momentaine, that their better part was
in heavens bliss, before their bodies were cold or out of the bouchiers hand,
their souls prayed unto both by their happy fellows openly, and by many a
good man secretly, before their bonnes were cold. Because S. Augustine gives
us that rule, That we must not pray for Martyrs, but pray to them.

What honor shall they be in hereafter in Gods Church, and in our country
specially, The honor they be in already.
when malice and envy shall be worn out, it is easy to conjecture. When even
in the days of their persecutors, and in as sharp punishment, diligence and
watchfulnes, that their memories be not recommendable to the world, as ever
was used of the old heathen persecutors, against S. Policarp, S. Albon, and
other ancient Martyrs, yet their renoume has passed through all the Christian
world, and has pearsed the very heretics hearts in France, Geneua and
Germany. No talk, as I am credibly informed, more common there, then of this
late double slaughter, first of F. Campion and his two fellows, then of
these vij. Machabees.

And for the Catholics, of Italy, Spain, France, and namely (which is less
to be marueled at) of England, The great desire men have of their relics.
more then the weight in gold would be given, and is offered for any piece of
their relics, either of their bodies, hair, bones or garments, yea or any
thing that has any spot or stain of their innocent and sacred blood. Wherein
surely great diligence and honorable zeal has been shevved by diverse noble
gentilme^ and verteous people, that have to their great danger obtained some
good pieces of them, to satisfy presently the godly greedy appetite of holy
persons of diverse nations making extreme suit for them

The devotion of the people toward their bodies already.
Marry that is most notable and memorable, that diverse devout people of our
nation that can get no part of their sacred relics, yet come as it were on
pilgrimage to the places where their quarters or heads be set up, under
pretense of gasing and asking whose heads or bodies they be, and what
traitors they were, whose heads are set high above others, there, to do their
devotion and prayers unto them, whose lives they knevv to be so innocent, and
deaths so glorious before God and the world.

IESV! what a pleasur, what honor and blessedness have their ennemies done unto
them, thus soddenly and everlastingly, to make them numbered in glory amongst
the saints: we and al their friends, and all the princes of the world, if they
could have yielded to them all the Kingdoms of the earth and the glory thereof,
could not have benefited them so much vvitingly, as their ennemies have done
against their intention, but by the providence of God, who turns the wicked
injustice of man, to the eternal good and honor of his Church and Saints.

O good God CHRIST JESUS, give these, thy, their, and our persecutors, for thy
deaths sake, and for this fresh blood of thy MARTYRS, and for the groans,
sighs and tears, of so many thousand thy chained, Imprisoned and afflicted
Saints, give them mercy and grace to see that they go not the right way to
save our country and them selves from perdition either temporal or eternal,
humble their hearts to the obedience of thy Lieutenant general, and to thy holy
spovvse in earth, that so under thee, and not against or above thee, our Prince
ELIZABETH as a member of thy Church, and not as head of the same, may reduce
her Realm to the unity of the Christian world, and so rule and govern our
temporal and civil state, in long peace, much honor and security. Amen.

Proverb. 17. Qui iustificat impium and quim condemnat iustum, abominabilis est
vterque apud dominum.

that is

He that justifies the impious, and he that condemns the just, both are
abominable before God.


A TRVE REPORT OF the death and Martyrdom of F. Campion Jesuit and Priest, M.
Shervvin, and M. Bryan Priests.
Boethius li. 1 de consol. philosoph. Pro verae virtutis premijs, falsi sceleris
poenas subimus.


And first, of F. Edmund Campion Priest, of the society of the name of JESUS,
Bachiler of Divinity, and sometime fellovv of S. John Baptists College in
Oxford.
THESE three glorious Confessors, learned, meek, godly and constant Priests,
upon the first day of December in the year of our Lord 1581, were (under
pretense of high treason, most injuriously, to the great lamentation generally
of al good men) drawn from the Tovver to Tyborne, there to be Martyred for
the CATHOLIC FAITH and RELIGION. F. Campion was alone on one herdle, the other
two together on an other, all molested by Ministers and others calling upon
them by the way for their subversion: and by some also as opportunity served,
and as in a case of so great danger it conveniently might be, comforted. and
F. Campion specially, by one consulted in some cases of conscience and
religion, and the mire wherevvith he was al to be moyled most courteously
wiped his face.

When they were come to the place of execution, where diverse of her M.
honorable Counsel, with many honorable personages, and Gentilmen of worship
and good account, beside an infinite multitude of people, attended their
coming, F. Campion was first brought up into the carte, where after some
small pavvse, and after the great rumor of so many people somevvhat appeased,
with grave countenance, and svveet voice, stovvtly spoke as follovveth.

Spectaculum facti sumus Mundo in the text.
Deo, Angelis and hominibus, saying, these are the words of S. Paul,
Englished thus: We are made a spectacle, or a sight unto God, unto his Angels,
and unto men: verified this day in me, who am here a spectacle unto my Lord, a
spectacle unto his Angels, and unto you men.

And here going forvvard in his text, They would not suffer him to speak in
religion, lest he should have persuaded the people.
was interrupted and cut of by Sir Frauncis Knovvles and the Sherifes,
ernestly urging him to confess his treason against her M. and to acknovvledge
him self guilty. To whom he ansvvered saying, For the treasons which have been
laid to my charge, and I am come here to suffer for: I desire you al to bear
witness with me, that thereof I am altogether innocent.

Whereupon, answer was made to him by one of the Counsel, that he might not
seem to deny the objections against him, having been proved so manifestly to
his face, both by sufficient witness and evidence. Well my Lord (quoth F.
Campion) I am a Catholic man and a Priest, in that faith have I lived
hitherto, and in that faith I do entend to dye, and if you esteem my religion
Treason, then of force I must grant unto you, as for any other treason, I
never committed, God is my Judge.

But you have now what you do desire, I beseech you to have patience, and
suffer me to speak a word or two, for discharge of my conscience. But being
not suffered to go forvvard, he was forced to speak only to that point
which they most urged, His INNOCENCE.
protesting that he was guiltles and innocent of al treason and conspiracy,
craving credit to be given to his answers, as to the last answer made upon
his death and soul: A time, when such a man would never lie.
adding that touching this point, both the Jury might easily be deceived, and
more also put into the evidence then was true. Notwithstanding he forgave, as
he would be forgiven, Great charity.
desiring al them to forgive him who^ he had confessed upon the rack. (for upon
the commisioners oaths, that no harm should come unto them, he uttered some
persons, with whom he had been).

He expounds his letter, falsely co^strued by the adversaries.
Further he declared the meaning of a letter sent by him self in time of his
imprisonement, to M. Pound a captive then also in the Tovver, in which he
wrote, he would not disclose the secrets of some houses where he had been
entertained, affirming on his soul, that the secrets he mea^t in that letter,
were not as it was misconstred by the ennemie, treason or conspiracy, or any
matter else, any way entented against her M. or the state, but saying of Mass
hearing of confession, Which in these miserable days, must be done as
secretly, as murder or treason.
preaching, and such like duties and functions of Priesthod: this he protested
to be true, as he would answer before God.

Then he desired Sir Frauncis Knovvles, and some other of nobility to hear
him touching one Richardson condemned about a book of his, and earnestly
besought them to have consideration of that man, saying, he was not that
Richardson which brought his book, and this he affirmed with vehement
protestation upon his death. ( This notvvithstanding, Richardson was executed,
one man for another, quid pro quo, like il poticaries.)

A new practice to coulor their injustice.
Then one Hearne a schole Master, as I learned after, red the new advertisement
openely with loud voice to the people, published only to coulor so manifest
and express injury: F. Campion all the time of his reading, deuoutely praying.

Notvvithstanding which advertisement or defense of theirs, as well because
they distrusted their own policy in publication thereof, as that they did
also desire some better coulor or faster visard for their procedings, pressed
him to declare his opinion of Pius quintus Bull concerning the excommunication
of the Q. To which demand he gave no answer.

But being asked whether he renounced the POPE, said he was a Catholic.
whereupon one inferred, saying: Catholicisme is treason, in Atheism.
In your Catholicisme (I noted the word) al treason is contained. In fine,
preparing him self to drink his last draught of Christ's cup, was interrupted
in his prayer by a Minister, willing him to say, Christ have mercy upon me, or
some like prayer with him: unto whom he loking back with mild countenance,
humbly said: Catholics may not pray with Heretics.
You and I are not one in religion, wherefore I pray you content your self, I
bar none of prayer, only I desire them of the household of faith to pray with
me, and in my agony te say one CREED (for a signification that he died for
the confession of the Catholic faith therein contained.)

Some also called on him to pray in English: to whom he ansvvered, that he
would pray in a language that he well understood. And God to.
At the vpshot of this conflict he was willed to ask the Q. forgeuenes and to
pray for her.

He meekely ansvvered: Wherein have I offended her? In this I am innocent,
this is my last speech, INNOCENCE.
in this give me credit, I have and do pray for her. Then did the Lord Charles
Howard ask of him, For which Queen he prayed, whether for Elizabeth Q. To
whom he ansvvered, Yea for Elizabeth your Queen and my Queen. And the carte
being drawn away, he meekly and sweetly yielded his soul unto his Savior,
protesting that he died a perfect Catholic.

Which his mylde death and former sincer protestations and speeches of his
innocence, In the book printed in Mundaies name, of his death.
moved the people to such compassion and tears, that the adversaries in their
printed books were glad to excuse the matter.

So graciously and gloriously this blessed man ended and overcame in Christ al
these mortal myseries, now enjoying in heaven the triumphant crown of his
happy confession and Martyrdom: F Campion martyred by Gods providence in the
city of his nativity.
made by Gods providence before all London, the place of his nativity. That
such of his citizens as were not vvorthie to enjoy the life and labors of one
of the famousest persons that their city has bredde in our memory: may yet,
either by his sacred innocent blood, He prays for his friends and ennemies.
povvred out here among them, or by his holy prayers, which he now doubtless
makes both for his loving friends and deadly persecutors, be converted from
their damnable and palpable errors.

His age.
He lived in this world about forty and two years: after his childhod and
education in London, he was brought up in S. John's college of Oxford,
passingly beloved for his singular graces, of the founder thereof, Sir Thomas
White of worthy memory, at whose burial he made an eloquent oration in
latin, having made the like before in English, at the funerals of my L.
Dudley, late wife to the Earl of Leicester. Where after he had passed with all
commendation through such exercises, degrees and offices, as the university
yeldeth to men of his condition: He passed through al offices in the
university.
though he were never wholly inclinable to the sects of this time, yet by the
importunate persuasions of some of his friends. much desirous for his vvorldly
honor and advancement to have him come to the pulpite, and take liuinges, he
suffered him self to be made deacon after their nevve manner, not well knovving
then, how odible to God, that and the rest of their schismatical degrees be:

But for all that our Lord mercifully with held him from that ambitious course
which is the goulfe that many goodly wits have perished in, He went into
Irland and wrote the story thereof eloquently.
in these days. Therefore spending some more time in study, and travailing into
Irland, the history of which country he vvrotte very truly and eloquently,
hearing that there was a Seminary not long before begone in Doway, thither
he went, where after a years great diligence and many excercises done booth in
house and public schools, He went to the Seminary at Douay.
he proceeded bachilier of divinity, He proceeded Bachiler of Divinity.
to his great comendation, and the honor of our nation.

Nevertheless all this while, specially, being now of more devotion, zeal,
lerning and judgment then before, the continual cogitation of that
Schismatical order of English deaconshipe which he had taken, did so sore
oppress his mind, His trouble of mind for taking scismatical orders.
and the conceit of the greatness of that sin, so burdened his conscience,
that no counsel of learned friends could give him satisfaction, nor otherwise
deliver him of the fearful conceit of that profane degree, til he entered into
religion, by penance and holy profession to wipe a way the same.

So making his choice of the society of the name of JESUS, he went to Rome,
He went to Rome, and there entered into religion.
where by the superior of that order he was admitted, and so not remaining in
the City much more then a month, he was sent into Beameland, He is sent into
Beamland.
where he abode viij. years, and was made Priest in Prage, continually
teaching, preaching, catechizing, writing and travailing for the Church of God.
Made priest.
Whereby he became so famous, that not only other principal states, He
preaches before the Emperor.
but the Imperial Majesty was contented often to hear him preach. Til at
lenght by the suit of such as knevve his great graces in dealing with heretics
for their conversion, his General called him thence to be bestovved upon his
own native country.

Vvhithervvarde by long and great trauail he came going about by Rome (because
his superiors knevve him not, He is sent home again by his superiors.
nor would not send him before they savve him) and by Remes, where besides
other communication parteining to the reduction of our country to the
Catholic faith, he demanded of D. Allen whether he thought that any service
he could do in England the time being as it is, His co^municatio^ with D. Allen.
were like to be vvorth al these long labors and hazardes past and to come: or
might counteruaile the lackes that those should seem to have by his absence
from whence he came. To which D. Allen ansvvered.

Father (quoth he) first, whatsoever you did there, D. Allens answer.
may be done by others one or mo of your order. Secondly, you owe more duty
to England then to Beamland, and to London, then to Prage: though it likes me
well that you have made some recompense to that country for the old wound it
received by us. In vvicliffes time, of whom they learned their heresies.
Thirdly, the recovery of one soul from heresy, is vvorth al your pains, as
I hope you shall gain a great many: because the harvest is both more plentiful
and more ripe with us, then in those parts. Finally, the revvard may be
greater, for you may be martyred for it at home, which you can not obtain
lightely there. So he was satisfied, and of this communication I have heard
him often speak.

And at last he happily landed at Dover upon the morrow afser Midsomer-day,
The day of his arriual in England.
the year 1580. being by Gods great goodness delivered out of the searchers and
officers hands, who held him with them upon suspicion for certane hours, He
was stayed at Dover.
upon deliberation to have sent him to the Council.

That was Christ's special work and providence, to be glorified booth in his
preaching a whole year, to the inspeakable good of innumerable deceived
souls, and also in his precious death afterward. Coming therefore to London,
he preached there his first sermon upon SS. Peter and Paul's day, which I was
at my self, His first Sermon.
having a full audience and very worshipful: but afterward booth there, and in
sundry parts of the realm, far greater through the fame and experience of his
manifold virtues, great eloquence and lerning, many Protestants of good nature
at sundry times admitted also to the same, who ever afterward contemned their
vulgar pulpit men in comparison of him.

The first man of calling to whose house he was conducted in the country,
The speeches bewixt him and the gentilman, in whose house he first preached in
the country.
demanded of the person that brought him thither, being him self of good
worship, what he was, and from whence he came, and lerning that he was a
religious man, and one that had been long in foraine parts: before he would
admit him, took him aside and asked the causes of his return home, and
repair to him, and whether he meant not under coulor of religion to withdravv
her M. subjects from their obedience.

To which he ansvvered, protesting before God, that he had neither other
commission of his superiors, nor inte^tion of him self, then to minister the
holy Sacraments, preach, and teach the people to salvation: and that he neither
could nor would meddle with matter of state. Whereupon the party embraced
him, and bid him heartily welcome to his house. Finding afterward by a littel
further acquaintance, which all the world might see, that he was no man for
worldly matters, but only for the schole, Church and pulpit, wherein his gifts
were excellent, in the highest degree.

And from that day, til his apprehension, he preached once a day at the least,
He preached daily and often. He converted many of the best sort.
often twice, and sometimes thrice. whereby through Gods goodness he converted
sundry in most shires of the Realm, of most wisdom and vvorshipe, besides
young Gentilmen students and others of al sorts.

At his first entrance he made his proffer of disputation for such causes as he
alleged in the same, His chale^dg and his book written to the universities.
and more at large afterward in his eloquent and learned book to both the
universities. Whereby the Protestant Preachers and Prelates, found them selves
so deeply wounded in their doctrine and credit, notvvithstanding they had
patched up a fevv pamphletes without al grace against him, that they pricked
her M. Council to alter the question from controversy in religion, The
protestants devise to overthrow him.
to the cause of the Prince and matter of state, that so they might defend
that by force and authority, which they could not do by all their lerning and
divinity.

Thereupon it was given out by diverse speeches and proclamations, that great
consederacies of POPE and foraine Princes were made for the invasion of the
Land, and that the Iesuistes and Seminary Priests were sent in forsooth to
prepare their ways: and such like trumperie, to beguile and incense the simple
against them. Then al exquisite diligence was used for the apprehension of
others, but specially of F. Campion, whom being but one among thousands of
the Churches children, The folly of the adversary.
nor the chief in England of his order, yet they called the Popes Champian and
right hand.

At length after he had labored in Gods harvest well nere xiij. Months, by
the notorious wickedness of on George Eliote a forelorne fellovv, Eliot the
traditor.
such as for affliction of holy men this world commonly uses, after long
search and much a do, by Gods permission he fell into the persecutors hands the
xvij. His apprehension.
of July 1581. being found in a secret closset in a Catholic Gentilman and
confessors house, called M. Yates of Lyford: And in what sort.
tvvoe Godly Priests M. Forde and M. Collington being with him, al lying, when
the ennemy discovered them, upon a bed their faces and hands lifted up to
heaven. He offered his ij fellows before in the time of the search, His
charity.
that if they thought all that a do was for him, and that his yelding might
acquit them, he would give him self up to their hands, but they would not
suffer that, in any wise: but hearing one an others confession expected Gods
good vvil together, every one having enjoined penance to say thrice, Fiat
voluntas tua domine, thy vvil be fulfilled and Sancte Ioannes Baptista ora pro
me, saint John Baptist pray for me. Which blessed Saint they principally
prayed unto, for that the said Father Campion, was delivered as he took it,
His patron.
out of the searchers hands at Dover, by the holy mediation of that holy
prophet, his special patron.

But F. Campion the man of God, His behavior.
being now in the power of his said traditor, and the officers, and made a
spectacle, and matter of mockery to the unwise multitude and ungodly of al
sorts, showed such marckable modesty, myldnes, patience, and Christian
humility in all his speeches and doings, that the good were excedingly
edified, and the ennemies much astonished.

After ij. His carrying up to London.
days that he was in the sheriff of Barkeshires custody, he was carried with
the rest as well Priests as Gentilmen, and other in that place apprehended,
toward London. In the way he had many pretty and pleasant disputes, speeches
and answers with the Gentilmen that guarded him, and other that came to see
him: to their wonderful liking and admiration of his so cheereful and
Christian behavior, in the midst of his destresses, which to the worldly
there about him seemed intolerable, but to him that had such an inward man
they were nothing.

At Abington among others, diverse scholars of Oxford came to see the man so
famous, whereof being told by one M. Lidcote, he said, he was very glad, him
self being once of that university, and asked whether they would hear a
sermon. There at dinner Eliote said unto him, Eliots speech to F. Campion.
M. Campion, you look cherefully upon every body but me, I know you are
angry with me in your heart for this work: God forgive the Eliot (said he)
for so judging of me: I forgive thee, and in token thereof I drink to thee,
yea and if thou vvilt repent and come to confession I vvil absolve thee: but
large penance thou must have.

M. Filbies strange dream.
Afterward at Henley, M. Filby a Priest and one of the prisoners (not found in
the house with the rest, but taken in the vvatch, as he was coming to the
house) had in his sleep a significant dream or vision, of the ripping up of
his body and taking out of his bowels: the terror whereof caused him to cry
so loud, that the whole house was raised thereby, which afterward in his
own, F. Campions, and other his fellows Martyrdom, was accomplished.

Besides the tying of their legs under the horses bellies, and binding their
arms behind them, which was done to others also, the Counsel appointed
special punishment and disgraces for F. Campion, Disgraces done to F. Campion.
not ever wont to be done til the party were convicted of some crime,
commanding a paper to be set upon his hat with great capital letters shevving
him to be CAMPION THE SEDITIOVS IESVIT: as the herodia^s once reuested his
Master for the like cause, and in like kind of mockery with kingly robe,
crown, and scepter.

And to take their further pleasure of him, order was given, they should stay
at Colbrucke a good piece of friday and al night that thence they might bring
him and his fellows upon Saturday in triumph through the city and the whole
length thereof, specially through such places where by reason of the markets
of that day, the greatest concourse of the common people was, whom in such
matters they seek of policy most to please, which was executed
accordingly: The wise lament. The simple gaze.
al London almost beholding the spectacle, the simple gasing and with delight
beholding the novelty, the wise lamenting to see our country fallen to such
barbarous iniquity, as to abuse a sacred man so honorable in all nations for
his lerning, and of so innocent a life.

When he came by the Cross in Chepe, He does reverence to the CROSS which
in these days there, is odious.
in the best manner he could being pinyoned, He christianly made the sign of
our Savior upon his breast: and with like humility, deeply bent his body for
reverence toward Christ's image there. Which was a strange sight to the
deceived people of that place.

So that day which was the xxij. of July, Committed to prison in the Tovver.
he was delivered up to the Lieutenant of the Towere. Where besides the
ordinary miseries incident to that kind of imprisonnement, doubled by the
inhumaine dealing and deep hatred of Catholics, The rigor and hatred of the
Lieutenant. Often examined and racked. The interrogatories at his first racking.
of the chief officer there, after sundry examinations, terrors, and threattes
by the L. Chauncellor and other of the Counsel and commission, he was diverse
times racked, to wring out of him by intolerable torments whose houses he
frequented, by whom he was releiued, whom he had reconciled, what he knevve
(a strange case) by their confessions, when, which way, for what purpose,
by what commission, he came into the Realm, how, where, and by whom, he
printed and dispersed his books and such like.

At his first racking they went no farther with him, using no great rigor
with him in the torment: The 2. racking, is for forged Treasons.
but afterward when they savv he could not be vvon to co^descende somvvhat at
least in religion, which they most desired, they thought good to forge matter
of treason, and framed their demaundes accordingly, about which he was so
cruelly torn and rent upon the torture the two last times, that he told a
secret friend of his that found means to speak with him, that he thought they
meant to make him a way in that sort and that they demanded him questions of
relieuing with money the Irish rebels, of conspiring the Queens death,
invasion of the realm, and of the sense of certain words of a letter which
he vvrote to M. Pound for answer of his former, The infidelity of the
Protestant messenger.
which a good fellovv promised by oath and his faith (that is the faith of a
protestant) receiving an angel for his labor to deliver saffly, but did not.
The meaning of the words he both then and afterward, as well at the bar,
as at his death uttered most sincerely: and for the rest if they had torn him
in ten thousand pieces or stilled him to the quint essence, in that holy breast
they should never have found any piece of those fained treasons.

He used to fall down at the rackehovvse door upon both knees to commend him
self to Gods mercy and to crave his grace of patience in his pains. His
usage before he went to the rack. His patience upon the rack.
As also being upon the rack he cried continually with much myldenes upon God
and the holy name of JESUS. And when his body was so cruelly distent and
streached upon the torment that he did hang by his arms and feet only, he
most charitably forgave his tormenters, His charity.
and the causers thereof, and thanked one of the rack men meekely for putting a
stone under his back bone. A pitiful case.
He said to his keeper after his last racking, that it was a preface to death.

The communication betwixt him and his keeper.
And his said keeper asking him the next day how he felt his hands and feet:
he ansvvered, not il, because not at al. And being in that case benomme^ both
of hand and foot, he likened him self to an elephant, He was merry in God in all his myseries.
which being down could not rise: when he could hold the bread he had to
eat, betwixt both his hands, he would compare him self to an ape: so mirry
the man of God was in mind in all his bodily miseries.

Now the ennemies not contented thus, and by many other vnvvonted ways of
tortures, secretly as is said used tovvard him to afflict his body, but also no
less by a thousand deuilish devises and sclaunderous reports, The Ministers
false reports and slanders of him.
sought to wrong him in his fame. Opening all the impure mouths of the
Ministers in London, to bark against the man of God: sometimes, that there
was great hope he would be come a protestant: sometimes, that he had been at
the Church, and service: an other while, that he had uttered upon the rack all that ever he knevv: yea sometime they blevve out of the Tower, that he had
therefore killed himself in prison: which no doubt they would further have
avouched, if he had died by racking, as it was very like he should have done.

The Lieutenant at the beginning hoping verily that he might be gained to their
side in some points, either by svveete words, The Lieutenants practice.
great promises of promotions, or extreme tormens, extolled the man excedingly,
affirming diverse times that he was such an one as England never brought forth:
and suer (said he) it is Gods singular goodness that he returned home. No doubt
her Majesty vvil prefer him to great livings.

And that he might lack no good pretense to yield unto their desires,
Potestants brought to co^fere with him.
they often brought to him such divines as they had, to confer with him: and
to persuade him privately to relente somvvhat to their sect but not prevailing
that way, they caused under coulor of satisfying his former challenge of
disputation, diverse public disputs, Disputatio^s.
or rather certain light skirmishes, to bark at him, and examine him: 4. or
5. of the contrary side, al provided as well as they could, against one void of
al helps saving Gods grace and lerning: The disorder of their conference.
now, one snatching and now another, and sometimes al biting together,
besides the Masters of the game, that when they savv F. Campion in answering
and defending him self (for he was never suffered to oppose) to gripe the
adversaries hard, The partiality used in the disputations.
then they parted them with their tipstaues, commanding him to silence, and
threatening him with laws, authority and punishment.

Thus they disputed iij several times with the man of God, shevving nothing in
the world, but barbarous despite, malice, and so deep ignorance in divinity,
that truly diverse of the protestants them selves were ashamed thereof, Their
ignorance in divinity.
and marueled excedingly at the others lerning, meekenes, patience and
humility. But these disputatio^s are to be published, and long sithince should
have been, but that having but hard means to print, and fevv presses and many
other books in hand, it could not yet be done.

And now by this time falling from al hope of his yelding to them, and so from
al pity and good affection toward him, they practiced how to make him and
his fellows away by foam show of justice, and that not for the new made
treasons: that is to say, No care of religion.
for mere religion, which in truth fevv of our adversaries have any care of:
but for matters of treason, so called of old, and action against the state,
meaning by the state (whatsoever they otherwise pretend) not the preservation
of her Majesty and the weale-publike in deed, which would and might flourish,
and more securely stand with the Catholic Religion, then by the sect now
allowed, but the wealfare of some fevv raised and vpholden by this new
religion. Well they forged matter for their purpose and to English cares most
odible: and found out three or four false fellows that would not stick to
svvere for their sake the same, against him whom they never knevv nor savv in
their life, before his apprehension. And yeat fearing lest nothing which they
could feign and forge should be hable for any ouert act done or past to touch
him, they fraudulently sought before hand to seek his inward intentions and
cogitations of future things also, by certain demaundes concerning the Bull of
excommunication put forth against the Queen, or that might be puplished
hereafter, that so at least they might seem to condemn him for his internal
il affection, whom they could not couinct of any traitorous external fact. So
they caused an enditement to be drawn against him and a number more of most
godly learned Priests, comprising him and them al in one, and together, that
whatsoever couloerably might be avouched or witnessed of the rest or any on of
the^ al either present or absent, al might seem to the simple and to the Ieury
deeply biazed by fear and authority, to touch him also with the rest.

The 14 day of November an. 1581. he and seven others were brought from the
tower to the kings beanches bar, and a bille of their enditement read in the
hearing of F. Campion and the rest: how that in the xxij year of the reign of
our sovereign Lady the Queen Maij vltimo, The enditement.
in the parties beyond the seas, they had practiced the Q. deposition and
death, and the sturring of rebellion within, and invasion of the Realm from
abroad and such like stuff. Whereupon he was arraigned with the other, and
commanded as custom is in such cases, to hold up his hand: but being
pitifully by his often cruel racking benumbed before of both his arms, and
having them vvrapped in a furred cuffe, he was ^ot able to lift his hand so
high, nor in that sor^ ^s the rest did, and was required of him: one of his
fellows humbly kissing his sacred hands, so vvroung for the confession of
Christ, took of his cuffe, and so he lifted up his arm as high as he could
pleading not guilty, as the rest did and not much standing upon privilege of
their clergy, Small respect of Clergy now.
which they knevv in this wicked time in that court could have no place, he
and all the other agreed to be tried by God and their country. Vvherevvith F.
Campion said as a true Father in the behalf of him self and the rest of his
children: F. Campions protestation.
I protest before God and his Angels, before heaven and earth, before the
world and this bar vvhereat I stand, which is but a small resemblance of
the terrible judgment of the next life, that I am not guilty thereof, nor of
any part of treason contained in the indictment, or of any other treason
whatsoever. Again (quoth he) to prove any such thing against me, it is merely
impossible. And then with great admiration and zealous indignation he lift up
his voice. Is it possible to find xij. so wicked and consciencelesse men in
this city or land, that vvil find us guilty together of this one crime,
diverse of us never meeting nor knowinge one the other before our bringing to
this bar? And at the same time when they asked the other severally by whom
they would be tried, the blessed confessor M. Shervvine, with great courage, M.
Sherwins protestation.
clapping his hand upon the bar, answered, That they would be tried by God
and the country, and by all the trials that be in heaven or earth, that God or
man has. Thus much only done that day, and a quest was impanelled for the
next monday: being the xx. day of the same month. But three of the first of
that impanel being Squiers, Some were loath to be of the Quest.
belike fearing God, and doubting that justice should have no free course that
day: but that conscience were like to be put to silence in these men's case,
whose blood was so ernestly thirsted a^^er, those three I say appeared not when
the day came, M. Lie forman of this Quest.
Lie Vtterbarrester in the Inner temple with the rest, made their appearance. In
the mean time F. Campion and his fellow confessors, were recaried to the
prisons from whence they came.

They were brought back again to judgment the xx. day of Nouembre before
mentioned. The great number of nobles and others, that were present to see the
event of this strange arraignement.
where notvvithstanding what commandment soever, or order taken to the
contrary, there was such a presence of people, and that of the more honorable,
wise, learned and best sort, as was never seen nor heard of in that court, in
our, or our fathers memories before us, or at any arraigneme^t of the greatest
dukes or peers of this land (excepting the number of Lords which are there in
that case of necessity) so wonderful an expectation there was, of some, to
see the end of this marvelous tragedy, contening so many strange and diverse
acts, of examining, racking, disputing, treacheries, proditions, subornations
of false vvitnesses, and the like: of others, to behold whether the old honor
of law and justice, wherein our nation has of all the world had the praise,
could or durst stand, not vvithstanding any violent impression of power and
authority to the contrary. Whether there were any Markams left in the land
that would yield up coiffe, office and life, In Edward the 4 his days.
rather then give sentence against such as they knevv in conscience to be
innocent, and in truth not touched by any evidence what soever. But this one
day gave that assembly and all the world, both present and to come, proffe of
the pitiful fall, together with the CATHOLIC FAITH, of Equity, law,
conscience and justice, in our poor country.

For nothing there said by the Queens Attorney, Solliciter or other
Councellers of that kind, No sufficie^^ prooffes brought against them.
either by any of those that were at their racking, either by the suborned
false vvitnesses, could in any well informed man's conscience, touch any of them:
as every of the rest, and specially this man of God F. Campion did point by
point prove and declare, F. Campions actions least subject to calumniatio^.
as clear as the sun. Yet of all the rest F. Campions innocence and defense
was so plain in all men's sight, that what coulor soever might be made for the
others condemnation, yet for F. Campions none at al. The judgment of the^ that
stood by.
In so much that whilst the Ieurie were gone forth, diverse wise and well
learned lawiers and others, coniecturing and conferring one with an other what
should be the verdict, they al agreed that it was impossible to condemn F.
Campion, although some of the rest perhaps might upon some sequel be declared
guilty.

They sought specially F. Campions death. M. Popham gave them a watch word that
the Q. Would have it found.
But it was F. Campion that specially was designed to die, and for his sake the
rest. And therefore no defense could serve. The poor xij. therefore did that,
that they thought was looked for at their hands, and made them al guilty,
which M. Popham told them must needs be found: the vniustest verdict that ever
I think was given up in that land, vvhereat already, not only England, but all the Christian world does vvonder, and al our posterity shall lament, and be
ashamed of the same. Thereupon the sentence of like iniquity, The sentence.
that al these holy men should be hanged, drawn and quartered, after the
usual terms of judgment in the crime of treason, was given: and so that
doleful day was spent. F. Campion and his happy associats rejoiced in God,
using diverse holy speeches of scriptures to their own comforts and other men's
much edifying, and so were sent back to their prisons again, where being
laid up in yrons for the rest of their time, expected Gods mercy and the
Queens pleasure.

And this blessed F. Campion amongst the rest passed his time with such godly
spiritual exercises, The good opinion of his keeper.
with such patience and svveete speeches to his keeper and others that had to
deal with him, who afterward having the custody of Norton, comparing their
conditions together, said plainly, he had before a Saint in his keeping, and
now a Devil: for which speech the plain spoken man was shent.

And all this while, His temptations to yield.
they still tempted him to their religion promising life and liberty,
notvvithstanding his pretended heinous treasons, if he would yield never so
little unto them: The Lieutenants proffer to his sister.
in so much as the Lieutenant said to his sister that came to visit him but
iij days before his Martyrdom, if he will yet conform him self, I will make him
spend a hundereth povvnds by the ear. But his grace and excellency could not
be expugned by such base proffers, the kingdom of England and all the wealth
and glory therein, not being a just permutation for the least of his virtues,
much less for his dear soul bought with Christ's precious blood, and adorned
with Gods so singular gifts and graces, the crown and reward whereof, he
received upon the first of December as is before said.

The morning that he was brought forth to dye, he meet with M. Shervvin and M.
Brian expecting his coming in Coulharbar. Where there passed much svveete
speech and embrasing one of an other: al which while M. Lieutena^t sought for
F. Campions buffe ierkine, meaning if he could have found it, for the more
disgrace of the man of God, to have executed him in it, so base is the
despiteful malice of such, who with all the persecutors of Gods Saints, shall
be doonge and durte, when these men shall be gloriouse in heaven and earth. The
basse and malicious spite of the heretic.
When he was brought furthe among the people, he said alovvde, God save you,
God bless you al, and make you Catholics.

And so was carried away to the ordinary place of execution, and was hanged
upon the new gallovves, which is now called among Catholics the Gibbet of
Martyrs, The Gibbet of Martyrs.
because it was first set up and dedicated in the blood of an innocent
Catholic Confessor, and afterward by this man's, and diverse Priests and others
Martyrdoms, made sacred.

After he had travailed a good while in the spiritual harvest of our country,
he wrote this letter following of the state thereof to his general, which I will
set down in Latin as he wrote it, because he had a special grace in that
language.

THE COPY.
POSTQVAM, diuina fretus misericordia, quintum iam mensem in his locis dego, R.
P. putaui faciundum, vt qui status rerum sit, quique videatur futurus, literis
exponerem. Aues enim scire, sat scio, cum pro communi solicitudine, tum pro tuo
in me amore, quid agam, quid sperem, quidve proficiam. Priora scripseram
Audomaropoli, que deinceps consecuta sunt, paucis accipe.

Dei consilio factum interpretor, vt quu^ dies ipsos quatuor, ventos secundos
expectassem, quinto demum, qui festus Ioanni Baptistae fuit, diuo tutelari meo,
cui causam iterque sepe co^mendaueram, vesperi nauigare^. Postridie, summo
mane, Dorobernium appulimus, homulus meus et ego. Ibi minimum abfuit quin
caperemur. Coram Praetore ciuitatis iussi comparuimus. Ille multa coniectat,
nos esse qui eramus: hosts haereticarum partium, amantes auitae fidei,
dissimulasse nomina, religionis causa domo abfuisse, eius propagandae studio
redijsse. Vnu^ vrgebat, Alanum esse me, quod quidem ego, iureiurando, si opus
esset interposito, me negaturum profitebar.

Tandem decernit, idque crebro repetit, cum certa custodia, ad regni proceres
transmitti oportere. Neque scio, quis illi noua^ mentem iniecerit, preter Deum,
cui tacitus interea supplicabam, D. Ioanne adhibito precatore, cuius auspicijs
eo perueneram. Repent prodit senex, cui Deus benefaxit. Placet, inquit, vos
dimitti. Valete. Avolauimus. Haec and hijs similia, quae hic experior quum apud
me reputo, confirmor in sententia, comprehensum iri, cum ea res ad maiorem Dei
gloriam spectabit, non prius.

Londinu^ attigi. Duxit me bonus angelus nescientem, in eandem domum, quae P.
antea Robertum exceperat. Accurrunt nobilissimi iuuenes, salutant, vestiunt,
ornant, armant, emittunt ex vrbe. Partem aliquam regionis obequito pene
quotidie. Ingens omnino messis est. Sedens in equo meditor conciunculam, quam
ingressus in domum perpolio. Deinde, si qui me adeunt, colloquor, aut
confitentes audio. Mane peracto sacro, verba facio. Aures afferunt sitientes,
Sacramenta percipiunt frequentissimi.

In ijs administrandis passim iuuamur a sacerdotibus, quos vbique reperimus.
Ita fit vt and populo satisfiat, and haec prouincia minus laboriosa nobis
reddatur. Presbyteri nostrates ipsi doctrina and sanctimonia praestantes,
tantam opinionem nostri ordinis excitarunt, vt venerationem quam nobis exhibent
Catholici, non nisi timide commemorandam existimem. Quo magis videndum est, vt
subsidiarij, quibus nunc maxim indigemus, eiusmodi sint, qui haec omnia probe
sustentent. Ante omnia concionibus habendis exerceantur. Diu euadere manus
haereticorum non possumus: tot oculi, tot ora, tot hostium insidiae.

Habitu dementissimo sum, quem saepe commuto, itemque nomina. Lego ipse
literas, in quarum prima pagella scribirur, Campianus captus est. Hoc iam ita
decantatum circunsonat aures meas quocunque venio, vt mihi timor ipse timorem
excusserit. Anima mea in manibus meis semper. Hoc afferant meditatum, qui
supplementi gratia mittentur.

Verum quae solatia in hoc negotio miscentur, ea non solum formidinem poenae,
sed etiam poenas quaslibet infinita dulcedine compensant. Conscientia pura,
robur inuictum, ardor incredibilis, opera insignis, numerus innumerabilis,
summi, medij, infimi, omni aetate and sexu. Hic inter ipsos haereticos, si qui
sunt paulo aequiores, prouerbium inoleuit, Catholicos esse, qui argentum
resoluant quod debent: adeoque si qui Catholici iniuriosius quempiam tractant,
expostulatur eo nomine, quod a talibus minime isthuc fieri conueniat.

In summa, haeresis pessime audit apud omnes. nec vllum genus hominum vulgo
vilius, aut putidius est, ipsorum ministris. Merito indignamur, in tam perdita
causa, homines tam indoctos, tam sceleratos, tam dissectos, tam abiectos,
cultissimis ingenijs dominari.

Circumferuntur in nos edicta minacissima. Cautione, and bonoru^ precibus, and,
quod caput est, diuino munere, incolumes bonam Insulae partem peruasimus.
Plerosque video, oblitos sui, de nobis esse sollicitos. Quiddam ijs diebus
acciderat, quod non speraram, Dei voluntate.

Posueram in scripto, articulate causas and postulata quaedam aequissima.
Fassus me Presbyterum societatis, hoc animo venisse, vt amplificarem fidem
catholicam, docerem euangelium, administrarem sacramenta, petebam a Regina and
regni principibus audientiam, and aduersarios ad certamen prouocabam.
Decreueram penes me vnum exe^plar tenere, vt mecum ad iudices raperetur:
alterum amico co^miseram, vt si me meu^que prenderent, illud continuo
spargeretur.

Amicus non caelauit, edidit, teritur, aduersarij insaniunt. Pro suggestu
respondent, se quidem cupere, Reginam nolle, rebus iam constitutis, amplius
disputare. Nos lascerant maledictis. Seditiosos, hypocritas, etiam haereticos
appellant, quod maxim ridetur. Populus ea re noster est. Mirifice nobis hoc
erratum profuit. Si iubemur fide publica, dabimus nos in curiam. Sed nihil
minus cogitant.

Omnes custodiae nostrae refertae sunt catholicis, nouae parantur. Nunc demum
aperte pronuntiant, satius esse paucos internecioni dedere proditores, quam tot
animas prodere. De suis martyribus iam tacent. Superamus enim causa, numero,
dignitate, opinione omnium.

Afferimus pro aliquot apostatis aut sutoribus exustis, Episcopos, Regulos,
Equites, antiquissimam nobilitatem, spectacula doctrinae, probitatis,
prudentiae, lectissimam iuuentutem, matronas illustres, reliquos fortunae
mediocris plane extra numerum, omnes aut semel, aut quotidie consumptos. Dum
haec scribo, immanissima saeuit persequutio. Moesta domus. Nam aut mortem
suorum praedicant, aut latebras, aut vincula, aut rapinam bonorum: tamen
pergunt animose.

Etiam nunc plurimi restituuntur Ecclesiae, nouitij milites dant nomina:
veterani sanguinem profundunt. Hoc sacro cruore, ijsque hostijs promerebitur
Deus, and sine dubio breui vincemus. Vides ergo R. P. quantopere vestris
sacrificijs, and precibus, and caelesti auxilio egeamus.

Erunt in Anglia, qui curent salutem sua^, erunt qui prouehant alienam:
irascatur homo, saeuiat demon. Tandiu haec Ecclesia consistet, dum pastores
ouibus non deerunt. Impedior praesentissimi rumore periculi, ne plura hoc
tempore. Exurgat Deus, and dissipentur inimici eius.

Vale. Ed. Camp.

THE SAME IN ENGLISH.
Right Reverend Father.
HAVING now passed by Gods great mercy five months in these places, I
thought it good to give you intelligence by my letters of the present stat of
things here, and what we may of likelihod look for, to come: for I am sure
both for your common care of us al, and special love to me, you long to know
what I do, what hope I have, how I proceed. Of other things that fell before,
I wrote from S. Omers, what have sithence happened, now I will briefly recompt
unto you.

It fell out, as I conster it, by Gods special provision, that tarying for wind
four days together, I should at length take sea the fifth day in the evening,
which was the feast of S. John Baptist my peculiare patron, to whom I had
often before commended my cause and journey. So we arrived safely at Dover the
morovv following very early, my little man and I together. Little Raph.
There we were at the very point to be taken, being by commandment brought
before the Mayor of the town, who coniectured many things, suspected us to be
such as in deed we were, adversaries of the new heretical faction, favorers
of the old fathers faith, that we dissembled our names, had been abroad for
religion, and returned again to spread the same. One thing he especially
urged, that I was Allen: which I denied, profering my oath, if need were for
the verefying thereof.

At length he resolves (and that so it should be he often repeated) that with
some to guard me I should be sent to the Counsel. Neither can I tell who altered
his determination, saving God to whom underhand I then humbly prayed, using S.
John's intercession also, by whose happy help I safely came so far. Suddenly
comes forth an old man, God give him grace for his labor. Well (quoth he) it
is agreed you shall be dismissed, fare you well. And so we to go apase. The
which things considered and the like that daily befall unto me, I am verily
persuaded, that one day I shall be apprehended: but that, then, when it shall
most parteine to Gods glory, and not before.

Well, I came to London, and my good Angel guided me vnvvitting into the same
house that had harbored F. Robert before. Vvhither young Ge^tlemen came to me,
one every hand, they embrace me, reapparrel me, fornish me, weapon me, and
convey me out of the city. I ride about some piece of the country every day.
The harvest is wonderful great. On horse back I meditate my sermon, when I
come to the house I poolish it. Then I talk with such as come to speak with
me, or hear t^eir confessions. In the morning after Mass I preach. They hear
with exceeding greedines, and very often receive the Sacraments.

For the ministration whereof we are ever well assisted by Priests whom we find
in every place, whereby both the people is well served and we much eased in
our charge. The Priests of our country them selves being excellent for virtue
and learning, yet have raised so great an opinion of our society, that I dare
skarcely touch the exceeding reverence al catholics do unto us. How much more
is it requisite, that such as hereafter are to be sent for supply, whereof we
have great need, be such as may answer al men's expectation of them.
Specially let them be well trained for the pulpit. I can not long escape the
hands of the Heretics, the enemies have so many eyes, so many tongues, so many
scoutes and crafts.

I am in apparel to my self very ridiculouse, I often change it and my name
also. I read letters sometimes my self that in the first front tell nevves,
That Campion is taken. Which noised in every place where I come, so fills
mine ears with the sound thereof, that fear it self at taken away all fear.
My soul is in my own hands ever. Let such as you send for supply
preemeditate and make count of this alvvaies.

Mary the solaces that are ever intermedled with these miseries are so great,
that they do not only counteruaile the fear of what punishment temporal
soever, but by infinite svveetenes, make all worldly pains be they never so
great seem nothing. A conscience pure, a courage invincible, zeal incredible,
a work so worthy, the number innumerable, of high degree, of mean calling, of
the inferior sort, of every age and sex. Here even amongst the Protestants
them selves that are of mylder nature it is turned into a proverb, that he
must be a Catholic that paieth faithfully that he owes, in so much that if
any catholic do injury, every body expostulateth with him as for an act
unworthy of men of that calling.

To be short, Heresy hears ill of all men: neither is there any condition of
people commonly coumpted more vile and impure then their Ministers. And we
worthily have indignation, that fellows so unlearned, so evil, so derided, so
base, should in so desperate a quarrel ouerrule such a number of noble wits as
our Realm has.

Threatening edicts come forth against us daily, notvvithstanding by good
heed, and the prayers of good men, and which is the chief of all, by Gods
special gift, we have passed safely through the most part of the ^land. I find
many neglecting their own security, to have only care of my saftie. A
certine matter fell out these days by Gods appointement unlooked for.

I had set down in vvriting by several articles the causes of my coming in,
and made certain demaundes most reasonable. I professed my self to be a Priest
of the society, that I returned to enlarge the Catholic faith, to teach the
Gospel, to minister the Sacraments, humbly asking audience of the Queen and
the nobility of the Realm, and proffering disputatio^s to the adversaries. One
copy of this writing I determined to keep with me: that if I should fall into
the officers hands it might go with me: an other copy I laid in a friends
hand, that when my self with the other should be seized on, the other might
thereupon straight be dispersed.

But my said friend kept it not close long but divulged it, and it was redd
greedely, whereat the adversaries were mad, answering out of their pulpits,
that them selves certes would not refuse to dispute but the Queens pleasure
was not, that matters should be called to question, being already established.
In the mean while they tear and stinge us with their venomous tongues,
calling us seditious, hypocrites, yea, heretics too, which is much laughed
at. The people hereupon is ours, and that error of spreadinge abroad this
vvritting, has much advanced the cause. If we be commanded and may have safe
conduct, we will into the court.

But they mean nothing less, for they have filled all the old prisons with
Catholics, and now make new, and in fine plainly affirm, that it were
better to make a fevv traitors away, then so many souls should be lost.

Of their martyrs they brag no more now, for it is now come to pass, that
for a fevv apostatats and cobblers of theirs burned, we have Bishops, Lords,
kinghtes, the old nobility, paterns of learning piety and prudence, the
flovvre of the youth, noble matrones, and of the inferior sort innumerable,
either martyred at once, or by consuming prisonement dyinge daily. At the very
vvriting hereof the persecution rages most cruelly, the house where I am is
sadd: no other talk, but of death, flight, prison, or spoil of their friends.
Nevertheless they proceed with courage.

Very many even at this present being restored to the Church, new souldiars
give up their names, whiles the old offer up their blood. By which holy hosts
and oblations, God will be pleased: and we shall no question, by him overcome.

You see now therefore Reverend Father, how much need we have of your prayers
and sacrifices, and other heavenly help to go through with these things.
There will never want in England men that will have care of their own
salvation, nor such as shall advance other men's. Neither shall this Church here
ever fail, so long as Priests and pastors shall be found for the sheep: rage
man or devil never so much. But the rumor of present peril causes me here to
make an end. Arise God, his ennemies avoid.

Fare you well. Ed. Camp.

M. RAPH. SHERWINE PRIEST, AND MASTER OF ART.
FATHER Campion having so gloriously triumphed over the world the flesh the
devil, and Heresy, and had received his long desired crown: M. Sherwins
spiritual ex^rcises.
M. Raph Shervvine a godly, wise, discret, and learned priest, was brought into
the carte, a man so mortified, so feebled with fasting, watching, and such
other spiritual exercises, as was wonderful unto such, who had conuersed with
him before his emprisonment.

His behavior in the carte.
He standing upon the carte, with closed eyes, with hands lifted up to heaven
in contemplation and prayer, al men marking his demeanur, with mild voice
first made this demand: Does the people expect that I should speak? Being
ansvvered of many and some of nobility, yea, yea, with stout courage and
strong voice he said.

Then first, I thank the omnipotent and most merciful God the Father, for my
creation: my svveete and loving Savior CHRIST JESUS, for my redemption: and
the holy Ghost, for my sanctification: three persons and one God.

After this thanks giving unto the holy and blessed Trinity, entering into the
discourse of his faith, his condemnation and death, was interrupted and staid
by Sir Frauncis Knovvles and the Sherifes, saying: you have declared your
faith, and we know it, come to the point, and confess your treason and
disloyaultie toward your Prince.

INNOCENCE.
Whereupon he constantly said, I am innocent and guiltles. And being still
urged, ansvvered, I vvil not belie my self, for so should I condemn my own
soul. And although I have confusion in this world, yet I doubt not of my
salvation in CHRIST JESUS, in whom only I look to be saved, and in whose
death, Passion, and blood I only trust: and so made a svveete prayer to JESUS
acknovvledging the imperfection, misery, and sinful vvretchednes of his own
nature, The cause of his going beyond the seas.
still protesting his Innocence from al Treasons and traitorous practices, and
that his going out of this Realm beyond the seas, was only for his souls
health, to learn to save his soul.

And being again interrupted by Sir Frauncis Knovvles he ansvvered in this
wise, Tush, tush, you and I shall answer this before an other Judge, where
my innocence shall be known, and you see that I am guiltles of this.
Whereupon Sir Frauncis said, By consequence quoth he?
we know you are no contriuer or doer of this treason, for you are no man of
arms, but you are a traitor by consequence.

But M. Shervvine boldly ansvvered, If to be a CATHOLIC only, if to be a
perfect Catholic, be to be a traitor then am I a traitor. After which words
being by authority debarred of further speech, he said, I forgive al who
either by general presumption, His charity.
or particular error have procured my death, and so deuoutely prayed unto
JESUS: They batie this Bull wonderfully.
after which prayer he was urged to speak his opinion touching POPE Pius his
Bull. to which point he gave no answer.

Then being willed to pray for the Q M. he ansvvered, I have, and do. at
which words the L. Howard again asked, which Q. he meant, whether
Elizabeth Queen? He smileth as their folly.
to whom somewhat smiling he said, Yea for Elizabeth Queen, I now at this
instant pray my Lord God to make her his servant in this life, and after this
life coheir with CHRIST JESUS.

When he had thus prayed, there were there, A heinous treason, to wish the Q.
salvation.
which said openly, that he meant, to make her a Papist, to whom he boldly
replied, Else God forbid. And so collecting him self to prayer, died patiently,
constantly, and mildely, crying, JESUS, JESUS, JESUS, esto mihi JESUS.

Thus this blessed man was delivered of this corruptible body. of whose life I
thought good ^o set down some fevv lines also. He was a Master of art, He
was Senior in the act.
and so well learned, that he was Senior of his act or commencement, which is
a schole charge of honor, and done by him in the presence of the Earl of
Leicester, and diverse other of the nobility that came from the court, then
lying at Vvodstocke, to their great liking and his commendation. And skilful in
the to^ges. Left the university. Went to Doway.
He was also very skilful in the three tongues. And leaving the University,
and the condition he had in his college, for conscience sake, went over to
Doway to the Seminary that was then there: and after some years study in
Divinity was made Priest the xxiij of March the year M.D lxxvij. together
with M. Lavvrence Johnson, Was made Priest.
that was martyred under the name of Richardson, and the ij. of August the
same year, He went to Rome.
he was sent to Rome in company with M. Rishton who was condemned with him
also, where he studied in the Seminary, til the year M.D.LXXX. at what time
he returned homevvard, and came to Remes where he stayed certain days after
his fellows (who then by diverse ways and ports were entered into the
Realm) upon this occasion.

A motion made to the Pope, of a Suffragane for England.
There was not long before special suit made to his Holiness, that as we had of
priests to al spiritual purposes good store for our country, so we might have
at least one Suffragane or Bishop to supply diverse necessary functions that
could not be done by the inferior clergy, as amongst other things the
sacrament of Confirmation, Great lack of Confirmation.
which being specially ordained of our Savior to give strength and constancy
to stand in defense of the faith in such times of persecution as this is, was
much necessary for our country, and could not be had, by reason al our true
Bishops were either dead in prison, or so restrained that they could not
exercise that, or other their holy Ministeries.

The POPE though he deliberated thereupon some days, Causes why the Pope
would not grant it.
yet in the end upon very many wise considerations, and specially for that he
would not have any of that high calling to fall into the hands of the ennemy,
not doubting but that they would use such an one as barbarously, as any other
Priest or Catholic, did not think it good at that time to create any such.

But afterward the right Reverend in God Thomas Goldvvel Bishop of S. Assaph,
The cause why the Bishop of S. Assaph came out of Italy.
a most Venerable and ancient Confessor, that has suffered banishment for his
conscience half his life, though he be well nere lxxx years of age, hearing
the marvelous zeal of so many Godly Priests, and their heroical endeavors for
the salvation of their country, was sturred in spirit, and much desired to
end the remnant of his old years in the service of his country, and went to
his Holiness to desire his leave and benediction in that behalf: and with much
ado, for that great respect was had of his dignity and old age, it was
granted him.

Whereupon the old honorable Father adventured down as fare as Rhemes in all
the heat, where he gave to the Seminary the greatest comfort, and the same
yielded to him all the contentement in the world. Co^sulting there how to gain
our country to salvation by any office of life, or by glad suffering of death
it self.

Which meeting, What the Counsel imagined of his, and others coming down.
and specially that old and Reverend Confessors coming down for England as
they al deemed, put marvelous concepts into the Counsels heads, that there was
some great and nevve attempt or invasion tovvard: for worldly men standing only
at the vvatch of the temporal state, could not imagine that for gaining of a
soul or two, or for conversion of a kingdom either, such men would be so
dilligent and venturous as to come upon their pickes and roopes without some
vvorldly succors.

The cause of the Bishops stay and return.
Now it so chanced by Gods providence that the said Lord of S. Assaph for other
causes and specially for that he fell into a very dangerous ague with the
contagious cough which then reigned in Rhemes, he could not pass on in his
journey so spedely as other of the Society and Priests did, and therefore for
his more honor and comfort some other and specially this man of God. M.
Shervvine offered to tarry with his Lordship during his sickness, and then
when God should send him strength to be one of his chapliens and conductors
into his country, but it was resolved at length that for the uncertainty of
his recovery, M. Shervvine should pass forvvard tovvard Roan, and there rather
to expect him as he did.

But the good Father now much weakened by his sickness, and otherwise not
well appointed, nor in deed fit for to take the pains, nor any ways by reason
of his markeable person, very great age and feeblenes, long like to escape the
persecutors hands, was in fine altered from that purpose, and after his
recovery he thought good, rather to return into Italy again, as he did.

His apprehension.
And M. Shervvine went forvvard toward England, where after his arriual he
occupied him self in all functions belonging to Priesthod, with great zeal and
charity, and sone after he was taken in M. Roscarrokes chamber in London,
How he was used in prison.
and committed to the Marshalsey, where he lay night and day in a great pair
of shakles for the space of a month.

In November after his emprisonement, there came word from the Knight Marshal
to the keeper of the Marshalsey, to understand of him, whether there were any
Papists in his prison that durst or would maintain their cause by
disputation, A motion of disputatio^s.
and if there were any such, that then they should send him such questions as
they would defend, subscribed with their hands, and make them ready to
dispute, for they should understand from him shortly, of the manner, time and
place, how and where to dispute.

This motion was so well liked of the Catholics, Accepted by the Catholics.
that this M. Shervvine and two other Priests that were condemned with him
afterward, M. Heart and M. Bosgraue offered them selves to the combat, drew
out questions, subscribed their names, and sent them to the said. K Marshal.
But their questions pleasing him not, they do accept and allow of other
questions sent unto them from the said K. Marshal, and do expect with joyful
mind the day appointed to dispute.

But lo, He is removed to the Tovver.
even the day before they should have disputed, M. Shervvine was removed to the
Tovver. where he was at sundry and several times examined and racked.

In his first racking he was asked where F. Campion and F. Parsons were, His
racking, and the interrogatories.
why he and they came over into England, what acquaintance he had here in
England, whether he had said Mass in M. Roskarokes chamber, and whether he
had of him at any time money. His conferences with the Ministers did much good.
He was close prisoner almost a whole year, in which time he had diverse
conferences with Ministers both privately, and in some open audience both of
honorable and worshipful, to the honor of God, the benefit of his afflicted
Church, and to the admiration of most of the hearers. He was after his first
racking, fet out in a great snow, and laid upon the rack, Great cruelty.
and the Gentilman in whose chamber he was taken, was kept in a bye darck
corner, to hear his pitiful groans and complaints.

On Midsomer-day in the year 1581, He was dealt with al to go to the
^c^ismatical Church.
he was called before the Lieutena^t (as likewise al his fellovv prisoners
were) who demanded of him by commission from the Counsel, whether he would
go to their heretical service, who refusing, the Lieutenant told him the
danger of a late statute made in that behalf, and that farther he should be
endited upon that statute with in ij or iij days, so that at that time as it
should seem, The treason as then not hatched.
they had no such matter to lay against him as after was pretended, for it
was not as then, thoroughly hatched.

The order of his life in his spare diet, his continual prayer and meditation,
Even the Protestants did admire his virtues.
his long watching with often and sharp discipline used upon his body caus^d
great admiration to his keeper. who would alvvaies call him, a man of God, and
the best and deuoutest Priest that ever he savv in his life.

When he came out of the Lieutenants hal (with other of his fellows, two
days or there about before he was Martyred, having talked with a Minister,
who was never so holden up to the wal in his life, His no^able sp^ach to F.
Campion.
by report of such as stood by) he uttered these words, Ah F. Campion, I
shall be shortly above yonder fellovv, pointing to the sun, with such a
courage, that some said he was the resolutest man that ever they savv.

He vvil never be forgotten in the Tovver, for some words which he spoke when
he was ready to go to execution, attending F. Campion, who was lodged
further of. Charke the Minister can best report them, The very Ministers judge
him innocent.
who stood hard by him. Some of Charkes fellow Ministers said, those words
could not come from a guilty conscience.

THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN out of the Tovver by M. Shervvine to his
friends. iij or iiij of the latter lines, are vvanting.
BEING vvearie of well doing, and yet desirous not to do nothing (my dear
companions) I chose rather by vvritting unto you to perform my duty then
otherwise to recreate my head with cogitations less necessary.

Your liberality I have received, and disposed thereof to my great
contentation, when hereafter at the pleasure of God we shall meet in heaven, I
trust you shall be repaied Cum foenore. Delay of our death does somevvhat dull
me, it was not without cause that our Master him self said, Quod facis fac
cito.

Truth it is I hoped ere this, casting of this body of death, to have kissed
the precious glorified wounds of my svveete Savior, sitting in the throne of
his fathers own glory. Which desire as I trust descending from above, has
so quieted my mind, that since the Judicial sentence proceeded against us,
neither the sharpnes of the death has much terrified me, nor the shortness of
life much troubled me.

My sins are great I confess, but I flee to Gods mercy: my necligences are
without number I grant, but I appeal to my redeemers clemency. I have no
bouldnes but in his blood, his bitter passion is my only consolation. It is
comfortable that the Prophet has recorded, which is, that he has written us
in his hands. Oh that he would vouchsaffe to writ him self in our hearts, how
joyful should we then appear before the tribunal seat of his Fathers glory:
the dignity whereof when I think, my flesh quaketh, not sustaining by reason
of mortal infirmity the presence of my creators Majesty.

Our Lord perfect us to that end whereunto we were created, that leaving
this world, we may live in him, and of him, world without end. It is thought
that upon Monday or Tevvsday next we shall be passible, God grant us
humility, that we follovving his fotesteps may obtain the victory.

AN OTHER LETTER WRITTEN BY him the day before his Martyrdom, to his uncle M.
John Vvodvvard, a venerable Priest, abiding at Roan.
Absit vt gloriemur, nisi in CRVCE Domini IESV CHRISTI etc.
MY dearest uncle, after many conflicts and worldly corrasies, mixed with
Spiritual consolations, and Christian comfortes, it has pleased God of his
unspeakable mercy to call me out of this vale of misery. To him therefore for all his benefits at al times and for ever, be al praise and glory.

Your tender care alvvaies had over me, and cost bestovved on me, I trust in
heaven shall be revvarded. My prayers you have still had, and that was but
duty, other tokens of a grateful mind I could not show, by reason of my
restrained necessity.

This very morning, which is the festiual day of S. Andrew, I was advertised
by superior authority, that to morovv I was to end the course of this life,
God grant I may do it, to the imitation of this noble Apostle and servant of
God, and that with joy I may say rising of the herdle: Salve sancta CRVX etc.

Innocence is my only comfort, against all the forged villainy which is fathred
on my fellovv Priests and me. Well when by the high Judge God him self this
false visard of treason shall be removed from true Catholic men's faces, then
shall it appear who they be that carry a well meaning, and who an evil
murdering mind, in the mean season God forgive al injustice, and if it be his
blessed vvil to convert our persecutors, that they may become professors of his
truth.

Prayers for my soul procure for me my loving patron, and so having great
need to prepare my self for God, never quieter in mind, nor less troubled
toward God, bynding al my iniquities up in his precious wounds, I bid you
fare well, yea and once again the louingest uncle that ever kinsman had in
this world, fare well.

God grant us both his grace and blessing until the end, that living in his
fear, amd dying in his favor, we may enjoy one the other for ever. And so my
good old John fare well. Salute al my fellow Catholics, and so without farther
troubling of you, my sweetest benefactor, farevvel. On S. Andrews day. 1581.

Your cosen, Raph Shervvine Priest.

M. Alexander Brian Priest, and graduat.
AFTER these two glorious martyrs, was brought unto his Martyrdom M.
Alexander Brian, a man not unlearned, M. Brians rare gifts.
of a very svveet grace in preaching, but of passing zeal, patience,
constancy and humility, of whose pressures in prison and tortures (strange I
dare say among heathens, more monstrous among Christians) I vvil speak a none.

Being in the carte prepared to death, he begane first to declare his bringing
up in the Catholic faith and religion, his being in Oxford, upon which word he
was staid by one saying: what have we to do with Oxford? come to the purpose,
and confess thy treason. INNOCENCE.
Whereupon he ansvvered, I am not guilty of any such death, I was never at
Rome, nor then at Remes, when D. Saunders came into Irland. To this end he
spoke and protested, as he would answer before God.

He spoke not much, but where as he was urged more then the other to speak
what he thought of the said Bull of Pius quintus, This Bull is still revived.
he said he did believe of it as al Catholics and the Catholic faith does,
and thereupon protesting him self to die a true Catholic, as he was saying
Miserere mei Deus, was delivered of the carte with more pain by necligence of
the hangman then either of the other, who after his beheading, him self
dismembered, his heart, bowels, and intrailes burned, to the great admiration of
some, being laid upon the block his belly dovvnevvard, lifted up his whole
body then remaining from the ground: and this I add upon report of others, not
mine own sight.

Of this man's life we will not speak, though it was alvvaies for all virtue
and grace most spectable, but add only a fevv words of the things that he
endured for his faith in the time of his imprisonment.

He is taken and his chamber riffeled.
About the 28. of April he was apprehended in his chamber at midnight by Norton,
his chamber riffeled, three pounds of money taken from him (for that is a
principal verb in all apprehensions of Catholics) his apparel and other
things, especially a trunk wherein was a silver Chalice, and much other good
stuff, which was not his, but committed to his custody taken away also, and
he sent close prisoner to the Counter, with commandment to stay all that asked
for him, He was almost famished.
and that he should have neither meat nor drink, who in such order continued
until he was almost famished.

In fine by friendship or what means. I know not, he got a penny vvorth of
hard cheese, and a little broken bread, with a pint of strong bear, which
brought him into such an extreme thirst, that he assaied to take with his hatte
the dropps of rain from the house eeues, but could not reach them.

The morrow after the Ascension day he was removed to the Tower, where he
verily thought, He is removed to the Tovver.
he should have been utterly famished, and therefore carried with him a little
piece of his hard cheese, His fear of famine there.
which his keeper in searching him found about him, but M Brian humbly
entreaded his keeper not to take it from him. His ordinary allowance in
drink, which was at every meal a potel-potful, could not for a great while
suffice him, such was his exceeding thirst.

Within two days after his coming to the Tower, he was brought before the
Lieutenant, His examination.
M. D. Hammon, and Norton, who examined him after their common manner, first in
tendering an oath to answer to al etc. And because he would not confess
where he had seen F. Parsons, how he was ma^teined, where he had said
Mass, A cruel kind of Torment.
and whose confessions he had hard: they caused needles to be thrust under his
nails, vvhereat M. Brian was not moved at al, but with a constant mind and
pleasant countenance said the Psalm Miserere, desiring God to forgive his
tormentors. Vvhereat D. Hammon stamped and stared, as a man half beside him
self, saying, What a thing is this, if a man were not settled in his
religion, this were enough to convert him.

He was even to the dismembring of his body rent and torn upon the rack, He
was pitifully racked.
because he would not confess where F. Parsons was, where the print was, and
what books he had sold, and so was returned to his lodging for that time.

His racked again almost to death.
Yet the next day follovving notvvithstanding the great distemperature and
sorenes of his whole body, his senses being dead, and his blood congealed (for
this is the effect of racking) he was brought to the torture again, and there
stretched with greater severity then before (supposing with him self, that
they would pluck him in pieces, and to his thinking there was a vain broken
in his hand, and that blood ishued out there a pase) he put on the armor of
patience, resolving to dye, rather then to hurt any creature living, and having
his mind raised in co^templation of Christ's bitter PASSION, he sounded, that
they were fame to sprinckle cold water on his face to revive him again, yet
they released no part of his pain.

The POPE, not the Queen, is head of the Church.
And here Norton, because they could get nothing of him, asked him, whether the
Queen were supreme head of the Church of England or not, to this he said, I
am a Catholic, and I believe in this as a Catholic should do. Why said
Norton, They say the POPE is. And so say I, ansvvered M. Brian.

So was CHRIST, and S. Paul used, by the like men.
Here also the Lieutenant used railing and reuiling words, and bobd him under
the chinne, and flapt him on the cheeks after an uncharitable manner. And all the commissioners rose up and went their way, giving commandment to leave
him so al night, at which when they savv he was nothing moved, they willed
he should be taken from the torment, This is a terrible Dongeon.
and sent him again to Vvalesboure, where not able to move hand nor foot or
any part of his body, he lay in his clothes xv. days together without bedding
in great pain and anguish.

When he went to westminster hal to be condemned, He was not ashamed of his
Masters Badge.
he made a Cross, of such vvodd as he could get, which he carried with him
openly, he made shifte also to shave his crown, because he would signify to
the prating Ministers, (which scoffed and mocked him at his apprehension,
saying that he was ashamed of his vocation) that he was not ashamed of his
holy orders, nor yet that he would blush at his religion. When he was
condemned, yrons ^vere commanded upon him, and the rest, as soon as they came
home to the Tovver, and they were never taken of til they were fetch forth to
be martyred.

These torments and the man's constancy are comparable truly to the old strange
sufferings of the renommed Martyrs of the primative Church in the days of
Nero, Decius and Diocletian, which he could never have borne by humane
streingth, if God had not given his singular and supernatural grace. Him self
confessed that by a vovv he made and other special exercises, he had great
consolation in all these vexations, whereof I will set down his own words
in an Epistle that he wrote to the Fathers of the society in England.

YET now, since I am by the appointement of God deprived of liberty, so as I
can not any longer employe my self in this profitable exercise: my desire is
eftsoon revived, my spirit waxes fervent hot, and at the last I have made a
vovv and promise to God, not rashly (as I hope) but in the fear of God, not to
any other end, then that I might thereby more devoutly, and more acceptably
serve God, to my more certain salvation, and to a more gloriouse triumph over
my ghoostlie enemy. I have made a vovv (I say) that when so ever it shall
please God to deliver me (so that once at the lenght it like him) I will with
in one year then next following, assign my self wholy to the fathers of the
society, and that (If God inspire their hearts to admit me) I vvil gladly, and
with exceeding great joy throvvly, and from the bottom of my heart give up and
surrender all my vvil to the service of God, and in all obedience under them.

This vovv was to me a passing great joy, and consolation, in the mids of
all my distresses, and tribulations. And therefore, with greater hope to obtein
fortitude and patience, I drevv near to the throne of his divine majesty,
with the assistance of the blessed and perpetual virgin MARIE, and of all the
Saints. And I hope verily this came of God, for I did it even in the time of
prayer, when me thought, my mind was settled upon heavenly things. For thus it
was.

The same day that I was first tormented on the rack, before I came to the
place, ^euing my mind to prayer, and commending my self and all mine to our
Lord, I was replenished, and filled up with a kind of supernatural
svvetenesse of Spirit. And even while I was calling upon the most holy name
of JESUS, and upon the blessed virgin MARIE (for I was in saying the Rosarie)
my mind was cheerfully disposed, well comforted, and readily prepared and
bent, to suffer and endure those torments which even then I most certainly
looked for. At the length my former purpose came into my mind, and there with
all a thought coincidently fell upon me to ratify that now by vow, which
before I had determined. When I had ended my prayers: I reuolued these things
in my mind deeply: and with reason (as well as I could) I did debate and
discuss them thorovvly: I Judge i^ good, and expedient for me: I accomplished
my desire: I put forth my vow and promise freely and boldly, with the
condition a for^ said.

Which act, (me thinks) God him self did approu^ and allow by and by. ^or
in all my afflictions and torments, he of his infinite goodn^sse, mercifully
and tenderly, did stand by and assiste me, comforting me in my trouble and
necessity. Delivering my soul from wicked lips, from the deceitful tongue,
and from the roaring lions, then ready gaping for their pray.

Whether this that I will say, be miraculous or no, God he knovveth: but true
it is, and thereof my conscience is a witness before God. And this I say: that
in the end of the torture though my hands and feet were violently stretched
and racked, and my adversaries fulfilled their wicked lust, in practisinge
their ^ruell ^yranny upon my body, yet notvvitstanding I was with out sense
and feeling well nigh of all grief, and p^^ine: and not so only, but as it
were comforted, eased and refreshed of the greeues of the torture by past, I
continued still with perfect and present senses, in quietness of heart, and
tranquillity of mind. Which thing when the commissioners did see, they
departed, and in going forth of the door, they gave order to rack me again
the next day following, after the same sort. Now, when I heard them say so:
It gave me in my mind by and by and I did verily believe and trust, that with
the help of God, I should be able to bear and suffer it patiently In the mean
time (as well as I could) I did muse and meditate upon the most bitter
passion of our Savior, and how full of innumerable pains it was. And
whiles I was thus occupied: me thought, that my left hand was vvounded in the
palm, and that I felt the blood run out, but in very deed there was no
such thing, nor any other pain then that, which seemed to be in my hand.

Now then, that my suit and request may be well known unto you: for so much
as I am out of hope, in short time to recover and ^^love my former liberty so
as I might personally speak unto you, And whether happily I shall once at
lenght speak unto you in this world, no mor all man does know. In the mean
season I humbly submitt my self unto you, and (suppliantly kneeling) I
besecht you, to do, and dispose for me, and of me, as shall seem good to
your wisdom. And with an humble mind most heartily I crave, that (if it may
be in my absens) it would please you to admit me into you. Society, and to
regester and inrole me among you: that so, with humble men I may have a sense
and feling of hum^^^^ie, (...) deuou^e men I may sound out a lovvde, the lauds
and praises of God, and continually render thanks to him, forms be^e^its: and
then after being aided by the prayers of many, I may run more safely to he
mark which I shoot at, and with out peril attain to the price tha^ is
promised.

And I am not ignorant that the snares and wiles of our ancient enemy are
infinite: for he is the slye serpent, which lies in the shadovv of woods,
vvinding, whirling, and turning about many ways: and with his vviles and
subtle shifts he attempteth maruelously to delude and abuse the souls of the
simple which want a faithful guide: in so much, as it is not without cause,
that we are admonished to try the spirits, if they be of God. To you therefore,
because you are spiritual, and accustomed to this kind of conflict. I commend
all this business: beseching you even by the bovveles of Gods mercy that you
would vouchesafe to direct me with your counsel and wisdom. And if in your
sight it seem profitable, for more hono^ to God, more commodity to his
Church, and eternal sasuation to my soul, that I be preferred to that
Society of the most holy name of JESUS: then presently before God, and in the
court of my conscience, I do promise obedience, to all and singular Rectors,
and governors established all ready, or to be hereafter established, and
likewise to all rules, or laws received in this society, to the vttermoste
of my power, and so far as God does give me grace: God is my witness, and
this my own hand writting shall be a testimony hereof in the day of Judgment.
As for the health of my body, you have no cause to doubt, for now well nere I
have recovered my former strength and hardness. By Gods help, and I wax every
day stronger than other. Thus in all other things commending my self to your
prayers. I bid you farevvell in our Lord, carefully expecting what you think
good to determine of me.

Vale.
An old fellovv of F. Campions would needs satisfy his devotion toward him
in these verses, which came to my hand after his life was printed, and
therefore I was forced to put them somevvhat out of place.
SIT mihifas EDMVNDE pater, quia mors tua vere
Sancta est, vitae etiam sic meminisse tuae.
Noui te Oxonij puerum puer haeret imago
Primatui cordi non abolenda meos
Doctus eras, facundus eras, gratissimus vnus
Omnibus ob mores ingeniumque tuum.
Per quoscunque gradus ires, Seu laurea hacca,
Sieve Magisterij te decoraret honor,
Primus eras, princepsque gregis, cessere priores
Parts and palmam caetera turba tibi.
Post vbi maturis fieres prouectior annis,
Procurator eras: hic honor amplus erat.
Multorum interea prudens, pius, atque peritus
Nobilium doctor, Caetera quid memorem?
Omnia pro Christo, reputas quasi stercor^, n^uem
Scandis, and angustas traijcis exul aquas.
Moxque Duacena consistis in vrbe, do^moque
Anglorum, cuius Praeses Alanus erat.
Totus es in studijs suoris, quorum ante^semper
Pene tibi puero mirits inhaesit amor.
Timotheo similis didicisti valde adolescens
Quae peritura fore^t non aliquando bona.
Accessit sacris studijs sacer and gradus: illum
Sacra Duacenae iura dedere scholae.
Pergis and ascendis caelestia versus, honores
Nec petis humanos aemplius: alta magis
Et diuina petis. Domus est celeberrima, IESV
Nomine dicta, illi te sociare cupis.
Is Romam: factus socius de nomine IESV,
Iussus es Arctoas mox peragrare plagas.
Bruna tibi primum, post est habitata Vienna,
Tertia p^stremo mansio ^^^ga fuit.
Hic tibi creuit honor, creuit nomenque decusque.
Famaque Teutonico grandis in orb tua est,
Multa doces, scribis, loqueris: Rectore iubente,
Omnia tam facile, quam iubet ille, facis.
Sieve perorares rhetor, facundia qualis!
Seu metra conficeres, quis meliora dedit!
AMBROSIA est testis, sic dicta tragaedia, cuius
Applausum, incessit tota theatra tremor.
Sed tamen excellens inter tua talia multa,
Festo quoque die Sermo latinus erat.
Obstupuere homines docti, quae maxima turba
Adfuit: attonitus Caesar and ipse fuit.
Os tibi mellifluum, faci^i grat^ venustas,
Vox dulcis, lenis, plena, s^nora, grauis.
Res sacrae, eloquium sanctum, diuina loquel^^
Spiritus accensus totus amore Dei.
Haesere astantes in te vultuque manuque,
Inque tuas voces pendula turba fuit.
Quid multis? multas animas lucraris ab orco,
Hussum and Lutherum saepe valere iubent.
Hos inter varios conatus atque labores,
Iussus es ad patrios ire repent lares.
Anglia mox repetenda tibi est, quae relligionis
Causa iam pridem terra relicta tibi est.
Longum iter ingressus pedibus, lateque patentes
Permensus terras, ad tua vota venis.
Saluus and incolumis Christo duce littorae prensa^,
Formidanda alijs, sed tibi tuta satis.
Haeresis hic regnat, non vna aut altera, multos
Multorum errores insulae parua colit.
Hanc syluam ingressus variaru^ hinc inde feraru^,
Te pugnae contra tot fera monstra paras.
Immo vltro inuitas, sed nemo restipulatur:
Horror erat, tecum disseruisse palam.
Scribis adhuc modicum sed magno pondere librum:
Ecce nouus metus, and mayor in host furor.
Interea peragrans regionem vltroque citroque,
Atque docens veram C^^^olicamque fide^^
Omnia tr^xisti tecum; liquefacta fluebant
Ligna, Petra, montes ignibus icta tuis.
Magnatum ipsorum mollescunt corda, tu^rum
Fulmine verb^rum, caetera turba magis.
Poenituit vitae pariter fideique prioris,
Et se tam miseros ante fuisse pudet.
Ardor inest animis, deuotio pectora complet,
Iamque colunt mira relligione Deum.
Post annum captus, vinctus, ductusque triumph^,
Tortus, and in mortem iudicis o^e datus.
Denique perpossus quacunque habet iste libellus,
Inter tot fratres MARTY^ ad astra migras
O foelix vitae cursus, finisque beatus:
Fortiter in domino pro Dominoque mori.
Sis mihi quaso tuo facilis patronus alumno,
Nec cesses pro me saepe rogare Deum.
Thus far of the three first, which only of the xiiij condemned the xx and xxi
of November 1580, were as you have heard together executed.

Now how after long tract of time, strait handeling, and much art used, to
make them either confess the fained fact, or deny their faith: Seven more of
them were Martyred, after their examinanation in these articles following, and
their several answers subscribed with their own hands, and with the iiij
commission^rs attestation of the truth of the act, we vvil briefly report.



THE ARTICLES MINISTERED TO THE 7 PRIESTS, AND OTHERS CONDEMNED WITH THEM,
WITH the answers of these 7 to the same. 13. Maij. 1582.
WHETHER the Bull of Pius quintus against the Queens Majesty, be a lavvfull
sentence, and ought to be obeyed by the subjects of England?

2 Whether the Queens Majesty be a lavvfull Queen, and ought to be obeyed by
the subjects of England, notvvithstanding the Bull of Pius quintus, or any other
Bull or sentence that the Pope has pronounced, or may pronounce against her
Majesty?

3 Whether the Pope have or had power to authorize the Earls of
Northumberlande and Westmerland, and other her Majesty's subjects, to rebel
or take arms against her Majesty, or to authorize Doctor Saunders, or
others, to invade Irelande, or any other her dominions, and to bear arms
against her, and whether they did therein lavvfully or no?

4 Whether the Pope have power to discharge any of her highness subjects, or
the subjects of any Christian prince from their allegiance or oath of obedience
to her Majesty, or to their prince for any cause?

5 Whether the said Doctor Saunders, in his book of the visible monarchy of
the Church, and Doctor Bristovve, in his book of Motives (vvriting in
allowance, commendation, and confirmation of the said Bull of Pius quintus)
have therein taught, testified, or maintained a truth or a falsehood?

6 If the Pope do by his Bull or sentence pronounce her Majesty to be
deprived, and no lavvful Queen, and her subjects to be discharged of their
allegiance and obedience unto her: and after, the Pope or any other by his
appointment and authority, do invade this Realm, which part vvoulde you
take, or which part ought a good subject of England to take?

Luke Kirbyes Answer.
LVKE KIRBY. To the first he says, that the resolution of this article,
depends upon the general question, whether the Pope may for any cause depose
a prince: wherein his opinion is, that for some causes he may lavvfully depose
a prince, and that such a sentence ought to be obeyed.

To the second, he thinks that in some cases (as infidelity or such like)
her Majesty is not to be obeyed against the Popes Bull and sentence, for so he
says he has read, that the Pope has so done, de facto, against other princes.

To the third he says, he cannot answer it.

To the fourth, that the Pope (for infidelity) has such power, as is
mentioned is this article.

To the fifth, he thinks, that both Doctor Saunders, and Doctor Bristovve,
might be deceived in these points of their books, but whether they were
deceived or not, he refers to God.

To the last he says, that when the case shall happen, he must then take
counsel what were best for him to do.

Luke Kirby.
John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


Thomas Cottoms Answer.
THOMAS COTTOM. To ye first, in this and al other questions he believes as the
Catholic Church (which he takes to be the Church of Rome) teaches him. And
other answer he makes not, to any of the rest of these articles.

By me Thomas Cottom Priest,
John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


Lavvrence Richardsons Answer.
LAWRENCE RICHARDSON. To the fifth article he answers, that so far as
Doctor Saunders, and Doctor Bristovve agree with the Catholic doctrine of
the Church of Rome, he allows that doctrine to be true. And touching the
first, and all the rest of the articles he says, that in all matters not
repugnant to the Catholic religion, he professes obedience to her Majesty,
and otherwise makes no answer to any of them, but believes therein as he
is taught by the Catholic Church of Rome.

Lavvrence Richardson.
John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


Thomas Fordes Answer.
THOMAS FORD. To the first he says, that he cannot answer, because he is not
privy to the circumstances of that Bull, but if he did see a Bull published by
Gregory the thirteenth, he would then deliver his opinion thereof.

To the second he says, that the Pope has authority to depose a prince upon
certain occasions: and when such a Bull shall be pronounced against her
Majesty, he will then answer what the duty of her subjects, and what her
right is.

To the third he says, he is a private subject, and vvil not answer to any
of these questions.

To the fourth he says, that the Pope has authority upon certain occasions
(which he vvil not name) to discharge subjects of their obedience to their
Prince.

To the fifth he says, that Doctor Saunders, and Doctor Bristovve, be
learned men, and whether they have taught truly in their books mentioned in
this article, he refers the answer to them selves, for him self vvil not
answer.

To the last he says, that when that case shall happen, he vvil make answer,
and not before.

Thomas Forde.
John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


John Sherts Answer.
JOHN SHERT. To all the articles he says, that he is a Catholic, and
svvarueth in no point from the Catholic faith, and in other sort to any of
these articles he refuses to answer.

John Shert.
John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


Robert Iohnsons Answer.
ROBERT JOHNSON. To the first he says, he can not answer.

To the second, he cannot tell what power or authority the Pope has in the
points named in this article.

To the third, he thinks that the Pope has authority in some cases, to
authorize subjects to take arms against their Prince.

To the fourrh, he thinks that the Pope for some causes, may discharge
subjects of their allegiance and obedience to their natural Prince.

To the fifth he says, the answer to this article depends upon the
lavvfulnesse of the cause for the which the Pope has given sentence against
her: but if the cause was just, then he thinks the doctrine of Doctor
Saunders, and Doctor Bristovv to be true. Whether the cause were just, or
not, he takes not upon him to judge.

To the last, he says, that if such deprivation and invasion should be made
for temporal matter, he would take part with her Majesty: but if it were for
any matter of his faith, he thinks he were then bound to take part with
the Pope.

Robert Johnson.
John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


William Filbee his Answer.
WILLIAM FILBEE. To the first he says, the Pope has authority to depose any
prince: and such sentences when they be promulgated ought to be obeyed by the
subjects of any prince: but touching the Bull of Pius quintus he can say
nothing, but if it was such as it is affirmed to be, he does allow it, and
says that it ought to be obeyed.

To the second he says, it is an hard question, and therefore he can not
answer it, but upon further aduisement, he answers as to the first.

To the third, he knovveth not what to say thereunto.

To the fourth he says, that so long as her Majesty remaynerh Queen, the
Pope has no authority to vvarrant her subjects to take arms against her, or
to disobey her, but if he should depose her, then he might discharge them of
their allegiance and obedience to her Majesty.

To the fifth he says, he vvil not meddle with the doctrine of Doctor
Saunders and Doctor Bristovve.

To the last, when this case happens, then he says he will answer: and
if he had been in Ireland, when Doctor Saunders was there, he vvoulde have
done as a priest should have done, that is, to pray that the right may have
place.

William Filbee.
John Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Jews. John Hammond.


THE MARTYRDOMES OE THE REVEREND PRIESTS M. THOMAS FORDE, M. John Sherte and
M. Robert Johnson, the XXVIII. of May, 1582.
And first of M. Thomas Forde, priest and Master of art.
THEY were al trailed upon herdles from the Tovver of London alonge the
streates thereof unto Tyborne, betwixt vj and vij of the clock in the
morning. first, M. Ford being set up in the carte, he blessed him self with
the sign of the Cross, being so vveake as he fell down in the carte, and
after he was up, he said: I am a Catholic, and do dye in the catholic
religion. and therevvith he was interrupted by Sheriff Martine, They ca^ not
abid, the confession of the Catholic faith.
saying, you come not hither to confess your religion, but as a traitor and
malefactor to the Queens Majesty and the whole Realm, They harp always
upon one string, that vvil not sound.
moving and sturing of sedition. And therefore I pray you go to and confess
your fault, and submit your self to the Queens mercy, and no doubt but she
would forgive you.

Whereunto he answered. That supposed offense vvherof I was endyted and
condemned, was the conspiring of her Majesty's death at Rome and Rhemes:
Neither was he ever as Rome or Remes in all his life.
whereof I was altogether not guitly, for the offense was supposed, for
conspiring the Queens Majesty's death in the 22 year of her Majesty's reign,
at which time I was in England remaining and long before that, for I have
remained here for the space of vj or vij years, and never departed this realm:
whereof I might bring the witness of an hundredth, yea five hundredth sufficient
men, and had thereupon been discharged at the bar, A notable charity, and
worthy such a priest.
if I would have disclosed their names with whom I had been, which I did
forbear only for fear to bring them in to trouble. Then Sheriff Martine
said, here is your own hand vvriting, with the testimony of worshipful
men, Nothing will serve to prove their condemnation to be just.
as the Queens Attorney, D. Hammo^, D. Jews and others, and if that vvil not
serve, here is one of your own companions that was the Popes scholar, to
testify your offense. To the which M. Forde ansvvered, that notvvithstanding,
I am altogether not guilty what soever you have written.

He continued for the most part in prayer secretly to him self, during the
time that the Sheriff or any other spoke to him. Then was a scrolle of his
examination redd by a Minister, to some articles he said nothing, but to others
he said that the POPE for some causes may depose a prince of his estate and
dignity, and discharge the subjects of their deuties and allegea^ce. for
(quoth he) this question was disputed xiiij years since, at Oxford by the
divines there, Though not determined by who^, the prince might be deposed.
before the Queens Majesty, and there it was made and proved to be a most
clear case in her own presence. And here being interrupted, A notable
co^panio^ for their purpose: that will bear witness of that which he never savv
nor hard in his life.
Monday the Popes scholar being called as a witness, said, That Forde was
priuey to their conspiracies, but was not able to affirm that ever he savv
him beyond the seas, this his assertion, M. Forde utterly denied upon his
death. And being asked what he thought of the Queens M, and vvithal willed to
ask her and the whole realm, whom he had stirred to sedition, forgeuenes. He
said, that he acknowledged her for his sufferaine and Queen, and that never
in his life he offended her, INNOCENCE.
and so praying secretly, desired al those that were of his faith to pray
with him: and ended with this prayer, JESUS, JESUS, JESUS, esto mihi JESUS.
and hanged until his fellovv M. Shert (belike to terrify him the more) might
see him.

M. John Shert Priest.
M. SHERT being brought from the herdle, and seeing his fellovv M. Forde hanged
before him, with a confident courage, smyling countenance, and with his
hands lifted up, he spoke as follovveth, O happy Tom, happy art thou that
did ru^ne that happy race, His martyrdo^ and innocence proved him to be a
Saint, and as to such a on he prayed.
O benedicta anima, thou art in good case. That blessed soul pray for me. And
being lifted into the carte, he desired al Catholics to pray for him. and
turning to the place of execution (by the commandment of the Sheriff) seeing
his fellovv bovveled and beheaded, he kneeled down, and cried

O Tom, o happy Tom, o blessed soul happy art thou, thy blessed soul pray
for me. And being found fault withal, because he prayed to those that were
dead, he said, O blessed lady mother of God pray for me, They ca^ not abid our
Lady to be prayed unto neither. A marvelous co^sta^cy
and all the Saints of heaven pray for me, the Sheriff finding fault with
this as with erroneous doctrine, he ansvvered that it was booth sound and
true doctrine, which he would now seal with his blood. and after began
as follows.

O blessed Lord, to thee be al honor and praise. First, I give the most hearty
thanks, A^ goodly speech worthy such a Martyr.
for that thou did create me of nothing, to thy likeness and similitude.
secondly, for my redemption by the death of thy svveete son JESUS CHRIST my
Savior and redeemer. And lastly that thou vvilt bring me thy poor servant to
so glorious and happy a death for thy sake, al though in the eyes of
worldlinges contumelious and reprochefull, They seem in the eyes of fools to
die Sap. 3.
yet to me most joyful and glorious, and for the which I yield the most hearty
thanks, and therevvith was let to proced further by the Sheriff, M.
Sheriff loves not such good talk.
who said to him, ask the Queen forgiveness for these treasons whereof thou
art condemned, who ansvvered, The asking of forgiveness does implie an offense
done, Douting the^ selves of the unjust co^de^natio^, were forced to seek
new matter.
for me to charge my self being innocent, it were not my deutie, and we have
been racked and tormented for these things, and nothing has been found. also
we have been twice examined since our condemnation, which has not been seen
heretofore in any malefactor: those supposed treasons whereof I am condemned,
I leave between God and my self, and upon my death I am altogether innocent
and faultles, and I utterly refuse to ask her forgiveness, for this fact
vvherof I am condemned, for that I am not guilty: but if in any other private
matter I have offended, I ask her and all the world forgiveness, for it is
impossible for me to be guilty of the conspiracy at Rhemes or Rome, being in
England long time before the said supposed treasons committed, and continuing
here still sithence (the which Monday being his accuser did not much deny) for
he said he never knevv him beyond the seas neither at Rome nor at Rhemes.

Then Sheriff Martine requested a Minister that stood beside to read his
examination. Who ansvvered that as the man is obstinate now, so upon his
examination was he as obstinate, for he uttered nothing that is to be red, but
that notvvithsta^ding he red the preface of the book, A pretty trick
containinge, as is there to be seen, which being redd, the Sheriff desired M.
Sherte again, to knowledge his offense seeing that it was so manifest, and
to ask the Queen forgiveness, It was manifest by the preface of their own
making. What a mockery is this?
affirming, that the Queen would deal very They knew he was as in noce^t as
the Q. merciful. A markable saying.
mercifully with him, and that he had authority him self, if he did
acknovvledge his fault, to stay his execution and to return him back without
more a do, and as even not long since I found fault with you for swearing,
and you cried God mercy therefore, so now here confess your offenses and be
sorry for them, who ansvvered, should I for saving this carkas condemn my
soul? God forbid. Being asked what he thought of the Queens Majesty,
ansvvered: I acknovvledge her for my sovereign lady and Queen, for whose
prosperous estat and well doing in prison and at liberty, INNOCENCE.
I did alvvaies pray. And being demanded whether he thought her to be supreme
governor under Christ of the church of England? he said: When they can find no
temporal and old treasons they flee to the spiritual treasons of their own
making.


I vvil give to Caesar, that which is his, and to God, that, that belongs to
God: She is not, nor cannot be, nor any other, but only the supreme pastor.
What do you mean, that whore of Babylon the Pope, said the Sheriff? Take
heed M. Sheriff (quoth M. Sherte) for the day vvil come when that shall be a
sore word for your soul, and the^ it shall repent you, A vvorthie admonition.
that ever you c^lled CHRIST'S VICAR GENERAL in earth, Vvhoore: when you and I
shall stand at one bar, before that indifferent judge, who judges al things
a right, then I say, vvil you repent your saying, and then must I give
testimony against you. And the hangman making ready at the importunate clamor
of the people, who cried to dispatch, As the Jews cried against christ and S.
Steue^, at the instigation of the Pharesies, so now moved by the Ministers.
England can have no excuse, being so notoriously warned. Have not Catholics
confidence in Christ's passion?
saying, that he had lived to long. He delivered his handkercheefe to the
hangma^ with two shillings therein, saying, take this for thy hire, and I pray
God forgive thee, leaving this warning and testimony to the whole people in
a loud voice that al might here him, denouncing as follows.

Whosoever dies out of the CATHOLIQVE CHVRCH he dies in the state of
damnation. Therevvith, turned almost round about, held up his hands vvagging
them to the people. and then began to pray as follovveth: Domine IESV Christ
fili Dei viui, pone passionem, crucem et mortem tuam etc. with his Pater
noster, Aue Maria, and other like prayers. And when the carte was trailed
away, his hands being before on high, in the putting the^ down, he light
upon the rope, and so held it, and the officers pulled them down. The Sheriff
then said, A malicious and folish interpretacio^, for a man dying, naturally,
takes hold of any thing he lights on.
notvvithstanding his obstinacy, see how vvilling he is to live. so he hanged
til he was dead. But it seemed to me that his hands by chance, as he was
putting the^ down, fell upon the rope which he by chance held fast in his
hands, as (in that case) he would have done any other thing if he had chanced
upon it.

M. Robert Johnson priest.
A new inhumane practis, to terrify them, and to force the^ by horror to
confess the things where of they were innocent.
M. JOHNSON being brought from the herdel, was commanded to look upon M.
Sherte who was hanging, and then immediately cut down. And so being helped
into the carte, was commanded again to look back toward M. Sherte who
was then in quartering. And after he turned him, and signed himself with the
sign of the cross, saying, In nomine patris et filij et spiritus sancti.
Dispatch, Crosses troubles them. The mildnes of the Martyr.
quoth the Sheriff, and speak quietly.

I would be sorry ansvvered M. Johnson, to trouble or offend your worship.
You shall not offend me says the Sheriff, so that you offend not God. Johnson.
I am a Catholic, and am condemned for co^spiring the Queens Majesty's death
at Remes: with the other company who were condemned with me. I protest,
that as for some of them, with whom I was condemned to have conspired with all, Plain INNOCENCE.
I did never see them, before we met at the bar, neither did I ever write
unto them, or receive letters from the^. and as for any treasons I am neither
guilty in deed nor thought. Sheriff. your own hand subscribed to your
examination taken by men of good consciences, God make them his servants, for
diverse of them do against their conscience. When al fails Mu^day is ready to
help at a pinch with his oath and testimony.
the servants of God. M Poppam attorney general, M. Egerton the soliciter, M.
Jews and M. Hammon doctors of the civil law, s^al be laid against you. Also
if that will not serve, you shall have him who was the Popes scholar and a
companion amongst you to testify your treasons viua voce, one Monday,
whereunto M. Iohnsons examination now in print, was red, his answers to the
vj articles proposed, are as above. But they urged him further touching the
fifth and the sixth articles. And the Minister redd his answer to the fifth
article to be, That he alovved of Saunders and Bristovves doings and vvritings.
To the which he ansvvered and said, my answer was not so as you read it
(neither in truth was it so in the book) but I ansvvered, and so I say now,
These Ministers can do nothing sincerely.
that as for the doings of D. Saunders and D. Bristovve, I am altogether
ignorant of, neither was I ever privy to their factes, and how then could I
approve or disalovv them? this was my answer then, and now also I say the
same. To the last article his answer was red, and now being demanded of the
same, he said he was of the same mind still, and would die in the same mind,
Sheriff. well that is high He was not condemned for this treason. He is in deed
a companion, but was never his companion.
treason, but you shall hear also what your own companion named Monday, can
say against you, whereupon Monday was called, and came nigh to the carte.

Johnson. Monday, did thou ever know me beyond the seas, or was I ever in thy
company? Monday. I was never in your company, neither did I ever know you
beyond the seas, But I was privy to your most horrible treasons, Mundays
conscience, may be turned in to a proverb.
whereof you were most clearly convicted, I speak this with safe conscience.
And were not priests sent from A most impudent and folish lie.
Auinio^ for that purpose? I pray God you may repent you thereof, and that you
may die a good subject. Johnson. Monday, God give the grace to repent thee of
thy deeds, truly thou art a shrevvd fellovv, but there is no time now to
reason these matters with thee, only I protest before God, I am not guilty of
any treason. Sheriff. Do thou acknovvledge the Queen for lavvful Queen?
repent thee, and notwithstanding thy traitoros How gladly they would have the^
to confess that which never was, to save their credites for murdering of the
rest. A necessary admonition
practices, we have authority from the Queen to carry the back. Johnson. I
do acknovvledge her as lavvful as Q. Marie was, I can say no more, but pray to
God to give her grace, and that she may now stay her hand from shedding of
innocent blood. Sheriff. Do thou acknovvledge her supreme head of the
church in ecclesiastical matters? Johnson, They flee to matters of religion.
I do ackonvvledge her to have as full and great authority as ever Q. Marie had,
and more with saftie of conscience I can not give her. How prove you that?
The Sheriff and other said, thou art a traitor most obstinat. Johnson. If I
be a traitor for mainteining this faith, the^ was king Henry, and all the kings
and Queens of this realm before time, and al our auncitours traitors. for
they maintained the same. Sheriff. what? you vvil preach treason also if we
suffer you? Johnson. I teach but the CATHOLIC RELIGION.

One demanded, what do you mean by Catholic religion? Johnson. I mean that
religion whereof the POPE is supreme pastor. Then a Minister asked him,
what, was Athanasius a catholic? what held he? to whom M. Johnson
ansvvered I am not so well red in Athanasius to know al his opinions. The other
said, I am shure you have read Quicu^que vult etc.? whereunto M. Johnson gave
no great attention. but he said again, what? have you not redd Athanasius
creed Quicunque vult etc? yes said he that I have, and I believe it to be good
and catholic. But in all that, said the Minister, you can not find the Pope
once named. An argument meet for a Minister.
It it not necessary (quoth M. Johnson) the Pope should be named in every
thing that appertains to the CATHOLIC FAITH. Whereupon the rope was put
about his neck, and he was willed to pray, which he did in latin. They
willed him to pray in english that they might witness with him: he said I pray
that prayer which Christ taught, But God does, to who^ he prayed, neither
needs he any witness there of. The Ministers speeches ar ever like them selves.
in a tongue I well understand. Sheriff. But we do not understand it. Johnson.
I do think your w. does understand it. Sheriff. If I do, others do not:
wherefore pray in english that others may testify it, and pray with you. An
other Minister cried pray as Christ taught. Johnson. what? do you think that
Christ taught in english? M. Johnson prayed in latin, saying his Pater noster
his Aue and Creed and In manus tuas etc. and so the carte was trailed away,
and he finished this life as the rest did: al hanged until they were dead, and
so cut down and quartered.

THE MARTYRDOMES OF the Reverend Priests, M. William Filbie, M. Lucas Kirbie,
M. Laurence Richardson whose right name was Johnson, and M. Thomas Cottam the
30 of May 1582.
And first of M. William Filbie, native of OXFORD.
ON wenesday being the 30 of May these 4 venerable Priests above named were
trailed from the Tovver of London along the streates to Tyborne, about vij of
the clock in the morning, when they were come to the place of execution,
William Filbie (being the youngest, not above xxvij years of age) was first
taken from the herdle, and being lifted into the carte, he blessed him self
with the sign of the Cross, saying, In nomine patris and filij and spiritus
sancti. and so proceeded with these words: Let me see my brethren, looking to
the other which lay on the herdle. and there w^thal holding forth his hands to
them, said, Pray for me. Then speaking to the company, said: I am a Catholic,
and I protest before almighty God, that I am innocent of al these matters,
whereof I am condemned, and I hope to be saved by the merits and death of our
Savior JESUS CHRIST: beseeching him to have mercy on me, and to forgive me my
offenses. And therevvithal a proclamation was red for keeping the Peace, and at
the end thereof was said, God save the Queen, to which he said, Amen.

The people asking him for what Queen he prayed for, INNOCENCE.
he ansvvered, for Queen Elizabeth, beseeching God to send her a long and
quiet reign, to his good will, and make her his servant, and preserve her from
her enemies. With that M. Topcliff and others willed him to say, God save her
from the Pope. To whom he ansvvered he is not her ennemie, therevvith the
Minister of S. Andrews in Holborne said, Note, that he says the Pope is not
the Queens ennemie. A ministers note.
And then a preacher called Charke, yes said he you are a traitor, for, you are
sworn to the Queens sworn ennemie. M, Filbie loking aside, said, what do
you mean, I never took oath in all my life. What said Charke, then are you not
a Priest, you are deceived, said M. Filbie, A promis of obedience to his
ordinary: but therein is no mention of the Pope.
it is a vow and not an oath. After that on of the Sherifes men standing in the
carte with M Filbie, said unto him, what have thou there in thy handkercheefe,
and therevvithal taking the handkercheefe from him, found a little Cross of
wodde with in it, which he holding up in his hands said, o what a villainous
traitor is this, He was no more ashamed of this his Saviors ba^ner, the^ of
his crown, the which he made shift to shave.
that has a Cross, diverse times repeating it, and diverse of the people
saying the same. Whereunto M. Filbie ansvvered nothing, only smiling at them.

Then the articles, with the preface of the book printed by authority, was
redd, and his answers unto them. It was replied against him by some urging him
further upon the same answer: if you hold this, then you can not be but a
traitor to the Queens Majesty, for that the Pope has deposed her by his Bull.
M. Filbie said, that that Bull was perchance called in again by this Pope
Gregory the 13. to the sixth article he ansvvered, that if he had been in
Irland, he would have done as a Priest should have done, that is to pray that
the right might take place, to whom some replied did Saunders well in that fact
of Irland, I know not (quoth he) I was not privy to his doings, I never savv
him or spoke with him, let him answer for him self. Then Shreife Martine
called upon the hangman to dispacth, and the roope being about his neck, the
Sheriff said, Filbie, the Queen is merciful unto you, and we have authority
from her, to carry you back, if you vvil ask her mercy, INNOCENCE.
and confess your fault do not refuse mercy offered, ask the Q. forgiveness,
to whom M. Filbie ansvvered, I never offended her, well then said the Sheriff
make an end, and thus desiring al Catholics to pray for him he prayed, saying
his Pater noster, his Aue, and In manus tuas etc. and when the carte was
trailing away, he said Lord, receive my soul. and so hanged knocking his
breast several times til some pulled down his hands, and so finished his
life.

M. Luke Kirbie Priest, and M. of art.
THEN was M. Luke kirbie brought to see his fellow hang, and being lifted up to
the carte, he began thus: O my friends, o my friends, I am come hither for
supposed treason, although in deed it be for my conscience, and after prayed
thus, O my Savior JESUS CHRIST by whose death and passion I hope to be saved,
forgive me sinful sinner, my manifold sins and offenses etc. and being
commanded to torn toward the place of execution, his fellow M. Filbie
being beheaded, and as the manner is, the executioner lifting his head between
his hands, he cried, God save the Queen, to the which M. kirbie said, Amen.
and being asked what Queen, An indiscreet question putting a scruple into the
peoples heads.
he ansvvered, Queen Elizabeth, to whom, he prayed God to send a long and
prosperouse reign, and preserve her from her enemies. Charke willed him to say
from the Pope his curse and power. Kirbie, If the Pope leauie war against
her, or curse her unjustly, God preserve her from him also, and so to direct
her in this life, as that she may further and maintain Christ's CATHOLIC
RELIGION, and at last enherite the kingdom of heaven.

And after, he made a solemn protestation of his innocence in that, whereof
he was condemned, adding, that if there were any living that could justly accuse
him in any one point of that, whereof he was condemned, he was ready to
submit him self to her majesty's clemency. And seeing Monday present, he
desired he might be brought in, to say what he could. Who being brought in,
said, that being at Rome he persuaded him and an other young man named Robinson,
to stay there, and not to come to England, for that shortly some stir or
trouble was like to come, and seeing that could not stay him, he said, that he
willed him to persuade those that were his friends to the Catholic religion
again the great day. to which M. Kirbie ansvvered, that it was unlike that he,
who knew before his departure from Rome how he was affected in religion, would
utter any such words to him, to persuade the people. To which Monday replied,
that it was like, because he delivered him some hallowed pictures to carry
with him. To the which M. Kirbie ansvvered, that because he mistrusted him he
would deliver, nor did deliver him any but he said, he did deliver him two
Iulies to bie pictures, and that now he was very ingratfully dealt with all,
being by him falsely accused: he being such a benefactor to al his countreimen,
although he knew them to be otherwise affected in religion then him self was.
for he said he spoke to some of the Popes chiffest officers, and was like
through them, to come to trouble. to others, he said he delivered the shert of
his back, and travailed with others, forty miles for their saffe conduct, and
only for good vvil: and said further, that vnvvitting to Monday, he wrote a
letter to one in Remes to deliver him fiften shillinges, which he never
received, because he never went to receive it. And he urged Monday again in
the fear and love of God to say but the truth, alleging farther how one
Nicolls, who in his books uttered much more of him then Monday did, yet his
conscience accusing him, he came to his chamber in the Tovver and in presence
of four, whereof he named his keeper to be one, recanted and denied that, which
before he had affirmed in his book. One Topcliffe said how do you know that
Nicolls has recanted. M. Kirbie ansvvered, he came into my chamber in the
Tovver, and there before four he said these words. (See M. Kirbies letter at
the end of this tragedy.)

Then the Sheriff enterrupted him, and said: Then, he accused him falsely, and
so there is no cause why he should confess it.
even as he has recanted his error, and is sorry for it, so do you. M. Kirbie
not regarding his words passed on, and shevved likewise, that this Monday in
presence of Sir own Hopton and others, did say, that he could charge him with
nothing. Which Monday denied. But he affirmed it again, and said, that then
one that was present said, that upon that confession he might take advantage.
Then the Sheriff asked who that was? and he after a while ansvvered that it
was one Coudridg. After this, his answer to the forsaid articles was redd:
where to the first, bein examined, he said, that the excommunication of Pius
Quintus was a matter of fact, wherein the Pope might err, the which I do
leave to him self to answer for. And where he said that the POPE for some
causes might depose a prince. now he does explain it, that it was a question
disputable in scholles, whether the POPE might depose princes? And being asked
by Topcliff, whether he would die for a matter disputable in scholles? he
said, he did only yield his opinion. To the second, he added further, that he
thought, some of the learned that were there present would affirm that also.
Vvhereat diverse with on voice said, No. Whereupon M. Kirbie called for one M.
Crovvley Once or twice. By this Ministers argument the Emperor could not have
deposed Pilat from his presidentshipe.
And a Minister brought a place out of Solomon, which says, By me kings rule
and Tyrants are exalted, and an other out of the Gospel, where it is said, unto
Pilat, Thou should not have any power against me, unless it were given the
from above. Proving, that because their authority was from God, no man might
have authority to displace them. And one Minister there argued thus to the
same poorpose, That every soul must be subject to superior powers, As though
the Queen were not a soul also, and the Pope in higher superiority then she.
and therefore (quoth he) the Pope him self if he be a soul must be subject,
and consequently can not depose others of their soueranitie. And M. Kirbie
being about to answer, was interrupted by an other Minister, who alleged the
practice of the primitive Church. when, notvvithstanding that Christians lived
under heathen princes, yet they did obey them. To which M. Kirbie said, The
Church has no authority over infidels: but over al Christians.
that the case did differ, for where the Prince is once a Christian, and after
falls to infidelity, there he may be disobeied, but where he was never
Christian, the case is otherwise. To the fourth answering as before,
notvvithstanding (faith he) I acknovvledge to my Prince and Q. (...) much
deutie and authority as ever I did to Q. Marie, or as any subject in France,
Spain, or Italy, do acknovvledge to his king or prince: and more I can not
nor ought not of deutie give her. And thereupon Topcliff demanded, Wisely.
what if al they be traitors, vvil you be a traitor to? to which he ansvvered,
what? be they all traitors? God forbid. for if al they be traitors, then al our
auncesters have been traitors likewise. And as for D. D. Saunders and Bristovv
they might err in their private opinions, the which I vvil defend no further
then they do agree with the judgment of Christ's CATHOLIC CHVRCH.

Being demanded. Whether he thought the Queen to be supreme gouernesse of
the Church of England, he ansvvered, he was ready to yield her as much authority
as any other subject ought to yield his prince, or as he would yield to Q. Marie,
and more with saftie of conscience he could not do. Then Sheriff Martine told
him, that the Q. was merciful and would take him to her mercy: so he would
confess his deutie toward her, and forsake that man of Rome, and that he had
authority him self to stay execution and carry him back again.

Who ansvvered, that to deny the POPES authority was a point of faith: O
Marvelous constancy.
which he would not deny for saving of his life, being sure to da^ne his soul.
Then was it tendered him, that if he would but confess his fault and ask the
Queen forgeuenes, she would yet be merciful to him. He ansvvered again, that
his conscience did give him a clear testimony that he never offended, and
therefore he would neither confess that, whereof he was innocent, neither
ask forgeuenes, where no offense was committed against her Majesty. Well, By
these numbers of proffers, it is plain they judged them innocent in their
conscience.
(then said Sheriff Martine) do but acknowledge those things which your
fellovv Bosgraue has done, such as appears by his examination, and I will yet
save your life. who denie^ likewise.

Then the people cried away with him, and he began to pray in latin, the
Ministers and others desired him to pray in English, and they would pray with
him. Who ansvvered, that in praying with them, he should deshonor God, but if
you were of on faith with me, then I would pray with you. But he desired al
those that were Catholics to pray with him, and he would pray with them: and
as for any other that was a Christian, and desirous to pray for him, he would
not let them: although he would not pray with them. And so after that he had
ended his Pater noster, and began his Aue, the carte was drawn away and
there he hanged until he was dead, and until his two fellows Richardson and
Cottam, did take the view of him. His speeches were very intricat, for that
many did speak unto him, and of several matters: but here are the principal
things by him uttered to my remembrance.

A true copy of a letter sent by that constant confessor Maistre Kirbie to
certain his friends.
MY most hearty commendations to you and the rest of my derest friends. If you
send any thing to me, you must make have, because we look to suffer death
very shortly, as already it is signified to us. yet I much fear lest our
vnvvorthines of that excellent perfection and crown of Martyrdom, shall
procure us a longer lif. within these fevve days, John Nicolls came to my
chamber windovve, with humble submission, to crave mercy and pardon, for all
his wickedness and trecheries committed against us, and to acknovvledge his
books, Sermons, and infamous speeches to our infamy and discredit, to be
wicked, false and most execrable before God and man, which for preferment,
promotion, hope of living, and favor of the nobility, he committed to
writing, and to the view of the world, whereof being very penitent and
sorrowful from his heart, rather then he would commit the like offense again,
he wishes to suffer a thousand deaths. for being pricked in conscience with
our unjust condemnation which now haith happened contrary to his expectation,
albeit he offered matter sufficient in his first book of recantation, for our
adversaries to make a bill of indightement against us, yet he minded then
nothing less, as he now protests. He knovveth in conscience our
accusations, and evidence brought in against us, to be false, and to have no
coullor of truth but only of malice forced by our ennimies: and for Sledd and
Mundaye, he is him self to accuse them of this wicked treachery and falshoode:
and of their naughty and abominable life. of which he was made privy, and
which for shame I can not committ to writing. In detestation of his own
doings and their wickedness, he is minded never here after to asce^d into
pulpet, nor to deal again in any matter of religion, for which cause he has
for saken the Ministry, and is minded to teach a schole (as I understand by
him) in Norffolke, in proof whereof he shevved me his new disguised apparel,
as yet covered with his Ministers weed. I wished him to make amends for all
his sins, and to go to place of penance, and he ansvvered me, he was not
yet conformable to us in every point of religion, nor ever was, but lived at
Rome in hypocrisy, as he has done ever since in his own profession. Again
he thought, that if ever he should depart the realm, he could not escape
burning.

He offered to go to Master Leiutenant, and to Master Secretaire Vvalzingham,
and to declare how injuriously I, and the rest wear condemned, that he him
self might be free from sheddinge Innocent blood, albeit he was some what
afraid to show him self in London, where already he had declared our
Innocent behavior, and his own malicious dealinge toward us in his book
and Sermons.

To give my censure and Judgment of him, certain I think that he will within
short time fall into infidelity except God of his goodness in the mean time be
merciful unto him, and reclaim him by some good means to the Catholic
faith: yet it should seem he has not lost all good gifts of nature, when as
in conscience he was pricked to open the truth in our defense, and to detect
his own wickedness and trecheries of others, practiced against us to our
confusion.

Now I see, as all the world herafter shall easily perceive, that the
doings of this man do confirm, the old saying: That rather then God will
have wilful murder to be concealed, he procures the birds of the aier to
reveal it.

I am minded to signify to Sir Frau^cis Vvalzingham this his submission unto
us, except in the mean time I shall learn that he has (as he promis^d
faithfully to me) already opened the same. Master Richardson and Master
Philbie have now obtained some bedding, which ever since their condemnation
have lain upon the bordes. Master Heart has had many and great conflictes
with his adversaries. This morning the x. of January, he was committed to
the dongeo^ where he now remains, God comfort him, he takes it very
quietly and patiently: the cause was, for that he would not yield to Master
Reignoldes of Oxford, in any one point, but still remained constant the same
man he was before and ever. Master Reignoldes, albeit he be the best learned
of that sort, that has from time to time come hither to preach and confer,
yet the more he is tried and dealt with all, the less learning he has
shevved. Thus beseeching you to assist us with your good prayers, whereof
now especially, we stand in need, as we by Gods grace shall not be
unmindful of you. I bid you farvvel, this x. of January. 1582.

Yours to death and after death. Luke kirbie.

M. LAVRENCE RICHARDSON whose right name was Johnson, and M. Thomas Cottam,
Priests and graduates.
THESE tvvoe were brought together to look upon M. kirbie which was then
hanging, and being cut down, they were put up into the carte, where with
cheerful countenances they signed them selves with the sign of the Cross,
saying: Here he blesses the people, and never cursed them, as lying Mu^day
vvriteth in his discovery of Ed. Campion etc.
In nomine patris and filij and spiritus sancti. M. Cottam turning him about
said, God bless you al, our Lord bless you al: with a smiling countenance.
M. Richardson being commanded by the sherifes man to look upon his fellovv;
who was in cutting up, said: o Gods will be done. With that one Field a
preacher said, dispatch, dispatch. to vvho^ M. Cottam said with smiling
cou^tena^ce, what are you an executioner or a preacher, fie, fie. His mirth in
God, proceeded of a sincer, conscience and courage.
A Minister standing by said, leave of those iestes, it is no time to ^east, he
is a preacher, and not an executioner, he comes to exhorth you to die well.
Cottam. Truly by his words he seemed to be an executioner, for he said
dispatch, dispatch. Field, A wise answer.
I did not say these words to any such intent, but that they which were
about the other should be quiet. Cottam. I cry God mercy for all my idle
words, and I beseech you M. Sheriff, that you vvil not be offended with me,
for truly I would lie under your horse feet to be trodden upon, before I
should offend you.

Then M. Richardson being placed right under the place where he should hang,
diverse moved speeches to him al at one time. To whom he ansvvered, I pray you
do not trouble me, if you demand any questions of me, let them be touching the
matter whereof I was condemned, and do not move new questions, and thereupon he
was turned back to look upon M. Kirbie. who was then in quartering, which he
did, and the head being cut of, they held it up, saying: God save the Queen,
and he being demanded what he said, I say, Amen, I pray God save her.
INNOCENCE. O happy me^ that die in the fellowship of al our holy aunciters.
And further said: I am come hither to die for treason, and I protest before
God I am not guilty in any treason more then al Catholic Bishops that ever
were in this land sithence the conversion thereof, til our time: and as well (if
they were a live) might they be executed for treason, as I am now. To whom a
Minister replied thus: the case is not like, for then Popish Priests lived
under Popish Princes, As though not to obey a prince in causes of religion,
were treason.
and did not disobey them, and so were no traitors. In the mean time many
words and sentences were uttered by M. Cottam. And a Minister amongst other
things, willed him to confess his wicked and leude behavior which he had
committed in fish-streat about four years since. A diuilish sclaunder raised
by the Minister to disgrace the man of God.
Cottam. What do you mean? Sheriff. He would have you to confess the filthe
you committed in fish-streat. Cottam. O blessed IESV, thy name be praised, is
this now laid here to my charg? the Minister said, no we do not charge you
with it, but we would have you to descharg you thereof if there be any such
thing. An other Minister ansvvered, He is charged with this act as truly, as
with treason.
no, it was not he, but his brother. Cottam. You shall here, you accuse me for
filthe committed about four years since in fish-street and I was not in London
this seven years, and if I had done any such thing, what do you mean to lay it
to my charg. With that ij or iij of the^ said that it was not he but his
brother. After that whilst they were talking with M. Richardson M. Cottam
took Bull the hangman by the ^leue and said to him, A very zealous and charitable
act.
God forgive the and make the his servant, take heed in time, and call for
grace, and no dout but God will hear the, take example by the executioner of S.
Paul, who during the time of his execution, a little drope of blood falling from
S. Paul upon his garment, white like milk, did afterward call him to
remembrance of him self, and so became penitent for his sins, and became a
good man: whose example I pray God thou may follovv, and I pray God give
the of his grace. The Minister of S. Andrews said, what, did milk fall from
his breast? Cottam. No, blood fell from his neck or head, in likeness of milk.
The vvrangeling of a Minister.
Minister of S. And. what? do you say he was saved by that blood which fell
upon him? Cottam. No. I marvel what you mean, and so was interrupted by some
others to proceade. Then the articles were redd and his answers to them adding
that as touching the doctrine of D. D. Saunders and Bristovv he allows of it
so far forth as they agree with the true CATHOLIC CHVRCH OF ROME. Topcliff
and some other ministers said, he builded his faith upon Saunders. To whom he
ansvvered I build not my faith upon any on man whatsoever, but upon the whole
CATHOLIC CHVRCH.

Then the rope being put about both their necks and fastened to the post. The
Sheriff said, Now Richardson if thou vvilt confess thy faults and renounce
the Pope, the Queen will extend her mercy toward thee, and thou shall be
carried back again. M. Richardson ansvvered, I thancke her majesty for her
mercy, but I must not confess an untruth or renounce my faith. All this while
M. Cottam was in prayer, and uttering of diverse good sentences, saying, all that
we here sustain, is for saving of our souls, and therevvithal lifting up his
eyes to heaven, said: O Lord thou know our innocence. Then he was willed
to confess his treasons. o Lord (said he) how willingly would I confess, if
I did know any thing that did charg me, and if we had been guilty of any such
thing, A most notorious evidence, of al their innocence.

In the most barboroust place vvherof, he had found better intertainement, then
here at home.

How gladly they would have had any one of them, to confess the pretended
fault.


surely on or other of us either by racking or death, would have confessed it,
or else we had been such people as never were hard of. And I protest before God
that before my coming into England I was armed to go into Indea: and if I
might be set at liberty, I would never rest but on the journey toward that
country. with that the Sheriff said, the Queen will be merciful to thee, if
thou will thy self, he ansvvered I thancke her grace, saying farther, do with
me what you think good and thervvithal the Sheriff commanded that the roope
should be losed from the post. And he removed down from the carte.

Then M. Richardson was willed once again to confess and ask pardon of the
Queen: he ansvvered, that he never offended her to his knowledge. Then
Topcliff said, the like mercy was never shevved to any offender, and if you
were in any other common wealth you should be torn in pieces with horses. That
were strange.
Then he was willed to pray, he prayed, desiring al Catholics to pray with
him, he said his Pater noster, his Aue, and his Cre^de. and when the carte
passed, Lord, receive my soul. Lord IESV, receive my soul. And even as the
carte passed away, M. Cottam said, o good Lavvrence, pray for me. Lord JESUS,
receive thy soul, which he repeated several times. All this time M. Cottam was
with the Sheriff and the rest of the Ministers upon the ground, having the rope
style about his neck.

I could not well hear what persuasions the Sheriff and the Ministers had with
him. But I do conjecture that if he would renounce his faith, he should have
his pardon. For I hard him well utter these words, I vvil not svvarue a jot
from my faith, A notable constancy.
for any thing, yea if I had ten thousand lives I would rather lose them al,
then forsake the CATHOLIC FAITH in any point. And with that he was lifted up
into the carte again. And the Sheriff said withal, dispatch him, since he is
so stubborn.

Then he was turned backwards to look upon M. Richardson who was then in
quartering, which he did, saying. Lord JESUS, have mercy upon them: Lord, have
mercy upon them. O Lord, give me grace to endure to the end. Lord give me
constancy to the end. which saying, he uttered almost for all the time that M.
Richardson was in quartering: saving once he said, Thy soul pray for me and
at the last said, O Lord, what a spectacle have thou made unto me? the which
he repeated twice or thrice. and the^ the head of M. Richardson was holden up
by the executioner, INNOCENCE.
who said (as the manner is) God save the Queen, to which M. Cottam said, I
beseech God to save her and bless her and withal my heart I wish her prosperity
as my lieage and sovereign Queen and chief gouernesse. By this it is evident,
that al was for religion, and not at al for treason.
They willed him to say, and supreme head in matters ecclesiastical, to whom
he ansvvered, If I would have put in those words, I had been discharged
almost two years since. Then the Sheriff said, You are a traitor if you deny
that. M. Cottam said, No: that is a matter of faith, and unless it be for my
conscience and faith, I never offended her Majesty. and with that he looked
up to heaven, and prayed secretly, and uttered these words. That is, (...)
Lord, thou have suffered more for me.
In te domine speraui, non co^fundar in eternum. O domine tu plura pro me
passus es etc, twice more repeating plura.

Then the Sheriff said to him. Yet Cottam call for mercy and confess, and no
dout the Q. vvil be merciful unto you. Who ansvvered, my conscience gives me
a clear testimony, that I never offended her: to whom he wished as much
good as to his own soul, whose estat he so favored and honored, that for all
the gold under the cope of heaven he would not vvish that any on hear of her
head should perish to do her harm. And that all that here he did suffer, was
for saving his soul, desiring almighty God for his svveete Sons sake, that
he would vouchsaffe to take him to his mercy, saying, that him only he had
offended desiring God, that if there were any more unspoken which were
convenient to be spoken, that he would put it into his mind now. And then he
prayed, desiring all the whole world of forgiveness, and that he, did from the
bottom of his heart forgive al. A warning, That the sheading of innocent blood,
cries veangeance against the realm.
Adding that the sins of this realm has deserved infinite punishment and
Gods just indignation: desiring him of his mercy, that he would turn his
wrath from them, and call them to repentance to see and acknovvledge their
sins. And desiring al Catholics to pray with him, after he had said his
Pater noster, and in his, Aue, the carte was driven away, and so hanged til he
was dead: and being stripped naked as he hanged, within his sherte he did were
a shert without sleues of very course canuas down beneath his middle. Which
belike was a sherte of here, for the punishment of his body: wherevvith
England is not now acquainted.

The manner and order of his apprehension.
And because the order and manner of M. Cottams first apprehension will clear him
from al suspicion of treason and treachery, and yield an invincible argument of
loyalty and innocence: I will set it down briefly, but yet truly, to the
great co^tentation and satisfaction of al good Catholics, and to the confusion
and ignominy of al our bloody persecutors and adversaries.

SLEDD that Notorius varlet, and infamous Judas (I will not say wicked homicid)
having ente^ded to work some mischefe: came from Rome in the company of diverse
English men, whose names and marks he took very diligently: and being come to
Lions, found M. Cottam there (who having entered into the society of the name
of JESUS at Rome; and being there fallen into a consuming and lingering
sickness, was by his superiors sent to Lions, to try if by change of air he
might be recovered, The cause of M Cortams coming out of the Society, and of
his return to England.
but the sickness so grevve and increased upon him, that he was made an unable
and unfit man for them, and thereupon they dismissed him) and travailing in
his company for some days ioruneis, understood of him belike that he meant very
shortly to repair home to his native country: wherevpo^ Sledd took his marks
more exactly and precisely, and being arrived at Paris, there he presented the
L. Ambassador, with the names and marks he had taken. Who sent them over to
the Q. Counsel, and from them they were sent to the searchers of the ports. M.
Cottam son after his arriual at Rhemes, being a Deacon, and a good preacher
long before, was made Priest, and hearing of company that were ready to go
into England, made great have to go with them, and ernest shute to have leave,
partly for his health, and specially for the great zeal he had to gain and
save souls. He arrived at Dover about the xvj or xviij day of June in the year
1580, in the company of M. John Heart and M. Edward Rishton two learned Priests
(which both are also condemned) and an other lay man.

After these iiij had been searched unto their skins, and nothing found upon
them, M. Cottam stayed at the port.
and M. Heart stayed and taken for M. Orton (to whom he nothing at al
resembled) M. Cottam was likewise stayed, by reason the marks which Sledd had
given of him, were in deed very clear and appare^t in him. And for the
avoiding of charges, one Allen then Mayor of Dover, and Steuens the searcher
requested the lay man M. Cottams companion, who named him self Hauard, to carry
him as a prisoner to my L. Cobhame: who agreed very easily thereunto. But
as soon as they were out of the town, I can not in conscience, nor will not
(quoth Hauard) being my self a Catholic, deliver you a Catholic Priest,
prisoner to my L. Cobham. But we will straight to London, and when you come
there, shifte you for your self, as I will do for my self. Coming to London, M.
Cotta^ repaired incontinent to one of the prisons and there conferred with a
Catholic a friend of his, recounting unto him, the order and manner of his
apprehension and eskape. his friend told him, that in conscience, he could not
make that eskape, and persuaded him, to go and yield him self prisoner.
Whereupon he came to his friend Hauard and requested him, to deliver him the
Mayor of Douers lettre to my L. Cobham. What will you do with it (quoth Hauard)
Mary (quoth Cottam) I will go and carry it to him, He was a man of a marvelous
zele, and of a timorous conscience.
and yield my self prisoner, for I am fully persuaded, that I can not make this
eskape in conscience. why (quoth Hauard) this council that has been given you
proceeds I confess from a zealous mind, mary I doubt whether it carries the
weight of knowledge with it: you shall not have the letter, nor you may not in
conscience yield your self to the persecutor and adversary having so good
means offered to eskape their cruelty. But M. Cottam persisting still in his
demand, well (quoth Hauard) seeing, you will not be distorned from this opinion,
let us go first and consult with such a man (naming one but newly cummen then
into the realm, whom M. Cottam greatly honored and reverenced, for his
singular wit and learning, for his rare virtues, and other gifts both of
body and mind) and if he be of your opinion, you shall have the letter and go
on Gods name. When they came to this man he utterly disliked of his intention,
and dissuaded him from so found a cogitation. M. Cottam being aflvvaged but not
altogether satisfied, went quietly about his business, and never voided London
for the matter. The Mayor of Douers letter being sent back unto him again,
with in ij or iij. days after comes up the host of the inn where M. Cottam
was taken.

This host by chance met with (Hauard) and taking him by the shulder said,
Gentilman you had like to have undone me, because the prisoner you promised to
deliver is eskaped. Wherefore you must come with me to one M. Andrews my L.
Cobhams Deputy who lies at the star in new fish streat, and give him
satisfaction in the matter. This good fellow Hauard, was somevvhat amassed at
this sudden sommoning, but after a while being come again to him self, says:
why my host if I do deliver you the prisoner again, you will be contented yes
says the other, deliver me the prisoner, and I have nothing to say to you:
upon this they went to M. Cottams lodging, but he was removed the folks of the
house knew not whither. The host would feign have had this Hauard, so called
for the time, to go with him to the said Andrews. and Hauard sought al
means to avoid his company, being sure, that if he had once cumme^ with in the
persecutors pavves, he should not have eskaped the^ so easily, and being as
then loath to fall into further trouble, says to the other, My host there is no
such necessity why I should go to M. Andrews, for if I did, peradventure he
would pick some quarrel unto me by reason of the prisoners eskape, and I might
come by trouble, and you should reap no gain or profit thereby. I would be
loath therefore to go unto him.

But this I will do for your discharge, I will bring you to a merchant, who I
think will give you his hand, that I shall bring you the prisoner by iiij of the
clock, or else, that I shall deliver you my body again. I am content says he,
so that I have the one of you tvvoe. to the merchant they come who at his
brother law Hauards request, gave his hand and promise for the performance of
the condition before specified (which promis albeit, it was performed, yet it
cost the merchant viij months imprisonment afterward: but how justly, will be
one day examined before the just judge) this Hauard leuing his host in the
merchants house went forth into the city with a another in his company to see
if he could meet with M. Cottam.

And coming into cheapside there by chance he meet him. and after ordinary
salutations he said, M. Cottam such a man is come to town, and has so seized
upon me for your escape that you or I must needs go to prison: you know my
state and condition, A charitable deliberatio^, and most charitable resolution.
and may guess how gentely I shall, be entreated if I once apeare under my right
name before them, your own state also you know. Now it is in your choice
whether of us shall go, for one must go there is no remedy, and to force, you
I will not, for I had rather sustain what punishment soever. M. Cottam lifting
up his eyes and hands to heaven said these words: Now God be blessed, I
should never while I lived have been without scruple and gruge of conscience if
I had eskaped from them, nothing greueth me, but that I have not dispatched
some business that I have to do, why (quoth Hauard) it is but x of the clock
yet, and you may dispatch your business by iiij of the clock, and then you may
go to them. Vvhither is it says he that I must go? to the sign of the
star (quoth Hauard) in New fish-streat, and there you must enquire for one
M. Andrews my L. Cobhams deputy, to him you must yield your self. I vvil
quoth he. and so they departed and never savv one the otherafter.

And so at iiij of the clock after he had dispatched al his business, he went
him self al alone to the place appointed, This does prove his innocence
inuincibly.
and there yielded him self prisoner, and was carried to the Court lying then
at None such or Otlands, from whence (after five days conference with diverse
ministers that labored, but in vain, to subvert him) he was sent to the
Marshalsee for religion, and not for treason. and from thence to the Tovver,
there to be racked, not for to reueile any secret treason as the adversaries
pretend full falsely, but tormented because he would not confess his private
sins unto them, as he both confidently and truly affirmed to their faces at
his arraingment. and so leed to westminster and there unjustly condemned: and
as you have heard trailed to Tiborne where he and the rest, were cruelly
murdered. ending this miserable life by a constant and glorious Martyrdom. and
now does follovv the immaculat Lamb. To whom be al honor and glory for the
constancy of these his Saints. Amen.

The order of the arraingnement and Martyrdom of M. John Pain Priest. 2.
Aprilis. 1582.
THE 20. of March 1582. Sir Ovvine Hopton Leutenant of the Tovver, came to M
Pains chamber door, and by knocking raised him out of h^s bead: who had much
vvatched before and provoked him half ready to come forth, not telling him to
what end: but afterward advertised how the matter stood, and perceiving
that he was to be removed, The key of the door was taken from the keeper, and
the L. Hopto^ after her fashion seized on the purse per vsucapionem.
he desired leave to return into his chamber to make him self ready and to
featch his purse, which he had left behind him, but it would not be granted,
but he commanded him to be delivered to certain officers there attending, as
he said for his conducting to Essex, appointed by the chief of the council. M.
Pain in his cassocke only, went forvvard with them, being the more gentely
dealt with, that he was not bound at al.

On Thursday at night his name was recited with about 13. witches, As our
Savior, Cum iniquis deputatus est etc.
other murderers and thieves. On Friday about 10. of the cloak, he was
arraigned after this manner.

First his endighteme^t was read viz. that M. Pain should utter to Eliot at a
certain Christemas lying with him in his chamber, that many devises have been
heretofore concerning the chang of religion, and yet none have prosperously
succeeded: but of al others this seems the best, which I have heard (quoth
he) sometime mentioned of the Earl of Westmerland, D. Allen, and D.
Bristovve, that 50. men well appointed with privy coats, and dagges, As though
the Catholics would care for these, if her M. were dead.

This poor captive lady is touched in all these forgeres of purpose to make
her odious.


should epsy some opportunity when the Queen were at progress, and sley
the Queens Majesty, the E. of Leicester and M. Walsingham, and then to
proclaim the Queen of Scotts Q. also that it should be no greater an offense
to kill the Queen, then to dispatche a brute beast.

This being read, M. Pain denied the endightement, and defied al treason.
Protesting that he alvvaies in mind and word honored the Queens Majesty
above any woman in the world, that he would gladly alvvaies have spent his life
for her pleasure in any lavvfull service; that he prayed for her, as for his
own soul: that he never invented or compassed any treason against her
Majesty or any of the nobility of England.

Then M. Morice the Queens counselor, on the part of her Majesty begane to
prove M. Pain to be a traitor two ways, by presumption and deposition. The
presumption was gathered, for that about v. years past, Either great
simplicity or great deceit, to say that in taking orders they swear to the
Pope Persons are named that the lie may seem more probable.
he went beyond the seas and returned again speedely. Secondly, because he
was made Priest of the Bishope of Cambray, and so had sworn him self to the
Pope, who is our most open ennemy. Thirdly, that he had speech with traitors
in Flaunders, with the E. of Westmerland D. Allen, and D. Bristovve. Fourthly
that he travailed with a traitors son, M. William Tempest. The deposition
was of Eliots oath, and his own confession on the rack. Consequently Eliots
swore that the endightement was true, and M. Pains confession was read.

This being done, M. Pain ansvvered to the presumptions, saying, that to go
beyond the seas was not a sufficient token of a traitor, neither to be made
Priest of the Bishope of Cambray: for so were many others, When he was of the
seminary, it had no pension of the Pope.
nothing at al thinking of treason, confessing also that he was not the Popes
scholar, neither had any maintenance of him. To the third he ansvvered, that
he never talked with the Earl of Westmerland, and that D. Allen and D.
Bristovve never talked to his knowledge of any such things. To the fourth,
That M. Tempest was an honest gentilman, and never talked with him about
treason, neither was it unlawful to keep him company, seeing that he was
servant to a right honorable counselor, Sir Christopher Hatton.

He refelled Eliots deposition, first, taking God to witness, on his soul that
he never had such speech with him. Secondly he brought tvvoe places of
Scripture, and a statute to prove, that without twoe sufficient witnesses, no
man should be condemned. the scriptures are. Io. 8. v. 17. 1 Elizab. 6.13
Elizab. 1.1 Ed. c. 12.
The testimony of two men is true. and Deuteronomy. 17. v. 6. In the mouth of two
or three vvitnesses shall he perish, which shall be put to death. let no man be
put to death one only bering witness against him. Thirdly, What kind of men
the persecutors procure to be vvitnesses against God Priests.
he proved Eliot insufficient to be a witness, for oppression of poor men even
to death, for a Rape, and other manifest lewd acts with women, for breach of
co^tracte, for cozoning the L. Peter of Money, for changing often his religion,
for malice against him self, for being attached of murder, and such like acts.
after he made a long discourse of Eliots dessembling, when he came to M.
Moors for him with a warrant, inducing him to warvvicksheere about his marriage.

Hereupon a Jury was impanneld, who on friday after dinner brought evidence
that he was guilty. Upon Saturday a littel before dinner coming again to the
bar, judge Gaudy asked M. Pain what he could say for him self. Who
ansvvered that he had said sufficiently, alleging that it was against the
law of God and man that he should be condemned for on man's witness, notoriously
infamous. Then the judge said that if he were not guilty the country would
have found it. M. Pain ansvvered, that those men of the Jury were poor simple
men, nothing at al understanding what treason is, and that he had demanded the
definition of conspiracy before of M. Morice and them, which they would not
give, but if it please the Queen and her council, A blessed resolution.
that I shall die, I refer my cause to God. Then the judge said that his own
words made most against him, and if Eliot had sworn falsely, Nether Eliots
oath, nor the Iuries verdit shall excuse the judge before God.
his death should be required at his hands, the which no man knevve but God
and him self. M. Pain said, that al was but treachery in seaking of his
blood. In fine judge Gaudy pronounced the sentence of condemnation: and
afterward exhorted him to repent him self, although said he, you may better
instruct me herin. The people are made believe, that Catholics put not their
whole trust in Christ.

Those men are no fit matter for Ministers ^o work on: persons lade^ with
sin are subject to their persuasions.


M. Pain demanded the time when he should suffer, it was ansvvered, on Monday
follovving about 8 of the clock.

After that he was returned to prison, the high Sheriff and others came to him
and demanded. Whether he made JESUS CHRIST the only cause of his salvation,
to whom he ansvvered affirmatively, professing unto them the Catholic verity.
Al sunday till v. of the clock, one D. Vvithers, and D. Sone were with him,
persuading him ernestly to ch^ng his religion, the which (said they) if you will
alter, we doubt not to procure mercy for you This M. Pain told me him self,
for no body was suffered to come unto them, saying that the Ministers by their
foolish babbling did much vex and trouble him. I amongst many coming unto
him about x. of the clock with the officers, he most comfortably and meekely
uttered words of constancy unto me, and with a loving kiss took his leave
of me.

The next Morning the ij of April about 8. of the clock he was laid on the
hurdel, and brought to the place of execution, where kneeling almost half an
hour, he earnestly prayed, arising, and vevving the galloes, he kissed it with
a smiling countenance, ascended, and the halter being applied, he lifted vpe up
his eyes and hands toward heaven a pretty while the^ began to speak to
the people: first, he made unto them a declaration of his faith (because he was
before informed by me, By such lying means the ministers beguile the people.
that the common people thought him to be a Jesuit, whose opinion they say is,
That Christ is not God) confessing one God in essence or substance, and
Trinity in persons, and the WORD to be incarnat for man's redemption, with
other Catholic words. Secondly, he desired God to forgive him his life past,
and to have mercy on al sinners. Thirdly, he forgave al which ever had offended
him, naming Eliot, Wonderful Charity.
whom he desired God most earnestly to make with him a companion in heavenly
bliss. Fourthly, INNOCENCE.
he said that his feet did never tread, his hands did never write, nor his
wit did never inuente any treason against her Majesty: but that he alvvaies
wished unto her as to his own soul, desiring almighty God, to give her in
earth a prosperouse reign, and afterward eternal felicity.

The Lord Rich willed him to confess that he there died a traitor^ and to be
sorry therefore. He confessed a true confession of his innocence before.
To whom very patiently he ansvvered, that he defied all treason, and to
confess an untruth was to condemn his own soul. I Confess truly said he
that I die a Christian Catholic Priest. And desired the L. Rich to bear
witness of his death, Good Lord give her his grace and her counsel to consider
of the matter.
saying, Svveete my Lord certify her Majesty thereof, that she suffer not
hereafter innocent blood to be cast away, seeing it is no small matter. Then a
Minister with an admiratiue reply, said to the people, that in these words
he shevved him self a great traitor, because (quoth he) this man says, These
Ministers truly are mad fellows.
that if the Queen touch the anointed of the Pope, she sheddeth innocent
blood. M. Pain turning unto him said, Truly you deal very uncharitably with
me, for says he, I desired my lord to speak unto her Majesty, that she
suffer not innocent blood to be cast away, and then uttered his great
affection to the Queen. In course of talk, my L. Rich said: Pain have you
not had alvvaies desire to spend your life, A pretty conceit to e^trap the
innocent man? they sport the^ sel^es with innocent men's blood.
for the Queens death? M. Pain then was in contemplation, and not hearing,
ansvvered not: if perchance he had ansvvered affirmatively (not thinking of the
word death, put so sophisti^ally in the last place, but of health) then God (to
whom al men's intentions lie open) knovveth what the adversary would have
gathered thereof. A Minister said, that although he denied this treason, The
Ministers spoke.
yet for all that he was a traitor, for said he, Campion and his company denied
their treason, and yet it was by more then tvvoe witnesses proved unto them.
There was nothing proved but that thee were false vvitnesses.

The devil is a lier and the author of these lies that his ministers utter.


M. Pain ansvvered, that immediately before their execution he demanded of
them if these accusations of treasons had any ground? they said by their faith
that it was never imagined, nor hard of by them. Then the Minister said M.
Heart had confessed it: he ansvvered that he would defend no man's doings but
his own and that he knevve not thereof: straight ways they affirmed that he
confessed such treason to the L. Poole, he said that he knevve her not. Then
the Minister inferred that his brother confessed to him in his chamber seven
years a go that he talked of such an intention. To this he ansvvered being
somvvhat moved: Bone Deus? My brother is, and alvvaies has been a very earnest
protestant, whom yet I know will not say so falsely of me, and then desired
that his brother should be sent for: they called for him, but then he was in
the town (when a sort of us came from the execution we found his brother in
our Inn, of vvho^ we asked if this was true, uttering unto him all the matter:
he swore unto us with great admiration, that it was most false, and told us
that he would so certify my L. Rich, immediately he was sent for to my lord,
and I took horse to ride away, and thereof as yet here no more.)

To conclude they would not tarry so long til his brother should be sent for
M. Pain often confessed that he died a Christian Catholic Priest. If
heretics had any religion they world never desire to pray with one of an
other faith.
They desired M. Pain to pray with the^ in English but he was attentive to
his end in co^templation, and being often called on, by the Ministers to join
with the^ in the lords prayer, he said, that he had prayed in a tongue which he
well understood: and again when he was praying, repeating their former
requests, one answered that he then prayed in English, perhapps to satisfy
the people: for he hard not a word. After M. Pain told them that he said our
lords prayer three times, and told them that he would say the Psalm Miserere,
and said it forth. A wise question.
The Minister asked him whether he repented not that he had said Mass, but he
heard him not, being in contemplation.

After all, very mekely when the ladder was about to be turned, he said,
JESUS, JESUS, JESUS, and so did hang not moving hand or foot. They very
courtesly caused men to hang on his feeete, and set the knot to his ear,
and suffered him to hang to death, commanding Bull the hangman of Nevvgate to
dispatch, lest he should as they said revive, and rebuked him that he did not
dispatch speedely. All the town loved him excedingly, the keepers and most of
the Magistrates of the shere. No man seemed in countenance to mislike with him,
but much sorovved and lamented his death, who most constantly, catholikely
patiently and meekely ended this mortal life, to rise triumphantly his
innocence known to all the world.

He had been long in prison very il used, cuelly handeled, and extremely
racked, he was once or twice demanded whether he would go to their church
(for that would have made amends for all these treasons) why? said he, you say
I am in f^r treason, discharge me of that, and then you shall know farther of
my mind for the other. Al faier means, al foul means, al extremity, al
policy, were used to find that which was not. After his racking the
Lieutenant sent to him for his farther examining or rather tormenting, his
servant with this letter follovving.

I have here with, sent you pen, ink, and paper: and I pray you writ what
you have said to Eliot and to your Host in London, concerning the Queen and
the state, and thereof fail not, as you will answer at your uttermost peril.

M. Pains answer.
RIGHT worshipful my deutie remembered, being not hable to writ without
better hands, I have by your appointment used the help of your servant: for
answer unto your interrogatories I have already said sufficient for a man
that regards his own salvation, and that, with such advised asseuerations
uttered, as amongst christian men ought to be believed, yet once again
briefly for obedience sake.

First touching her Majesty, I pray God long to preserve her highness to his
honor and her hearts desire, unto whom I alvvaies have and during life will
wish no worse, then to my own soul. If her pleasure be not, that I shall
live and serve her as my sovereign Prince: then will I willingly die her
faithful subject, and I trust Gods true servant.

Touching the state, I protest, that I am and ever have been free from the
knowledge of any practice whatsoever, either within or without the realm
intended against the same: for the verity whereof, as I have often before you,
and the rest her graces commissioners called God to witness: so do I now
again, and on day before his Majesty the truth now not credited, will be then
revealed.

For Eliot, I forgive his monstrous wickedness, and defy his malicious
inventions: wishing, that his former behavior toward others, being well
known, as hereafter it will, were not a sufficient disprose of these devised
sclaunders.

For host or other person living, in London or else where (unless they be by
subornation of my blouddy ennemy corrupted) I know they can, neither for word,
deed, or any disloyaultie justly touch me, and so before the seat of God, as
also before the sight of men, will I answer at my uttermost peril.

Her Majesty's faithful subject and your worships humble prisoner John Pain
Priest.

THE ARRAIGNEMENT AND Martyrdom of M. Euerard Haunse Priest: who was
arraigned the xxviij Day of Iulie 1581. and Martyred the xxxj of the same
Month.
M. EVERARD HAVNSE sometime a Minister of the Heretical service, and well
beneficed, fell, by Gods providence and mercy toward him, into a grievous
sickness, in which as well by that chastisment, as by some special miraculous
admonitions from above, he began to consider of his former life, and the
damnable state and function he was in. Whereupon calling for a Catholic
Priest, he reconciled him self to the Church, forsook the sacrilegious
function of the Ministry, abandoned his wrongfully gotten and holden benefice:
The heretics say he could not get lerning enough to be a Priest so quickly,
and yet they thought him learned enough to be a Minister 4. or 5. years before.
and so passed over to Romes. Where having lived nere ij years in most zealous
and studious sort, and by that time through continual exercise well instructed
in cases of conscience, and al deuties of Priesthod: he was for the unspeakable
desire he had to gain both others, but specially some of his dearest friends
into the unity of the Church and salvation, much moved to be Priest and to
return home.

He had his intent, and so came into England. Where he had not been long, but
aduenturing one day to go visit certain prisoners in the Marshal see: there
he was apprehended, and being examined by an Officer, what he was, and from
whence he came, without more ado confessing boldly him self to be a Catholic,
a Priest, and a Seminary man of Rhemes: was thereupon cast into Nevv-gate
amongst thieves and laden with yrons. And a few days after, when the gaile
delivery of that prison was holden, he was brought to the bar with other
malefactors. Where M Flitvvod the recorder sitting in judgment, asked him
where he was made Priest, what was the cause of his coming into England, and
the like. Which the man of God marvelous resolute without fear or
dissimulation told him. affirming the cause of his return to be to gain
souls, and that he was made Priest at Rhemes. Then (says he) you are a
subject to the POPE? so I am sir says M. Haunse, to which M. Flitvvod replied,
then the POPE has some superiority over you, that is true quoth he: what in
England said the Recorder? It is no temporal law that can take from him the
right that Christ has given him.
yea in England says he, for he has as much authority and right in spiritual
government in this realm as ever he had, and as much as he has in any other
country, or in Rome it self.

Upon which most true and sincere confession, the Heretics (as their fashion
is to falsify althings and by contrived sclaunders to to make odious the
servants of God) gave out afterward in print that he should say, How
heretics belly the Catholics.
That Princes had not any supreamicie or souerantie in their own realms but
the POPE only: which was far from his and every Catholic man's mind. But upon
his former answer, to bring him by course of question into the compase of some
of their new statuts of treason, they asked him further, whether he thought the
POPE could not err? to which though he expressly ansvvered, that in life and
manners he might offend, How, where and when, the Pope is free from error.

An other forgerie of the protestants.


and as in his private doctrine or vvriting err also, yet as in judicial
definition and deciding matters of controversy he did never err. this plain
speech notwithstanding, the ennemies gave out, that he should say, The Pope
could not sin.

Then they proceeded with him further: and demanded whether the POPE did not
iudicially proceed in the deposition of the Queen. And thereupon read a piece
of the Bull of Pius qnintus, those words specially, in which he declared her to
be an Heretic, and a fautor of Heretics, and deprived her of al regal
authority and pretended right of these dominions, In a matter of fact the Pope
may be misin formed, or do sometimes things, that are not profitable for the
Church, though it be a good ma^s part to trust that his chief pastor does al
things with good consideration.

An other snare.


absoluing al her subjects from her obedience. did he not err quoth they in
this? I hope said M. Haunse he did not. which term (I hope) he used purposely
in this matter, and not any other asseueration, because Pius quintus his act
was in this case not a matter of doctrine, but of fact. Wherein he did not
affirm, that the POPE could not err. But to go on stepe forvvard, and to
bring him into the compass of the first statut of the last parliament,
whereupon they intended straight to end it him, M. Recorder asked whether he
spoke the foresaid thing to persuad other men that heard him, to be of his
mind. I know not what you mean by persuading says he, but I would have al men
to believe the Catholic faith as I do.

That being done and said of each sid, order was given to one present, that was
learned in the Law to dravve an endightement of treason against M. Haunse,
upon the new statut made in the last parliament which was out of hand done. The
effect whereof was, that the said Haunse, being on of the Popes scollers and
made Priest beyond the seas, was returned to seduce the Q. M. subjects from
their obedience, and that he had affirmed the Pope to be his Superior here in
England, and had as much authority in spiritual government with in this
realm as ever he had before: saying further, that he hoped Pius quintus, erred
not in declaring her to be an Heretic, excommunicating and deposing her M. and
discharging the subjects from their oath and obedience toward her,
acknovvledging, that he uttered so much to have others think therein as he did
etc. Which endightement being openly redd, and M. Haunse thereon arraigned, he
was willed to hold up his hand: he held up his left hand, whereupon the
Recorder blamed him, attributing it to some pride or superstition, that being a
Priest h^ would not vouchsafe or might not hold up his anointed right hand,
but the truth was, he did it for that his right hand was occupied in easing him
self by holding up the great boultes wherevvith the blessed man was excedingly
laden for being admonished, he forth with streached forth his right hand.

And being asked whether he was guilty of the things contained in the
endightement, after a few words, wherein he said that he was not altogether
guilty in those things as they there were set down, he yet acknowledged
the substance and the sense thereof with great courage and constancy.
Whereupon the sentence of death was pronounced against him, in form well
known to al men. This done he was returned to the prison from whence he
came: whether Minister Crovvley, and others came to assay his constancy, but
after much talk and many persuasions to relent in some point of religion, and
to acknovvledge hi^ ^^ul^ tov^^rds her M. When they savv they could not
prevail against the blessed Confessor, the^ forged to his disgrace, and to
make him odious, That he should affirm to the^ in talk, That treason to the
Q. was no sin before God. Which sclaunder they were not ashamed to put out
in print.

Upon the last of July 1581. he was drawn to Tyborne where being put into
the carte, with cheereful countenance he professed him self to be a Catholic
Priest, and most glad to dye for testimony thereof. And being willed to ask
the Q mercy, and demanded whether he took her for his prince and sovereign:
he ansvvered, that he did take her for his Q. and that he never offended her M.
otherwise then in matters of his conscience, which they have drawn to
matters of treason. And whereas says he, I understand it has been given
forth that I should say, Treason was no offense to God: I protest, I neither
meant nor said any more, but that these nevve made treasons, which are nothing
else in deed, but the confession of the Catholic points of religion, were no
offenses to God howsoever they were treasons to man.

The^ the Ministers called upon him to pray with them, and to desire the people
to assist him: he ansvvered, that he might not pray with Heretics, but
desired humbly al Catholics to pray for him, and with him. And so praying
deuoutely to him self, the carte was drawn away, and before he was half
dead, the rope was cut, and he bovvelled a live, and afterward quartered, a
spectacle of great edificatio^ to the good, and a wonder to every one that
looked upon it.

The Copy of a letter sent by the said Martyr to his brother.
BROTHER, I pray you be careful for my parents, see them instructed in the way
of truth, so that you be careful for your own state also. What you shall take
in hand that way, think no other, but God will send good success, my prayers
shall not be vvanting to aid you by Gods grace. Give thanks to God for all that
he has sent, cast not your self into dangers wilfully, but pray to God when
occasion is offered, you may take it with patience.

The comforts, at the present instant are unspeakable, the dignity to high
for a sinner, but God is merciful. Bestow my things you find vngeuen away,
upon my poor knisfolkes. A pair of pantoffls I leave with M. N. For my
mother. Twenty shillings, I would have you bestovv on them from me, if you
can make so much conveniently, some I have left with M. N. I owe Ten
shillings, and two shillings, I pray you see it paid, M. N. will let you
understand how, and to whom, if you want money to discharge it, send to my
friends you know where, in my name. Summa Conciliorum I pray you restore to M.
B. the other books you know to whom.

Have me commended to my friends, let them think I will not forgett them. The
day and hour of my birth is at hand, and my Master says, After we had ended
the history of these xij MARTYRS, which at the beginning we meant only to writ
of, we were desired to add also iij others that suffered for the same quarrel
these years past.
Toll crucem tuam and sequere me. Vale in domino.

Yours Euerard Haunse Pridie obitus.

THE ARRAIGNEMENT AND Martyrdom of M. Cuthbert Maine Priest, and Bachiler of
Divinity: Martyred the 29 of Nouemb. 1577.
IN the year 1577 and the month of June the superintendent of Execeter being
in visitation at a town called S. Trurie, was requested by the sheriff of
the sheere and other busy men, The order of his apprehension.
that he would aid and assist them to search M. Tregians house, where M.
Maine did lie: after some deliberation it was concluded that the sheriff, the
B. Chauncellor, with diverse gentilmen and their servants should take the
matter in hand.

As Soon as they came to M. Tregianes house the sheriff first spoke unto him,
saying, that he and his company were come to search for one M. Bourne which
had committed a fault in London, and so flod into Cornevval; and was in his
house as he was informed. M. Tregian answering that he was not there, and
svvering by his faith that he did not know where he was, further telling
him, to have his house searched, he though it great discourtosie, for that he
was a ge^tilman as he was, for he did acount his house as his castle, al^o
stoutely denying them, for that they had no commission from the Prince.

The sheriff being very bold, because he had a great company with him, swore
by all the oaths he could devise, that he would search his house or else he
would kill or be killed, holding his hand upon his dagger, as though he would
have stabbed it into the Gentilman.

This violence being used he had leave to search the house, M. Tregians house
searched.
the first place they went unto was M. Maines chamber, which being fast
shut, they bounsed and beat at the door, M. Maine came and opened it (being
before in the garden, where he might have gone from them) as soon as the
Sheriff came into the chamber, he took M. Maine by the bosom and said unto
him, what art thou, he ansvvered, I am a man, vvhereat the Sheriff being very
hot, asked whether he had a coat of maile under his dublet, and so vnbuttened
it, and sound an AGNVS DEI case about his neck, which he took from him and
called him traitor and reb^^, with many other opprobrious names.

They carried him, his books, Papers and letters, M. Maine carried to the
superintendent.
to the superintende^t who when he had talked with him and examined him of
his religion: he confessed that he was learned, and had gathered very good
notes in his books, but no favor he shevved him Thence the Sheriff carried
him from one Gentilmans house, to an other, until he came to Lanstone, Cruelly
imprisoned.
where he was cruelly emprisoned, being chained to his bed posts with a
pair of great gives about his legs, and strait commandment given that no
man should repair unto him.

Thus he remained in prison from June til Michelmas, at what time the judges
came their circuit, His arraignement.
the Earl of Bedford was also present at M. Maine arraignement and did deal
most in the matter. He was endited for having a Bull, Holy grains and an Agnus
Dei, which was against their hethenish statutes. M. Maine ansvvered negatiuely
to every point of the enditement, and did prove it very well, if they had not
been blinded with malice and envy. The Jury that went upon him were chosen
men for the purpose, and thought him worthy of death whether there came any
proof against him or no, because he was a Catholic Priest, such is their
euangelical conscience. The sentence.
After the twelve had given their verdict guilty, the Judges gave sentence on
him that he should be executed within xv. days, but it was deferred until S.
Andrews day upon what occasion I know not.

The Sheriff in the mean time went to the court where he was made kinght for
this notable piece of service, and there he procured a commission that M. Maine
might be executed, which he sent into the country to the Justices. Three days
before he was put to death, there came a serving man unto him, and willed him
to prepare for death, for says he, you are to be executed within these three
days at the farthest. He takes the aduertisment of his death. thankfully. His
spiritual exercises.
Which gentil admonition M. Maine took very thankefully, and said to the
seruinge man, that if he had any thing to give, he would rather bestovv it upon
him, then on any other, for he had done more for him then ever any man did.

After that aduertisment he gave him self ernestly to prayer and contemplation
until his death. The second night after he gave him self to these spiritual
exercises, there was seen a great light in his chamber, between twelve and
one of the clock, in so much that some of the prisoners that lay in the next
romes, called unto him to know what it was for they know very well that he had
neither fire nor candel) he ansvvered; willinge them to quiet them selves, for
it did nothing app^rtaine unto them.

At the day of his execution many Justices and Gentilmen came to see him, The
Ministers dispute with him.
and brought with them two proud Ministers, which did dispute with him, whom
he did confute in every point: but the Justices and Gentilmen who were blind
judges in their doings, would hear nothing of that, but they affirmed that
the ignorant Ministers were much better learned then he, albeit they confess he
died very stoutely, whereat they did much marueil, saying to the ignorant
people, that he could avouch no scripture for his opinion, which was most
untrue: for I know by the report of honest men that were present, that he did
confirm every point in question with testimonies of scriptures and doctors,
and that abundantly.

This ended, he was to be drawn a quarter of a mile to the place of
execution, and when he was to be laid on the fled, A barbarous request.
some of the Justices moved the Sherifes deputy, that he would cause him to
have his head laid over the carre, that it might be dashed against the stones
in dravving: M. Maine humility.
and M. Maine offered him self that it might be so, but the Sherifes deputy
would not suffer it.

When he came to the place of execution he kneled down and prayed: as he was
on the ladder and the rope about his neck, he would have spoken to the
people, but the Justices would not suffer him, but willed him to say his
prayers, which he did very deuoutely. And as the hangeman was about to turn
the ladder, one of the Justices spoke to him in this manner. Now villain and
traitor thou know that thou shall dye, A Protestants spirit.
and therefore tell us whether M. Tregian and Sir John Arrundel did know of
these things which thou art condemned for, and also what thou do know by
them.

M. Maine ansvvered him again very mildly, saying, I do know nothing by M.
Tregian and S. John Arrundel, out that they be good, and godly Gentilmen, and
as for the things I am condemned, for, they were only known to me and to
no other, then he was cast of the ladder, saying, In manus tuas etc, and
knocking his breast.

Some of the Ge^tilmen would have had him cut down straight way that they
might, No Gentilmans blood in such cruel hearts.
have had him quartered alive, but the Sherifes deputy would not, but let him
hang til he was dead. After he was quartered, one quarter was sent to S.
Probus where he was taken, an other to wade-brig, the third to Bastable in
Deuonsheir where he was borne, the fourth and his head remain in Lanstone
where he was executed.

This B. man M. Maine borne in Bastable in Deuonsheir, had an old Schismatical
Priest to his uncle, and well beneficed, who being very desirous to leave his
benefice to this his Nephew, brought him up at scholle, He was made Minister.
and when he was xviij or xix years old, got him to be made Minister: at what
time (as M. Maine him self with great sorrow and diep sighs did often tell me)
he knevv neither what Ministry nor religion meant. Being sent after to
Oxford, he heard his course of logike in Alborne hal, and there proceeded
Bachiler of Art.

At that time S. John's College wanted some good fellovv to play his part at
the communion table, His degrees in schole.
to play which part M. Maine was invited and hired. in which College and
function he lived many years, being of so mild a nature, and of such svveet
behavior, that the Protestants did greatly love him, and the Catholics did
greatly piety him, seeing so honest a nature cast away upon so contemptible a
function, in so much that some dealing with him, and aduertising him of the
damnable ^^ate he stood in, he was easily persuaded their doctrine to be
heretical, and vvithal brought to lament and deplore his own miserable state
and condition.

And so being in heart and mind a persuaded Catholic, continued yet in the
same College for some years and there proceeded M. of Art: and every sunday gave
them a dry communion. The dry communion, A vveet supper rightly handled.
for as I think he never gave them the vveet supper but once, at what time all the communicants put that profane bread into their bosoms and did cast it
afterward, either to dogs or upon the donghil. As M. Read then a hot
Protestant and one of these communicants, now a great preacher and my L.
Treasurers chaplen can best tell you.

Some of his familiars being already beyond the seas for their conscience, did
often solicit him by letters to leave that damnable function of the Ministry,
and invited him to come to Doway: one of these letters by chance fell into the
superintende^ts hands of London, who dispatched a purseuant straight to Oxford
for M. Maine and some others, the rest appeared, and were sent to prison, but
by chance M. Maine was then in his country, and being advertised by his
countreiman and friend M. Ford (then fellovv of Trinity College in Oxford, and
of late Martyred) that there was process out for him, he took shipping on the
coast of Cornvval and so went to Doway when the Seminary there was but newly
erected. He went to Doway.


Where falling to Divinity, and keeping the private exercises within the
house diligently, and doing the public exercises in the scholles with
comme^dation, after some years proceeded Bachiler of Divinity, Made Bachiler of
Divinity.
and was made Priest. and desirous partly to honor God in this sacred order,
and to satisfy for that he had dishonored him by taking the sacrilegious title
of Ministry, partly inflamed with zeal to save souls, he returned toward
England together with M. John Pain who was since Martyred the 14 of April in
the year, 1576. M. Maine placed him self in his own country with a Catholic
and virtuous Gentilman M. Tregian, where he had not been a full year but he was
taken in the order above specified.

When the adversary made M. Maine this proffer, to have his life, if he would
swear upon a book that the Q. was supreme head of the Church of England, and
if he did refuse, then to be hanged drawn and quartered: he took the Bible
into his hands, made the sign of the Cross upon it, kissed it, and said, The
Queen neither ever was, nor is, A most true oath.
nor ever shall be, the head of the Church of England.

The Arraignement and condemnation of M. John Nelson Priest, who was Martyred
the ^iij of February the year M.D.lxxviij.
THIS virtuous Priest M. Nelson was taken in London upon the first of December
in the year M.D.lxxvij, His apprehension.
late in the euenning, as he was saying the Nocturne of the Mattins for the
next day following, and was presently sent to prison upon suspicion of
Papistry, as they term the Catholic faith.

And after v or vj days, He is examined of his faith. He refuses the oath of
the supremacy.
he was brought forth to be examined, before the high commissioners, and there
they tendered the oath of the Q. supremacy unto him, the which oath he refused
to take, and being asked why he would not swear, ansvvered because he never
had heard or read that any lay Prince could have that preeminence: and being
further demanded who then was the head of the Church, he ansvvered sincerely
and boldly. That the Pops Holiness was, He makes a true confession.
to whom that supreme authority in earth was dvve, as being Christ's vicar and
the lavvful successor of S. Peter.

The English religion is schismatical and heretical. Schism.
Secondly they asked him his opinion of the religion now practiced in England,
to which he ansvvered promptly, that it was both Schismatical and heretical.
Whereupon they bid him define what schism was, he told them that it was A
voluntary departure from the unity of the Catholic Roman faith.

They seek to entrappe him.
Then they inferred, what, is the Queen a schismatike or no? he ansvvered he
could not tell, because he knevv not her mind in setting forth or manteyning of
the religion now publikly used in England. The commissioners replied, that the
Q. did both promulgat it, and manteine it, and urging him, that if she so did,
then whether she were a schismatike and heretic or no?

M. Nelson pavvsed a while, as being looth to exasperat his prince if he might
have chosen, but yet more loath to offend God and his own conscience, or to
give scandal to the world, ansvvered conditionally after this sort: If she be
the setter forth (quoth he) and defender of this religion now practiced in
England, They drive men into the compase of treason, of purpose. His
arraignement.
then she is a SCHISMATIKE and an HERETIC. Which answer when they had wrong
from him, they said he had spoken enough, they sought for no more at his hands.

And so he was desmissed and sent back to prison: And about vij weeks after,
he was brought forth to his arraignement, and the same interrogatories
propunded again, and he answering still the self same to every question, as
he had done before, sentence of death was prononced against him, as against
one guilty of treason, the first day of february, the year 1578.

His constancy of mind.
When the sentence was prono^ced against him, he never changed his countenance,
nor there never appeared in him any sign of a troubled mind, but took his
condemnation very meekly, and prepared him self with a good courrage for death.
The gailours wife, moved with compassion, offered him wine, thereby as she
thought to asvvage the heuines of his mind, but he would not cast it, He did
voluntary penance, after his condemnation.
saying he rather desired a cup of cold water, as more meet for him. And from
the hour the sentence was prononced against him, til the hour of his death he
took no other food but bread and small beer. His mind only upon heavenly
things.


He was so delited with prayer and secret meditation, that he would not hear
of any other things willingly. Especially if they were wordly matters. In so
much that when a friend of his (for his greater comfort and the more to animate
him against the terrors of death) wished him to read and meditat upon the lives
and deaths of Martyrs, as they are set down in the service according to the
use of Rome, He was full of spiritual comforts
albeit he misliked not of the counsel, ansvvered yet, that he had enough to
occupy his mind withal and to meditat upon full well.

And being put in mind by the same friend, with what alacrity and joy of
mind many thousand Martyrs had suffered exquisite torments for Christ's sake,
and that they never complained of shrunk thereat, he ansvvered, In what
things he specially to^ comfort.
that that cogitation came often to his mind, and that he took such comfort
thereof, that he doubted nothing but that he should find and feel the grace
of Gods consolation in the midst of his agony.

And surely this resolutnes of mind, and willingness to dye, came of this, that
the Thursday before his arraignme^t and death, he had cleansed his conscience by
confession, The chief causes of his comforts.
and had fortified him self by receiving the B. SACRAMENT of the ALTAR. For a
priest coming to visit him, with others in his company, desirous to
communicate at M. Nelsons hands, vvishing it might be upon Candelmas day because
of the solemnity of the feast. but after they had considered on the matter a
while they savv it was no fit day, because such festiual days are more
subject to suspision then other days are, It was Gods special providence that
he should so resolve.
and therefore they concluded to difer it til the day after Candelmas day, but
M. Nelson wished rather to prevent the feast, and to communicate upon the
Thursday before, which was done. Though that neither he him self, nor any of
his friends, had any the least conjecture, that he should so shortly come to his
Martyrdom. And behold the very next day after, word was brought him that on
the morrow he should be arraigned, and undoubtedly condemned, if he did not
revoke his former words, and so it fell out in deed as you have hard.

Upon Monday the iij of February being the day of his Martyrdom, His demeanor
the day of his death.
he came, very early before day, up to the higher part of the prison: whereas
from saturday til then, he had been kept in a lovv dongeon. Two of his nearest
kinsmen coming unto him, found him ernest at his prayers with his hands joined
together and lifted up, in so much that the other prisoners there present, did
both mark it and vvounder at it much.

His cheerefulnes in God.
When they had talked a while together, and he seeing them so full of sorrovv,
that they had much a do to abstain from weeping, yet for all that was nothing
moved him self, neither gave any sign or appara^ce of sorrow either in voice
or countenance. but rebuked them saying, that he lookeh for some comfort and
consolation of them in that case, and not by their tears be occasioned to
grief and sorrow of mind. Vvilling them farther, to lament and weep for
their own sins and not for him. for he had a sure confidence that al should
go well with him.

When his kinsmen took their last farevvel of him, they fell into such
immoderat tears and lamentations, that he was somevvhat moved therevvith, but
stayed and repressed nature by and by, and so dismissed them. And they were no
sonner gone, The Devils Ministers, had no power ou^^ him.
but two proud Ministers of Satan came unto him, seeking by all means to
remove him from his faith, but in vain. for he utterly refused to have any
talk with them, vvilling them to let him be in quiet, and so they did, and
departed from him.

When he was brought forth of the prison, and to be laid upon the herdle,
some of the officers exhorted him to ask the Q. M. whom he had highly
offended, forgeuenes, he ansvvered, His innocence.
I vvil ask her no pardon, for because I never offended her. At which words
the people that stood about him raged, and threatened him, that if he would
not, he should be hanged like a traitor as he was, well (says he) Gods vvil
be done, I perceive that I most die, His vvillingnes to dye.
and surely I am ready to die with a good vvil: for better it is to abide al
punishment be it never so grievous here, then to suffer the eternal torments of
hell fire.

Being come to the place of execution, and put into the car^e the first words
he spoke were, His prayers at his death.
In man as ^^as domine. etc. then he besought such of the standars by as were
Catholics, to pray (...) him, and for him, saying either in Latin or English,
the Pater noster, the Aue Maria, and the Creed. which he him self said in
Latin, adding thereto the Co^sti^^r, and the Psalms Miserere, and De
profundis. which finished turning him self round above to all the people, said
unto them in this sort: I call you all this day to witness, A notable profession
and his prayer.
that I dye in the unity of the CATHOLIQVE CHVRCH, and for that unity do now
most willingly suffer my blood to be shed. And therefore I beseech God, and
request you al to pray for the same, that it would please God of his great
mercy, to make you and al others that are not, true Catholiqu^ men, and both
(...) and die in the unity of our holy mother the C^THOLIK^ ROMAN CHVRCH.

The deceived peoples clamor.
At the which words the people cried out, hence, away with thee and thy
Catholic Romi^h faith: but this notvvithstanding he repeated the same prayer
again. Then he requested to be forgeuen of all men as well absent as present,
He prays for his persecutors.
if he had offended any protesting that he forgave al his ennemies and
persecutors, desiring God also to forgive them. Here again he was willed to
ask the Q. forgeuenes, the which he refused to do for a while, at the last
he said, If I have offended her or any else, I ask her and all the world
forgeuenes, as I forgive al.

And so the hang man being willed to dispatch, M. Nelson prayed a little while
to him self, and then requested such of the assembly as were Catholics to
pray with him, That CHRIST by the merits of his bitter PASSION would receive
his soul into everlasting joy. His last prayer.
When the carte was drawn away, a great number cried with loud voice,
Lord receive his soul.

He was cruelly executed.
He was cut down before he was half dead, dismembered and ripped up, and as
the hangman plucked out his bare; he lifted him self up a little, and a^ some
tha^ stood nere report, spoke these words, I forgive the Q. and all that were
cause^s of my death. But I though I savv his lips move, yet heard not so much
and the ha^gman had iij or iiij blows at his head before he could stricke it
of. His quarters were hanged on four gates of the city, and his head set
upon London Bridge: and thus he changed this mortal life with immortality.
God be blessed for him, and blessed be the memory of this his Martyrdom
amongst men in all our posteri^ies. Amen.

This man from his youth had the ^el^ of God and of his house excedingly,
detesting ever (...) had the knowledge of the truth, specially sin (...) was
made priest and instructed beyond the seas, the f^rst great necligence that
most men of our Co^^^^^y eue^ Catholics, Note this point well.
in the beginning of this Q. reign committed, in goeing to the Comunion,
Church, and seruise of heretics, much glorifying God, that he vouchsafed
afterward to open that error to the people, and to give to so many the grace
of reconciliation and constance to resist that wickedness: and to follovv the
example of their chief pastors therein, the holy Bishops and Confessors, that
then were deprived and in prison for the same.

After his death it is credibly reported, that some sick persons were
restored miraculously to health by his holy Relikes. And a man worthy of al
credit, riding down from London north ward straight upon his execution, spoke
these words, to a grave person that told me the story, It is now come to
pass (said he) that John Nelson foretold me vij years since: That he should
dye for the Catholic faith. He foretold his own death, and this persecution.
And diverse others may well remember, how he would often times say. That the
Catholic religion would never be restored in England, until many should sheed
their blood for confession and testimony of the same.

Which we may undoubtedly take, both for a prophecy of this great
persecution, and also for the conversion of our country, through the
acceptable cry of so much holy innocent blood, so meekely yielded on the one
side, and so unjustly spilled on the other. Which God grant for his Sons
sake, the Head and revvarder of al these blessed Martyrs.

The Martyrdom of Thomas Shervvod, 1578. the vij of February.
THIS was a lay man and young of years, but by the special grace of God and his
fathers, a holy Confessors example and instruction, excedingly given to the
Catholic faith, piety and great penance. He was apprehended in the streats of
London ready to go over to the seminary at Remes, by the wickedness of Martine
Tregonian. Who by il company and education became a Caluinist, and upon
suspicion that this young man brought Priests to say Mass in his mothers house,
who was a good Catholic lady, meeting him by chance in London cried. A
traitor, A traitor, stay, stay the traitor.

Whereupon the people durst do no less, but ^shevv out of their shopps and
apprehend him: so they brought him to the Recorder, his accuser having nothing
in the world to charge him with al; but because it was for suspicion of
religion, they quickly entrapped him by enterrogatories of Pius quintus. Bull,
of the excommunication, of the Q. religion, and whether she was an heretic,
and of her spiritual soueraignitie: unto al which v^hen he ansvvered like a
true Christian man, ^oth then and afterward at this arraignement, after about
vj months miraculous constancy, suffering of most cruel dongeons, yrons,
famine and racking, almost to death, being the first that was racked for nere
matter of faith in our memories, a^ l^^gth, the day and year above specified,
he was ^^^^en to Tyborne, hanged cut down bovveled a live, and so divided
and set up his head and quarters, he gloriously took his leave of the world,
and is received into the eternal tabernacles in glory and felicity eternal.

GENTIL READER,
CONSIDER OUR difficulties in printing, and bear with the faults escaped us.

FINIS.

