A Dialogue full of pithe and pleasure: between three Philosophers: Antonio,
Meandro, and Dinarco:

Upon the Dignity, or Indignity of Man.

Partly Translated out of Italian and partly set down by way of observation.

By Nicholas Breton, Gentleman.

Dignus honor pius, Gloria sola Deus.

LONDON Printed by T. C. for John Brown, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Saint Dunstons Churchyard in Fleetstreete. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful the lover of all good spirits, and nourisher of all
good studies, John Linewray, Esquier, Master Surueior general of all her
Majesty's Ordinance, Necholas Breton wishes the merits of much worthiness on
earth, and the joys of hea^uen hereafter.
SIr, it is a custom among the best minds, to call their thoughts daily to
account, to whom and in what they are beholding, which considered, they fall
next to the endeavor of desert, and last of all into a hate of themselves, if
they perform not something, wherein they are seen^ to be themselves: now,
finding my self so much bound to your undeserved favors, that I cannot avoid
Ingratitude, to bury them in oblivion, I have awaked my dull spirit to salute
your kindness, with this token of my love: wherein you shall find a matter of
more worth then I am worthy to meddle with, handl^d in Diologue-wise, betwixt
three Philosophers: in which, vnde^ the Title of the Dignity or Indignity of
Man, are discoursed many necessary points to be cons^d^red of* as well for the
outward as the inward parts; wher^in it may be you shall find pleasant wits
speak to some purpose, no Machauilian policies, nor yet idle fables, no
strange Riddles, nor vain libelling ballades, but quick spirits whetting
their brains, to show the edge of their inventions: and not to be tedious in
my Preface before you come to the matter, you shall find in sum, that true
worth, wherein lies the whole matter, that only makes the worthy or unworthy
man, and the due glory unto God, who is only worthy of all honor, and of all
men: the greatest part of this book was in Italian, dedicated to a man of much
esteem, in the Dukedom of Florence, and this book in this our Language, I
have thought good here in England, to present to your worthiness, of a better
work, in this her Majesty's Royal Tower of London: in which, as by your
continual travels in your place, you doubtless deserve no less gracious
regard of the greatest, then account with the wisest; so would I be glad by
the due fruit of my thankfulness, of your self, and men of your worth, to be
worthily thought honest. In assured hope whereof, leaving my book to your
kind acceptance, and my love to your like account, I rest.

Yours affectionately to command: Nich. Breton.

To the Reader.
BY your patience gentle Reader, give me leave to lay before your eyes, a
discourse upon the Dignity, or Indignity of Man, handled in the manner of a
Dialogue, by two or three conceited companions: that though they were no great
Graduates, yet it seemed by that they spoke, they understood what they learned;
and though they exceed not in their knowledge, yet they went not to schoo^e for
nothing: two of them it should seem were younger then the third, who, in his
sullaine humor used speech that might give cause of mirth; how ever they
disagreed in their opinions touching the matter they had in talk, yet they
parted, and lived such friends, as made good use each of others company. So
would I wish it to be with you that read, what ever you think of my writing,
yet so to conceive of my labor, that being not disdainfully spoken of in this,
it may be better employed hereafter: but least I should beg a liking of that
which may seem not worth the looking on, I will leave my wo^ke to the worlds
courtesy, and my good will to my friends kindness: and so rest to every one as
I have reason.

A friend, Nicho. Breton*

A Dialogue between three conceited companions: Dinarco, Antonio* and Meandro,
upon the Dignity or Indignity of Man.
Antonio. MY good friend, well overtaken.

Dinar. That is as it falls out.


Anto. Why? I speak out of a good mind, that hoped to meet with no other.


Dinar. Nay, your words may seem to be good, but your mind is known to your
self.


Anto. So it may be to you, if it pleas^ you.


Dinar. But what shall I get by it*


Anto. No hurt, i^ you mistake not your self: But why do you grow into this
humor? If you desire to be sollitary, let not me b^ troubles^me. God be with
you.


Dinar. Nay sof^, I love you too well to let you pass with your impatience:
an^ therefore temper your wits, your walk will b^ the better: but tell me
what you would say, if you could speak?


Anto. I would say that I never heard any man speak as you do: but I would
you would speak to some better purpose.


Dinar. V^nitie, vanity, and all is vanity.


Anto. What of that?


D^n. W^y, when all is nothing, to what purpose is any thing*


Anto. Then leave the world, and speak of God.


Dinar. Oh leave that to the Angels, for men are become such devils, that they
are not worthy to think upon the name of God.


Anto. Oh those be Atheists, au^ngeance on them: but surely there are some goo^
creatures on y^ ^arth, that sinc^r^ly hono^ God.


Dinar. But are they no^ (...) m^^t o^ them?


Anto. Such beggars are ric^ men, wh^^h in Grace have a great possession.


Dinar. Yea, bu^ that Grace has little grace in this world.


Anto. No matter, for there will one day be a change, when the goats will be
severed from the sh^epe, and then Conscience will be somewhat in account.


Dinar. You speak of a great while hence, but there are many things to be done
before that day.


Anto. And yet it may come ere it be looked for.


Dinar. True, but that is either not believed, or l^^^e thought on: but a little
by the way, i^ your haste be not the greater* will you st^^e a while with me,
and sit down by this fair spring? for I am not young, and old men must have
baits, i^ their ^ournies be ^ar^e.


Anto. I will either stay or go with you with all my heart, for my business
is not such as can draw me from your company: but look you who comes out of
the wood, over the style, making toward us.


Dinar. It is Meandro, seem not to s^e him.


Mean. Gentlemen, is are well met this fair morning: her^ are two sweet
Fountains, one of clear water, and an other of clear wit.


Dinar. What shall we have a play?


Anto. Why Sir?


D^. Why, do not you hear the Parasite begin the Prologue?


Me. Oh Sir, good words, you know I am no capper nor curt^^s man and therefore
if I were deceived, I am sorry for my opinion.


Dinar. Why you know, water may be foul, and wit foolish: and therefore wash
your hands ere you know the one, and call your thoughts together, before you
judge of the other.


Mean. Ind^ed Sir you do well to teach children how to read, but he that is
entered in his Primer, needs no help in his A.B.C.


Dinar. Indeed an old fool is no babe, and yet ^leare eyes may have a blind
sight.


Me^n. It may be a principle among Spittle-men, but sound limbs need no
Surgeon: but yet for your good words I thank you, and as I can, I will req^ite
you. But leaving this cross ^inde of car^ing, I pray you let us fa^l to some
^airer play, that Signi^^ Antonio may have a part, and not stand like a Torch
bearer.


Dinar. Why, devise what you will, that may not lo^se time, and you shall soon
try my cunning.


Mean. Why Sir, shall we speak of love?


Di. Oh the vainest thing of the world, which is either mistaken, or unknown,
or at least if there be any, it lives in the heavens, where the world cannot
come at it: what say you Antonio?


An. Truly I have no pleasure to loose time in idleness, for either as you
said in the world it is not, or as it is, not worth y^ talking on.


D^. W^ll said, wanton love, is lust: wealthy love, couetousness^, and fained
love hypocrisy* but the true love is Charity, which in the world is grown so
cold, that it makes me shiuer to think on it, and therefore have little
pleasure to speak of it.


Mean. Then S^^ shall we talk of Virtue?


Dinar. What, how little she is esteemed in the world? what says Antonio?


An. Truly Sir, I can rather sigh for her, then speak of her, ^or she is so
poorly maintained in many places, that she is called but the Lady of the
beggars: and therefore I had rather honor her where I find her, then talk of
her, where I can do her no good: but i^ it please y^u, shall we speak of Arms?


Di. Me thinks peace were a better hearing, and valor is better to be seen
in action, then argument: what says Meandro?


Mean. Me thinks the sound of blood is hideous, and the terror of death is
miserable: but shall we rather speak of peace?


Dinar. I think you may hold your peace a good while, before you can truly
speak of peace among men, for since the Author of it went from the earth, I
think it was never seen in the world. How say you Antonio?


Anto. I think that discord has so got the upper hand, that peace is so put
to silence, that there is almost nothing to be spoken of her, but that it is
pity she is no more to be spoken of.


Dinar. True: for not only men have no great pleasure in her, but the women are
out of love with her: and what shall we th^n talk of her?


Anto. Shall we then talk of state matters?


Dinar. Not for your lives: make clean your dishes and your platters, but
talk of no Princes matters.


Mean. Indeed the mean is best, and a quiet is a happy life, obey laws, pay
duties, ware bonds, keep silence, fear God, and pray for the Queen: these
are all the state matters, that I will either speak of, or harken too.


Anto. Indeed little said, is soon amended: and silence s^ldome has o^fended:
who look^th hye, may have a chip fall in his ^ye.


Dinar. Yea, and perhaps a choppe on his neck, that may cost him his head: but
what, shall we speak in rhyme?


Anto. A little, but if you like it, shall we speak of Poetry?


Dinar. What, Ballades? why it is grown to such a pass, that the E. i^ taken
out, and of Poetry, it is called pottry: why verses are so common, that they
are nailed upon every post: besides, it is a poor profession.


Mean. Ind^ed they are most in use with Players, and Musicians, for else they
go down the world for employment: but if there were a fall of rich men, there
might be some work for them about Epitaphs: for if they be too busy with
Libels, they are put to silence for ever after: but shall we leave this poor
subie^^, and speak of the ^xcellency of Music?


Dinar. Oh the Instrument betwixt the legs, where the stick and the Fiddle
can divide finely upon a plain song, and carry the parts full, puttes down
all the Music of these days.


Mean. Yet a still Recorder does well in a Chamber, where a so^^ ^p will use
him sweetly: but, what should staid wits trouble their heads with too many
crochets? Let us honor the Art, and talk of some other exp^rienc^.


A^to. Shall we speak of Phis^cke?


Dinar. Oh the word is ill in pronouncing, Physic is an vns^uery matter, that
shows nothing but sorrow, for the charge of the recovery, makes the grief^ of
the remedy: besides, only on the Patients pain, grows the Physicians
profit: no, no, exercise, and a spare diet, early rising, and warm clothes,
is better then a pill or a potion: Oh the very thought of it hurts my stomach,
I pray thee let us talk no more of it.


Mean. Shall we then discourse of Law?


Dinar. Argue that list upon their cases, I pray God keep me from their
Courts, where their q^irkes and qui^ides makes me desire title of their
acquaintance.


Anto. Indeed I have heard it compared unto a Laborinth, where one may get in
when he will, and out, when he can: but the cry of the poor so discredits many
of the professor^, that I have no pleasure to speak of it.


Mean. Shall we then talk of hunting or h^wking?


Dinar. What birds, and dogs? No, no, tyring of legs, and tearing of
throats, with luring, and hollowing, are nothing pl^asing to mine humor, I do
not love so to make a ^oyle of a pleasure.


Anto. Shall we then talk of Astronomy?


Din. No: let us rather look about us in the world, then stand stari^g on the
stars: I love not, with following the Moon to fall into a d^tch.


Mean. Shall we then speak a little of Beauty?


Dinar. D^ it is grown so Artificial, that the natural is almost out of p^int,
and because I will rob no Artificer of his cunning, I will leave that Art to
the Painter.


Anto. I^^eed S^r, I hear that most young Lovers are Idolaters, for in stead
of lively faces, they do reverence to painted Images.


Dinar. Truly, I am of your mind.


Mean. Then let us begin where we left this other day, to speak of the
Dignity or Indignity of m^n: what say you Master Antonio?


Anto. I will answer your proposition, but Dinarco that hau^ the garland.


Mean. Why ^^r, I will not iniure the Tavern to steal away she bush, and
therefore let words that ^ost little, be affoorded good cheap, and as well
taken as spoken.


Dinar. Content is pleased, and for that I will not be ceremonious, I will
begin to break ^he Ice. I am persuaded that there is no creature so little
worthy honor as man: I mean not absolutely without exceptions, as man has
been and should be, but as man is, and should not be: but because I would be
glad to hear your two kind quarellings upon the questions, and for that my
memory of that I would say, may be the better refreshe^ by that that either of
you say, let me in^rease Antonio begin, as the elder, I cannot say the better
scholar.


Mean. Father, w^e will confess our selves all punies to your perfection, and
Scholars in your school, where, who does remember what you teach, may make
much of his understanding.


Dinar. Go too I say, use Rhetho^icke so a better use then flatt^rie, and
rather do as you have reason, than say that you have no thanks for: and yet
but lovingly angry, I pray you take not ill a good meaning: and Master
Antonio, ^et me entreat you to begin the delivery of your opinion, wi^h your
reasons for the same, touching the worthiness or the unworthiness of man.


Anto. Father you may command your children, though w^ blush at our b^ldnesse,
and therefore under correction, I will be but obedient to commandment.


Dinar. Well Antonio, be not sine with your friends, it is Art to hide Art:
you know I love you, and so I pray you understand me, and yet modesty I allow
of, so it be not below the cliffe of good Music: but I pray you begin.


Anto. Touching the dignity, or indignity of man, this is mine opinion, that
by all which I can with indifferent judgment find out by all the notes that I
have taken in the nature and the life of man. I see not any, but that compared
with other creatures, I ^^nde him the less worthy of any, yea almost of any
to be commended. For ^^^st, touching his first s^bstance, was he not created
of the ^^me of the earth, then which, what can be worse imagined? And t^uching
generation, is not man even at this day of the like substance? In his
conception, is he not inf^cted with corruption? In his breeding, full of
trouble, grief, and sickness, to his breder? his place a hou^e of darkness,
and his li^ertie conjoined to a limit? when with a world of pain to his
enlarger, covered with v^cleen^nesse, he comes he knows not whither, is
received by he knows not whom, does he knows not what, and lives he knows
not how; dis^urnished of all defense against hurt, unprovided of all comfort
toward his g^od: unable to stand without help, or to be thankful to them
that holds him up: crying before he speak^s, to signi^ie sorrow b^yond
speech; and subject to so many dangers, a^ ho^rely threaten but his death:
which if h^e escape in his Infancy, he shall find in his elder age: for
n^thing is more certain then death, nor v^c^rtaine then the time, and the
mean: his des^res in^atiable, his humo^re variable, his ^uries intolerable,
his sinne^ innumerable* and so h^s life ^^^crable. What* h^e is not this, he
is not himself, and being this, wh^t can be worse then himself? for his
estate, in what estate so^u^r he be, let us see the best that he can be, an^
then consider what withal he may be. If a ^^ing, he may be a tyr^nt, and that
is odio^e: or a sheep, and that is (...) If a Couns^^lor, he may be prend, and
that may breed envy* he may be covetous, and that may corrupt conscience. If a
soldier, he may be desperate, and so dangerous, or bloody, and so murtherous:
or covetous, and so treacherous. If a Lawier, he may b^ partial, and that were
perilous: or greedy, and that were gre^uous: or faithless, and that were
villamous. If a Merch^nt, he^ may be banquerout, and so a beggar* or a theater,
and so a villain. If an Usurer, he may be a dog, and so half a diuel^. If
a Tradesman, he may be a false dealer, and so a deceiuer, or a plain
deal^^, and so a beggar. If a Farmer, he^ may be a Corne-monger* and so a
C^arl^: Or a Grazier, an^ so a Chuffe. If a Miller, he may towle false, and so
pro^e ^ Thee^e. If a Labourer, he may be lazy, and so lubber: or ^ beggar,
and so a ^ag^e. In sum, examine every ^ne of ^^ese, and see of what estate he
is, that may deserve to be honored for his worthiness. If a Queen, I say
nothing but Go^ preserve her. If a Lady, she may lack honor, and that were
shameful. If a Gentle woman, she may have a wrong title, and that were
pity. If a Citizen, she may be proud, and that is uncomely. If a Country
dame, she may love ^auncing, and so further fro^^ng. If a beggar, she may be a
Bawd, and so a bagage: so that ^^ale, and female, I see no state, but in the
same they are subject to such imperfections, that there is little desert of
commendations, which may make man a more worthy creature then any other. If he
be young, ^is ^ddes h^ is wanton: if aged, he is wilful: if rich, he is proud:
if p^^re, he is desperate: if wise, he is troubled: if fond, he is scorned: so
that (...) is many ways so blameable, as that he is almost no way commendable:
but in desert of due praise, inferior ^o many other creatures: what feeds so
grossly, speaks more loudly, (...) so vile^y* An Eagle will catch at no flies,
when high minds will stoop at (...) matters: a Lion will not prey on a Lamb,
^ut a Tyrant will no^ spare the innocent: a Hawke will be reclaimed to her
^ure, when a man will harken to no learning: a horse will know hi^ ^yder, when a
Scholar will be a stranger to his master: ye^, a ^ogge will be a watchman at
his masters door, when a servant will be (...) in his house: and a spaniell
will wagge his tail for a bone, (...) will be ungrateful for a great benefit. A
Nightingale singes b^ nature, man cries by nature: the Elephant will lead a man
thr^^gh the wilderness, but man will lead man into destruction: the Lizard will
keep a man from the Serpent, but one man is a Serpent to another: the Ant
labors for his living, while man sleeps out the time of his labor: the
Sparrow will learn to keep ^ut, while man will keep in no compass: the birds
unto their ^ing the Eagle, the beasts to the Lion, the fishes to the Whale, are
more in subjection by nature, then men either by law* or love, to their
Sovereign. For neatness, how clean keeps the Be her hiue, and ^ow foul is
many a Sluttes house? For apparel, how does the ^wanne prune her feathers ^
and how full of feathers is many a Slo^ens foul coat? For wit, how has
nature ^aught the Fee to suck ^he^oney, and gather the wa^e off the flowers,
while man with his folly gets but poison from the w^edes? What cunning has
nature taught the Spider in her web, while men by Art are feign to study for
less skill? for outward neatness, the beast kicketh his hair, the byrd
pr^neth her feathers* the fish scowreth his scales: while man only is so
lazy, as he will fearce f^nde time to wash his hands: for inward cleanness I
mean, of nature, look into the Beasts, and of all the most monstrous, the
Elephant, and compare them with man, you shall see such to be the difference,
as may be a shameful grief to think on: there is no beast, great or small,
but knows his time of generation with his ^emale, which past, he l^^ueth her,
and falls to such course, as either (...) or service does command him, not
dwelling upon the vileness of his action, but as it were glad to be from it:
yet for the time is he to her so kind, that he will sport and play with her,
so careful over her, that he will suffer none to hurt her, and so jealous of
her kindness, as that he will adventure death, ^re an other shall ^nioy her.
But of all the most worthy to be noted, as I before said, is the Elephant, who
certain days before his meeting with his female, that she may kindly
entertain him, goes to the Sea, and ther^ as deep as he dare stand for
drowning, stays till the waves do almost cover him, when being well washed,
he walks into some place where he may dry him in the Sun, then goes
unto some Rock, where betwixt two stones, he whetteth his tuskes, as it were
to burnish them and sharpen them for some fight: all which performed, he
walks full of melancholy, till he have met with his female, when putting on
a pleasing humor, he makes her such sport, as he finds most fitting her
contentment: which done, and having performed for certain days, that due
course where unto nature has commanded him, he then retires himself into
some sollitarie place, where as it were, weary, and not well pleased with
himself with that he has done, solemnly steals alone down again to the
Sea, where in like manner as before, he stands till he be clean washed
from that uncleanness wherewith he finds himself defiled: which done, and
dried as before in some sunni^ place, he gets him again to his fellow
mates, where he passes the rest of his life: and (which I had almost forgot)
it is sai^ that ^ee only once in the year, and only to one, thus ties the
time of his delight.

Now for byrds, have they not all a time of breeding? an^ does not every Cock
keep with his Hen? yea, and if he find any f^ne grain or seed that he
holds most dainty, will he not call for his H^nne, and spare it from
himself, to bestow it on her, and dye upon him that will ^are to tread her?
yea, and in the time of her sitting, when she seeks for foo^e, will help to
hatch up her young, or bring food into her neast, both for her and her young
ones, and withal, having once chosen each other, how kindly without change,
do they keep one with an other, while b^t one month in the year, they have
(most of them) the time of their treading.

Now note I say, this the nature both of beasts and birds, both in their
cleanenesse and kindness to their females, and how far it exceeds the
nature of man* who spares neither time, nor place, to follow his f^^thy
desires, not caring how unclean either himself or his minion be, so he may
after a full stomach, and drunken ryotting, tumble with his Trull, and almost
not caring who behold him: and withal, many a one, yea to his own wife, to
whom he is bound, both by the law of God, and nature, to be kind, and in all
honest course of reason to be careful of, will be more dogged then any dog,
and care not what become of her, nor who enjoy her, so that he may make a
gain of her: but how w^full is the state of that woman, and how wicked is the
^atur^ of that man, let indifferency give judgment, to the commendation of
all creatures but man, and the only discommendation of man. Oh how sweet a
thing is it to behold the ^^we suckle her lambs, the Hen clocking her
chickens, and to think how little a time they take in their generation, after
which, they no more endure the company of their ^ales: and what a sorrow and
shame it is, to see some women send their children to Nurses, far from them,
and so ^^idome look after them, as though they never cared to see them: yea,
and without providing for them, let them either beg, or starve for their
livings, and withal, have their lu^ts never satisfied, but ready to spoil
one, to make an other, or so o^t to be breaking up of the ground, that the
seed has no time to bring fruit. Again, what beast or b^rd, but knows his
own young? and how many a man, that God know is, knows not his own child,
but labors to maintain the fru^te of an others pleasures? What shall I say?
Tedious it were to run through the courses of nature in all creatures: of
which no doubt, there is not any, but for due causes of commendation exceeds
man in his corrupt nature.

Again, what good^y flocks of sheep, what herds of cattle, what flight of
byrds, and what s^oules of fishes, are oftentimes to be seen, to live kindly
together: and man, oh wretched man, how few can agree together, when one can
scarce live by an other: yea in the very time of death, when the sheep finds
it self infected, he ^trayeth from the flock, and dies alone in some
sollitarie place, as loath to infect his company: if a byrd be either sick or
diseased, she pearcheth alone upon some bough, or swigge, where alone she makes
an end of her life, as loath to grieve her friends with her calamities: the
fish no sooner is either sick, or hurt, but he runs to the sh^re, where
alone he ends his days, as loath to infect the water with his putrefaction.
Man only when he finds himself sick or hurt, gets himself into the City
or Town of most company of people, there in his own, or his Hostess house,
in the best Chamber, in the finest sheets, and the most sumptuous bed, and
among a number of his best friends, how foul and infectio^s soever be his
disease, not ashamed who see him, nor caring who be hurt by him, giving grief
to many, and leaving good to few, perhaps with roaring and crying, vomitting
and purging, in all the ^^thinesse of corruption, dies f^rre more beastly then
any beast.

Consider then, since in so ma^^ parts of imperfections, man is so worthy
dispraise, and all creatures living in all due parts of commendations, do so
exceed him, I cannot in mine opinion, but conclude him to be the most
dishonorable, and vncommendable of all creatures in the world.


Dinar. Antonio, gramercie for thy too true, though semewhat too bitter, laying
open the beastly nature of man, as too many are found in these days: but as I
greatly like of thy consideration of their corruption, so would I hear what
may be spoken of the contrary: for I am partly persuaded, that either some
fri^nd has deceived thee, some enemy abused thee, or some creature like a
woman, played false with thee, that thou have so narrowly looked into the notes
of their evil nature. But let it be as it is, thou have spoken but a truth,
for which let other, I will not blame thee, but rather heartily thank thee.
And now Meandro, shall I entreat you to deliver your mind upon this subject?


Mean. Father Antonio has spoken so home to his purpose, that he has made me
half afraid to make any reply, yet at your commandment, I will show my
weak judgment. Touching the worthiness of man, I find him in many due
considerations, the most worthy reverence, honor, and commendation, of all
creatures. And first, touching his first substance: the first substance whereof
I find man to be framed, was rather the ^reame of the earth, then the slime of
the earth: for surely it had never else made such butter as could receive the
print of so excellent a form as man: but when nature had bethought her self
of some such exceeding substance, as that therein she would be pleased above
all other, she then took rather the Cream then slime of the earth, whereon
she set the four Elements, to show their virtues in that work, which she
would name her best b^loued, and having framed that excellent form of man, who
both b^ his outward and inward gifts, she had-made most gracious of all
creatures: what predomination did she give unto him over them all? yea even
unto the Elements, who had their workings in his creation, to be now at his
commandment: has he not the fire to warm and to heat with? the water to
^oole, and wet with? the air to breathe by, and to fill with? and the earth to
dwell, and to plant on.

Does not the Bird come down from his highest pitch? the Beast come down from
the highest mountains, and the fish come up from the deepest waters, and all
to ^eede his hungry stomach, to cloathe his naked carcass, and to enrich his
rustie treasure? do they not fear his eye? tremble at his voice? and be they
not obedient to his commandment? but to answer more particularly to each
point: In his generation, is not his substance of y^ strength and almost life
of the four elements? which met in a little matter, form so excellent a
creature? then for his place, though dark to blind eyes, yet has
understanding there that clear sight, that nature has her placing of every
part of his perfect breeding, where knowing his constitution, she preserues him
from all hurt, and feeds him so purely, as passes a simple comprehension:
then at the time of her appointment, she delivers him into the hands of those
that she knows will preserve him, not like a beast in the wilderness, nor a
bird in a mossy neast, nor a fish in a muddie hole, but in a private place, and
in such modest company, as concealing the fruit of corruption, bring him
foort^ like the fairest of all creatures: when his crying prognosti^ateth his
sorrow for this world, where he lost the first of his perfection, and fears
too great an infection: for his pain to his breeder, it is forgotten, being
bred, and for his weakness in knowledge of either time, place, or person, it
is a cause of a greater thankfulness, when he li^eth to know them all: for his
dis^urnishment of defense, his de^enders are provided, and for his want of
comforts, a world of comforters: and for dangers when death is the worst,
being the end of sorrows, the fear is nothing: his desires are reasonable,
his furies appeaseable, his humors tolerable, his offenses though
innu^erable, yet in pity, pardonable: his labors infinite, his cares
discr^ete, his thoughts high, his studies deep: his wit admirable, and his
life honorable: this if he be not, he is not himsel^e, and being this, on the
earth what can be better then himself? Now for his estate, let us consider
each estate sp^ke^ of, and by degrees answer the oppositions: consider the
worst that is, and the best that may be. If a king in his ^iranny over the
wicked, he may be a friend to the virtuous, in his clemency to the repentant,
he may reclaim the malignant. If a Counselor, his anarice may teach the
prodigal thriftinesse: and i^ haughty, it may breed fear in the envious: If
a soldier, a bloody execution may breed a quick victory, and a speedy
peace: If desire of gain, it may breed the more care to keep, for fear to
loose: If desperate, Fortune may be a friend to the aduenturous. If a Lawier,
he may be partial in pity, and that may be gracious* and if covetous, it
may make him studious: If a Merchant, his poverty may breed patience: and
care, may recover his credi^: If an Usurer, he may pleasure the needy, and
punish the spend-thri^t: If a Trades man, he may be cunning, and so wealthy: If
simple, yet honest, though not rich: If a Farmer, good husbandry is no
churlishness: And if a Grazier, each ^atte beast is not an Ore: If a Miller, a
large Thumb shows a strong hand: If a labourer, recreation may be no
laziness: If a beggar, a good exercise of Charity, and a Beade-man for the
liberal. If she be a Queen, I say not only with Antonio, God preserve her,
but knowing such a Queen in a little, but I may say, a greatly blessed Island,
whom according to ^he excellency of her nature, the heavens have worthily
named Bazilethea: I say such a Queen, as, not the greatest Monarchy in the
world has the like, to love, and honor.

Let me say thus much in her due, that what dignity soever may ^e justly given
unto man above all other creatures, that, and much more may be given unto her
Majesty, above all other: who in all the judgments of the worth^est wits on
the earth, is worthily held, not only the Grace of all her Court, but under
heaven the very glory of her kingdom: whose patience in all trouble, whose
temper in all passion, whose vountie to the well deserving, and Justice over
the obstinate, whose mercy to the offendant, and love to the vert^ous: whose
beauty in nature, whose wisdom in judgment, whose magnanimi^ie in dangers,
and constancy in Religion, whose providence in care, and resolution in
performance, makes her the true figure of the Phaenix, and the worthy honored
wonder of the world: whose praises so far pa^^e the reach of humane reason to
set down, that admiration may rather cont^mplate, then conceit express them:
for while the wise serve, the virtuous love, the valiant ^eare, and the mighty
admire. What can be said? but that since in the dignity of humane nature she
is the worthy wonder of her days, let her subjects ever pray, that in the ever
wonder of the world, she may live the blessed Majesty of her kingdom, and be
persuaded, that where the virtue of beauty, and beauty of virtue, the mercy
of Justice, and care of judgment, in the eye of Grace, the heart of Truth, and
the hand of Bounty, makes that Angel of a woman, which proves the glory of a
creature. Let the Phaenix be drawn from her spirit, and the dignity of man in
this world under heaven from her Majesty: whom the Chronicles of never ending
ages, may eternize for the most gracious Queen of the world. Of which Truth,
while Envy is eating of her snaky haire^ with anger, to hear of, Fame joyfully
sounds her name in eternal triumph.

But least I blot my paper, in seeking to show a fair hand, and abridge much
of her worth, in so little touching the wonder of her worthiness, I will only
leave Princes to admire her, the virtuous to love her* the honorable to atten^
her, the learned to commend her, the devout to pray for her, that God who by
his Almighty power for the good of her kingdom, did in her seat of Majesty
place her, will so in his glorious mercy, in the same ever preserve her, that
while the whole world is full of her worthy fame, her subjects may joy to
behold the Majesty of her person: and while the greatest part of the world
does admire her, the heart of England may ever joy to enjoy her: to which
prayer I hope he lives not s^ unworthily borne, that will not joyfully say,
Amen. And now, if in the weak sex of human nature be found this matter of
so excellent a Majesty, let no creature by many degrees of commendation come
near unto man in his true dignity.

Now to answer more briefly unto subjects of lower tytles: If a Lady, she may
want honor, but not virtue. If she be a Gentlewoman, she may be mistaken,
and so wronged. If a Citizen, she may be proud, to avoid base familiarity.
If a Countrey-woman, she may be ^auncing, yet no fi^ling: And if a beggar,
though poor, yet may she be honest.

In sum, there is no estate of man, from the Prince to the beggar, but in the
worst that they are, they may be better then they seem to be: in youth he
(...) witty, ^n age he is wise, in wealth he is wary, in poverty he is
patient: i^ wise, he is honored: if l^nd, he may be instructed, or pitied:
what feeds so finely? speaks more sweetly, or lives so virtuously? being man,
as he is indeed, or el^e indeed is not man: the stooping of a high mind,
shows the virtue of humility, and to roo^e ^ut the offspring of Idolatry, if
it be, it is a good tyranny: who reclaimes the Hawke to the lure, but the
expert Faulconer? or why loves the horse the Ryder, but for his good keeping
and managing? A servant will keep his masters cophers, while a dog will
steal his meat from his Trencher: and a peasant will plant him a v^n^yard,
while a spaniell can but spring him a Partridge. A Nightingale cannot but sing,
nor sing but one m^neth, man sings or sorroweth as he sees cause, in reason,
at what time so^uer. The fish cannot but swim, nor swi^me, but in the water:
man can swim in the water, and walk out of the water: the Elephant will lead
a man out of the wilderness, and man will deliver man out of much woefulness:
the ^yzard keeps man from the Serpent, and man instructs man how to shun the
devil: yea, and in his divine counsa^le, may be called a God unto man: Man
labors for the corn whereon the Ant feeds, and teaches the Sparrow the
cut that she keepe^. In sum* all creatures fear their king for his
greatness, only man loves his Sovereign for his goodness. Now what Bees
^iue is so clean, as the Merchants parlour, or the milke-maides dairy? And for
appar^ll, what Swannes feathers more neat then the Courtiers cloak and the
Citizens gown? and while man plants his gardens with sweet flowers, the
droanes deceive the Bees of the honey. And how weak the web of the Spider is,
every common Weauer can decipher.

Now while the beast lickes his hair, man brusheth his coat: while the bird
pruneth her feathers, man combeth his hairs: and while the fish scowreth his
skales, man batheth his skin: so that for outward neatness, there is no
comparison in any creature to be had with man. Now for the inward part* the
Spirit, man is not carried only by the instinct of nature, to seek out his
(...) lust, but by reason, to love the object, where virtue is the grace of the
subject, where beauty mu^t please the eye, and th^se qualities the mind, that
make marriage honorable, and love comfortable. When conceit having met with
contentment, cannot only keep company for a time, but is so tied in the bands
of affection, that fancy can never get loose, but continneth love unto lives
end: where both are so kind, that there can nothing be too dear for each
other, and a loving jealousy, is a pleasing humor, while he labors
abroad, and she hu^ wi^eth at home; for their own profit, and their
childrens comfort: and while the Wolf kills the Lamb, and the Kite ^he
Chickin, man keeps his little ones from the danger of all hurt: and being
satisfied with one choice, they never make other change. How many Histories
are to be alleged, for the approouing of this truth* yea, how many have dyed
for want and loss of their beloved? and for their love to their little ones,
oh how infinite are the studies, labors, and travails in the parents, for the
breeding, nourishing, instructing, and bestowing of their children in their
lives, and what care in laying up f^r them after their deaths? what care has
the husband for his wife in her childe-bedde? what solemnity at a
Christening? and what sorrow at a burial? and for knowledge, how many Fathers
have not only begot, but bredde their own Children? so that God knows they
are not ignorant of his blessings: Now for their deaths, as they were borne so
they dye, in a bed, or Chamber, among such as are by goods, or good
counsel to be the better for them, and in Cities, for that there is most
hope of remedy, and amongst friends, wh^re is most assurance of help and
comfort: and sometime dye, as well pleased as to live, and rather to dye, then
live diseased: so that in all estates of what condition soever, I still find
man to be the most honorable creature.

Thus have I a^ near as I can answered Antonio ^o eneuery particular point of
his Inuectiue: but in brief, who could consider the majesty of a King, the
wisdom of a Counselor, the valor of a souldi^r, the learning of a Lawier,
the travail of a Merchant, the husbandry of a Farmer, the toil of a
Tradesman, and the patience of a beggar, might well auow loyalty to the
Prince, love to the Counselor, honor to the soldier, service to the Lawier,
and praise to the Merchant, and wish a good harvest to the Farmer, a good
chapman to the Tradesman, and a good alms to the beggar: and in all and every
of them, find so much matter of commendatio^, as no other creature can come
near: but since it were a Laborinth too long to enter into the infinite causes
all other creatures, I will say but this in conclusion, that the fair Ladies of
a Court, the gallant soldiers in a Camp, the grave scholars in a
Universitie, and the solemn companies of a City, and the good fellows in a
Country, so puts down, a flight of wild Geece, a heard of Swine, and a
skoule of Herings, that for all causes, both majesty, amity, and unity, man
is the only creature worthy of all honorable commendation.


Dinar. Meandro, thou have spoken a little to some purpose, it may be thou have
either met with a kind wenche, or an honest friend, that has brought thee
into this good belief of all other: but howsoever it be, I mislike not what
thou have said, what ever it be that thou think: but to answer ye both, let
me tell ye, that ye are both short of that you would seem to speak of,
which is the worthiness, or unworthiness of man: which neither lies in your
praise, nor his disgrace, but in that which either above, or below your
reaches is to be considered: ye have been like two Fishers that came to a
Brook where were good Fish, but they lay at the bottom, which though no
deeper then they might wade, yet they loathd to take too much pains, caught a
few Engines in the shallowe gravel, and thought themselves no mean
Fishermen: you have studied some point of Philosophy, and observed much of
that you have seen, but Aristotle must give place to Plato, and you may learn
more if you will take pains: and for that I will not be so ungrateful, as to
say nothing touching your opinions, I will deliver ye a little of what I have
read, and gathered fully: by my reading, touching this point of the Dignity,
or Indignity of man.

First, touching his ^st substance, it was neither of slime; nor Cream, as
either of you have imagined, but of a secret instinct of love, which would have
an Image like unto it self, when the omnipotency of the Deity began a work
of great Majesty: when in the second person of himself he showed the
perfection of that form. Learn then to know, that before all beginnings
there was a beginning, which being without beginning in it self, began all
beginnings by it self, and willing to be pleased in it self, began this
first Image to it self: so that hereby ye may see in this beginner of all
beginnings, was love the first beginner of this work, which we call man, who
having all things before it self to look upon, made love the only first
substance to work upon, which laid upon this slyme or Cream as ye have
termed it, brought it to that form which it self lyked: and (as it is) then
first named it, man.

Here now was the first and only best part of his honor, that the creature was
made unto the Image of his Creator. I speak not of that outward form, wherein
we behold him, but in that inward perfection wherein his glory created him. Now
to his second honor, he placed him in Paradise, where he made him keeper of
his garden, with possession of all his fruits, one only excepted. The third
honor, he gave him power and commandment over all his earthly creatures, and
to name them at his own pleasure. The fourth honor was his wife, that he
took out of his own side, that he might be matched, but with himself, nor
with any meaner creature then himself. These are the four first proofs of
the dignity and honor of man, in his first perfection: his creation to the
Image of his Creator, his keeping of Paradise, his command over all other
earthly creatures, and his companion but a part of himself. Now to enter into
further parts of honor bestowed upon them, the wisdom of the Prophets, the
miracles done by them, the valor of the Kings, the victories got by them,
the blessings of the faithful, the true memory of them, his love of his
beloved, the death of his only Son Jesus Christ for them, the messages of
his Angeles, to the servant of his love, the Incarnation of Eternity, in the
womb of virginity, the inspiration of the Apostles, the patience of the
Martyrs, and the ^oy of the ^^ect, these all are proofs of great honor above
all other creatur^s, whom God had endued with so many excellent beauties. What
Byrd can build a neast like the Temple of Solomon? or Eagle make a wing with
the wisdom of John the Evangelist? What Lion so stout, but Sampson could tame
him? and what Giant so great, but little David could conquer him? and what
Whale so ravenous, but Jonas could get out of him? what danger so great, but
Iosuah would attempt it? and what misery such, but Jacobs patience did endure
it?

Now leaving to speak of those a^ncient examples, let us come into these days
to behold the myraculous works of God in the heart of man, in the government
of kingdoms, in war, and in peace, the rare Art in gorgious buildings, the
running hand in planting of fruits, the excellent skill, in the fortifying of
countries, the dainty Art of the Needle in works of all colors, the
excellent Harmony in the Art of Music: In sum, all the excellencies that
can be imagined, as well by Sea, in the Shipwright and Sayler, as by Land in
the Soldier, and Miner, and the Scholar as well in knowledge, as utterance:
Are not all these excellencies, with all the morrall virtues, only propper
unto man? and last of all his acknowledging of his God, to whom he is only
bound for all his goodness? Are not all these I say, with innumerable more,
to be said, sufficient proofs of the honor of man? who still looking up
toward heaven, from whence only he has all his good, and where knowing, and
despising the world, he l^ueth to be, for his bent, last, and everlasting
good: Is not all this I say, enough to make man joy in himself, to be the
servant unto such a Lord? as in love would first make him like himself, and
then never cease to bestow his daily and hourly blessings upon him? yet it
must needs be, by all that has been and can be said, that by all due causes
of honor, man is of all the most worthy creature: For did not Jehovah
himself speak out of the cloud and the bush unto Moses? Came not the Angel
from heaven, to salute Abraham on the earth? was not Eilas carried into heaven
in a whirlwind? came not Gabriell the Arch-angell, with a message to the
blessed Virgin Mary? and came not Christ h^mselfe from heaven, to save sinners
from hell? and can there be a greater honor to man, or that may make him more
honorable, then to be spoken t^o by his Creator, salu^ed by his Angel, and
saved by his only son? no, no, let the Eagle soar as high as she can, she
must come down to man: the Lion look as fi^rce as he can, he must fall down
to man: and the Whale gape as wide as he can, he must cast up Iona^, and give
honor to man: for God has given him, and he must have the honor of, and
above all earthly creatures. But now I have spoken thus much in his behalf for
his dignity, least I make him proud of that which is none of his own, let me
a little speak of his vileness, which is the just cause of hi^ indignity. Man
being at the first created so pure within, and perfect without, that there was
no creature so pleased God, having made all creatures to please man, man only
to please himself, oh how soon^ began the in^ection of corruption to enter
into this excell^nt matter, when the subtlety of the Serpent began so closely
to spet his poison, that the venom was not felt till it came to the heart, and
so ran to the very soul, when ^it proud of understanding, unthankful for his
knowledge in seeking more then needful, lost that was necessary: and by whom
was this bane brought him, but by her that came out of him, even a part of
himself, the R^^me of his whole self, and which is most to be lamented, a
piece so near his heart, should be the hurt of his own soul ^ oh what
indignity can there be more in wit? to prove it more truly ^olly, then like
Aesops dog, to loose a bone for a shadow, or worse, comfort for sorrow? and
what more indignity to the nature of man, then to be so unthankful to his
maker, to make no more regard of his command, then having b^t one thing
forbidden, and with a penalty of offense, yet would presume to adventure that
ill, that might be the l^sse of all his good* Oh unwise unthankfulness, the
first ground of his vnha^pinesse, and first note of his vnworthin^sse. Oh most
unhappiness of all other, that he who was made of love, should so be made a
subie^^ of hate: and oh most unworthy of all creatures to be honored, that was
so ungrateful to his most honorable Creator* and note now how by one sin, he
lost all his honors: he lost the perfection that he lived in, before this his
desert of death: his perfection of that love, which let him lack nothing while
he loved: by tasting the forbidden fruit, he swallowed the poison of
presumption, and by the Angel was driven out of Paradise. Here was two honors
lost* the Image was now defaced, the creature of his place dispossessed, and
from his pleasures banished: for whose sin, the earth that before was blessed,
was now accursed: oh two plain a note of his Indignity, when for his
unworthiness the earth was cursed with barrennes: he that was only framed ^y
the love of God, should now fly from the voice of God. Now the third honor,
where he before had the service of all earthly creatures, he now was feign to
labor with thos^ creatures: and in seeing their obedience to his will, sorrow in
shame, to think of his own disobedience to his ma^^ter. Now to the last
honor, his companion, his wife, that woman, that part of himself, which in
love might have been his comfort; by want of love, through the poison of
pride, wrought his utter dishonor: where the shame of his nakedness, was too
true a note of his wickedness; too plain a proof of his unworthiness. Thus
lost the first man through pride, the whole honor of his first happiness. Now to
enter into further parts of dishonor, what wickedness was in Cham, to uncover
the nakedness of his fa^h^r, which proved unworthiness to be a son, that would be
the shame of his father? what dishonor was in Cain, who slew h^s brother Abel,
how unworthy was he to be a brother that sought the death of his dearest and
nea^est bloo^? what Indignity of a Crown showed Pharaoh, when in the swelling
pride of his power, he would oppose himself against the (...) o^ Kings? How
unworthy was he to be a king on the earth, that proved such a rebel unto the
king of ^ea^en? how dishonorable were So^ome, and Gomorrah, who with the fi^^h
of their concupis^ence would have pr^^sed upon the Angels? what Indignity
was in those Princes that ston^s the Prophets, the Ambassadors of heavens
Emperor? what Indignity was in Judas to b^tray his m^ister, Christ Jesus? was
he worthy to be a servant, that would be a villain to such ^ master? and what
Indignity was in all the Jews, that sought ^he death of the son of God?
Tedious it were to run ou^^ all the examples of the Indignity in man, which
in the sacred word of truth are set down, where ye may plainly discover all
the due causes both of man's honor, and dishonor: but leaving that true
discourse for all gracious eyes to look on, let me a little lower descend, into
reasons daily observation. What dishonor it is to a King, to be ungracious to
his subject? what dishonor in a subject, to be disloy^ll to his Prince? what
Indignity it is to Counselor, to be either f^i^hlesse to his King, or
careless of his command? what a dishonor it is to a soldier to betray his
trust, to an enemy? how unworthy is that Lawier that pleades against conscience
for coin? how unworthy is that Merchant that plays ^anquerou^ without need?
how ungracious is that Farmer, that starues the poor people, and feeds the
Rats with his corn? how dishonest is that labourer, who will not work for his
wages? and how base a villain is that beggar, that makes an art of his rogery?
let the agreeued confess, I would it were not to be considered. Let me look
f^rther into other proofs of the Indignity of man, where the son is ^ike of
the father, the sister of the brother, the servant of the master the wife of
the husband, and the subject of the Prince: where the son is unnatural, the
sister is unkind, the servant is untrue, the wife is dishonest, and the subject
is unfaithful: what Indignities are these, to prove the disgratious nature of
man? Again, where the wrath of the mighty is more fierce then the Lion, and
the pride of the ambitiou^, flies higher then the Eagle, and the greediness of
the covetous swallows more then the Whale; oh how great are these Indignities
apparent* yea in those, in whom they are most to be lamented. What Crocodile so
dangerous as the tongue of a Parasite? and what Cockatrice so venomous, as the
eye of a leaud womon? and what Indignity it is to a scholar, that should be
the minister of truth, to cover craft with eloquence: and what ignominy to
beauty, that is an enemy to Virtue, let the deceived confess, and abusers
amend. In sum, of what estate can that man or woman be, that some way shows
not some such part of Indignity, a^ speaks not something in their dishonor?
B^t to be short, the chief cause of all the Indignity that I find in man,
grows either through impatience in the proud, pride in the mighti^,
disobedience in the subject, or unthankfulness in the poor. Learn then the
honor of humility, the virtue of patience, the grace of obedience, and the
blessing of thankfulness, in which only, and God^ mercy, I find lies man's
all, and only truest happine^^e, and his honors most apparent worthiness.
And therefore leave to make comparisons betwixt either beast, foul, or fish,
and man, knowing the excellency of his nature in his first perfection, neither
think any beast, fish, or foul, so monstrous in shape, as man is in nature,
when he follows the course of his corruption: but if he were created of the
slime of the earth, as Master Antonio describes him, the greater was the glory
of the Creator, of so vile a matter to make so excellent a creature as man: or
if he were as Meandro holds him, created of the cream of the earth, yet the
Butter was but a gross substance to make so gracious a creatur^ as man: but
say that he was first framed out of the love of God, which did create him to
his own Image, yet you see more then was of that love, kept no part of
perf^^tion, but fell through the weakness of it self, into the ruin of it
self, for the flesh took infection, whereby the spirit being corrupted, the
whole creature was overthrown: so that that man or woman, that in the love and
fear of God, is not obedient to his will, nor thankful for his graces, such a
world of enormities will sin beget in his soul, that by the infection
thereof, he will become more ugly in the sight of God, then the greatest
monster in the world in the sight of man: and s^ by due consideration, be found
by many indignities to be the most dishonorable creature in the world: for
outward form, behold the excellency of Gods wisdom, in his workmanship upon
all creatures, the feathers of the byrds, the hairs of the beasts, and the
scales of the fishes, how even and smoothe they lie, how long they keep their
colo^r that nature has once given them: whi^^ man, according to his age,
either changes or loses both colo^^ and hair too: in strength the ^yon
does exceed him: in swiftness the Hare will outrunne him, and the Dolphin
outswim him: in sweetness the Nightingale outsing him: in labor the Ox will
out-toile him, and in subtlety the Fox will out-match him; so that in all
these gifts of nature, with many other, he is inferior in commendation to the
beasts, birds, and the fishes: and therefore can justly challenge no honor
above them, only reason he has beyond them, by which he has power to govern
over them: of which once deprived, he is worse then any of them: the beast,
though he have all the field before him, will eat no more: the bird though she
perch never so safely, will sleep no more: the fish though he have all the
sea before him, will drink no more then will suffice nature: while the Epicure
will eat till his Jaws ache, the Drunkard will swill till his eyes stare, and
the sluggard will sleep till his bones ache: while the one with his blowing,
the other with his reeling, and the third with his snorting, so lays himself
open to the world in the filthiness of his imperfection, that who beholds the
beasts temper, and the man's intemperancie, will in worthiness of commendation,
set the beasts before the man.

Again in talk, what Pie, chatters like a Scold? what wolf more cruel then
a Tyrant? what Sow more filthy then a Sl^t? what Sparrowe more luxurious then
a Whore? what Fox more subtle then a knave? what Toade more venomous then a
Villain? or Serpent more deadly, then a malicious woman? Did ever bird betray
the Eagle, his king? the beast, the Lion, his king? or the fish the Whale, his
king? and, how many Kings have been betrayed by traiterous Rebels, and supposed
subjects, yea be their own servants? I would there were not too many examples
to the shame of man to confirm it. Nay more, how that all, and above all,
blessed, gracious, good, holy, and glorious, merciful King of Kings, our Lord,
and Savior Christ Jesus, was betrayed by that devil of a man, that false,
wicked, and most detestable villain Judas: what a shame may it be to the
nature of man, to think that ever man should be of so vile a nature.

Thus then you may see, how in the worst part, in the wickedness of the heart,
man may worthily be called the worst creature of the whole world. Yet least I
leave man in despair of himself, to think of the vileness of his corrupted
nature, let me speak somewhat to his comfort, that has yet been spoken of:
that first pure substance, that spiritual instinct of love. The first cause of
man's creation, has in his spirit such an eternal power, as that though some
vessels of his wrath, he has ordained to his secret judgment, yet in man
generally, that has any feeling of his mercy, he has so glorious a working
of his grace, that by many admira^le deserts of commendation, he may well be
called the most honorable of all creatures: who teaches the horse his true
manages, the bird his ^are notes, the dog his strange qualities, but man?
Furthermore, is there not in the face of man such a kind of divine power,
given him by his Creator, as gives a kind of terror unto all creatures, and in
the heart of man is not that understanding that makes him the most honorable of
all other? How many, and ra^e Arts, how excellent and cunning works, how rich
and gorgious monuments, the divisions of times, the app^ications o^
experiments, the employments of natures, and the observations of examples, the
fetching the byrd from the air, the fruit from the earth, the beast from the
field, the fish from the sea, the Fowlers grinnes, the Hunters snares, and the
Fishers nets, are they not all the labors of the wit of man? the
Instruments of war, the treatise of peace, the harmonies of Music, and the
ditties of love, are they not the devise of man? Is not the firmament, as it
were ruled out, the earth as it were chalked ^ut, and the sea, as it were cut
out, as if there were a walk amid the stars, a passage through the earth,
and a path through the seas, to which purpose, the Globes and Mappes are made
by the wit of man? and may not all these excellencies in the wit of man,
above all creatures, prove the honor of man? But above all these, that spirit
or soul of man, which in immortality beholds the eternal life, in grace
beholds the eternal comfort, and in mercy beholds the eternal goodness,
wherein the Saints are blessed, the Martyrs rejoice, the virgins are graced,
and the Angels are glorious, and where all together in one Consort do sing the
Halleluiah of eternity: this comfort, when man receives by that faith that
God has by the inspiration of his holy spirit so fixed in him, that it can
never be from him, when man I say, by the gracious blessing of God, can effect
so rare excellencies in the world, and behold so many superexcellencies in
the heavens, as the eye of no creature but man is able to look after: and
withal, has as I said, that heavenly blessing of immortality, that is
granted to no creature but man: Let man be as he was in his creation, or as
he should be in his generation, and then leaving all creatures to the service
of man, and man only to the service of God: Let us conclude man to be the
most honorable creature, and by due desert of commendation, to be by many
degrees set above them all.

Thus have I showed you mine opinion, how man may justly receive his Title of
Dignity, or Indignity, either by the gracious use of that Reason, by which
he does far exceed all Creatures in commendation, or by the abuse of that
Reason, that may make him the worst of all Creatures. It is not a fair painted
face, a proud look, a crafty wit, a smoothing tongue, nor a scraping or a
bribing hand, that makes a man a worthy Creature, but an humble heart, a
modest eye, a simple meaning, a virtuous disposition, a true tongue, a liberal
hand, and a loving heart, that makes man truly honorable. Oh then let the
Prince be gracious: the Courtier virtuous: the soldier merciful: the Lawier
conscionable: the Merchant charitable: the Farmer no Snudge: the labourer
painful: and the Beggar thankful: and then will the Commonwealth of the
world, be such a kind of heaven on the earth, that the very Angels of the
heaven, will commend the beauty of the world, when thus only in man, they
shall see the chief dignity of a Creature: for there will be a day of
change, ^he wealthy must leave his treasure, the fair must loose her beauty,
and the powerful must come down from his place, and all be summond to appear
at one time, and to one Court: where, as prisoners at a bar, they shall
answer to their Inditements, and from whence delivered, either to comfort or
execution, and that eternal to either: where account must be had of all, and
no partiality be admitted: where Conscience accuses, Truth confesses, and
Justice concludes: when if Mercy were not gracious, Judgment would be
terrible: where Faith is only blessed, and despair only accursed: and then
shall man see his dishonor, when the honor of all honors, shall make him see
his disgrace, and receive his chief honor, when in mercy he receives comfort:
of which honor is no man worthy, but whom the honor of all worthiness, and
worthiness of all honor, makes honorable by his worthiness: in him then the
substance and sum of all honor and worthiness, that Judge of all justice,
that searcher and sounder of all truth, that Lord of all mercy, King of all
grace, and God of ^ll glory, our Savior Christ Jesus, let man's honor be
sought, and his worthiness be s^ene: for, what more he is then in Christ, he
is a most dishonorable creature: and what he is in him, he is better then any
creature. Thus have I shown you in my opinion, how a man is the most worthy or
unworthy creature of the world, of ^ither honor, or commendation: which if you
study never so much in the rules of nature you can never find out, but in the
rules of grace, you shall ^inde only discovered: think then with your selves
how glorious is the study of the divine comfort, where reason only by grace,
beholds the bea^tie or deformity, the honor, or dishonor of nature. And
now that you have so well stored your minds with the observations of
experience, betake your spirits to contempl^tion, in matter of higher comfort:
that Reason the governor o^ Nature, may not loose the honor of his virtue:
nor Grace, the governor of Reason, may loose the majesty of his glory: for
man being as he should be, is as it were a god unto man: but as many a one is,
and should not be, is worse then a beast, and little less then a devil unto
man. For the Physician that by his learned skill, and honest care finds the
grief of the diseased, and does speedily bring him to health: is he not a
kind of god unto man, that saues his life so near death? The Lawier that by
his reading and knowledge finds the right of the distressed, and by justice
delivers him from his oppression, is not such a Judge a kind of god upon the
earth? The Merchant tha^ has his debtor in prison, and seeing his misery, in
the virtue of charity, forgiueth the debt, and sets him at liberty, is he
not a kind of god unto man* And first of all to be spoken of, if the Prince
find an unwilling offender, with confession, penitent, yet by the law to
death condemned, and out of the majesty of his mercy, pardons the offense,
and fa^oureth the offender, is he not worthy to be called a kind of god unto
man? If a man shall find his neighbor assaulted, and by thieves, ready to be
robbed, spoiled, and murdered, if be by his valorous adventure of his life,
do not only defend him, but be the death of his enemies, and so for ever
procure his safety, is he not a kind of god unto man? If a rich man passing
by a poor creature, whom he sees ly^ in misery and poverty, if like the
Samaritane, he relieve him, comfort him, and never leave him till he have
recovered him, is he not in a kind, as it were a god unto man? If a learned
and true Divine, fin^ing a sinner, through the greatness of his sins, almos^
in despair of mercy, and so in danger of damnation, with preaching to him the
true word of God, and showing him the book for his warrant for that he
preaches, if with such preaching to him, prayer for him, he do deliver him
from that dangerous sin of despair, and by God^ grace do es^ablish that
faith in him, that bring him into the estate of the blessed, is he not a god
unto man? But contrariwise, if a Prince upon a false information command his
loyal subject unto death, that has by many good services deserved his
gracious favor, is he not if he be a Tyrant, half a devil unto man? If a
soldier for the gain of a little money, betray the trust of his Captain, and
make sale of his people, is he not a kind of devil unto man? If a Lawier
shall by extortion or bribery, grieve the oppressed, wrong the poor to
pleasure the rich, and plead against his own conscience, to the undoing of a
simple creature, is he not a kind of devil unto man? If a Physician, will in
stead of a preservative, give his patient a poisoned potion, is he not a kind
of devil unto man? And if a Merchant, void of charity, cast his debtor into
prison, and there beholding his misery, without remorse of conscience, lettes
him perish without relief, is he not a kind of devil unto man? If a
neighbor i^ the cauy of his neighbors good, seek not only by himself, but
by all the means ^e can to spoil him of all his goods, yea and to deprive him
of his li^e, is not such a dog, a kind of devil unto man? If a rich man,
shall pass by a poor soul, sick, sore, lame, and wounded, and will not only
like the Leuite run from him, or not so much as the Priest say, God help
him, but giving him nothing, rail upon him, rate him, spurn him, and with
taun^s, che^ks, yea and whippes, wound him deeper then he was at first, and so
with crue^tie, crucify him, that he will never leave till he have killed him:
is not he a kind of devil unto man? Last, and most of all, if he, who takes
upon him the outward habit of a Divine, and within be so far from divinity,
that he will rather lead the sinner into hell, then the repentant to grace, is
not he a kind of devil unto man? What shall I need to run into a world of
questions in this point, is not the virtuous a kind of God, and the vicious a
kind of devil in the world? Consider therefore, since only in God is that
original of Virtue, whereby man only is made virtuous, and by that Virtue so
gracious, as makes him the most honorable of all creatures, and in the devil
is that original of sin, whereby man is made vicious, and by his vices so
disgracious, as makes him the most dishonorable of all creatures.

Whatsoever you read her^, or imagine, touching the true ^esert of the
Dignity or the Indignity of man, these two verses shall be sufficient for
your instruction, to lead you to the most true and perfect understanding of
the same: which, without further dila^^tion I will make my conclusion.

Si Christum been s^is,
nihil est si cetera nescis:
Si Christum nescis, nihil est
sicetera d^scis:
Know Christ aright, know all
that can be worth the knowing:
But know nor Christ, and know
all knowledge overthrowing.

An. Father, I am glad of this good morningsmeeting, which I would not have
mist for a great matter, and I am persuaded Meandro is of the same mind: for
where we have been but beating the air with idle words, you have laid matter
before us, worthy the looking on: to which I answer no more, but, if my memory
can a^ much pleasure me, as your speech, I will never go to school for better
learning: how say you Meandro?


Mean. I say that I know not what to say, but that Dinarco has said so much,
that for the much good that I have received by his very much good discourse, I
hold my self so much beholding ^o him, as while I have a day to know him, I
will not cease an hour to honor him: but as I can but admire him, I will vow
to love him: and in my love, will follow him: and so I think will you, or else
you shall deceive me.


Anto. Yea, and not be my self.


Dinar. Well, the best is, the Sun shows what time of the day it is, and if
it were not for going home to dinner, we should have a great deal of idle
talk, but, if I have done you any good, thank God, the author of all
goodness for it: but if you will be vai^e-headed, God help you, for I cannot:
for your kind company I thank you: and if it may not offend you, the next time
I meet with you, I will have another bout with you: till when, for that our
bodies would as well be refreshed as our wits, let us go to dinner.


Anto. Father we will attend you, and glad when we may enjoy you: what say you
Meandro?


Mean. I say I shall think each hour a year, till we meet again, for I
could swear a good fast, to meet with such an other banquet.


Dinar. Well children, since you will needs put the title of a father upon me,
I will take it: and wherein I can, do^ you all the good that you desire. And so
with Gods blessing upon you, I end. Let us go.


FINIS.

