THE MOTHERS blessing.

Printed at London by T. C. for John Smethick, and are to be sold at his shop
in S. Dunstons Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1602.

TO THE SPIRIT OF MVCH forwardness, in the inclination to much goodness, in
the love of learning, and the honor of virtue: M. Thomas Row, son to the
Lady Bartley of Stoke, Nich. Breton wishes with continuance of health, a
prosperous atchieuement of his virtuous desires.
Sir, my acquaintance with you has not been little, nor my love, less; which
I would be glad to manifest in some better matter the^ bare words, and yet,
since words well weyed, sometime carry matter of good sense; in the words which
I write, I pray you wey the sense of my good will; which if it have not done so
well as I wish, bear with it for a little fault, and it may be I will mend it
with a greater: but leaving complements, let me entreat you, in your kindness,
to Patronage this child of my best choice, to answer the regard of your good
discretion; in whom, though you find not that finenesse, that is fitting to
phantastike humors, yet it may be you shall note some such matter of
contentment, as may be a little worthy entertainment: the best is this; there
is a careful mothers blessing to her beloved son: the first I know you have
and the second I doubt not you are: who reading what I have written, and
remembering what you have read, I am assured will please her that loves you,
and love him that herein has pleased you: and for that much good that he
knows in you, will ever love you: but seeing it were better that I rather do
so, then tell you so, I will leave my hope to a good occasion to manifest the
nature of my affection: And so beseeching God to bless your forwardness in
all good actions, and to preserve you from all illusions.

Yours Irest at command, in what mine own. Nich. Breton.

To the Reader.
GEntlemen, there are so many idle Pamphlets under the abused name of Poetry,
abroad in the world, that matter of good worth, either moral, or divine, if it
be handled in verse, it is almost as ill as virtue; it will not sell almost
for any thing: yet among a number, of, no matter for the^, I doubt not but
there are some will give Reason his right, and Virtue her due; to such only I
commend this little tract of moral discipline: which though it be handled in
single verse, yet if it please you to peruse it, I hope you will not utterly
disdain it: such as it is, I leave it to your discreet censures, and kind
corrections; in which, as you shall show the best conditions of dispositions,
so shall you give me cause with much tha^ ^lnesse, to present you hereafter
with some better substance: But least I promise more then I can perform, I
pray you take this in as good part, as if it had bin a matter of more worth:
and so wishing you all that bear good minds, the happy fruits of your best
desires: Loath to be too tedious, I rest as I find cause.

Your friend, N. Breton.

The Mothers blessing.
MY son, my son, my best beloved son,
Hear my dear son, what careful charge I leave thee:
Take hold of Time, the glass is quickly run,
Trust not to Fortune, for she will deceive thee:
What ere thou art, let not the world perceive thee.
Know God, love him, be governed by his will,
And have no doubt of good, nor fear of ill.
Weane laizie Will, from thriftlesse Idleness:
Beware the wanton, to abuse thy wit:
Unbridled Will breeds but unhappiness,
How ever sorrows Care would cover it:
Who buys Repentance must pay dear for it.
Time, Truth, and Trial, will in one agree:
The fruits of sin, Death, shame, and sorrow be.
Love not upon the first delightful look:
Nor hate, upon the first conceived harm:
Let not the care of Conscience be mistook,
And fear the force of the Almighty arm:
Fear not mischance, nor harken to a charm.
By graceles means, devise not to enrich thee,
And let no worlds unworthy love bewitch thee.
If that thou serve a Thatcher, do him due:
But if thou can, subscribe not to the Clown:
Lest all too late, thou find'st it all too true,
When thou have thatcht the house, he throw thee down,
But never fret, how ever Fortune ^rowne.
For what the higher powers of heaven decr^e,
There is no asking, why it should so he.
Break not thy word, that well thou may perform,
For words are waide by men of worthy mind:
Take heed of those, that falsehoods do inform,
And strike not ^aile, for every blast of wind*
Nor do thy spirit to thy body bind.
Give not a Misers liberality,
And fear the fruit of prodigality.
Hear all men speak, but harken to the wise,
Learn of the learned, and the virtuous love*
And let no pride thy blessed soul surprise,
That may discretion from thy mind remove:
Humility is graced with God above.
And Courtesy, with honors carriage,
Twixt Love, and Beauty, makes a marriage.
Be kind to those, that kindly do deserve,
Cruel to none, a Tyrant is a Devil:
Have special care, thy health for to preserve,
And keep thee from the Epicurian evil,
Love not the eye that squints, nor lips that dreuill.
Beware the Pander, and the Parasite,
And do not leave a Faulcon for a Kite.
Give not thine ear to every Idle tale,
And trust no more, then what of needs thou must:
Set not the secrets of thy heart to sale,
For fear, they throw thine honor in the dust,
And do not love the treasure that will rust.
Make it thy day, but when the Sun does shine,
And joy in soul but in the love divine.
Place not thy learning in a Library,
Yet reed, and mark, remember, and apply:
And till thou art a perfect Antiquary,
Stand not too much upon antiquity:
Let virtue note the best Nobility.
Be wise in all things, that thou do intend,
A good beginning makes a blessed end.
Stand not on terms with persons of estate,
Be truly loyal in thy life and love:
Know what belongs unto a Magistrate,
Who has his office from the heau^ns above:
Nor make a Gaunlet of a hedging glove.
Let Bounty ever be the fruit of thrift,
For borrowing is too near the Beggars shift.
Look into Nature with Discretions eye,
And sort thy self with understanding spirits^
Build not thy Castle of conceit too high,
Nor let thy hopes be grounded but on Merits,
While heedles Connies fear the hunters Ferits.
Give none abuse, nor basely take disgrace,
Nor love that mind, that has a brazen face.
A blessed Color is a maiden blush,
And settled Countenance is a comely sight:
Stand not too long in beating of a bush:
For fear the Bird begu^le thee with her ^light,
In idle follies, never take delight.
Travail, but toll not, painful is the pleasure,
Where lack of care, in labor has no measure.
If God have blessed thee with an inward good,
Be joyful of his blessing, but not proud:
For, be the Ph^ a (...) so (...) a Blood,
Nature does wond^ in her work house shroud
The Sun itself, sometime is in a cloud.
Concealed comforts are the kindest sweets,
Where, love, and honor, with discretion meets.
A boasting tongue is like a heard man's hor^e,
Which makes a noise, (...) nothing worth the hearing:
And bragging (...) are no^ to be borne,
Though fools of choice, ^time are worth the chering,
Yet in the points of wisdoms true appearing;
Presumptuous fools, and (...) religious Jews,
Among the Noble^ sort should never use.
Know how to love, but know not how to hate
The One half a heaven, the ^other half a hell*
Learn what belongs to (...)* and to Fate,
And trust not all, that Idle stories tell:
And do not reed, before you learn to spell.
But keep thy spirit with that special care,
That Truth may show thee, where her honors are.
Offend not God, with (...) the fair,
In higher (...) (...) (...) fit their (...):
And look (...) (...) (...) in the ^ire,
That (...) the (...) (...) (...) (...) spirit (...),
And let no (...) so thy soul perple^,
But that (...) (...) all (...) remove,
That may be ^full to thy happ^e love.
Regard thy followers in a kind, as friends,
But (...) a difference in th^e eyes affect:
(...) use their (...) in such careful kinds,
(...) (...) (...) (...) speak of thy respect,
And well (...) rewards do not neglect.
For ^s the hand, that (...) the service bind,
Although the spirit (...) command the mind.
(...) Reason by the rules of Grace,
And ch^ (...), (...) in virtues choice:
In (...) (...), dwell not on the Base,
And let thine (...) be pleased in the voice
That sounds the song, that makes the soul (...).
A^oyd all substance of the souls annoy*
And only Jesus be thy spirits joy.
If honor fall upon thee (...),
Note how it comes, and how it may begone:
And guide thy (...) with such inward (...)*
Thy ground may still be sure to build upon,
But needles (...) (...) study on.
For Time is (...) to (...) (...),
And brings the (...) soul to Paradise.
Follow the wars but in a worthy cause,
And Court it but for ^bilitie,
Be not a Rebel unto honors laws:
For it is a maime to true Gentilitie,
In all the notes of true Nobility.
So use thy sword in field, at home thy pen,
Thou may be both beloved, and feared of men.
Let not a Sha^t, a Bowl* a Card, nor Die,
Take up thy Rent a year before the day:
A Parats feather, nor a (...) cie,
Make thee too fast, to throw thy wealth away,
Lest bad I wist do keep fools holly day.
Esteem a horse, according to his pace,
But loose no wagers on a wild goos^ chase.
Tear not thy throat with hollowing to hounds,
Nor ride thy horse to death, to seek a Hawke:
Spoil not thine eyes with leuelling of grounds,
Nor bar thine honest neighbor of his walk,
But take no pleasure with a fool to talk.
But harken to the shepherds what they saine,
Both of the Sun shine, and a shower of rain.
Feed not too gross, and drink not over much,
The sparing diet is the spirits feast*
The Pitch and Tar, are dangerous to tuch,
And want of reason makes a man a beast:
Of forced evils ever choose the least.
Be warned by a little, from the more,
And take heed of an inward breeding sore.
Wound not the conscience of a woeful heart,
Nor take delight in doing injury:
But ease the sick in his consuming smart,
And help the poor man in his misery:
So live, so die, so live, and never die.
Relieve thy friend, but not with all thou have,
Lest thou be driven to seek to him as fast.
Importune not a Prince in any suit,
Nor do a suitor long delaie his hope:
In cause of Justice, be not over mute,
But in a malice, do no secrets open:
But keep thy care within discretions scope.
Smile at the bird, whose bill is ouerlong,
But never listen to the Cuckoes song.
Loose not thy pains, to teach an Owl to speak,
Nor strive to wash an Ethiopian white:
Make it no triumph to subdue the weak,
But use thy force, to put the proud to flight,
And in renow me, give every man his right.
Begin no more, then so thou mean to finish,
As of thine honor, may (...) (...) diminish.
Travail to learn diversity of Natures,
But keep at home, the care of thy content:
And ever have respect unto those creatures,
That have their talents in thy service spent:
And love the soul that is to virtue bent.
For ever keep this point of noblenes,
Let no man note thee of unthankfulness.
Deprave not any that do well deserve,
No^ magnify an idle headed wit:
Nor let thy will from wisdoms order swerve,
How ever humors disalow of it:
Manage affection with discretions bit.
For time will teach thee in true reasons creature,
A fool, is but the weak effect of nature.
In Princes Courts, do never press too fast,
Nor shrink a foot from thy desert of fame:
And slip no time, for once the humor past,
A pleasing fancy may be out of frame:
Shun all occasions of deserved blame.
(...) i^ ^nwares, thou happen to offend,
Let wit^ excuse the care of will commend*
(...) not too great, for fear of Enuies fig*
Yet joy in all that virtue may advance:
Make not thy music of a country Iigge,
But leave the Lou^, to tread the Moris-daunc^:
And keep thy senses from Narcissus trance.
And follow not Acteon to the wood,
For fear Diana, do thee little good.
Study the law, but to maintain thy state,
Divinity, to keep thy soul in peace:
Logic, but only questions to debate,
Arithmeticke, but knowledge to increase:
How numbers may both multiply and cease.
Philosophy, to judge of Natures best,
And Physic, but gross humors to digest.
And Rethoricke, to speak in tune and sense,
Music, but to remove melancholy:
Astrology, to know circumference,
For Architecture, learn Geometry,
And for thy travail, learn Cosmography.
For recreation, soorne not Poetry:
But for discourses, study History.
To have a kind of superficial sight,
In hawks and hounds, and horse, and foul, and fish:
Is not amiss, but let thy hearts delight
Be never settled in an idle dish,
Nor show thy folly in a wanton wish.
Be silent to thy self, what ere thou think,
And take good heed, with who^, and where thou drinkest.
Learn for instruction, Reed for exercise;
Practice for knowledge, and for gain remember:
In worldly pleasures make no paradise;
Know that thou art of Christ his church a member,
And do not make thine April in September.
Unto thy God, in youth direct thy ways,
And he will bless thee in thine aged days.
Let Conscience know the title of a crown;
Yet know withal, there is a king of kings:
Who hoisteth up, and headlong tumbleth down;
And all the world does cover with his wings,
While heaven and earth but of his glory sings.
To whom discharge the love thou daily owe,
And he will bless the where so ere thou go.
Wink at the world (...) though thou saw it not,
And all earths treasure, but as trash despise:
Let not thy folly lose that wit has got,
Nor lose an Art, by lack of exercise:
Yet let no labor, honor prejudice.
Be wisely sparing, but not miserable,
And rather die, then be dishonorable.
Fear not a Giant, for his monstrous shape,
The devil cannot go beyond his bounds:
Nor learn to play the Monkie with an Ape,
But keep thy self within discretions bounds,
And keep thee from the worm the conscience wounds.
Thus in thy way, let wisdom ever guide thee*
And be assured, no evil can betide thee.
Do not awake the Lion in his den,
Nor think the Fox a fool before you try him:
Nor put an Eagle in a Capons pen,
Nor trust a Wolf, if that you come too nigh him;
But come not near him, if you can go by him.
For ravening beasts, have wonderful wide laws,
And spoil what ever comes within their claws.
Beat not the air with hammers in thy head,
Whose dreaming labors, will but dull thy wit:
And do not put thy silver into lead,
Except thou make a double gain of it,
And ever do that may thine honor fit.
Know trades and traffic, merchants and their wares,
But spend thy spirit in more noble cares.
Be not condemned for a common Lover,
I mean, love maker, to a world of weemen:
For care can hardly credit lost recover,
And who are bound, can never well be free men:
Beauty has cunning in her eyes to see men.
For where she leads the heart unto her eyes,
She leads it finely to fools paradies.
Boast not upon the bravery of youth,
Nor sco^ethe weakness of decrepit age:
But hold this for a principle of truth,
Death has a part upon this worldly stage,
Where none can escape the fury of his rage:
A Tragedy, where old and young are slain,
But spite of death, the virtuous live again.
Spend not thy ^res upon a self conceit,
In grieuing for that never can be had*
Nor let thy wit an idle will await,
Where giddi^ humors are inclined to gad;
And let not melancholy make thee mad.
For better shut thine eyes from such a light,
Then have thy heart tormented by the sight.
Spare to discourse upon experience,
And always rather answer then demand:
And let no passion show impatience*
But make entreatie where thou may command:
And never be with flatterers ouerfawnd.
Nor stand too much upon thine own opinion,
How ever Pallas mark thee for her minion.
Let not a Princess favor make thee proud,
No^ g^ue too much upon a small disgrace:
Be^ (...) affection to a filthy dowd,
No^ ^ake an Idol of a painted face:
No^ love a colt but of a coursers race.
No^ vow thy service to mistaken Saints,
Whose truest tytles are but honors Saints.
Wear not a feather in a shower of rain,
Nor swagger with a Swiser for his swill:
Put not thy spirit unto too much pain,
In searching secrets far above thy skill:
And know a halbert from a hedging bill.
And ever note those noble points of nature,
That truly make an honorable creature.
Forbear thy fury on a sudden rage,
Yet in thy right be ever resolute:
And let true patience choler so assuage,
That honors quarrel may be absolute:
Lest rashness too much reason ouershute.
For careful valor in a cause of strife,
Strengthens the heart, and gives the spirit life.
Fly Machiuile his vile instructions,
Which are but poisons to a princely mind:
And noted well, are but destructions,
That do the world with wicked humors blind:
And do the soul to hellish service bind.
Where nothing for gain must be forbidden,
While devils in the shape of men are hidden.
Note what is done, by whom, and how, and when,
And mark what issue grows of each event:
If by the sword, the purse, or by the pen,
And where the honor of the action went:
And how to take it for a president.
For many things have many times been done,
That had been better, nere had been begun.
Know all the courses that thou can attain,
But follow only that may do thee good:
In questions always make thy meaning plain,
Obscured thoughts are hardly understood,
But let not choler ouerheate thy blood.
So shall thy fear of fortunes force be small*
And thou shall stand when other men do fall*
Take heed my son, thy soul be not deceived
With any strange, or all too strong illusion:
For cares best wit cannot be misconceiued,
Which sees the force of follies close intrusion,
While heedlesse will brings wit unto confusion.
Be wise my son, in heavenly wisdoms book,
And thou shall angle with no devils hook.
Love not a Iester, nor a hackney Jade,
Time is but lost in either of their trial:
Rather regard the mattocke and the spade,
And take the sun to be thy truest dial:
Where thou shall see the fool a knauish spiall.
Shake off the lowse that hangs upon thy clothes,
And hate the swearer that is full of oaths.
The ru^ian, (...)-by, and the rascal fly,
But love the virtuous, valiant, and the kind*
Look toward heaven, and let the world go bye,
And make thy body subject to thy mind:
How ere thou winkest, be not wilful blind.
But look into the glory of that grace,
That makes the faithful spit in satan's face.
Confound the devil with the word of God,
Look to thy soul, it is the special part:
And love the life that death has ouer^rod,
And to thy Savior wholly give thy heart:
Who saues his servants from ^fernall smart.
And when thy greatest sorrow does assail^ thee,
Trust in his mercy, that will ^er fail thee.
Mine own dear son, I am no deep divine,
But what my God has taught me, that I teach thee:
Beseeching him to bless that soul of thine,
That no illusion ever ouerreach thee;
Nor wilful sin of lack of grace imp^ach thee.
Nor faithless thought may ever so deface thee,
But that his mercy ever will embrace thee.
But for my notes of natures obseruation^,
By long experience to my pains revealed*
Where truths co^structio^s made those (...)*
That too much proof has for assurance (...)*
Which private care has from the (...) (...).
To thee my son, and for thy good I hope,
I do this casket of my Jewels open.
Esteem them richer then a mass of gold,
And part not with them for a world of wealth:
For such a treasure is not to be sold,
As is both for the soul and bodies health*
Then leave them not unto unworthy (...)*
But in thy bosom, lock them as their (...),
Till good occasion bid thee (...) the^ (...).
And when thou find^ (...) (...) (...) (...) mind,
And leads thee to the ground (...) of thy good:
Go forward still, and further seek to find,
How best the substance may be understood;
That after purging breeds the lively blood.
And thou shall feel such pleasure in thy pain,
As idle spirits have no power to gain.
And ere I grow too fast unto an end,
Let me a little furthermore advise thee:
Be careful in affecting of a friend,
Least subtle kindness cunningly surprise thee:
And let thus much for such respect suffice thee.
Let honor, valor, truth, and wit allure thee,
Or never of a faithful friend assure thee.
For pa^entage affect equality,
For l^ ^ing, virtue ioind with eloquence:
For bounty, wisdoms liberality,
For valou^, resolutions patience:
For pro^, ^bour with experience.
For ho^our, virtues inclination,
For spirit, graces inspiration.
The ch^ ^ fri^d, if thou will favor any;
For (...) (...) they that cannot alter nature*
But fauo^ few, for if thou make of many,
Thou will be held a simple witted creature:
Take heed therefore of a dissembling feature.
Sound the condition, and approve it ^ound,
Before thy faith be to thy favor bound.
But if thou find'st a mind of that true worth,
That is not matched in all the brokers shops:
Whence thou can draw, that true loves liquor forth,
Which is not seasoned with unsavory hops:
While faiths strong pillars need no underprops.
All as a Phaenix, do esteem that friend,
With whom thy life with thy affection end.
But if a smoothing tongue, a fleering face,
A capping knee, with double diligence,
By close colloging creep into thy grace,
To make an use of thy magnificence;
Know he will but abuse thy patience.
Away with such, and from thy care discard them,
They purchase bur disgrace that regard them.
And if he seek to undermine thy thought,
And go about thee with a bad invention:
And do deny thy due desire in ought
That may perform the truth of his intention:
Or stand on ^ermes in causes of contention;
Then do thus much for thy assurance know,
A hollow friend is but a hellish foe.
And now for knowing of thine enemy,
Let this suffice for reasons true direction:
Who does intrude into thy company,
And make a show of too too much affection*
Such nimble wits have ever in reiection.
And by a serpents hiss, and beare-whe^pes eye,
Mistrust the treason of an enemy.
If he persuade thee to disloyal thought,
Imagine him a villain in the height;
If that he have with wanton humors wrought,
Know that an Idol is the devils bait:
And if he cheat thee with a gaming slight,
In cares discretion leave his company,
And hold him for a cunning enemy.
If he importune thee with borrowing,
Or careless live upon thy purses spending:
Or daily put thee off with morrowing,
Till want do make thee weary of thy lending,
Then in the care of better thrif^s commending,
Shake o^ a varlet in his villainy,
And hold him for an inward enemy.
But leaving more of friends, or foes to speak,
The one too few, the other all too many:
So many friends, their friendships daily break,
That few are faithful, if that few be any:
The Sun so soon, the painted f^e will tawny.
Tha^ he that has the world well ouergone,
Find* foes too many, friends, but few or none.
(...) when thou will a servant fitly choose,
Have great regard unto his quality:
Lest lack of care, thy kindness do abuse:
Allow no counterfeit formalitie;
No prigging theft, nor prodigality.
No pot companion, nor no prating knave,
Not lazy Rascal, nor uncomely slave.
(...) (...) ^ggard, nor sheep-biter dog,
(...) (...), night-walker, nor game player:
(...) ^ing copes-mate, nor no grunting hog;
(...)* swearer, brabbler, nor way layer:
(...) (...) Iester, nor soothsayer.
No da^ie tooth, nor double diligence;
Nor him that has a world wide conscience.
But sober, honest, witty, thriftie, kind,
Good shape, good face, expert, and laborous,
Good hand, good heart, good spirit, and good mind,
Discreetly careful, but not covetous:
Faithful and firm, in perfect truths approving,
And think that servant kindly worth the loving.
Now if thy sernant unawares offend,
In secret give him reprehension:
But if you see he care not to amend,
Nor of advice take better apprehension,
Mistrust his spirit of some ill intention.
Away with him, and turn him to disgrace,
And seek to put a better in his place.
But last of all, and not the least in charge,
I wish thee look into thy loves consort:
For when the heart has left the eye at large,
Venus commands where Cupid scales the fort:
As all too many, all too true report.
Be careful therefore in thy thoughts affection,
That they be governed by a good direction.
Beauty with virtue, honor joined with kindness,
Wit with some wealth, and person without pride:
True nobleness, without ambitious blindness,
Fair haird, straight bodied, sweet countenance, and clear ^ide;
A spirit where no poison does abide.
Where these sweet birds do all in one bush sing,
Who would not spend his life in such a spring?
But if she be ilfauour'd, blind, and old,
A prattle basket, or an idle slut:
A sleepie huswife, or a hateful scold,
Or such a sparrow as will not keep cut:
Spoil not thy teeth with cracking such a nut.
For in the world there is no greater hell,
Then in a house with such a hagge to dwell.
Or if complexion with condition meet,
A Croidon sanguine, and a currish nature:
A mind that treads good manners under feet,
A sorrel foretop, and a sowish feature:
God bless thee son, from such a wicked creature.
And let thee rather lead a single life,
Then kill thy self, to live with such a wife.
Learn then to choose the best, and leave the worst,
And choosing well, make much of such a choice:
And thou shall see while other live accursed,
Thy heart and soul shall inwardly rejoice:
Oh hearty love is such a heavenly voice,
As he that know it, or does kindly hear it,
Will find no music in the world come near it.
But I will leave thee to the heavens direction,
Beseeching God of his high heavenly grace*
To settle so the care of thy affection,
It take no root in an unworthy place:
But that a virgins eye, and Angels face,
So make thee joyful of thy happy chain,
That fancy bound, would not be free again*
But that this course, and every other care,
May purchase and continue thy content:
And that thy soul may live, where virtues are,
The happy souls eternal ornament:
To him that framed the highest firmament.
Thy heart and soul in love all humbly bow,
And to his will, thy service truly vow.
At morn, at noone, at evening, day, and night,
Unto his mercy do confess thy sin:
And beg of him, to clear thy blinded sight,
And teach thy spirit how it may begin
To find the way that gracious love may win.
Pray, weep, and cry, until thou have obtained
Into his service to be entertained.
And when thou feel'st the spirit of that grace
That rules the heavens, come down into thy heart:
And so thy thoughts in order all to place,
That virtue do dispose of every part:
When thus thou feel that thou blessed art,
Pray for continuance of that comforts bliss,
That keeps the soul, it cannot go amiss.
And when thou feel'st the loathing of that sin,
That long misled, that mournful soul of thine:
And the true way of grace art entered in,
That does the soul to sacred love incline,
And does assure thee of the love divine,
Then let thy heart, thy mind, and spirit sing,
An Halleluiah to thy heavenly King.
Begin with glory to his majesty,
Proceed with glory to his holy name:
Coutinue glory to his Deity,
And end with glory to his worthy fame:
And endless be the glory of the same.
Begin, proceed, continue, end his story,
Without beginning, never ending glory.
O highest glory, in the heavens above,
O brightest glory, of theau'ns behoue:
O purest glory, before heavens to prove,
O blessed glory, above heavens to love:
O lovely glory, that all love does move.
O gracious glory, that all grace begins,
O glorious glory, that all glory wins.
Thus my dear son, sing unto God thy Lord,
And sing in tune, that heavens may joy to hear:
And let thy tongue, thy heart, and soul accord,
To chaunt it out with such a joy full cheer,
That heavens may see, thou hold'st their master dear.
And thy true faith may in thy spirit prove,
The living comfort of thy heavenly love.
But if thou do not serve thy God aright,
And humbly fear his holy majesty:
Thy clearest day will turn to darksome night,
Thy wealth to want, thy wit to vanity:
Thine ease to pain, joy to calamity.
Thy sweetest music to a mournful quell,
Thy life to death, thy hope of heaven to hell.
For though a while he suffer thee to thrive,
And find on earth a feigned paradies:
Yet death will come, who quickly will deprive,
Thy senses of the pleasures of thine eyes:
Wherein th'illusion of thy spirit lies.
And thou will be within thy soul so torn,
As thou would wish, thou never had bin borne.
A world of woes will ouerwhelme thy heart,
And fearful dreams affright thee in the night:
A thousand torments will increase thy smart;
And dreadful visions will thy soul affright:
Thou shall be bard from the eternal light.
And in the darkness, where all horrors dwell,
Thy soul shall burn in everlasting hell.
Where thou shall see the mizer-minded-dogge,
Fry in the furnace of his molten gold*
The glutton monster, and the drunken hog,
Gnawing their bones, with hunger, thirst, and cold:
The murderer in pains not to be told.
The leacher so bedight in beastliness,
As kills his soul to see his filthiness.
The tyrant tortured with those ugly spirits,
That fed his humor with the thirst of blood:
The traitor followed with those hungry ferits,
That only fed upon the poysned food
Of damned souls, that never did man good.
The thief tormented with the shameless liar,
The swearers mouth, all in a flame of fire.
The pander and the wicked parasite,
Shall sup the broth of hellish beastliness:
The heretic in wilful oversight,
Shall feed upon the froth of foolishness:
Boyld in the fire of all unfaithfulness.
The Atheist so shall feel Gods vengeance on him,
That all the plagues of hell shall fall upon him.
The unjust Judge, at least if there be any,
The bribing client of ill conscience:
The perjured witness whereof are too many,
The plotting pate of sinful pestilence;
The wrothfull spirit of impatience:
All these shall justly all their torments bear,
But God bless thee from seeing of them there.
But if thou rightly serve thy Lord and God,
And day and hour do sue to him for grace:
When faithful Truth this world has ouertrod,
Thy soul shall fly unto afairer place;
Where thou shall see thy Savior in the face;
And in that face, that everlasting blis,
In which the brightness of all glory is.
There shall thou see from hie the daylight springing,
Which darksome night has never power to shade:
There shall thou hear the Saints and Angels singing,
And all their ditties to his glory made;
There shall thou feel the joys that never fade.
There shall thy soul more perfect joys possess,
Then tongue, or heart, or spirit, can express.
There shall thou see the bounteous richly crowned,
The gracious Prince in Angels arms embraced:
The virtuous soldiers with the Saints renowned;
The Judge of Justice, in high honor placed:
The faithful witness, in Truths favor graced.
The virgins singing, in the Angels quier,
How patient hopes unto their heaven aspire.
There shall thou feel the blessed joy of peace,
Wherein the life of holy love does rest:
There shall thou hear the Music never cease,
Where Angels voices ever are adrest,
In their best tunes to sound his glory best,
Where every one a blessed part does bear,
God bless thee son, to set them ever there.
Amen.
FINIS.

