MACHIVELS DOG.
MY d^gged Muse where have thou dwelt so long,
Or hid thy self from this sad heart of mine?
That longs to hear there sing that deadly song.
That Sorrow set unto that soul of thine?
Where tired spirits, that in torments dwell,
Find how the Devil turns the world to hell.
Do thou not see, except thou will be blind,
How life has lost the notes of natures love:
And wisdoms words are held but as a wind,
Where Machauilians ma^chlesse villains prove,
And Tigres, Foxes, wolves and Owls, and Apes,
Began the world in shows of humane shapes.
Say truth good dog, and do not spare to bark,
But snarle and snappe at every snea^ing thief.
Let not a Curre go lee^ing (...) the dark,
But show thy kind, bough (...) a dog be brief;
Lie at the door, give wa^ning to the house,
Scratch out a flea and (...) for a ^ow^^
^tudy no terms of stained Eloquence,
But speak as plainly, as a paued floor:
Give pride the height of sins pre-eminence:
And bid the Pander keep the Lechers door:
And let the flatterer be the Slingthrifts guest,
And lock the Misers heart up in his chest.
Brissell thy self up at a beastly slave,
That cares for nothing, but to feed on fat:
And cast a leere at such a lurking knave,
As pries about thee like a prowling Cat:
And if the Fox come near thy Chickens pen,
Run at the Rogue, and course him to his den.
But if thou chance to (...) the Lion roar,
Lie down and cowch, there is no looking out:
But if thou meetst a Bull or a wild Bore,
Beware the horn, and come not near the snowte:
For other Cattle, horse, or Mare, or Ass,
Come not too near their heels, and let them pass.
Be plain and honest, do not swear and lie,
Nor complement with cappe, and crouch and knee,
Nor like a Baby run away and cry,
For fear to look upon a Humble Be:
Love no extremes in neither heat nor cold,
And make no treasure of ill gotten gold.
Do not persuade a foul ill favored slut:
She is as fair as Venus forehead cloth:
Nor stand to teach a Sparrow to keep Cut:
Nor dwell all day upon a dish of broth:
But do thy business that thou art about,
And when it is midnight put the candle out.
Stand, strut and stout, and do not wagge the tail
At every fillip of a fidling friend,
Bark at a Cow that kicketh down her paile,
And make no banquet of a puddings end:
Call not a knave a knight, nor clown a king,
In rules of reason, it is a rascal thing.
For birds, let not the Crane pick out thine eyes,
Nor let the Parat teach thee how to prate:
Nor fill thy paunch too full of Woodcockes pies,
Nor let Madge Howlat make thee watch too late:
Nor let the Cuckoe teach thee how to sing,
Nor with the Buzard, make too low a wing,
For Fishes do not swallow like the Whale;
Nor like a Cre^fish creep into a hole:
Learn of the Dolphin how to keep his scale,
But do not swim among the Herrings shole:
L^^^ie of the Fl^oke to sto^t, but with the flood,
^
But whether runnest thou Counter with thy sent,
Back take the wind, and beat it out again:
The Hare is gone, thou know not where she went,
List, how the hounds do plie it on the plain,
Well fare the kennell makes the merry eye,
Hah, good old Tibbe, it is pity thou should die.
But leave this hunting, let us fall to play
At Cards or Dice, or some such pretty sport.
With merrcy tricks to pass the time away.
While idle spirits do but long and short,
But so, that in the end we may find out,
How Gamsters bring their golden world about.
Take up the Cards, and give the Coats their places,
Honor the Kings, be subject to their swords,
Bow to the Queens, do reverence to their Graces,
But use the Knaves, but as the time affoordes:
Where, rhough the knave of Clubs be calde the chief,
An other knave may be as close a thief.
Sort out the suites, together lay the Tricks,
Note a Bumcarde, and how to stop at need,
The Hearts are spotted, Diamonds are but pricks,
His time ill spent, that happens best to speed.
The Spades are broken, and the C^^ (...) rotten,
and by the small Cards ^^thin^^
But what shall be our game? Primero? Gleeke?
Or one and thirty, Bone ace, or new Cut,
Or Mawe, or Ruff, or Trumpe, what do you leeke?
Or Post and Pair, or put and under put:
All one to me, no Card can come acrosse:
Who has no money, has no fear of loss.
But let us think upon a gallant game,
Primero? yea, there let us set our rest:
Prime in his nature has a Princely name:
And Hero bears his honor with the best,
Oh royal grounds that such a game begun,
Blessed be the Fathers christendo such a son.
But it is costly to apply this play?
A good adventure shows no idle vain:
For when the stake is at the lowest stay,
A happy Prime will make all whole again,
Then deal the Cards, and happy be his time,
That sets his fortune on so fair a Prime.
Enough of this, now let us go to Gleeke:
Fair play, and square, l^t^'^ have no falling out.
Look to your hand, and have no brains to seek:
For dotage often comes home with a flo^^
And (...) this ^b^^^^ion make,
^
But let me see, who speaks unto the Ruff?
Who vies it? he that has the happiest suit:
But pack no Cards, for that deserves the cuffe,
And ever let the standers by be mute:
For many a time, a blind and simple eye,
May loose much money by the standers by.
But deal the cards, a mournivall of Aces,
Welcome poor spots that makes the Players rich,
And better welcome then those painted faces,
That lay a Lordship in a durty ditch:
But what? are all the stakes up? then away,
And let us fall upon some other play.
Give over Gleeke, a set or two at Maw:
The Knave five fingers, and the Ace of Hearts:
It was a Clown that first deui'sd the law,
That Pesants so should come to play their parts,
And baseness so about the Game should bring,
A knave should take the stake up from the king.
And truth to tell, I cannot well digest,
These heaues and helps, and livings after loss,
For when the game sometimes is at the best,
A baggage card may hap to come a cross,
and make the Gamster fret, and swear and curse,
(...) leave him never a penny i^ his ^urse.
Then let us leave this Mawe, and go to R^ffe,
Honor the King, the Queen, and the Knave too:
But yet me seems it smelles of Country stuff,
A Knight, unto a Knave should honor do,
Yet, if the Cards such fortune him allot,
If that it be his due, deny him not.
But, for I see, some hidden note does rest,
Of base Ambition in a Peasants pride:
To give a Knave such honor though in jest,
I mean at Cards, when Trompe is on his side,
Cast up the Cards, the Tricks together put:
And leaving Ruff, lets fall upon New Cut.
New Cut, indeed, lets see no iugling Cut,
But he that hits the game upon the head,
May in his bag the money closely put,
While other Gamsters may go bare to bed:
But, whatsoever Card you play upon,
Take heed of going out, for then all is gone.
So farewell New Cut, and to be you pleased,
A pretty game to get into the hole:
Loose a good Card, and by an Ace be easde,
A lingering sport, the last man winnes the gole:
A pretty note, for many an eye to make,
Wh^ holds out ^o^ (...)
But leaving Cards, lett's go to dice awhile,
To Passage, Treitrippe, Hazard or Mumchaunce:
But subtle Mates will simple minds beguile:
And blind their eyes with many a blincking glaunce:
Oh, cogges and stoppes, and such like devilish tricks,
Full many a purse of gold and silver pickes.
And therefore first, for hazard, he that list,
And passes not, puts many to a blancke:
And trippe without a Treye makes had I wist
To sit and mourn among the sleepers rank.
And for Mum-chance, how ere the chance do fall,
You must be mum for fear of marring all.
But since I see that both at Cards and Dice,
There is such cogging, stopping, cutting, striking,
Where poor Repentance pays so dear a prize,
For want of wit, in idle wantons liking:
I care not, if I quite give over play:
And ^et my wits to work some other way.
Then let us go to gardning, planting sowing,
And turning up of pasture grounds for grain:
But in soul weather herbs may have ill growing,
And in fat grounds, ill weeds grow up amain,
and many a time does many a poor man furde
^^eld of corn all blasted with a ^in^^
Then leave the Plough, and take the Merchants trade,
And set our fortunes upon ebbes and floods;
Alas, a poor cold reckening will be made,
When Seas or Pirates swallow up the goods,
And he that sets his state upon a wind,
May look before, and see his haps behind.
What? shall we then be Lawyers? out alas,
It is a fearful clogge of conscience,
To see a poor man from his right to pass,
When in the proof of truths experience,
A quitidy, a quirke, a word, a point,
May put a long ioyed title out of joint.
Shall we be Soldiers then? but, to what end?
Unchristian comfort is the fruit of blood:
Better keep inward with a faithful friend,
Then purchase foes for any private good:
And better pray that quarrels all may cease,
And say, God save the holders up of peace.
What? shall we then be Gallants? and go gaye?
L^ue easily, feed, and sit, and sleep or talk,
Or study, how to throw our wealth away?
Or with a wanton make an idle walk?
No, think upon the Proverb often told,
A careless (...)
What? shall we then be Scholars? plie our books?
Alas, poor learning has but little Grace:
And, we that want the gold and silver hooks,
Shall hardly hit upon a happy place,
Yet let us love all holy heavenly lines,
And wish them honor that are true Divines.
What? shall we then be men of Art and Skill,
And by our Physic to preferments clime?
No, a mistaken or distempered pill,
May bring a man to death before his time,
Yet, let us love all Noble Studients
That cure, but do not kill their Patients.
What? shall we then go learn to play and sing,
And study Music in a merty Note?
No, heavy strains do come from that hearts string,
That makes a living of a Livery coat:
Yet, let us love those Angelike sweet voices,
Whose silver soundes, the sorry heart reioyces.
What? shall we then become close Alkemists,
And study the Philosophers fair stone?
Oh no, I see a sight of had I wists,
Do weep for silver when their gold is gone:
^^ope Noddy, never was there such an other,
(...) make a Cosen of a simple brother.
What shall we then do? somewhat must be done,
Of Idleness comes naught but Ignorance:
The Ditchers daughters and the Hedgers son,
Must make no marriage at a Morris dance:
But if that she can sow, and he can reap,
The Ric may hap to make a pretty heap.
But to the purpose: What shall we go do?
Make love, and learn to tell a lie by Art:
Oh no, it is an idle thing to woo,
And, on an eye to throw away a heart:
It shows, the brain lies ill within the head,
That works all day to bring a fool to bed.
Yet, let us think on something for our good,
The world protests against Idleness:
The Cuckowe finds a means to hatch her brood,
Although she cheat the Sparrowes simpleness.
But, since that Nature so her course has run,
It is no matter, it must needs be done.
By laughing, now there is but little got:
Iesters and Iuglers may go walk the Fair:
Beggars are looked at, as men knew them not,
The younger brother seldom proves the heir,
And yet sometimes it does vnhapply hit:
The heir a fool, the younger has the wit,
What shall we then? turn fools when all is done;
Laugh, wear long coats, and sing, and eat far meat:
Follow my Master, dandle his young son,
And tell my Mistress, who the fool did beat,
That she may chide her wenches every one,
For meddling with her fool, when she was gone.
Or, shall we turn brave Pirates? scour the Seas,
And rob, and kill, and drown, or hang at last:
Oh no, that course does not mine humor please,
Of all conceits, I like no halter cast:
For in the end, this fortune follows them,
The Sea, the Gallows, or hell swallows them.
What shall we then do? speak once like a Dog,
Shall we turn Poets? prove Satiricall?
And call an Ass, an Ass, a Hog, a Hog?
Say holla, horse, and to a Jade, ho Ball:
Be libell knaves, and fools unto their faces.
Oh no, I love no pleading in such cases.
What? shall we then turn Brokers, Usurers?
And strippe the needy to their naked skins,
Or secret B^ibers, or Extortioners?
Oh no, God bless us from such devilish sins.
What? shall we then be Colliers? dig for Coals?
Oh no, great dangers are in durty holes.
What shall we then do? we must not be idle;
Go teach a Spaniell, how to fetch a Ducke:
Or how to ride a Colte without a bridle,
Or a young Nurse, to give a Baby suck?
Oh no, these are but idle toys and trifles,
And there is nothing to be got with Nifles.
Write Epitaphes upon the death of dogs?
And say, here lies a good old sucking Curre;
Cut rusty faces out of rotten logges:
And of an Owls skin, make an Ape a furre?
Or teach a Bird to whistle in a Cage.
Or bear a Bride Cup at a marriage?
Or sing new Ballads? or make country games;
Or set up sights were never seen before?
Make Epigrams or Anagrams of names;
Or learn the healing of a festred sore?
Learn any practice that may gather pelf:
But if thou love me, do not hang thy self.
Bring up a Cat to hunt a Mouse dry foot,
Or teach a Squirrell how to clime a reed,
A Skarre crow in a garden how to shoot,
Or a blind Harper; how a song to read:
Or how a flea may escape the fingers ends,
Or how a lowse may l^^^ among his friends.
But, can thou do no good with cats and dogs?
Turn Ratcatcher, and lay for rats and mice:
For, it is but idle to go fish for frogs,
And beggars get but little by their lice:
And Pandarisme is so poor a trade,
That none but beggars bargain for a Jade.
But, do not bite so softly, make them smart,
Tell John a Noddes he is no Gentleman:
And give the Rogue the whippe, the Whore the cart,
And turn the fool to his Maid Marian:
And tell the Hobby horse he is an Ass,
And old Tom Piper but an Owliglasse.
And tell the Wittoll, that does wear the horn,
He is a Rascal, be he near so rich.
And Iilian Justice in her proudest scorn,
Jane Shore her sister, dyed but in a ditch:
And Jack a Lent that looks above the Moon,
His breakefast has been brought him after noone.
Tell Tom a Lin, that holds the world with tales,
A Iester, and a Jack, are cosen Iarmines:
And he that trades for nuts, must take the shales:
And Coney-keepers must lay trappes for vermines:
And he that goes a fishing for a Flooke,
(...) be do not loose his hook.
And when the painted Image of ill thought,
Shall see how Age shall shriuell up her skin,
And she shall see her cunning come to naught:
When nature was but nourisht up with sin:
Oh, in what fright will her poor spirit dwell,
When she shall serve for Kitchen stuff in hell.
And when the Bawd that fills the golden bags,
But with the fruit of Natures excrements,
Shall at her death behold those rotten rags,
That shall become her richest ornaments,
How will her spirits fret, and ban and curse,
When she shall serve to be the Devils nurse.
And so good Dog, lie down and take thy rest,
The beggars all are going home to bed:
Each little bird is nuzling in her nest:
And every horned beast ginnes to cast the head,
And every Mowse into her hose is gone,
And thou have little left to think upon.
For if it be, as I do hope it is,
The world is come unto a happy pass:
Kindness lets no man know what thing is his:
The Horse is grown so inward with the Ass,
And love is grown so g^^^^ (...) friend (...).
^
The coast is clear, there are no knaves abroad,
The Cuckowe hushed, and cannot sing a note:
The Owl is hid within the Iuy todde,
And Jack a Lent has cast his lively cote,
The Miller gone to the Market with his Mare,
And cleanely wenches quickly sell their hair.
There is no swearing now, but yea and nay,
And Conscience now determines every case:
And charity is so in every way,
That every Beggar dare to show his face:
And beauty is so courteous, and so kind:
That every man for money knows her mind.
And honesty is wondrously beloved;
And simple Truth is held a blessed soul,
And patience almost every where approved.
And virtue writ up in ^he ^nly roll,
And Time so well imployde to profits use,
That where no fault is; there needs no excuse.
The rich men love to hear the poor men's prayers,
And poor men love to take the ric^^ens p^^ce:
The wise and learned sit in judgments chaires
And thiefes and murderers hangs for their offense,
And men and women do^ (...)
^
Tell William VVoodcocke with his winking eyes,
He is a fool for all his show of wit:
And Lawrence Lobcocke, that he prates and lies
Of his pied Beagle, and his Sorell Titte:
And David Dogbolt, with his boasting brags,
The Hangman is his Tailor for his Rags.
Tell Peter Pudding; with his paltry stuff,
His wealth is all but in a Pedlers pack:
And Saunder Huffe cappe, with his Ruff and Snuff,
The Tinkers boy is but a bragging Jack,
And Sinior Spruse that smoothes it like a Bride,
He makes himself the laughing stock of pride.
Tell Captain To spot with his Tarletons cut,
His swaggering will not get him sixeteene pence:
And Susan Slapsauce she is but a slut:
For all her powder of experience,
And Stabbing Stinckard with his minsing mouse,
The Hangman meets him at the Sessions house.
Tell Slouenista that does lie and sleep.
He breeds but filthy blood to fatten fleas:
And drunken Dicke that lays his brains in steep,
The dropsy is a horrible disease,
And Barnaby that goo^ (...) ^awdy Squire,
A cup of sack, (...) Nose on fire.
Tell Ragge a Muffin that does rap out oaths,
The Cutpurse swears to keep him company:
When Tiburne shall uncase them of their clothes,
And make an end of all their villainy,
While old Madge Howlat, and young Mawkin Spooner
Will weep for sorrow, they were hangde no sooner.
And tell old Gregory with his grumbling chappes,
He shall not bear a penny to his grave:
And if he do not, look to after claps:
He may hap know, what it is to be a knave:
When he shall lie in deadly gripes and groans,
To see the devil come to gnavv his bones.
And tell fine princking Parnell of Picked hatch,
The Surgeon says, that she is past all cure:
And though she cousned a poor silly patch,
To bring a buzard to a baudy lure:
Yet now, both town and country knows her tricks,
She may go seek the hedge for rotten sticks,
And tell old Tibbe, that dwells in Turnhole street,
Her name has been in Bridewell long ago;
And for her breath it is so pockie sweet,
That all her teeth are rotten on a roe:
And for her tongue the Clarke of Cl^^ken well,
^^^e shall be sent for, for chief scol^ in hell.
And tell that ilfac't whore of Islington,
She poisons all that come but near her breath,
And brings a world unto confusion:
For, who comes near her, comes upon his death,
And if he escape the plague the pox will have him,
And if the devil take him who shall save him.
Tell shame faced sheep head with his rubies blush,
He cannot make a curtsie handsomely:
And, all his Rethoricke is not worth a Rush,
Because he tells his tale ill-fauouredly:
And, for his mistress, she can not abide him,
Because she sees the fool so often ride him.
And, tell the Pander that does purchase lands,
Out of the lust of filthy lechery;
When, he shall fall into the Devils hands:
To feel the venom of loves treachery:
Besmearde all with the excrements of nature:
He shall in hell, be the most horride creature.
And tell the Lecher that does take delight,
To ferret all day at a Coneyhole:
And makes the night his day, the day his night,
When lack of warmth shall make him blow the cole,
After the pox has here confound his bones:
His soul shall ^^ue in ^^^ing ^ones.
Tell Clownifista with his clowted shoes,
His cobling craft will prove him but a knave,
When that his nose is in the Devils noose,
His soul in hell shall serve but for a slave,
Within the sincke of all the filth of sin,
To dig up holes to throw the damned in.
And tell the ouerglutted Epicure,
Whose ease delights but in fat and froth,
When he in hell shall hourly toil endure,
And have his wages in unwholesome broth.
When boiling lead shall do his guts no good,
When he shall starve or gnawe his flesh for food.
Be sullen, loure, and skowle at knaves, and fools,
That walking come by thee like men of worth:
And send the scoldes unto the cucking stools:
And bring the beggars with their wallets forth:
And sweep the streets from all the cheating mates,
And take heed of the horn beasts in the gates.
Run all about among the rascal people,
And beat the beggars from the rich men's doors,
And go from Charing Cross unto Paul's steeple,
And cleanse the streets of all the knaves and whores,
Kill all the dogs for fear of their faction,
And send the idle roagues unto ^^rection.
Scour all the coasts, Kent street and Clarken well,
Wapping, East Smithfield, Chick lane and Turnhole street
Pickthatche, the Spittle, Shorditch, and Halliwell;
And all the by-lanes where the Baudes do meet:
And Tuttill street, S. Giles and Islington:
And make a step over to Newington,
All scolding Allies, and such scuruey places;
And take them as thou find'st them every where:
Bring out the Punkes with all their pockie faces,
The purple, tawnie, round and russer hair,
Set up a stake, and bring the Refuse thither,
And make a Bonefire of them all together.
Make much of none, but true kind hearted wenches,
That would be honest, if they could tell how,
But meddle with no great ones on their benches,
For fear of worse hurt then a broken brow:
Yet if thou see a knacke of knavery go
Think what thou list, although thou say not so.
Bark at a Traitor, sawne not on a thief,
Tell them the halter hangs right in their way:
And tell the Butcher when he buys his beef,
The horns may help to make the hide away,
And watch the least good fortune may befall,
For greedy hounds will have the devil and all.
Or, with Diogenes, go seek and see,
If by a Lantern, and a Candle light:
Thou can find out where there may hidden be:
One honest man from wicked wordlings sight:
Or make a Survey of old Timons trees:
Whether the pockie whores have paid their fees.
Rail at the world, and hate it to the death,
And s^y it is but patience Purgatory:
A c^^^red mouth that gives a cursed breath:
That sounds but sorrow, death, and misery:
Where he that can in his best sense conceive it:
Thinks himself never happy, till he leave it.
But for the virtuous, either high or low:
Honor and love them, though thou do not know the^:
But for the vicious, let the villains go:
Down to the hell, a blast of whirlewinde blow them:
Yet vvish them not to hell, but somewhat better:
Although thou know they be the Hangmans debtor.
Fret till the flesh be bare unto the bones,
To see thy spirit so thy body spend:
Sigh, sob, and swell, with such deep inward groans,
As heart would burst, to see thou can not mend:
Not mend a slender hurt, nor little pain:
But heart all broke, that cannot heal again,
Bite hard thy lips, and shake thy troubled head,
And grate thy teeth until thy gummes do bleed:
And look as lumpish as a piece of lead,
And speak to no man, but to serve thy need,
Walk by thy self, and seek no company,
And hate the thought of hellish villainy.
For, let rich Midas be a golden ass,
And like a toade, a dogged tyrant swell:
And Judas with his poisoned spirit pass,
With all the cursed damned crew to hell:
Love thou thy God, and for the godly pray:
And so, with all the world make holy day.
If that thou see a Beggar grow to wealth,
Mark how he gets it, and so give him grace:
If honestly, regard him, if by stealth
Of villainy, wish him a viler place,
And yet alas, in charity pray for him:
Hell may not have him, though the heavens abhor hin.
And put on patience, for it is but vain
To fret and fume, and chafe, and play the fool:
Let us go fall upon some finer strain,
And bring our wits unto some better school:
Entreat a little, it may breed^ good blood,
See if fair words will I (...) the world to good.
Entreat all knaves to turn, all honest men,
And honest men they will be honest still:
Entreat no Cock to tread his neighbors hen:
But let the Turtles kindly sit and bill:
Entreat the Tinker, better stop his holes,
And Grim the Colier give us better coals,
Entreat the shepherd that does sheare his sheep,
He will not clip too low, to cut the skin:
And bid his woman that she do not weep,
Because the mouse has been within her Binne:
Her husband will not feel it in his purse,
And sift the meal, the bread is near the worse.
Entreat the Geese and Ganders hold their peace,
There is not one wise word among them all:
And all the alley scoldes, their brawling cease,
For it is a filthy thing to scolde and brawle:
And all fair wenches that are beauties flowrse,
They will not be the Devils Paramours.
Entreat the Asses for to leave their braying,
The Peacocke that he will not stoop his tail:
And mad young wenches for to leave their maying:
The milk maid that she look unto her payle:
The Stallion horse, he do not beat the mare,
And greedy hounds they do not kill the hare.
Now fie on fools cap, here is a dish of drink,
To choke a dog, let all these toys alone:
Let us our selves of somewhat else bethink,
That yet may do some good when all is gone:
That though our bodies our of frame are grown,
Our spirits yet may not be overthrown.
Then let us leave the world and go to Church,
And turn all Preachers true and holy men?
And while the Knave does give the fool the lurch.
And plotters write, with an ungodly pen:
Let us deliver by the word of truth,
The way to heaven, both unto age and youth.
Yea, let us read the rules of sacred life,
Persuade the troubled soul to patience:
The husbands care, and comfort to the wife:
The child and servant, due obedience,
Faith to the friend, and to the neighbor peace,
That love may live, and suites at law may cease.
Pray for the health of all that are diseased,
Confession unto all that are convicted:
And patience unto all that are displeased,
And comfort unto all that are afflicted,
And mercy unto all that have offended,
And Grace to all, that all may be amended,
Pray for the King, the Queen, and Countries health,
Their royal Issue, and their Peers of State:
The Council, Clergy, and the common wealth,
That no misfortune may their bliss abate.
But that the almighty so his Church will cherish,
That not a member of his love may perish.
To King and Queen give Rights of Royalty,
And for their virtues give them worthy praise:
Grace to the Prince, the Subject loyalty,
That all together may have happy days,
The Council wisdom, and the Commons wealth,
The virtuous honor, and the gracious health.
Inuay against all vile iniquity,
But chide the sinner with no bitter check:
But so persuade him with such piety,
That on the block he may lay down his neck,
And at the stroke of death such comfort find,
As mercy gives to a repentant mind.
Come by the proud with, Lucifers great fall,
And lay down Dinah at the unchaste door,
The irreligious with the life of Paul,
Who once converted, never fell no more,
The painted face with wicked Iezabel,
And the rich Churl with Dives deep in hell.
Come by the fine, but fond conceited wit,
With Herod's and in all his Eloquence:
And tell the frantic in a furious fit,
Of cursed Saul, in his impatience,
With Ananiah, touch ill conscience,
And bribing hands with (...) thirty pence.
Come by the Judge that gives Injustice doom,
With Pilats fear of Caesar, more then God:
And bid the Tyrant look on Neroes toombe,
Whose flesh an earth with worms does make abode:
While deep in hell, his soul does feel the smart
Of a proud Tirants bloody wicked heart.
Tell them that murmr at heavens Majesty,
Of Corah, Dathan, and Abirams death:
And finely touch the tongue of blasphemy,
With huge Goliath in his hellish breath:
And bid the murderer look on Abels blood,
When tears nor prayers, Caine did any good.
And tell the powerful in their highest places,
That mercy is the grace of majesty:
And from the poor the proud that turn their faces,
Shall find the fruits of their Impiety.
When deafened hellish ears, and blinded eyes,
Will see no tears, nor hear the damned cries
Allure the world to charitable love,
And show the comfort of a christian peace:
And seek the sweetness in the soul to prove:
How patience, virtue makes all passions cease,
In humble, faithful, careful, constant, kind,
Set down the notes of a true noble mind.
Bid virgins follow all the Virgin Mary:
And men their Master Christ in all his merits:
And men and women all their selves so carry,
That they may show true hearts and christian spirits,
In mildness, meekness, and loves lowliness,
Set down the notes of natures happiness.
Give beauty warning of a wanton eye,
And riches warning of a wretched mind:
And Honor warning of Indignity,
And aged eyes from being Cupid blind:
And power a warning of the fall of pride.
And pray, the gracious may in grace abide.
And show the curses threatened upon sin,
The blessings on obedience unto grace:
And how the cursed here their hell begin,
Whose tears nor prayers in mercy have no place:
And how the blessed here begin to taste
The joys of heaven that shall for ever last.
Wish every King to have King David's heart,
And every Queen, the Queen of Sheb^s wit:
And every Council, Salomons best part
Of understanding, for a kingdom sit,
And every Lady, fair Rebecca^ face,
And every Virgin, the wise Virgins grace.
And every Soldier, Iosuahs true spirit,
And every Scholar Aarons Eloquence,
And every Miser, wicked Di^^^ merit:
And every poor man Io^^ true patience,
And every Lawyer Moses h^^^nly mind
And every Merchant of Zac^^^ kind.
Do not with Esau him of or Venis^^
And sell thy birthright for a mess of po^ge:
Lest Jacob steal away thy B^^^on.
When Isaac falls upon the years of ^otag^:
But be a Joseph in the time of heed
To good old Jacob, and his blessed seed.
Be Abraham in his sons sacrifice,
And follow Lo^ in his loves h^^linesse,
Like Solomon be in thy judgment wise,
And Jonathan in friendship faithfulness,
Like Henoch make thy ^o^^ (...) love;
And with Eliah live (...)
Be both a Priest, a Prophet and a King,
A Priest to make thy heart a Sacrifice,
A Prophet to declare the way to bring
The blessed Spirit unto Paradise,
A King to rule thy self with such direction,
Thy soul may keep thy body in subjection.
Oh kill not Conscience with a cruel letter,
Yet let the Atheist have but little hope
And count the false Professor little be^^er,
That for dissembling does deser^^^ the rope,
For cleanely Cook^^ do more it is a ^^^th,
That filthy water makes (...) ^o ^efo^^e b^^^^^.
And make no monster member of the Church,
Nor take ill counsel of Achitophel:
Nor let illusion give thy soul the lurch,
To lead thy heart into the sink of hell,
Teach humble love, hate all ambition^ pride,
And shrowde thy virtues under Gra^s side.
And diet not with Holofor^es drink,
But join with Judith in her joyful strength,
Let Dalila, not make stout S^mpson wink,
Lest the Philistints fall on thee at length,
No Solomon be led by Phara^^ ^^l^i^^,
^est by the flesh, the spirit be b^^^^lde.
Know, what and when, and where, and how to speak
Be fearful, how thou do thy God offend:
A virtuous vow, take heed thou do not break,
And Mercies pleasure, patiently a^en^
Love no man for his purse, (...) for his place:
But for his wit, his virtue and his grace.
Be wisely careful, but not covetous,
For Conscience wo^^e, will make a mortal wound,
And be devout, but not Idolatrous:
For, that both soul and body will confound:
Be kindly loving, (...) lecherous,
For that in, nature is most impious,
To idle things accustom not thy thought:
And tremble at the word of Blasphemy:
With vain persuasions, (...) wrought,
And keep thy tongue from (...) Infamy;
Hold back thy hand from all unlawful action;
And weane thy Spirit from ungodly faction.
Care not to read except to understand,
And let thy learning teach thee how to live:
With perfect care let every course be scand;
And spare to spend, that thou may have to give,
Think no man happy o^ (...) Stage,
Where death and (...); make a marriage
Pry not into the faults of priu^^^ (...)
To lay them open to their ^^eed sh^^^^;
Nor strike a dash with a false deadly pe^^e,
To kill the credit of an honest name;
And for the simple, use no ^^btil^ ^ai^^^,
But pity the afflicted in their pains.
Flatter not folly with ^n idle faith,
Nor let earth stand upon her own desert;
But show what wisdom in the scripture says,
The fruitful hand does show the ^^thful ^art,
Believe the Word, and th^^ to ^^nd thy will,
And teach obedience for a blessed (...)
Let not the beauteous, nor the ri^h be proud,
Nor aged wanton, nor the youthful wild;
For in the rules of Grace, (...) not allowed,
And graceles h^^ts, are all from heaven e^^ld:
Let valor nor be cruel, wi^^^ kind,
Nor base conceits corrupt a no^le mind.
But do not rave, nor rail, (...) sta^^ ^or stare,
As if thy care would go to ^^ffes with sin:
But show how mercy does repentance spar^,
Whilst working faith does heavenly fa^our win,
And Loves obedience to the (...) d^^h pr^^e,
The chosen soul, that God does chiefly love.
Chide ^inners, as the Father does his child,
And keep them in the awe of loving fear:
Make sin most hateful, but in words be nice,
That humble patience may the better hear;
And wounded conscience may receive relief,
When true repentance pleade^ the sinners grief.
Throw not the sinner headlong to damnation,
Nor fright the faithful with a cursed fear;
But win Repentance unto Reformation,
And teach the Christian, how his cross to bear,
Give comfort in thy Cares instruction,
To save the faithful from the souls destruction.
Heal the Infect of sin with oil of grace,
And wash the soul with true contritions tears,
And when Confession shows her heavy case,
Deliver faith from all Infernal fears,
That when high Justice threat^^^ sin with death,
Mercy again, may give Repentance breath.
Yet flatter not the foul delight of sin,
But make it loathsome in the eye of love;
And seek the heart with holy c^res to win,
To work the best way for the souls be ^^ue?
So teach, so live, that both (...) deed,
The would (...)
Time has a course, that Nature cannot stay,
For youth must die, or come to doting age:
What is our life on earth? but as a play,
Where many a part does come upon the Stage,
Rich, poor, wise, fond, fair, foul, and great, and small
And old, and young, death makes an end of all.
Where he that makes his life a Comedy,
To laugh and sing, and talk away the Time:
Shall find it in the end a Tragedy,
When mournful bells, will make no merry chime,
When sad despair shall fear infernal evil,
While Sin and death; are Agents for the Devil.
Oh when the rich, and greedy Miser dies,
While fearful visions will his soul affright?
And keep his heart in hellish miseries,
To look upon so many a fearful sight,
When Pride, oppression, Avarice and Theft,
Of hope, of mercy, has the foul bereft.
And when the Murderer that delights in blood,
Shall feel his heart to have a mortal wound:
And grieves to look upon ill gotten good,
While guilty conscience runs his care a ground:
What will he do? when truth his soul shall tell,
A tyrants blood shall make a broth in hell.

