AN OLD MAN'S LESSON, AND A YOUNG MAN'S LOVE.

By Nicholas Breton.

LONDON Imprinted for Edward White, and are to be sold at his Shop near the
little Northdoore of S. Paul's Church at the Sign of the Gun. 1605.

To the Right Worshipful and worthy Favorer of Learning and nourisher of
virtue: Sir John Linwraye Knight, Master Surueyer of all his Majesty's
Ordinance within his Highness Realms of England and Ireland: Nich. Breton
wishes increase of all happiness on earth, and the joys of heaven hereafter.
I Have often noted, that the wisdom of experience, has been the School of a
good wit, where youth giving ear to age, may the better determine of his
courses: And again, that nature weying love with reason, works the best
effects of understanding. The truth of this you may find made good in this
little Dialogue, where the Father kindly deals with the Sons duty, and
the Sons love, with the Fathers discretion: many pretty tractes have passed
among them, where each was so pleased in the Summarie of their discourse, that,
if all Fathers would be as kind, and all Children as wise, there would be a
blessed common wealth: but the world is to be weyed as it is, and their rules
to be made examples of much good: the discourse is Diagolicall, and the
variety not unpleasant: where nature with wit, wit with learning, and learning
with judgment, may prove some pains in the writing, and worthy patience in
the reading. Such as it is (with my better service) I co^me^d to your good
favor, hoping that as in this little you may see my love, so in a greater
service, you will command the bonds of my affection: in which, with hearts
thankfulness* for your ever undeserved kindness: I take my leave.

Yours Devoted and obliged: Nich. Breton.

To the Reader.
MY good Friend, if you be so, if not, I would you were so, at least, if you be
worth the being so: I have met of late with a discourse written by I know not
whom, and how well, judge you that read it: it is written in the manner of a
Dialogue, betwixt an old Man, and his Son: the Father was a Widdower, and
the Son a Trauailer: who after a long absence, came home to his Father, at
whose coming, (after kind greetings) there passed many pretty passages: in
which was handled An old Man's Lesson, and a young Man's Love: I will not
comme^d the ha^dling of it, but rather leave it to correction of the wise, then
the allowance of the contrary: and so wishing it may displease none, that are
worthy to be pleased, and not to be worse thought on then it deserves: I leave
it to your patience, and my self to your kind regard, and so rest.

Your Loving Friend. Nich. Breton.

An old Man's Lesson: and a young Man's Love.
Chremes and Pamphilus. Chre. Son, welcome home, God bless thee, and make
thee his Servant.


Pam. I thank you Father, and say Amen to your prayer.


Chre. Well said Boy, but let me talk a word or two with thee: Thou have been
abroad in the world, and have seen more then thou have eaten, and have left
many a good Town behind thee for fault of carriage: tell me I pray thee,
whence came thou now?


Pam. Directly from the University, where I have made no long stay: for had it
not lain in my way, I had not come at it at all, such was my haste home, as
well first to show my duty to you, as to acquaint you with the occasion of
some matters, which at leisure I will impart unto you.


Cre. I understand you well: me you come to see, but my money is the matter you
would talk of, for certain occasions you thereunto moving: but by the way,
let me ask you what news are abroad?


Pam. News enough, but few worth the hearing: and in the place from which I
came (I mean the Academe) there are but two points the Scholars stand upon:
and one point the Townes-men.


Chre. And what are the Scholars points?


Pam. Truly neither leather, thread, nor silke-points, nor points of pinnes,
nor needles, nor points with the finger but the full point: of either truth or
falsehood: for in argument, wit, and learning, to try their best virtue, is in
finding out a falsehood or maintaining a truth.


Chre. Why then wit and learning can make a fair show of truth where there is
none:


Pam. Yea, but bettter wit, and better learning can lay it open, that it may be
known as it is.


Chre. And when it is known, what then?


Pam. Then to be regarded as it deserves.


Chre. As how, I pray thee?


Pam. If one hold an opinion that a man is wise because he is rich, and an
other hold the contrary, and both having showed their reasons, he that
finds out the truth of wisdom what it is, and in what it lies, makes it known
so apparently to all good understanding, that wisdom is to be honored as a
virtue and grace of the divine Essence, and wealth to be esteemed as a Servant
of necessity.


Chre. And this is your School talk:


Pam. Yea Sir.


Chre. Good talk for Scholars: but do their Masters hold it so, that money
is but a servant of need?


Pam. Yes, and learned it themselves before they teach it us.


Chre. But how understand you a servant of necessity?


Pam. For provision of apparel which is necessary, meat and drink, and
lodging, which are necessary: horse and furniture, which are necessary:
maintenance of wife, children, and servants, all which are necessary: to keep
good courses, with good company, which is necessary: to procure advancement,
which is necessary: to keep off want, which is necessary to help the
needy, feed the hungry, and relieve the oppressed, which is necessary: In
all which necessary causes, the spirit being moved by grace and reason, to
effect that which cannot be done without money, he is to be employed as a
necessary servant, and a servant at all necessities* but wisdom which is a
directer of the spirit in all good, and necessary courses, and the employer of
wealth in all necessary causes, is to be honored above all things,
whatsoever man can be master of.


Chre. Well said; but superfluity then, money has nothing to do withal, as
thus: better want money then waste it upon drunkenness, wantonness, or
wickedness* for when one has a coat that will keep him warm, which was the
cause garments were first made, and money is employed for them to lay on
needeles lace of thread, Silk or Silver, or Gold, which makes the garment
more weighty then warm, money is to be pardoned for any such unnecessary
expense.


Pam. Pardon me Sir, it makes the garment more comely, and comeliness is
necessary so far that it exceed not reason in measure: furthermore it is an
utterance of Silk, an vpholder of traffic, and maintainer of Art.


Chre. So Sir, well said Master Scholar, how finely you can make superfluity
in pride, be a relief of necessity, and necessary to maintain traffic*
but, content your self, cloth the back warm, satisfy hunger and thirst,
and so far my money has been my Servant, and so far he shall be yours.
Why so you may say of a house, when the first cause was to keep Man dry: to
make more rooms then there is use for, more Chimnyes, then is fire for; more
Windows then there is wit for, and more Painting and Guilding then there is
good reason for: why should not monye lie still rather then be employed in
such unnecessary humors?


Pam. Oh Sir, are not many poor men employed in their labors, many men of
trade exercised in their Art? and is not the beauty thereof comely to the
eyes of the beholder? which may as well praise God in the worke-man-shippe, as
have pride in the profession of it? oh, it is the ill mind of one that
misconstrueth the good meaning of an other: and therefore monye being made for
necessary uses, and many necessary uses in the building of fair houses,
monye is to be employed and the builder for his wisdom to be honored.


Chre. I thank you Sir: but for my self, he has served me to build rooms
necessary for my use and no further, and for a house fit for your calling my
monye shall serve you and no further: why, you perhaps will defend feasts, and
banqueting, when monye is only to be employed for necessity to satisfy
hunger and thirst.


Pam. Without offense, I think I may say, that Feasts are as necessary as
Fasts: for, as the one does pull down the flesh from rebelling against the
Spirit, so does the other give the Spirit more life in rejoicing upon a just
cause of joy: as in many excellent Histories, as well Divine as human, we
may read: but to allow thereby of Drunkenness or glotonny, I have no such
meaning: As at marriages, holy days, and honest merry meetings, a little too
much, is better then much too little: further-more the varieties of meats and
drinks, as Ale, Beer, Wine, Sugar and Spices, are the better known, wherein
God is glorified, and praised for his blessings, and the Vintner, the Grocer,
the Comfit-maker, the Cook, the Brewer and the Butcher, do by the venting of
their wares, the better maintain their trades* so that I think I may well
say, that monye in the provision of Feasts and banquets, is to be employed as
a servant of necessity.


Chre. So Sir, you say well: but money has served me for the good loaf and
the Cheese, Beef, and Mutton, and now and then a Goose and a Chicke, or a
Ducke of mine own breed or your Mothers; and a cup of Ale or Beer of our
own brewing: this outlandish drink (this Wine) is more costly then wholesome:
I warrant you the greatest part of this Country stands upon Corn, and
Sheep: and where have you a Plough-man or a Shepherd, that almost knows what
Drink it is, or cares for it, when he sees it? No, Ale and Beer is our best
liquor, and therefore so far as may kill hunger and quench thirst, monye has
served me, and so far shall it serve you: but, whether is more wisdom in
getting money to serve necessities, and keep it for necessary causes, or to
study tricks to lay it out upon nice inventions?


Pam. Truly Sir, (as I said before, monye is but reasons servant, and wisdom
is reasons master: the^ if reason the Servant to wisdom, can find means even
among fools to get money, either by Labor, Art, or Fortune: and wisdom
only be the director of reason in the employment of that money, to the
necessary comfort and honor of man: I hold it a greater wisdom well to
dispose of a Servants business, then to come by the Servant, for money is
every man's Servant in one sort or other: but wisdom lives but with a few,
whom she makes more honorable then the money-Master.


Chre. Yea, how can that be? what honor is there without money? the best
Scholar without money may make a hard dinner, and go in a threed-bare Coat:
and for all his grace in the Schools, have little grace in the world.


Pam. Yet learning in it self is honorable, and if he be gracious in patience,
either to bear his Cross, or to attend his comfort, then deserves he the
honor of that vetue that learning has taught him, and is wronged if he have
it not given him: for shall an Ass be held wise because he has put on a
Foxes skin, or like a wolf can pray on a lamb? or if a fool that has but
so much wit as to play the knave, and by his cunning to gather coin, shall such
a Devil in the shape of man be honored as a God? God forbid: no, the Golden
Calfe of Horeb was an Idol, and covetousness is the witch of wit, and the
root of all evil.


Chre. And which is the Top?


Pam. Pride.


Chre And what is the body?


Pam Sloth.


Chre. And what is the Arms?


Pam. Glotony and drunkenness.


Chre. What is the Sap?


Pam. Letcherie.


Chre. What the Bark?


Pam. Envy.


Chre. What are the Leaves?


Pam. Vanities.


Chre. The fruit?


Pam. Shame and pain.


Chre. Oh brave! a Tree for the Devils garden, God bless my ground from such
Trees.


Pam. Amen.


Chre. But here me a little, I think if a man should touch you with a
tickling humor, of an effeminate nature, you would defend it to be good, and
money necessary to be used in such a service: and were not that a pretty
piece of learning?


Pam Howsoever Sir you think of it: I can show good reason for it: for Love is
an humor of the mind infused into the heart, by the virtue of the Spirit:
which by the grace of wisdom, the art of reason, and the Service of money,
works honorable effects in nature: for when the eye beholds beauty,
nature is pleased in the obiecte; when reason finds wit, wisdom is delighted
in the Subject; and when wisdom finds grace, reason is joyful in
understanding; and then all these meeting together in conceit, must needs
work together for contentment: for the accomplishment of which, money must be a
servant of necessity. As thus: If your neighbor had two Sons, the one were
wise, learned, valiant, and honest, yet did want money to advance his virtues,
and the other had much money, and no other good matter to move the least humor
of good liking my sister to whom my gra^dmother has left a good Portion,
should effect this younger Brother without monye, and leave the other to his
all money: is it not fit and necessary, that her money should rather be an
advancement of his virtues, and a content of her kindness, and perhaps
increase of her comfort, rather then be a choaker of Midas, with more money
then he can swallowe, and be an increaser of Idolatry: and perhaps, a grief to
you in the Prime of her own comfort: so if it should fall out with me to affect
the hope of my fortune, would you spare your Pursse to procure my preferment?
believe it father, the best love is begotten by the eyes bred in the Brains,
and grows to perfection in the heart: and shall not money be a servant then
of necessity to attend the commandment of Love? fie on this Market-matches,
where marriages are made without affections, and obedience is performed by a
grieved patience: no let money be used as a Servant to reason, and not a
Master of Love.


Chre. Oh fine boy; I almost find where you are, but let me tell you, though
your words hang well together, yet me thinks, money lies better together: for
if a Wench that has money Love thee, spend of her purse, or else thou want
wit: if thou have money and love her that has none, her wit has made a fool
of thee: for, tell me a tale of a Tub, of eyes and ears, and hearts, object
and subject, and wisdom, and reason: without money, it is not worth a whiffe:
for Aurum potabile is a strange quintescence: it will make age young again, it
will give the heart a life beyond all the physic of the world: why Gold is
half a God on the earth* it has such power among people, Let a wench be
wealthy, and set out in her bravery, though she be painted for her beauty,
and scarce gentill for her parentage, yet, if she catch the name of a Lady, she
must be honored like Queen Guineuer: and if she be but near a Princess,
she shall be almost worshipped like a Goddess. Why go no further but to our
own neighbors: what a slut will have a husband if she have but a little
money. and what fine Wenches match with Clownes, but only for their Farms and
their stocks?


Pam. Yea, but Father, what follows? Iealouzie and Cuckoldry, and Bastardry,
and Rogery* she cannot Love him, nor he her: youth cannot love age, age will be
Jealous of youth, and love will have his working: and therefore as I said before,
the cause is covetousness and the root of all evil.


Chre. Well said again boy: but yet twill not serve your turn, for I will have
an other bowte with you: for money is a matter of more moment then you make
account of: why? money makes the medicine for the sick, pleades the Clients
cause, maintains the Merchants Trade, makes the Soldiers fight, and the
Craftsman work, the Trauailer tread lightly, and the old Mare trot, and the
young Tit Amble: it does, I know not what, nor almost what can on earth be
done without it? It frames the instrument, tuneth the strings, plays the
lesson, and sings the song it furnishes the court, graceth the city, and
maintains the country: In sum, let me tell thee, it is a matter of such
moment, as there is neither youth, nor Beauty, Valor, nor Learning, wit nor
wisdom, but if it want money to grace it, it shall have little grace in the
world: and therefore let him be first counted wise that gets it, then wise that
keeps it, and last wise that knows how to use it: and whatsoever opinions are
of it, hold you with me this assurance of it, that he is wise who has it, and
so contrary to all them that say against it, say you, he is wise that is rich.


Pam. Oh Father I am sorry to hear you speak so feelingly of your love to
money: which you have been long in getting, careful in keeping, and will be
sorrowful in leaving: Oh let it not have such power over you, to make you a
slave to your Servant* it is but a dross trodden on by the feet of Beasts,
serves the beggar, as a greater person, the wicked as the virtuous, the Jew
as the Christian, embrodereth the Horses clothes as the Lords cloak, and the
Maids kertell, as her Ladies petticoate: it begets Pride, breeds wars,
procures Treasons, and ruynes countries: and yet let me say this of it: the
fault is not in it self, but in the use of it: and for the good that is done
by it, is not of it self but in the wisdom of him or her that has the use
of it, and therefore let it be left indifferent good or evil, or neither of
both, but fit for either as it is used: and count him rather wise that knows
how to use it, then how to get it: for many get it by a wicked Father, which
being wise, will not leave it to a wicked Son: many get it by Dice and
Cards, which being wise, will employ it in better courses: many get it by an
old blind widow, that have wit to spend it with sweeter creature: many get it
by piracie at Sea, that employ it in a better course at Land: In brief, the
getting of it sometime is so grievous to a good conscience, as can approve no
wisdom in it, and the employing of it may be to so good an end, as proves
great wisdom in the mannaging of it: and therefore in my judgment, knowing no
man wise through riches, but, many rich through wisdom, I hold him rich that
is wise, not him wise that is rich.


Chre. So then you would have me that have been careful to get money, which I
have lying by me for necessary uses, bestow it upon you that know (as you
think,) how to prove more wisdom in the employing of it: it may be I will
do so with part of it, in hope, that you that can speak so well of it will
know as well what to do with it: but before we come to that point, let me
talk a little further with you touching your travail: what have you chiefly
noted for your benefit?


Pam. The natures of the Soiles, the inhabitants of the Countries, the
dispositions of the people, and the wisdom of the Governors: To the first, I
noted according to the climat of wihat heat or coldenes, dry or moystnes,
what fruit, what store, and in what season, what Rivers, fresh or salt, what
Cattle, and Foul, and Fish, what Mineralles, and what Mines.


Chre And for Fish, you could bring none home alive, nor sweet: and, have not
our Seas, and fresh-waters, as good Fish as other? And for Cattle, there can
be no better Beef nor Mutton, then ours: Now for Foul, both Land and water
Foul: there are in our heathes, woods and fens, I think as good and as great
variety with us as any where* but it may be, far fetched and dear bought is
good for Ladies, and if you have hit on a little monster, as a Camelion, or an
Indian Fly, it may be, if you can use the matter hansomely, fools may give
you money for the sight of it: now for Mineralls, how much money soever you
found in the country, I fear you have brought but a little out of it, and
therefore for these notes, I think for any profit you made of your travail, you
had bin as good a tarried at home: Nowfor the people, I think, they are as we
are in shape though by some of those outlandish, they mishape themselves in
their apparel, I know not what to say to them, but, if the me^ be rich, it is
like they will keep their money, and if poor, they will either beg, cheat,
or steal, and so live as long as they can: and for the women, if they be
fair, they know what to make of their beauty, and if Foul, how to make of
their money. Old Folks can tell how to govern Children, and youths will
play the wagges, if it be with their own Fathers: for Boys (God send them
Grace) had never more wit then they have now a days. Now for the Governors,
where there are many, it is strange if there be not one wise, and if the rest
will observe good notes, their wits may prove nere the worse: now if there
be many wise, it will trouble one wit too much to take notice of them all:
and therefore Son, though a little expense of money have bought thee a little
experience, and the variety of knowledge have given thee a little contentment,
yet, let no Idol corrupt thy conscience, no vanity corrupt thy wit, nor folly
be Master of thy will: thy native soil is natural, thy Countriemen nearer
to thee then strangers: thy kindred, then unknown people, and thy Fathers
house will give a kinder welcome, then the Palace of a Princess: Let not the
alteration of the Air, alter thy nature, the object of thine eye the Judgment
of thy mind, nor the sound of the ear, the sense of thy heart: If thou be
returned home, as thou wentest out, I shall be glad of it: but if either
France have taught thee fancies, Italye wantonness, Flaunders drunkenness, or
any place wickedness, I shall be sorry for thy Travail and wish thou had
never gone: Oh let not wars make thee bloody, Courts make thee prodigal, trade
make thee covetous, law make thee partial, women make thee wanton, nor
flattery make thee proud: for, as Travail is the life of youth, and variety
the love of knowledge, so yet after all thy Travail learn this, nay by thy
variety of thy knowledge learn this Lesson, could thou see all the world,
thou should see nothing but a world, and in the end of all, find all have
an end: Riches must either be spent or left, beauty must decay, honor must
be transported, nature must grow weak, senses loose their sense, and life
must end, and then when all is gone, then vanity, vanity, and all is
vanity: in the grave there is no beauty, no honor, no wealth, no sense, no
life: and thither you must as well as I, and who knows, who first? now
whether it be in the Sea, or in the la^d, in a Fishes belly or a Leaden
Coffin: all is one, a grave there must be, of whosoever it be: and therefore
before thou come to that last Inn of thy worlds Journey, let me wish thee
wheresoever thou go, and whatsoever thou see, be still one man and
remember one thing: serve but one God, love but one and thine own country,
have but one wife and trust but one friend: for many Gods breeds heathens
miseries, many countries trauailers humors, many wives men's purgatories, and
many friends trustes ruin: first God gave thee life, love him for it: yea he
loves thee, live to him for it: your Country gave you food under God, love
it for it: your Country gave you knowledge first under God, live in it for it:
your wife gives you Issue, love her for it, she eases your house cares, live
with her for it: and your friend conceales your secrets, love him for it: and
is an other your self, live near to him for it: and leaving the vain desire
of variety, live to the only love of virtue: spend your thoughts in
contemplation of Divine comfort, your substance in the service of God, and
benefit of your country: wagge not wanton with the wandering eyes, nor trifle
out time in unprofitable toies, cover not your balde head with Periwigs of
borrowed hair* curle not your beard with hot Irons: leere not aside like a
Beare-whelpe, nor look under the brows like a Bull*Dogge, march not in a
town of peace like a Soldier, nor run out of your wits in an humor: carry
not a picke-tooth in your mouth, a flower in your ear, nor a Glove in your
Hat, for it is apish and foolish, devised by idle heads, and worn by shallowe
wits: bind not your invention to Poetry, nor make an Oration of an Epistle:
Learn but two parts of speech, to speak good words, and to good purpose:
go cleanely but not gaiely, and gain honestly, and spend thriftilie: feed
sparingly, drink moderately, sleep soundly, but rise early, so passing thy
time merrily, thou shall live happily and die blessedlie: this lesson has been
taught me at home, and I doubt: you will scarce find a better abroad: but
least I grow teadious to thee, thus to take thee to School as soon as thou
come home, I pray thee tell me thy opinion of contentment: whether it can be
so well had abroad, as at home?


Pam. Truly Father I know not the mind of every man, nor how fullye to
define content: but when wit has found out, reason has Judged, and nature
has received the pleasure of the Spirit in the delight of the senses, I
think, if in the world there be any content it is there: Now, be it at home
or abroad, all is one, for there is an old sentence which is oftentimes newly
in effect. Omne Solum fortis patria: every house is home, all Countries are one
to a resolute mind: a friend is a frie^dabroad, and an ennimie is an ennimie
at home: virtue is limited to no place, but honored in all persons, and love
has a world to walk in, to take the pleasure of his fortune, where variety
of choice tries the wisdom of judgment: my father, if I behold him but as a
man, I can love him but as a man, but when I think of his love, I love him as
a Father: now, love being bound to no place, cannot forget his own nature any
where: nay absence of place strengthens the memory of Love: and therefore if I
behold my self, in being a son, I remember my Father* if I behold your
bounty, I remember your blessing, and honor your Love: so that still I say, it
is not the place, that perfecteth affection, no not in nature: and sometime
absence is the cause of the more Joy in love, as in the Soldier, who after
Conquest returns with more honor then he had at home: the Merchant after a
voyage, pleases his mistress with better wares then she had at home: the
Courtier after travail, tells his Lady a better tale, then of a Fox and a
Goose, and the Scholar after Travail, makes a better verse then at home: why
the Clown after travail can learn to kiss his hand, and maid Maulkin after
travail, can make new countenances and new complexions: oh father, this home
humor will soon be worn so threed-bare, that if it were not shifted with some
travail (even with lazy) wit would grow louzy: for in place of account, where
knowledge is to be enquired, there is more matter then for the Market, and of
more judgment then master constables: were the wise that have seen the
world, note the necessary good of Travail: who never heard but a Iacke-Dawe
would think a Parret a spirit, and either be affraide of her, or in love with
her, when he that knows her what she is, will regard her as she is: now he
that never saw but an Ape, would think a Baboone a little devil* but he that
has travailed where they are bred, will know them for ordinary beasts of
those countries: he that never saw a Mountibanke, would take a curtizen for a
better creature, but he that had seen their traffic would never care for
their trade: he that never saw a Whale would think it a Devil in the Sea, but
he that had been where they are bredde would know it there, an ordinary
Fish: he that never saw a Picture would go near to think it an Angel, but
he that knows them what they be, will think of them as they are. Oh Father,
the Tyranny of one Prince makes the mercy of an other more glorious: the
terror of war, makes peace seem more joyful, and the danger of the Sea
makes the Land more wished for: does not the drunkenness of one Country make
sobriety in an other seem more gracious? the Treasons in one Country make
loyalltie more honorable in an other? and who has not seen the one, how can
he Judge of the other? now, for further causes of contentment, what Gold is in
the Indies? what Art in China? what workmanshippe in Millaine? what building
in Florence? what Fountains in Genoua? what State in Norremberge? and for
Venice who has not seen it cannot praise it, but who has seen it, and can
judge of it, I leave him to speak of it. Oh the Corn, wine and fruit of
France* the Oil, Spice, Drugges and fruit of Spain* the Rosen, Pitch, Tar,
and Hemp, Wax, and Honey from the East Countries* the Veluets, Sattens,
Taffaties and Silks of Italy, and other far Countries! are these at home?
yea, but how? not to be seen with that contentment that it is at their home:
for, to see the little Worm that winds the Silk, how she lives before her
working, and then, how with her work, she pays for her living, how neat
the Maids bring them to Market, wound up in their work, how finelye they are
wound out of their work, and their Silken threedes wouen into diverse fine
Stuffes, as well Cloth of Gold, Tissue, Silver, or Tuffed or plain Velvet or
Satin, or stuffes of other names, the rarenes in the Art of it, and the
neatenes in the doing of it, it is a thousand times more contentiue, then to
buy it in a Shop, and to wear it in slappe: Oh to see a General in the
midst of an Army, or a City besiedged! to see the Beauty of one, and note
the strength of the other, and to tarry the fortune of both, it would make you
break your Spade, and your Flaile, and as old as you are, try the Fortune of
your Sword, to see but one such a sight in all your life: why in a Chamber to
see a woman of worth sued to, by the better sort, to hear the excellency of
her wit delivered at the end of her tongue, with such a grace of modesty, as
might clear suspicion of ungracious action, when her eyes like stars did
sparckle in the little Element of her face, and her hayres like wiers, might
wind up the thoughts of loves heart, while her words like Oracles, should
conjure honor to loyalty, to behold such a queene-like creature in the
richest of her array. to read her in the excellency of her wit, and hear her
in the excellency of her music, were such a contentment to the spirit of
good understanding, as would make the heart to rise, to the highest of his
worlds joy: and, is this to be seen at home in a cupboord, or a Corne-lofte,
or a Cow pastor? no, no, I confess, flesh and blood, red and white, and
lovely brown, will do well where are no better: but a country dance is but
a Iigge to a stately Pauen: no father had you seen that which I have seen,
and know that I know, you would long as well as I to see that I would see: for
an old Man's lesson, is knowledge by experience, and a young Man's Love is
variety of understanding, which is the fruit of Travail.


Chre. Well Son, I said it not for naught, that Boys in these days, have
wit at will, God send them grace to use it well: but, now I have heard you at
leisure, give me leave to answer you a little touching contentment: you say,
every house is a home, and every Country alike to a resolved spirit, but he
that sells Land at home, to look over Land abroad, when his money is spent,
and he has neither house nor home, what then follows, but, insteede of
content, play Mal-Content: and for the commodity of Land, better have an Acre
of land in Cheape-side, then a hundredth in the Land of waste, for it is either
under water, or subject to drowning, and therefore tell not me of your
outlandish earth nor the fruits of it: for, I can have as good herbs and
fruits here at my door for my money, as you can have any where in your
travail, I know it: for I have heard the^ say it, that have tried it: why?
have not we our Cherry, our Strawberry, our Raspesse, our Goose-berrie and our
Mulberie, and I know not how many berries, as the Season serves? have not we
the Plumme, the Pear, the Apricocke, the Apple, the warden, and the Quince,
the Walnut and the Filberd, and the Hasell Nut, the Medler, and the Ches-nut,
and al in their seasons, growing in our countries, and brought to our markets?
and are they not cheaper here then to travail for them, I know not whether?
Indeed, I think we have them not in such abundance, for I hold no such
necessity: now, for Mineralles, I do not think but you may find more Gold
and Silver above the ground in one Acre in Cheape-side, then you may find in
ten of the best Acres in your Travail: and therefore, for Earth I think we
have as good at home, as you can find abroad: and so much for your earth. Now
for your fine worms, and your worming Maids, it is a pretty idle thing to
stand peering on a Worm, but, perhaps we have worms at home, that wind
themselves up in Silk, though they be not carried to Market, one of which are
better worth then a hundredth of your worms, and for Maids, if our maids be
not as cleanely on the market day, as they are on a Holy Day, trust me no
more, and I am sorry you can say no more for yours: for they that be not
Sluts, will be neat, and there is an end: and for your Silks and Veluets,
we have our Sattens here with such a glass, that you may almost see your
face in it, upon the backeside of a Vardingale: and therefore talk no more of
it: we have it here without travail, as well as you have it thore with your
travail, and so content your self: Now for your Parrats, your Apes, your
Whales and your tricks, some of them we hear speak, and other we see dance,
and other we hear of, and what care we for more? they that will be fools to
give money for fancies, let the^ alone with their follies, I wish not to
Travail for any such toys: Now for your Camp and your City besiedged,
how gallant soever the sightes seem pleasing to your humor, yet I think the
heart of a wise man will be better pleased with a poor peace, then a Rich
War: though commonly War be the cause of poverty, and peace of wealth:
Now for your wenching humor, so fine and so wise, so fair, and so sweet in
her looks, and her words, and her tricks, and her toys, I thank God, the
thought of that world is done with me, and I would it were never to be
thought on with you: for let an Old Man's lesson be what it will, a fair
wench is a young Man's Love, and so I allow it should be: but then I would
have it near home, that I might Judge the better of it, for there are as I
hear, so many Painters of Women's faces, so many Instructers of Women's tongues,
and so many flatterers of Women's humors, that if a man have not both his
insight and his outsight, he may pay home for his blindness: and therefore,
let Wiers, And Oracles, and such Poetical figures or fictions pass, and for a
flaxen or a brown hair, for a chaste eye, and an honest face, for a good
complexion, and a gracious disposition, I think all the world is not better
provided for good Wenches then our Country, talk of your far Countries what
you list, and therefore I see not how you are benefited by your Travail, more
then to have liberty to tell more then many well believe: but let me ask you
one thing in your Travail, did you not read any Ancient Histories?


Pam. Yes diverse: and one which me thinks were worthy to be read of
daily: of Licurgus the great Lawmakers.


Chre. What might that be, that you wish so to call in memory?


Pam. The Law that he first made when he came into the City of Athens, that
all the Fools and Iesters should be whipped out of the City.


Chre That would go sore now I tell you, for they thrive strangely in these
days: but tell me, have you not read, nor heard the opinions of the
Philosophers, touching their discriptions of some especial matters?


Pam. Yes, I have read certain discriptions of opinions, but, I find not
their names set down: I have read a strange description of a Woman.


Chre. And not of a man?


Pam. Oh yes and that to good purpose.


Chre. I pray thee if thou can remember them, recite them.


Pam. First I read that a woman was the crack of a Man's wit, and the trouble
of his understanding, the hardest part of his body, and the worst part of his
substance, Natures Baby, and reasons Torture.


Chre. And what of Man?


Pam. I read that Man is the Pride of Nature, the play of Time, a Woman's
Fool, and an Apes Schoolmaster.


Chre. And what of Riches?


Pam. That they are the Plague of wit, the subduer of reason, the tempter of
Nature, and the abuse of time.


Chre. And what of poverty?


Pam. That it is the Badge of Patience, the trial of virtue, the Touchstone of
grace, and the punishment of mercy.


Chre. Good Notes, but whom have you noted the most happy in the world?


Pam. The Fool.


Chre. Your Reason?


Pam. Because he knows no unhappiness.


Chre. And who most unhappy?


Pam. The Athist, because he wants grace.


Chre. Whom the Richest?


Pam. The wise: bcause, knowledge is a high Treasure.


Chre. And who the wisest?


Pam. The faithful, because they are half way in Heaven.


Chre. What is the best government?


Pam Love.


Chre* And what is the best punishmen?


Pam. Fasting.


Chre. What is the best Law?


Pam. Justice.


Chre. And what the best pleading?


Pam Truth.


Chre. Short, and sweet, I like all this well: now tell me what is the best
Beauty?


Pam. Virtue: for that it makes the foul fair, and the fair gracious.


Chre. What the best honor?


Pam. Wisdom, for that it serves God, and gouernes the world.


Chre. What have thou read to be the greatest torment of the world?


Pam. An unquiet wife, because a man is bound to her.


Chre. And what the greatest comfort?


Pam. A quiet conscience, because it keeps the soul in peace.


Chre. What find you the most precious?


Pam. The word of God, for it directes the soul.


Chre. And what next?


Pam. Time, for it is wisdoms rule.


Chre. And what is most grievous?


Pam. A frustrate hope, for it grieves the heart.


Chre. And what most joyful?


Pam, A settled faith, for it is fearelesse.


Chre. Which is the most witty creature in the world?


Pam. A Woman because she can make a Fool of a man.


Chre. And which is the most foolish?


Pam. A wicked man, because he leaves heaven for hell.


Chre. What hold you the least worth?


Pam. Vanity, because it is a hurt of wit.


Chre. What virtue hold you the greatest?


Pam. Patience, for it keeps the Spirit in temper.


Chre. And what vice the vilest?


Pam, Drunkenness, for it makes a Beast of a Man*


Chre. What is the best studdie?


Pam. Divinity, for it is the School of Wisdom.


Chre. What next?


Pam. Philosophy, for it is the School of Nature.


Chre. What think thou of Love?


Pam. A trouble of wit.


Chre. What think thou of beauty?


Pam. A color.


Chre. Of Youth?


Pam. A Spring.


Chre. Of Age?


Pam. A Blast.


Chre. Of Honor?


Pam. A Title*


Chre. Of power?


Pam. A charge.


Chre. Of Wealth?


Pam. A care.


Chre. Of life?


Pam. A Travail.


Chre. Of death?


Pam. A rest.


Chre. Truly Son what thou have benefited thy body by thy travail, I know
not, but by the Travail of thy spirit, I see thou have so much bettered thy
knowledge, that I care not whether thou go, so thou returnest so well home:
and were it not to weary thee to much, I would ask thee a few more questions.


Pam. What please you I will answer the best I can and crave pardon, if al be
not to your liking.


Chre. No thou can not displease my love, that joys not a little in thine
understanding: and therefore, let me first ask thee, where do thou think is
the most danger in the world?


Pam. At the Sea: for the Winds, and the Waves, the Rocks and the sands do
often threaten destruction.


Chre. And where most safety to live?


Pam. In heaven: for in the world there is none.


Chre. But in the world where is the sweetest life?


Pam. In the University: for there are the best wits, and the best rules.


Chre. And where the vainest life?


Pam. Among women: for there is but loss of time


Chre. And where the costliest?


Pam. Among Courtiers: for there is much pride in apparel, and great causes of
expense.


Chre. And where the Idlest?


Pam. In the Ordinaries where there is naught but talk, and play, and Cheer.


Chre. Where is the quiet life?


Pam. In the Country, where wit may feed the spirit in contemplation.


Chre. Where the noblest?


Pam. In the wars: where valor may show mercy, and wisdom gain honor.


Chre. And where the most blessed?


Pam. In the Church, where prayer and fasting finds admirable comfort*


Chre Well said my good Boy, but out of thine own Country, tell me where
thou did find most contentment?


Pam. In Italy: for there I found the Merchant rich, the Soldier valiant,
the Courtier Affable, the Lawyer Learned, and the Craftes-man cunning, the
Women fair, and the Children toward: the earth fruitful, the fruit
pleasant, the Climat temperate, and the Labourer painful. I cannot say but in
other Countries I found diverse of these, but not al, so much in any.


Chre. And where most coffeehouse?


Pam. In Barberie, where the Soldier is bloody, the Jew lives with the
Gentill, the Merchant is of no pleasing carriage, the Courtier I never saw, the
Women are not beautiful, the Climat is hot, and the Soil but even so, so: and
in sum, little good but Hides and Sugar.


Chre. I hope thou did make no long stay there:


Pam. No Sir, nor ever intend to come there again: I had rather make Salt my
Sugar, then Travail thither again for it.


Chre. Where did thou make thy longest aboade?


Pam. In Italy, and there, except at home with you, I had rather spend my
life, then in many places of the world: and in Venice of any place there.


Chre. Your reason?


Pam. Because there I may feed mine eyes with many fair objects, and my
mind with many deep considerations: to behold the platform and Situation
of the City, how it stands environed with the Sea: then to view the stately
buildings of stones, as well in their Churches as their Houses: upon the Realta,
to see the variety of strangers, to observe the people, their habites, their
Languages, and their carriages: to see the treasurer of S. Marco, the provision
in their Arsenale, and the state in the Dukes Palace: to note the strict and
civil manner of their government, to converse with fine wits, to accompany
kind natures, to behold their fair Ladies, and to enjoy the liberty of
conscience, to take a Gondolo, and cross a smooth Sea, to their sweet Rivers,
and at pleasure to take the air of their pleasant villages: to feed of their
sweet fruits, and drink of their delicate wines: with other needeles things to
talk of, that except this country, and your house, I know no such place of
contentment.


Chre. Thou say well, these causes, of content may well make thee in love with
the Country: but I am glad to hear thee except thine own country and my
house, where I doubt not, thou shall receive as much true content, as either
Italy, or all the world can afford thee: at least if I can devise it, it shall
be so: but if it cannot be, it shall be my content, that thou shall have it
where thou will, or can devise it: but, being now abroad, and supper will
not be ready this hour: I pray thee recite me some pretty History, or tell
me some pretty tale of somewhat that has passed in the way of thy passage: I
care not of what nature it be, it shall content me.


Pam. Upon the sudden to call to mind any history of ancient time, that
may be worth the recounting, I shall have somewhat to do: but of some such
matter as has passed in my Travail, whereof I have been either an eye witness,
or had perfect intelligence, that I may tell you the truth, I care not if I
acquaint you with the discourse.


Chre, I pray thee do, and thou say well, for Trauailers are given (some
say) to begull the world with gudgins: especially such as long after news and
to hear strange things, though they neither understand them in the telling of
them, nor can remember a word of them, but for thy self, though I were but a
friend, yet I see, such is thy knowledge of good, as will not let thee commit
so great an evil: and therefore, on gods name say what thou will, it shall
content me, I will believe it, and thank thee for it, for it will be a good
mean to pass away the time, and to make our walk seem the shorter.


Pam. Sir to tell you of a bloody fight, a defeated army, the Sack of a
City, or the wrack of a Ship, were more lamentable the^ comfortable: to
tell you of a monster, that had bin the death of a man, would but move pity
and grief to tell you of the plague in a country, and the ruin of a
kingdom, would but be a breeding of melancholy: to tell you of a Shepherd
and his Dog, would but show you that you see every day: to talk of a Fox and a
Goose, why the country is too full of them every where: to tell you of a
Wolf and a Lamb, why it would but make you pray for your flock: and therefore
to leave al idle and unfitting humors, I will tell you in my opinion, a true and
pretty discourse of somewhat that happened in a City, where I spent some time,
which I hope shall not dislike you.


Chre. I pray thee do.


Pam. Then Sir you shall understand, in the City of Venice, a place in which
I spent some time, it was my hap, among other contentme^ts to fall acquainted
with a young Ge^tlema^, much of mine own years, had bin at the university,
seen something in travail, and there finding many pleasing spirits, thought
good to spend some time among the^: it fell out one morning among other, going
toward S. marco in my company, passing by a house of a great Magnifico or
gentlema^ly marcha^t, he chanced to espy, in an entry within the door, a
pretty, nay a young gentleman talking with a fair damsel, whom he imagined to
be the young man's mistress, but it fell out she was his sister: now the young
gentleman well acquainted with my friend, beckned him into the house, and gave
not only him, but me also* for his sake, a very kind welcome, and procured no
less at the hands of his fair sister: who^ though far short of her desert, I
will describe in her worthiness her years about twenty the prime of natures pride
and virginities honor: beautiful, so far, as a creature can be imagined. wise
with that modesty that made her wit admirable: and kind, with that care that
made humility gracious* her portion though not for a prince, yet able to make a
poor man wealthy: and for her proportion, the painter might be graced in her
counterfaite* loved she was of all that knew her, hated of none that could know
her: served of many that were happy to attend her, and especially beloved of
one that did truly honor her, who was the young man whom as my self I loved:
often did he solicit his suite with such secret proof of his affection, as
made her Parents no less willing to entertain his kindness, then her his
love: his speech was sildom and not much, his letters few and not teadious, his
gifts not many, but of worth: and thus far wrought her favor with his
affection, that for women though he saw many, yet he loved none but her: her
virtue made him vow chastity, her beauty were his eyes bliss, her modesty,
was his loves praise, and her love, his life's honor: she knew it, and was
pleased in it* I knew it, and love him for it: her parents used him as a
Son, her Brother as himself, and she as her Brother: now affection grew to
passion, and patience to join with reason, for the confirmation of a mutual
comfort: but what fortune does in these courses, too many in their crosses can
witness: he was far from his parents, and she at home with her friends:
loath he was to put her to adventure of her honor, with his fortune, though
in him she reposed her worlds felicity: loath she was to leave him for want
of what with him, and yet her care was such of him, that she would be ruled
by him: and therefore having betwixt themselves sealed with their hands, the
infringible band offaith and troth in the heart, after a supper in her fathers
house, and a breake-fast in her brothers lodging, as well as love could give
him leave, he took leave of his fair lady, to look home toward his father,
to whom he would impart his suite, of whom he would obtain a blessing, and
from whom he would return to her, with his fortune: To tell you the manner
of their parting, if ever you were in the like perplexity, would but revive a
forgotten passion: but, when swallowed sighs, and bleeding tears had almost
marred all on both sides, her brother carried her away, and I brought him away,
and so went the world away: Now many a night since have I lain with him, and
heard him deliver such due praises ofher worthiness, and sigh out such deep
sorrows of his own unhappiness, that if I could have done him good, I could
not have denied him, and not being able, I could not but sorrow with him.


Chre. Alas poor Gentleman, where did you leave him?


Pam. Not far from his fathers house.


Chre. And does his father love him?


Pam. Or else he were unnatural.


Chre. And does he love his Father?


Pam. Dearly, I will swearefor him.


Chre. And will not his father help him?


Pam. He is fearful to charge him.


Chre. And do thou love him?


Pam. As my self: and dearest of any but your self.


Chre. What will serve him?


Pam, A thousand Crowns.


Chre. I will give it him, and thee as much more to accompany him*


Pam. And will you not repent it when you know him?


Chre. Why, I know he is not mine enemy, if he be thy friend: and if thou
love him, I will think nothing too dear for him?


Pam, Imagine it were my self:


Chre. Have I ought too dear for my Son, that could find me out such a
Daughter?


Pam. Then dear Father pardon my circumstance, and favor my suite, your son
is the man* my Mistress the Lady: and in the performance of your word, lies
the hope of my comfort.


Chre. Say thou me so Boy? gramercie for thy merry tale: I will be as good
as my word to thee and better in my love to thee: I will go to her with thee,
and make up the match for thee: Thy valor with her Beauty, thy learning with
her wit, thy honesty with her virtue, thy land with her money, I hope shall
make a happy conjunction: for though thou were a stranger, thou shall be found
no beggar: and now thy Mother is dead, and thy sister is married, I care not in
my old age to see a little of the world with thee: but yet by the way, now thy
wooing is past, for thy wiuing let me tell thee: If she govern thee, thou art
gone: Lord have mercy upon thee: and if she will be governed by thee, then
beware of a Fools Paradise, for Women have stomachs: and if they cannot
pranke, they will powte, if they be fair they are either idle or worse
occupied, if foul either sullaine, or uncomfortable: if rich, either proud or
froward: if witty, in danger of humors: if fantastic, out of question
Amorous: if young, wilful: if aged: wayward: Now tell me how will thou choose a
wife? if thou fit not her humor she will frown, if she fit not thine, thou will
fret, and therefore though wit be gracious, and beauty be precious, and
kindenes be comfortable, and virtue be honorable, and wealth do well, and love
be a wonderful thing, and all this be in a woman, yet, when use makes wearines,
and wearines makes loathsomnes, and constancy is so cumbersom that it hinders
much conte^tment: when she falls deaf, or thou blind, or she sick, and thou
poor, or she be of one mind or thou of an other, that complaints must be
made, causes must be decided, quarrels must be ended, enemies must be
reconciled, or parties parted, and how the^? when will or want breeds woe or
wickedness, and love is an other thing then has been talked ofin the old time,
what then? swearing and staring, scolding and brawling, cursing and banning,
and crying: oh fine life for a mad dog, when the child bawles in the Cradle,
the wife brawles at the table, the nurse wralles in the kitchen, and the maid
mumbles in the seller, where are you then? in a pitiful wood, alas the day
that ever I did it: there is no help for it, and therefore in time look to
it* if thy mistress be as thou say, God keep her so: if she be not and hold
not, if thou say thou love her, I pray heartely that it hold it so: but
hope says the best, and I will believe it, and fear says the worst, and I
will defy it only this my Son, let me tell thee touching the managing of a
wife, maintaining love with a wife, and the assured notes of a loving wife: and
first for the managing of a wife note her years, her wit, her disposition, and
her acquaintance: if she be young, be careful but not jealous of her, make not
two beds with her, except in sickness, and that not fained: let her not want
such company, as you think fit for her, for idleness and solitarines, put many
thoughts into a woman's head, that may anger her husband at the heart: why a
dream sometime of unkindness will put strange passions into some woman's head,
and therefore awake let her not be without company to exercise her wits in good
conference: least she be worse employed in ill cogitations: let her be
apparrelled to thy calling, but no further, for fear of pride, and then a
worse plague: let her feed holsomely, but not to daintily: for, as snow
enge^dreth hail, a licoris tongue will have a covetous mind: you know my
meaning, let her want no necessaries, nor feed her with superfluities, welcome
her friends that are honest, and keep her from tatling Gossips, make some
commend her modesty in her hearing, but unseen: cherish al good humors in her*
let her lack no silk, cruel, thread, nor flax, to work on at her pleasure,
force her to nothing* rather prettily chide her from her labor, but in any
wise commend what she does if she be learned and studious, persuade her to
translation, it will keep her from Idleness, and it is a cunning kind task:
if she be unlearned, commend her huswifery, and make much of her carfulness,
and bid her servants take example at their mistress: wink at an ill word, at
least if it grow of ignorance: and sometime feed her humor, so it be not to
thine own dishonor: let her use thy purse but not be privy to thy state: If
she be given to play, take heed of a trick, and if it be at Tables, look
she bear not false: at board be merry with her, abroad kind to her, always
loving to her, and never bitter to her for patient Grizell: is dead long ago,
and women are flesh and blood, though some have little wit and reason: if she
be wise observe her, if virtuous love her, if kind requite her, and if
constant make too much of her, for she is a Jewel, and more worth then you can
imagine her: believe me Son what I tell thee, for I have daunced the dance
before thee, and though I will not blow the horn to thee, yet if thou hunt a
good chase, I can teach thee: Tush though Boys be mad wagges, yet an old
Dog bites sore: and therefore, my good Boy, hear and note what I tell thee:
thou will find it will be good for thee: if she coll and kiss thee, and hang
on thy lips, take heed she do not flatter thee, and look who is behind
thee: if she powte, and lowre at thee, she means no good to thee: words of
course may be good, but course words are naught: take heed of a leering eye,
and glibbe tongue, for they are commonly like a crosse-bowe, soon bent: take
heed of a proud spirit and a foul mouth, for they are most of them either
costlye, or unquiet: take heed of a swearer and a drunkard, for they will
surely bring thee to destruction: but what need I to give thee warning of
these woes, when thou have made a choice of so many comforts? and therefore I
will only hope the best, and believe it, and help thee in what I can to it.


Pam. My good Father, how much I hold my felfe bound to your kindenes, I
cannot express, but will endeavor in my duty to make you find: for though I
am assuredly persuaded of my judgment, yet shall my wit give place to your
experience: and such and so many are the merry tricks of these days, that
four pair of spectacles will scarcely help one pair of eyes, to see
clearly into the true constancy of a kind woman: for though in my mistress, I
hope it is not so, yet naturally in many, it is so: they have strange humors in
painting their faces, in borrowing their hayres, and changing their minds:
why, sure I think they are mad, when they think themselves wise: when
running from God to the Devil, they can cuckolde their husbands with knaves,
though sometime money makes such matches, that Beggars live better lives: and
it is a fine jest, to see how the devil teaches them, to excuse their own
sin, as thus: flesh is frail, these wicked men are full of temptation, and my
husband is such a, and so forth: but this will not serve, when time shall
serve, that they shall answer for their service to God, and their husbands:
but I hope mine is not so, nor will prove so: nor any honest husband is so ill
wiued, nor any honest wife so ill minded: it is but a tale surmised to wrong
poor Wenches, and fright poor fools, and therefore such as are good, God
hold them so, and such as are to blame let them do no more so.


Chre. Amen Boy say I to: but I doubt the worse, therewill be tricks in the
world, that every man shall not be acquainted with: but since we are entered
into this same loue-talke, though it be a matter past my reach many year ago,
yet to refresh an old wit, let me ask thee one question?


Pam. As many as please you.


Chre. If love be in the world, where do thou think he lives?


Pam. In men's hearts and women's eyes.


Chre. How is that found?


Pam. By women's tongues, and men's wits.


Chre. How so?


Pam. Why their eyes speak kindly, and men's hearts believe it: and their
tongues bewitch men's wits, that are carried away with it.


Chre. Whither are they carried?


Pam. To their wills.


Chre, And what to do?


Pam. To undo themselves.


Chre. Is it so in all?


Pam. For the most part.


Chre. How then is it with thee?


Pam. Far otherwise* for when you shall see the subject of my choice, I doubt
not but you will say, if there be a Phoenix in a woman, and an Angel in an
earthly creature, she is one.


Chre. Oh but Son, speak neither poetically, nor profanely, for the Phoenix
is but a fiction, and an Angel is a heavenly creature, if it be a good one, or
else I know not what to say to it, whether it may be in a woman or not: for
let me tell thee, a woman being the weaker vessel, I wonder how (having a
stronger spirit then her husbands) she does not burst with the force of it?


Pam, No, no, as you say, it may be a worse spirit then her own that does
haunt her but by fits, to try her husbands patience, which being found, puts
the fury to flight, and then she becomes her self again: but from such
spirits in women that use men thus, good Lord deliver us.


Chre. Amen say I boy, for thy sake, for I have done with them: but tell me now
the reason of patience, why, a man than sees his misery, knows his abuse, and
will abide it, why he should so befoole himself to digest it.


Pam. Because, in seeking to help himself, he may hurt himself, and of two
evils the least is to be chose^, for shame cannor be recovered, grief cannot
be put off, murder cannot be answered, and therefore a fault must be winked
at: and in time either age or weakness, will make the^ weary of it that use it,
and then repentance makes the perfect creature: virtue is a divine guifte, and
every one has it not: Chastity is good for Alcamistrie, but that is a long
study: wisdom lines but with a few, and therefore a great many must be borne
withal, and honesty is such a Jewel, that there is little money to be
gotten by it* and yet there are wise, and fair, rich, and virtuous women, and
make men happy that can happen on them: among which it may be that your
mistress may be, and I hope will be one of them.


Pam. Oh Father doubt it not, for a stayed eye, a natural beauty, a soft
speech, a strait proportion, a gracious gesture, and an humble mind, show a
true heart, a good wit, a blessed soul, and an excellent creature, and such is
my Mistress.


Chre. And yet a stayed eye, may have a strange sight, a blushing cheek, an
ill forehead, a soft speech, a slye meaning, and an humble mind, a covered
craft: but so I hope has not your mistress.


Pam Oh no, variety of knowledge, solitary walks, holy observance and
necessary exercise: show a careful wit, a contemplative spirit, a zealous
heart, and an industrious mind, and such has my mistress.


Chre. And yet variety may breed vanity, solitarines may shadow pride, holy
shows may hide hipocricie, and exercise may prove cunning: but such I hope
isnot your mistress.


Pam. No Father, virtue and vanity, are odd, Solitarines and pride are of a
contrary humor, holiness and Ipocricie, are contraries, and labor and craft
are of sundry natures, and my mistress and an ordinary creature are different
in their dispositions: and therefore I beseech you, if you speak of the best
sort, let her not be left out, and if of the worst, think not of her name,
for she has no place in their imperfections.


Chre. I like thee well boy, I see persuasion does well in affection, thou will
stand for thy Mistress against the whole world: it is well done, for if she be
worthy thy praise stick to her, if thou be worthy her favor, never leave
her: but now leaving this love tale till we come where the matter is further
to be talked of, let me have an other bowte with you, for a few points of your
opinion touching certain propositions, that I mean to make you.


Pam. Dear father your Son will be ready to perform his best to your
pleasure: and therefore say what shall please you.


Chre. Tell me then, if you must leave your father, or your mistress, which
would you leave?


Pam. My Mistress.


Chre. Your reason.


Pam. Because I may have such an other mistress, but such an other father I
cannot have.


Chre. But if your Mistress were your wife, how then?


Pam. I must leave Father and mother, and cleave to my wife.


Chre. If you must loose your land or your love, which would you?


Pam. My Land: for I may purchase other Land but I cannot purchase such an
other Love.


Chre. If you were without a wife, you may be rich, and by a wife shall be
poor: which will you?


Pam. A wife for Godliness is great riches to him that is content with that he
has.


Chre. If you may be wise, and will not, and would be wise and cannot, which
would you choose?


Pam. The may be, for where there is power, we may be persuaded, but where
there is no power, will is not to be spoken of.


Chre. If example teach you, and you conceive it not, or if you conceive it,
and regard it not, which is the worse?


Pam. Not to conceive, for will is sooner cured then wit, of any imperfection.


Chre. If a friend deceive you, and an enemy help you, whom will you love
best?


Pam. My friend* for they do both again their wills, and the one out of no
good, the other out of no evil mind.


Chre. Thus much for a friend and a wife: Now to other matters: what do thou
think most needful in the world?


Pam. Honesty there is so little of it, that it is in few men's hands.


Chre. And what least needful?


Pam. Villainy, there is so much, that many ha^g for it.


Chre. What is most comfortable in the world?


Pam, Air, for it maintains life.


Chre. What most profitable?


Pam. Money, for it gains thousands.


Chre. What least profitable?


Pam. Pride, for it spendes much.


Chre. Which is the vylest creature in the world?


Pam. The Cucko, for she kiles the sparow that hatched her


Chre. And which the kindest?


Pam, The Pelican, for she killes herself to feed her young.


Chre. Who is the truest lover in the world?


Pam. The Turtle, for she never changes whom she chooses.


Chre. Which is the most dogged bird in the world?


Pam. The Turkey-Cocke for he beats his hen when he has trodden her.


Chre. which is the most foolish bird?


Pam. The Woodcocke, for she is ever showing her tail.


Chre. Which is the best beast in the world?


Pam. The Unicorn, for his horn kills poison, and he never hurts a Virgin.


Chre. Which is the most stately?


Pam. The Lion, because he stoopes all other with his look


Chre. Which is the most crafty?


Pam. The Fox, when he scrapes the huntsman.


Chre. And what the strangest?


Pam. An Ape, because he is like a man,


Chre. And which is the most monstrous Beast?


Pam. A wittoll, because he has a world of horns.


Chapter Well said, which is the nimblest beast in the world


Pam. A Camelion, for he can turn himself into diverse colors in an instant.


Chre. Which is the most profitable beast in the world


Pam. An Ox, for when he has drawn all the year, he will make beef against
Christmas.


Chre. What is the most unprofitable Beast?


Pam. A Wolf, for he is good for nothing while he lives, nor dead, but for his
skin.


Chre. Which is the sweetest Beast of the world?


Pam. A Ciuit Cat.


Chre. And which is the most unsweet?


Pam. A dog when he has eaten carrion.


Chre. Well, thus I see thou art able to answer me to good purpose, to
whatsoever I shall propound thee* but leaving this ticktacke, shall we go to
some other game?


Pam. What please you.


Chre. Then let me be merry with thee: and to my questions answer me
conceitedly.


Pam. As I can without offense.


Bhre. Then first to your Gramer rules, how many parts of speech are there?


Pam. Two, to speak well or speak ill.


Chre. What is a nowne substantive?


Pam. A rich man, for he can stand alone without help.


Chre. A nowne adjective?


Pam. A Beggar, that lives of alms, for he cannot stand alone.


Chre. What is a Verb?


Pam. Love: for when you have declined it to the full, it makes nothing but a
noise: for it has no substance.


Chre Well, leaving further to speak of these grounds of learning, let me ask
you, when an english is given to be made in Latin, what is to be done?


Pam. No harm, if it be well made.


Chre. How do the Nominative case, and the verb agree?


Pam. Better then many neighbors, that can hardlye live together.


Chre. How understand you the Plural number in one person?


Pam, Two ways: one in haec homo the common of two or three: or in a Wench
great with child, before she know her husband.


Chre. How make you a figure of a Cipher?


Pam. When a fool keeps a place among wise men.


Chre. And how a Cipher of a figure?


Pam. Of a wisema^ without money: for a purse without money is a body without
life.


Chre. How figure you a Gerunde?


Pam. In hope, ever doing, and never done.


Chre. And how a Participle?


Pam. In hap, done well or ill.


Chre. And how make you a broken number?


Pam. With sighs, and sobbes.


Chre. And how a full point?


Pam. At the grave: because I can go no further at least in this world.


Chre. A good place for them that walk right, but for other, it is a sorry
gate to a heavy house: but leaving those points to men of more divine
studies, let us a little more talk of the course of the world: and tell me
what is the reason, why one man that has no wit, shall have much money, and an
other that is very wise, can get little?


Pam Because the one has gotten understanding, and the other has gotten to
stand under.


Chre. Indeed thou say well, the wise man stands over, and the covetous
stands under his money: but tell me thy opinion, why should a knave prosper,
and an honest man go down the wind?


Pam. Because the one seeks his paradise here, and the other in an other
world.


Chre What do thou think most beautiful in the world?


Pam. A fair day.


Chre. And what most uncomfortable on the earth?


Pam* Emprisonment.


Chre. And what most pleasing to nature?


Pam. Liberty.


Chre. And what most grievous?


Pam. Sickness.


Chre. What is the best substance of a Sillogisme?


Pam. Truth.


Chre. And what the best proof of a good wit?


Pam. To maintain it.


Chre. Thou say well, but I fear I trouble thee with to many questions,
and therefore not to try thee too much, I will only tell thee a word or two,
of my opinion of the world, and so we will go into supper.


Pam. I thank you sir: I shall be glad to hear it, and hope, not hastily to
forget it.


Chre. I will tell thee: I think the world, a maze of wit, a walk of will, a
trouble of reason, a poison of nature, an enemy of rest, a labor of man, a
Laborinthe of time, a wilderness of creatures, and a pilgrimage of patience:
where the wise govern best, and the wicked thrive most, the rich have most
power, and the poor most misery: where pride makes her triumph, vanity
selles her wares, folly hunts after fortune, and honor follows wealth: where
children have long breeding, Women bring charge, and men Travail toward death:
Learning breeds studdie, Art breeds labor, and Sickness weakness: the
Sea is dangerous, the Air infectious, the earth laborous, and the fire is
terrible: In sum, no felicity in it nor happiness, but to leave it, and
therefore, when thou have as well past it as I, and know it as I do, Coelum
virtutis patria, et non est hic mihi mundus: Heaven is virtues Country, and
here is no world for me: but for that thou art young, and some things are to
be done in this world (I hope) before thou shall go out of it, I will first
provide for thy content in the happy course of thy wished comfort, and then
leave thee to the heavenly contemplation of thy spirits happiness: but I see
my servant coming toward us; the messenger of my stomachs attendance, and
the Sun is toward his declination, and therefore for this time I will trouble
thee no further, but only rejoice in thy happy health, and that I have heard
from thee: I see it is even supper time, and therefore let us away.


Pam. I will wait upon you.


FINIS.
Imprinted at London for Edward White, and are to be sold at his Shop near
the little North-doore of S. Paul's Church, at the Sign of the Gun. 1605.


