STRANGE NEWS OVT OF DIVERSE COUNTRIES, Never discovered till of late, by a
strange Pilgrim in those parts.

The Pilgrims


LONDON, Printed by W. Jones for George Fayerbeard, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Royal Exchange. 1622.

TO THE READER.
News are more told then true, especially if they come far off; and if they
be of State, they are dangerous to meddle with; if of home-spunne thread, it is
held little worth. Stale news are not worth the telling; but a new matter
never heard of before, will be hearkened after, though they be not worth the
hearing: but yet a new thing of small price may be every man's money, especially
if it take a liking in the humors of common people. Such ware I have sent to
the market, news from a strange country, of strange matters and stranze
people, and among all, of one chief Ruler of the unruly. What is to be read
and understood, follows in the leaves following; which if your patience will
give you leave to peruse, you may find more matter to laugh at, then imitate.
Such as it is, I leave it to your censure, and so rest

Your wel-wishing friend, B. N.

STRANGE NEWS OVT OF DIVERSE COUNTRIES, Never discovered till of late, by a
strange Pilgrim in those parts.
IN a strange Land, never found out till now of late in this present time,
there was a kind of people that had great heads and little wits, and strong
bodies, but weak hearts. The men were only known by their shapes from
monsters, and the women only by their tongues from pictures: the aged spent
their time most in weariness, and the youthful in wantonness: their Cities and
Towns were of ancient buildings; their houses large within, and without
beautiful, many rooms richly furnished, and with many pictures but few people:
their gardens and orchards so full of flowers and fruits, and so finely
dressed, planted and pruned, and weeded, that it seemed they made their
palaces their Paradise: for by their hellish courses it seemed that they
thought of no other heaven.

Nature being (as it were) the goddess of their worship, when supernatural was
too high for their capacities their apparel of diverse colors according to the
variety of their humors their Churches like shops, and their wares bables;
their inventions Apish, and their fashions foolish; while their wisdom going
no further then the world, kept them from the wealth above the world. Their
language more full of eloquence then truth, and their actions of more craft
then conscience. Their Priests read a language, that often gauelleth their
own understandings; and their Religion is without rule of grace. Their
devotion is full of darkness; for they cannot see in the day time without a
candle: and their prayers are by the dozen, when if they miss-tell one, they
think all the rest lost. And for Saints, they have so many to serve, that the
devil will not let them come at God.

Meetings they have many, upon small matters. Their music is most in a Jews
trumpe, and their dances are all without measure. Feasts they make many times,
when their flesh is Guls, and their fish Gudgeons.

The rich are for the most part covetous, and the poor patient: for punishment
is much more common then charity. Cuckolds they have in community; for they
are not so wise as to account of honesty: and for wittals, they have it grown
to such a custom, that it never troubles their conceit. Their wooing is like
bargaining; for their purses make their matches: and jealousy so holds in
love, as kills the comfort of kindness; when the agents for flesh, break the
order of fasting days.

Wars they have seldom, and their quarrels most upon the cup; their great
Ordinance are Pot-guns, and their small shot half Cans. Their fields are
commonly cellers, where they are so overcome with kindness, that their forces
are all overthrown. When they are to travel, they have horses, but most of
them Hobbies, which commonly they buy at Faires for small prices: and some few
Hackneys, that are such T^^s, that they will start at every Butterfly, and
fall down ere a man be well mounted. Their riding is without spurs; for
their Nagges are willing enough for their way.

Asses they have many, which bear great burdens; and when they have labored
them all day, they walk them at night; and they feed them poorly. Their dogs
are commonly little ones, and they are most of them called Fancies, which when
they grow old they knock them on the heads. Cattle they have store, and most
of them Cowes; for there is hardly a house without a Calfe: and Swine a world;
for every Stie has a Sow or two in her. Birds they have many, but their chief
pleasure is in Wagtailes, that are pretty fowls, and ever pidling in water
plashes. Cuckoes they have great store, but they sing only in May; and Parrots
very many, that talk strange things in their languages: and Cock-Sparrowes so
many, that they can scarce find Hens for their treading. Duckes and Geese in
abundance, and they breed out of measure. Other birds they have, as Tittimouses
and Robin Redbreasts, Larks and Buntings, which were often carried to the
markets, and bought for small prices. Ringdoues they had many, but Turtles very
few. Exercises they have many but chiefly wrestling, when they have more foiles
then fair falls. Sometime they use riding of the wild Mare, shooing of the
Goose, and sho^ting at the Conie. Hunting they use little, but to find a Hare
at squat, a Do at laire, a Fox in a snare, a Mouse in a trap, a Woodcocke in
a spring, or a Blackbird in a pitfall.

Some strange tricks they have to get money with, as to make a Beggar speak
like a Lord, a Fool like a wise man, a Cobbler like a Captain, and a boy like
a wench; but that is but for a time; for when the date of the letter is past,
the counterfeit is conceived, and the Metamorphosis returns to his own shape.
When there are any burials, they mourn much; for the youthful, because they
die so soon; for the aged, because they lived so long: for the wise, because
there is so few left; and for the foolish, because they want company: for the
rich, that they had no more for them, and for the poor, that they might have
prayed for them: wives for their husbands, because they are unprovided of new;
husbands for their wives, because seldom comes the better: parents for
children, because of the loss of hope of their goodness; children for their
parents, for loss of hope of the more goods. But their mournings were not
long, for they lasted not so long as their apparel; for out of sight, out of
mind; and they knew they must live by the living, and not by the dead. The
mony-men are very covetous, for they will not lose the scraping of a kettle;
and the women are very miserable, for when they make broth, though it be very
thin, they will not lose the dropping of their noses. For the young things, they
are as wanton as kitlings, for they will play with a mouse, till they have
wearied her of her life: and for the aged, they are so melancholik, that the
youthful have no pleasure in them. For Lovers, they are so foolish that they
will weep if they have not their wills; but if the Groom get his Bride, he
will so pranke it, and she so prinke it, that while it is honey Moon there will
be such joy, as if Summer should never hear of Winter. Languages they have not
many, and few that speak one well: and for learning, it is most in observation;
for as the Gander goes, the Geese follow. Their husbandry is most in turning
up of fat earth; and their corn is Rye and Oats, which they sow in the
Spring, and reap in the Fall. Diseases they have not many, for labor sweates
out ill humors but for their women they are full of qualmes, especially when
they have declined with the masculine gender.

Their traffic is much for trumpery, and if they save their stocks whole,
they think they have made a good market. Their Adventures are fearful, for
they endanger the body for the soul: and their minds are so fantastic, that
their wits are like weathercocks. Friendship they regard not, but take it as
they find it: and for love, it is so light, that they know not how to take
hold of it. They have among them certain Fortune tellers, which use commonly
among fools: and for knaves, they are so cunning, that they go under the
shadow of honest men. Some odd shauers they have among them, called Die
Doppers, whose diuing or dopping sometimes proves deadly; for they will diue so
closely into your pocket for your purse, that you can hardly see them till they
be upon the gallows. Other kind of close mates there are, that carry Rings in
their mouths, to keep their tongues within their teeth; and they are called
Squiers, but they are only of the order of the Apple: their names are often
recorded in a Court of Correction, where the Registrer of Rogues makes no
little gain of Rascabilians. Other kind of subtle companions there are, which
are called Setters, which finding young heads that are too narrow in the brows,
will feed their humors with such follies, as may either bring them to beggary,
or in the height of an idle brain, for words above wit, break the backs of
their estates, or send them to heaven in a string. Now these, they say, are
great with the Devil, for they do a great deal of mischief in the world:
their names are only found in the notes of destruction, for by their hellish
courses they sell themselves to damnation. Other kind of knick-knackers there
are, which betwixt knave and fool can make an ilfauourd passage through the
world. Scholars they have many, that are perfect in the home-book, who when
they were young, were taught their crosse-row, and to spell and put together,
before they could well read.

They had moreover a kind of Rimers, which were great proficients to the
Players and Pedlers, which are the fools of Poets, for they taste little of
Poetry, more then the last two letters: but for the pot, they may well
challenge that badge, for it is the maintainer of their Muses. Now among all
these, they have a kind of Naturals, which get the start of better wits, for
they are provided for the back and the belly, without care or labor; and
sometime have access where better brains are barred out: and if they be
she-fooles, they are kept fine and cleanly, to come and play with children and
aged people. But among all these, it is set down* that there is one great
fool of their own choosing, that for a certain time has the commandment of
most part of them, who during his time may do very much in little matters; who
with his copesmates, having in his hand the staff of small strength, and
willing to show the greatness of his little wit, for to make a Stable of his
government, to the subjects of his Supernoditie, set down certain Articles to
be observed and carefooly to be looked unto, as they would answer it at their
pleasure, and those scarce worth the printing; yet were to be read in Markets,
Faires, Wakes, and merry meetings, upon such days as should be thought fit
for such a purpose.

First, that no sword should be carried before any of his Magistrates, for all
should be obeyed for good fellowship. Secondly, that no man without legs should
have arms, lest a coat without sleeves should make a Jack an Apes a
Gentleman. Thirdly, that no man should keep two men in one Livery, lest the
coat should not be fit when it came to wearing. Fourthly, that no man should
blush at the telling of a lie, because it was more common then truth. 5. No man
must commit any secrets to a woman, lest it burst her heart before she have
revealed it. 6. No man must kneel to a dead image, while there is one alive
for the purpose. 7. No man must go on foot if he may ride, lest his horse be
founderd in the stable. 8. No Landlord must let his trees grow too long, lest
they prove dotards. 9. No widow must be afraid to marry, because one man may be
like another. 10. No man must die for love, lest a Goose graze on his grave.
11. No man must deny his neighbors Goose his Gander, for fear of wanting
Goslings at Goose Fair. 12. No tradesman must be idle, for fear his wife be
oue^busie^ in providing for implements. 13. No Seaman must keep his frigot
vntrimd, lest she lose the opportunity of a good voyage. 14. No man must be
jealous of his wife, for fear it should not be without cause. 15. Every child
should know is own father, if he could. 16. Every woman should know her
husband from another man, if she likt him. 17. No foul woman should wear any
Mask, for fear of abusing the hope of beauty. 18. No fair woman should be
painted, lest Art should put down nature. 19. Every woman must keep close her
husbands secrets, for fear of losing the comfort of her knowledge. 20. Women
must be honored for their wit, when they make fools of the wisest men. 21.
Women must be pited for their travel, for they take more pains in bearing of
one child, then a man does in getting of twenty. 22. No man must be too
learned, for fear he be thought to conjure. 23. No man must be too wise, lest
he be troubled with too many fools. 24 No man must marry a scold, for fear he
disquiet his neighbors, and be put to the height of his patience. 25. No man
must lend any money, to think ever to have it again. 26. No man must borrow
more then he can pay, for fear of the loss of liberty and credit. 27. No man
must meddle with an Usurer, for fear that interest eat out the whole stake.
28. No man must grow inward with a thief, for fear of execution after
infection. 29. No man must build castles in the air, for fear they break his
neck in the falling. 30. No man mustly open his wives secrets, lest she commit
them rather to a wise friend then a foolish husband. 31 No man must leave an
old friend for a new, for fear he lose by the exchange of his credit. 32 No
wise man must marry a fool, lest she waste his goods, and corrupt the
perfection of his capacity. 33 Beggars must keep from the Alehouse, for fear
they drink out the revenue of charity. 34. Rich men must not counterfeit
poverty, lest the thief discover the truth of their dissembling. 35. No man
must be wise in his own conceit, lest he prove a fool ere he be aware. 36. No
man must talk to himself as he walks, lest he be thought to be mad, or
making verses. 37. No Bankerout must purchase land, lest he be thought to
cozen his Creditors with his breaking. 38. No man must converse with a witch,
for fear he go to the devil by Attorney. 39. No man must put his land into
money, lest the Bankerout run away with his inheritance. 40. No man must carry
two faces in a hood, for fear that the devil be in one of them. 41. No woman
must cry when she weeps, lest it be thought more for cursed heart then any
other cause. 42. No man must have two wives, lest one prove too much to be well
managed. 43. No meetings but for meriment. 44. No bargains but for a
bag-pudding. 45. Friends must not fall out. 46. Neighbors must be friends. 47.
Patience was never angry, and quietness was a goodly hearing. 48. Fathers
darling and mothers nowne child, must be brethren and sisters children; and
cousin Varmins removed, must trust to the world as they find it.
These were the chief Articles agreed upon among his Ninnihammers, which being
published among poor fo^l^s, were kept as well as they could hit on it.

Now to the purpose, such a Commonwealth for a dog, being governed by Apes and
Asses, the great Fool of all must needs be a strange beast, and yet in the
shape of a man he walks strangely through the world: and one thing among other
he hit on strangely to save charges in charity, he took this order for
beggars, that rather then they should lack lodging, they should sit in the
stocks, and in stead of alms persuade them to fasting, because abstinence is
a fit preparation to prayer.

This little worshipful John a Nods, in stead of a mistake^ gentleman, has bin
in his youth brought up in learning how to read ilfauouredly, and to write
worse, and yet with much ado, after his schoolemistris an old woman with
spectacles had taught him his Primer, and the Clerk of a country Church had
taught him to write a Copy or two, and put his name to a bill Lobligatorie, he
grew to such a delight in reading of Ballads and hearing of old stories, that
he bought at the second hand out of the Library of little learning, some few
books of his mothers language, which having kept long in an old chest did now
serve him for his Library: which books sometime ass he was able to find
idle time, which at the best is little better, he would now and then take out
of his course cabbinet, and read by peece-meales as it came into his addle
brain: the names whereof, as I found them set down, were these, I mean
chiefly those whom his little understanding took most pleasure in: Presidents
of Imperfections, News of no importance, and Labor in vain.

And first for Presidents of Imperfections:

He that would put out his eyes, because he would see no vanities, would be a
blind man, and so an imperfect man.

He that would cut out his tongue, because he would tell no untruth, should be
a dumb man, and so an imperfect man.

He that would cut off his hands, because he would take no bribes, should be a
lame man, and so an imperfect man.

And as of men, so of women.

A maid is no perfect woman, because without the help of man, she is only
called a Maid, and not a woman.

A widow is an imperfect woman, because with the loss of her man, she loses
the title of a woman, and is only called a widow, but not a woman.

A barren woman is no perfect woman; for a woman was created to increase an
multiply: till therefore she have brought forth children, she is an imperfect
woman, except the fault be in the man, and then he is an imperfect man, to put
such imperfection upon a woman.

A whore is no perfect woman; for every woman is either a maid, a wise, or a
widow; and being neither of these, she must needs be a monster, and so an
imperfect woman.

A painted woman is no perfect woman, for all women by nature are either fair
or foul: but if an artificial fair be set upon a foul complexion, it makes
but a speaking picture, and a picture is no perfect woman.

These and such like were his Presidents of imperfections, which for his poor
instruction he would take some idle humors to bestow his blind sight upon.

The next book was entitled, News of no importance, which I found set down
as follows.

First, in the Gulf of small grace, near to the coast of Comgligrande, upon
the fourteenth day of the fifteenth month, in the strange year of foul
weather, it is said, that in the passage boat between Verola and Gon^ria, two
dangerous places for infection, the boat entering into the Lake of
Lasciuiousnes, a very unwholesome harbor, with ouercharging the vessel,
perished a great number of poor people, who bringing but common ware to the
market, and their greatest losses being Asses and galled Hackneys it seemed
there was no great miss of them, for I find nothing worthy nothing written of
them, and therefore being News of no importance, they served only for a tale
of a tub, to exercise the brains of such a Hogshead.

Secondly, from the land of Unluckiness, in the city of Sinfulness, it was
reported that Sir Henry had land, Sir Lawrence little wit, and Sir Ninny
nothing worth, three Knights of the Order of Saint-Asse, men of infamous
memory, after that they had run through the courses of expenses, without
ever hope of recovery of either coin or credit, going in the gulf of
Canavery, to see a Bear hunt a wild ducke, fell by chance into a But of
Malligo, where they were drowned horse and foot: what became of their Funerals,
or Epitophs upon their deaths, having no matter in their lives to be recorded,
I can say nothing, but that the News being of no great importance, it is no
matter for their passage out of life, but for fear of their passage to no
better; and so let them go, and as many fools as will follow them.

Thirdly, in the Island of Saint Elfe, the great Lady of little worth, which
was no less kind to her neighbors, then ready to entertain strangers, and
for her recreation had set up many May-poles in diverse places near to her
dwelling place. Now for her diet, she used most to feed upon such morsels as
most fitted her appetite, especially such nourishing meats as best agreed with
the constitution of her complexion; when in an idle humor one evening she was
so busy with a Lobstart, that with a surfeit upon the same, she fell quezie
stomackt, and so inflamed her blood, that she grew fantastic, and in a few
nights after set many of her Maypoles on fire, and in a little time after, with
the extremity of passion, fell into the Falling sickness, which in a short
time brought her carkas into a consumption, and so in a few days after into
her last lodging in the earth: but for any great memorial of her, I read
nothing, but that in her life time she had the breaking up of youth, who since
her death have continued their course to their utter condemnation; but since
that for any matter of great note, more then that she was a notorious piece of
pedlers stuff, the news being of no importance, it is no matter what became
of her.

4. In the valley of Saint Grineums, the great Lord of Lo^zie bush, venturing
to ride late in the night, and not seeing his way, fell into a deep bog, where
he was so bemir'd, that with a cold after a heat, he caught such a relapse, as
that many of his copartners in his passages were greatly afraid that he would
fall into a consumption both of body and goods: a great infirmity, and hardly
to be helped. But hearing no matter of worth in the man, nor any thing, but
that he lived in all unworthiness, and died nothing worth; the news being of
no importance, it is no matter what became of him, only as a Lord of
Langdebie^e, let him be well boiled, and served in a mess of Bruesse at a
beggars table, and so let him go.

5. From the coast of Careaway near the Cape of ill Hope, there came news of
a little Knight of great valor, Sir Walter whet whistle, who was of that
force, that whosoever encountered with him, if he stood long with him, in the
end he was overthrown Now there dwelt near him one Sir Dogbolt Driebread, who
did oftentimes make a road into his country, and upon a time set upon him
with all his Forces, thinking at unawares to surprise with him; of which an
evil neighbor to them both, Sir Swines head Great swallow having
intelligence, with his army came upon them both, and so stoutly followed his
fortune, that he took them both prisoners in the field, and made them both
Tributaries to his greatness. Whether the news be true or no, it is of no
importance, and therefore only fit for the great Fool to feed his humor
withal.

6. In the unknown Island, some twelve thousand miles from the great Bay of
Port de Pouero, where the watrie monsters keep their Court under water, it is
reported, that in that Land were great store of flesh, but little wholesome for
the use of man, saving only Hares and Conies, which well dressed would now and
then serve the ^urne for a strong stomach: For most of their other beasts were
Foxes, Wolves, and Badgers and Polcats, which were the spoil of many young
Lambs and sucking Rabbets, yea and sometime of elder Game. They had also in
that country great store of Foul and birds of diverse feathers, but few of them
wholesome or toothsome, as Dawes, Rookes, Crows, Night ravens, Shrich Owls,
Cormorants and Guls, which feed upon Lambs, Rabbets, Mice, Worms, Fish, Carrion
and Garbidge, but few of them whose flesh was fit to be served at any Table of
account; but among many other Fetherd creatures, they had many balde Buzzards
which fed much upon Titrimouses and hedge sparrowes, which were no sooner out
of the hedge, but they would be upon them, and sometime so ouergorge themselves
with them, that with foul feeding and ouerfeeding, they would fall flat on
their backs, with their heels upward, so weak and faint, that every Crow
might have a pick at them.

Now the Traveler into that country, who brought the news from thence, being
unhappily by ill weather cast upon that coast, and finding little or nothing to
trade for, that might give him hope of any gain, having upon a cold night lien
watching at a Coniborough, and scarce well, and weary, in the morning making
haste to get on board, with a fit gale for his purpose, put out of an ill
harbor, and gate roundly to sea, and safely returned home again, saving that
he gat such a numnesse in his joints and stiffnesse in his elbowes, that he
could scarce put his hand to his head, to take off his hat at the delivery of
his travel Of which hearing nothing worth any thing, being of no great
importance, I found it served only for an idle Fool, to fit the great humor
of his little wit.

7. In the Island of A Merricat, under the Equinoctial line, in the Straits of
Margerian in a swift current between the Lake Maudelina and the mouth of the
river of Allitia, by reason of certain unwholesome vapors that arose out of
certain Sulphurous mines near unto the sea, diverse passage-boates perished,
or grew so rotten, that if any of the passengers made shift to get home again,
though with loss of their ware, and danger of their lives, yet neither they
nor the vessels were ever fit for any good emploiment, or to any service of
worth; but being likely that either they were old vessels that could abide no
foul weather, or some small Barks that were swallowed up in some swelling
billows, since the certainty thereof is not yet known, and being doubted
that some of them have bin hotly shot at betwixt wind and water, till the
return of the next Gazette, there is little to be said to it; and being news
of no importance, it may pass for a Fable among the like fancies to fit the
fancy of such a Fool.

8. From the Desert of Arabia it was reported that the people of that country
live strangely, neither by trade nor traffic, fishing nor fowling, nor yet by
cheating nor cozening, but by plain theeuing; so that betwixt them and the
Turks there is such havoc with killing and spoiling, that the poor Friars
in diverse places among them or near unto them are in pitiful fear of their
lives: a great deal of land they have, but ill inhabited, and Fruit trees but
few, and the Fruit very watrie, and of little or no good nourishment. They are
commonly well horsed, and weaponed for Bows and arrows, darts and swords, but
Pieces few or none: and therefore being no matter of importance, the news are
not worth the noting, more then that it is a wonder that they should have a
King among them, that may be called the King of thieves: For being all
outlawes, they must have a strange kind of government, which it should seem is
but during pleasure.

Now to these and such other toys, he had some odd discourses of Labor in
vain, which were not many, but as they came to my hands I have set them down,
which were as follows.

1. In time out of mind, when Beasts and Birds could speak, and winds could
whisle wondrous things, there was in a strange country a great bird like an
Eagle, that flying up and down in diverse places of the world* espied by chance
a far off a fair bird like a Phoenix, upon a high rocks, sitting among a number
of fair Fowls and sweet singing birds round about her, but she sat in a
great majesty above them all: now this other great bird in his pride scorning
all birds but himself, and envying the greatness of this fair blessed bird,
called a council of his kites together, to find out some device or other,
whereby to seek the death and overthrow, not only of her, but of all the
goodly Fowls and sweet birds about her. Much talk there was how to bring
this matter to effect, and the better to set it on work, before the enterprise
was attempted, the great Bird sent out certain Buzzards as spies to flicker
about the coast of the country, where the fair bird kept her high flight, who
being returned with matter of such majesty, as bred increase of malice in the
heart of the proud bird, he standing so much upon his strength, that he thought
no bird should be able to bear a fether in his frown, commanded forthwith a
number of cages to be made, in which he put a number of Peacocks, woodcocks,
Dawes, Ravens and Crows, Guls and Kites, to make war with this fair Bird
and her Fowls: which were no sooner put to sea, but a chattering Pie in all
places where she flew, cried, Victory, victory: but having passed along the
Seas, near the coast, they were encountered with such a flight of brave birds,
as put the cages with all their forces to such a flight, as so drove them upon
the rocks and sands, that few of them were able to get home, with the hard
news of their heavy fortune: but when the great Bird beheld the woeful
spectacle of his drouping flight, he fell into such an agony, through a
passion in his disgraced pride, finding his labor all in vain, stoupt his
train, hung down his head, and shortly after turned up his heels. And thus
ended his discourse of Labor in vain; a tale of a tub without head or foot:
and therefore, like a Fable of the Fox and the Goose, I leave it to the Gander
with whom I found it.

2. In the Island of Terra Lorida, a place of great merchandise of small wares,
near the chief City of Nullibi, in an universality, in stead of an
Vntuersitie, where Scholars were as ill read as taught, there was a deep
studient in the secrets of Nature, which laboring much to bring all to
nothing, wrought day and night for the Mooneshine in the water, when having
spent both time and means, to work wonders out of imaginations, finding
Nature not so subject to Art, but to keep her own power in all properties,
when his fire lacked fuel, his eyes were ouermatched, and a long hope of great
substance went away all in smoke; and while he labored to marry the Sun and
the Moon together, there was such a cloud between his wit and the light of
wisdom, that he could effect nothing to his purpose; and that with the stone
of Philosophy, many brains had bin beaten long, and the head nere the better,
with a great deal of grief, and little hope of amends, walking one day to the
Sea side, and studying how to find out the cause of the ebbing and flowing of
the sea, but never able to find it out, saw as it were a vision, or rather
some conceited apparition of a man lading of water into a pot, which though it
was full and ran over, yet he still laded in water: when this little well
learned Scholar wondering at his work, asked him what he meant to do? quoth
he, As you do, Labor in vain; and so upon the sudden vanished out of his
sight, and left him so perplexed, that with very pity to see the passion of
the poor man, I awaked.

3. In the old time when Hobgoblin and Robin good Fellow made country wenches
keep their houses clean ouernight* for fear of walking spirits should get
into their chambers, and ere they were aware slip into their beds, and get them
with child before morning. In a country village called Lobkin the large, there
dwelt a plain dealing man, who with his wife a good breeding creature, with
eating of Mummada pudding and the inward of a beast, with the help of a pot of
Ale and Ginger, found the means to fill the world with beggars: the poor man
having passed many days in no small purgatory with her intolerable tongue,
which would call him by many more names then belonged to a Christian, sought
all the means to bring that unquiet creature into some more peaceable course,
pleased her humor in all he could, but all would not suffice, but an Eios hawke
would ever be prating; but when she was either at jack or at feeding; so this
tatling gossip that took a continual pleasure to hear her self speak,
though seldom to any good purpose; the poor man so tired out with trying all
means he could to stay the ringing of this house bell, and finding his labor
all in vain, resolved to put on such a patience as was past all understanding,
and to let her talk till she was weary, which could be never while she had
breath, and letting her have her swinge till he could no longer suffer it,
knowing a day appointed when they should ride to a Wake or a wassell, a merry
meeting of gossips and their Assebands, her Mare that she used to ride to
market on, being then in the stable and fed with the best hey and oats, to
please his Dame, but little to her knowledge kept her from water a day and a
night before she was to ride: but when the day came, and she was mounted and
upon her way, it fell out that they were to go through a deep river, where the
Mare greedy of water to quench her thirst, as almost or rather stronger headed
then her Dame, ran into the deep, and stumbling in a hole, floundring out
with much ado, threw her into the poole, and with much ado saved her self.
When the poor man looking back and not hearing her speak, who all the way
before never held her peace, but was ever finding fault with the ill setting of
her pannell, or the raines of her bridle, or the shooing of her near foot,
because she would now and then trip somewhat low, and so with one thing or
other be ever finding fault to keep her tongue wagging; but when he could not
hear her speak, and seeing only her clothes appear a little in the water,
after he had got out his Mare, called for help to get out his Dame, in a manner
dead; which being laid on the bank, and the water powered out of her belly by
her mouth, she gave three or four gasps, and opened her mouth as if she would
have spoken: whereat the poor man affrighted, started, and falling backward,
me thought fell upon me, and therewithal I awaked. And thus ended the dream
of the Labor in vain, to quiet an unquiet and an intolerable Scold.

Now this great Fool had also in his Library, in the bottom of his old
chest, certain Poetical, or rather potticall Dreams put into time, but for
reason, more then for natural capacities, I find little; yet such as they
were, and fitted the humor of his noddle pate, as I found them after his
death, left for a Legacy to his cousins Loblollies, I thought good to set them
down in manner and form following.

And first, A Dream of a Monkey and a Be.
A Kind of Be (me thought) did get into a Monkies ear,
Who was more half horn mad to hear her kind of humming there:
He picked, he pulled, he clawd, he scratcht, he mopt, he mowd, and cried,
As if his ugly Mastership would presently have died.
But as the Be came creeping out, he caught her by the wing,
Who for his labor in his hand did leave a cruel sting:
Wherewith enraged, be eat her up; but yet did feel such pain,
He wished his hand were well, and she were in his head again:
When such a face the Vrchin mads, with such a rufull look,
That with a laughter at the jest, I suddenly aw^^ke.
A Dream of an Oister and a Crab.
Upon the shore near to the Sea, an Oister gaping wide,
Ley looking for a little food to come in with the Tide:
But hard by lay a crauling Crab who watched his time before,
And threw a stone between the shells, that they could shut no more.
The Oister cride, Ho neighbors, thieves: but ere the neighbors came,
The Crab had murtherd the poor fish, and fed upon the same.
When wondering that such craft did live with creatures in the deep,
With troubling of my brains withal, I wakt out of my sleep.
A Dream of a Fox and a Goose.
A Fox came to a Gooses pen, where she all brooding sat,
And like a Gossip sought with her to have some friendly chat:
And asked her how she did, and how her swelling grew so much,
And he would help her if that he might but her temples tuch.
I pray, quoth she, put in your head, that I may hear you speak:
Yea, thought the Fox, I Will teach the Goose and Gander how to keake.
When putting in his head, a dog that closely hidden lay,
Did quickly catch him by the snout, and plucked a piece away.
When home ran Rainard to his bitch that lurked in his den,
And told her that the Goose had bit his nose off in the pen:
Out slave, quoth she, get out of doors, do thou come bleeding hither?
And say a Goose bit off thy nose, and bring home nere a fether?
When laughing at this mad conceit, my thoughts so ran upon,
I wakt and saw nor Fox nor Goose, but all were fled and gone.
A Dream of a Jack an Apes, Bulls, Bears and Dogs.
ME thought within a Bearards charge, among the dogs and Bears,
A sudden Mastiffe set them all together by the ears:
The Bears vnmuzzld, dogs vnchaind, they fought and roared and cride,
Some ran away, and some to death the bloody quarrel tried.
The Bearards scared to hear the noise, came out with clubs and staves,
The Master came out after them, and called them careless slaves:
When in among them brake the Bull, in midst of all the fray,
And as he met them, with his horns he tossed them every way.
The master Berard gat him home, away the Bearards ran,
And Jack an Apes came only in, to play the gentleman,
Who skipping up upon the Bull, so bit him by the ears,
That he had more ado with him, then either dogs or Bears:
For, to their house the Bears gat home, the dogs in kennell coucht,
And neither dog, nor bull, nor bear, that one another touched:
But Jack an Apes upon the Bull did so bestir himself,
That I awakt with laughing at the knavery of the Elfe.
A Dream of a Chough, a Pie, and a Parrot.
ME thought I saw a Cornish Chough stand chattring with a Pie,
Dishuting on their colored coats, which had the purest die.
The Pie she spoke of iet and snow, and pitch, and milk and chalk,
Of black as ink, and lilly white, and thus her tongue did walk.
To whom the Chough replide, who knew what stuff was best to hold;
What left would stain, and what would best abide both heat and cold;
Spoke only for the Russet coat, which country maidens ware,
Good huswiues and good husbandmen, and such as thriftie are:
And how it makes the soldiers clothes, and Courtiers winter weed,
At lest such as upon their clothes will spend no more then need.
But as they thus did chattring stand, a Parrot in a tree,
Cride, Hah, hah, hah, ye foolish birds, be still, and look on me:
Behold the colors of my coat, how gay I am and fine;
Your Russet, and your black and white, are Liueries unto mine.
With that the Chough cride, Haw, away, and Magpie chattring, cride,
Let us away, this is some witch, or wanton child of pride;
Or else some stranger, that so much upon his colors stands,
And bring in gaudes for giddie heads, to make them sell their lands.
With that the Parrot spide a fool, and flew down to his fist.
Who strokt her feathers, called her love, and her most kindly kissed.
Whereat the Chough in fear or chafe, away did take their flight:
And with their stuttring I awakt, and all were out of sight.
A Dream of three Cocks and a Hen.
ME thought I saw two dunghill Cocks were fighting for a Hen,
And by them stood a right bred Cock put up within a pen:
Their gils were both as red as blood, their heads were both bent down,
And neither of them but did bear a cocks comb on his crown:
But as they spurd, it seemd their spite was nothing near to death,
They struck so seldom, and twixt blows they took so long a breath:
The Hen did cackle (as it seemd to laugh) to see the sight:
When Chaunticleere in chafe to see so base a coward fight,
Put open the pen door, and flew out and beat them both away,
And trod the Hen, and crow'd to show how he did end the fray;
And with his Hen he walks and crows with such a lusty cheer,
That not a crauen Cock durst crow, at least, if he were near.
With that the Cock-master came in, or he that kept the pen,
Took up the Cock and put him up, and shought away the Hen.
When to her came the dungbell Cocks when Chaunticleere was gone,
Who chucking laughed within his pen, his sport to think upon,
And crowa so loud, that with the sound, the Crauens were afright:
And I awakt out of my sleep, and all were out of fight.
A Dream of a Ducke and a Goose.
ME thought I saw a little Ducke into a brook let loose,
Who in his pride did offer to swim wagers with a Goose:
The match was made, the Gander keakt to see the Ducke so caught,
And thought her but a simple thing to be so ouermatcht;
And on they went, but in their way, the Ducke with diuing skill,
When that then Goose did look for her, would be before her still:
The Goose was strong, the Ducke was quick and nimble in her art,
So much that many a Foul did fear to take the Gooses part:
But ere they came unto the place to win or lose the match,
For fear the Ducke with some odd craft, the Goose might ouercatch,
The Gander ran unto the Cranes and Cormorants, and praid,
Before the match was won and lost, the wager might be staid:
Who being sent for, quickly came before the greater birds,
Who bad them on their loves and lives, to listen to their word:
And that all quarrels might have end, that had bin brought in thither,
It was agreed the Ducke and Goose should kindly swim together:
With that the Gander keckt for joy, the Ducke as fast did quacke,
And I with laughing at the sport, out of my dream did wake.
A Dream of a Swan and a Goose.
ME thought I saw a fair cock Swan that had a hen Swan such,
As if a Swan knew how to love, he could not love too much:
For she was fair and smoothe and white, and to her cock as true,
As any creature of her kind, or any bird that flue:
He trod her often, and had by her a fair and kindly breed,
And in the stream they kindly did together swim and feed:
But in a mistie day by chance a Goose came swimming by,
And at the Swan did seem to cast full many a wanton eye:
He trod her, and along the stream away with her went he,
And left his Hen, a thousand times a goodlier bird then she.
But when the owners of the Swans did come their birds to mark,
And like good birders kindly knew a Bunting from a Lark:
Seeing the Goose swim with the Swan, they took her by the neck,
And gave her such a twinge that she scarce able was to kecke;
They plucked her bare, and cut her wings, and after let her go,
And let her Gander ask the cause why she was handled so:
But as she swam a buzzard kite did beat at her so sore,
That with her keaking I awakt, and saw the Goose no more.
A Dream of a Bucke casting of his horns.
ME thought I saw a gallant Bucke had newly cast a horn,
Which made him seem a goodly beast when it was bravely borne:
And rubbing of the other horn which did disgrace him so,
That of a fair and goodly beast, he did ilfauourd grow:
He lost the beauty of his head, and his defensive arms,
Which both did grace him, and often times preserve him from great harms.
Now as I will beh^ld the Beast, me thought a Keeper came,
And said, My friend, now may you see how nature has her shame,
Of beauty and of arms at once to leave him naked so,
That now among his gallant mates he has no heart to go:
But if it be such valor be and beauty in a horn,
Why should they blush that bear the horn? and have it so in scorn?
When smiling at the sudden ierke, and closing of the jest,
I wakt, and (...) it but to be a vision of a Beast.
A Dream of a Peacocke and an Ass.
ME thought I saw within a field, where I along did pass,
Two creatures that each other faced, a Peacocke and an Ass:
The Peacocke spread abroad his tail, the Ass set up his ears;
The Peacocke leerd upon his train, the Ass did lick his hears:
But at they thus each other brau'd, the Ass began to bray,
Wherewith the Peacocke sore afright did take her flight away;
Wherewith the Ass did smile that he his valor did so try,
That with a word but of his mouth he made the Peacocke fly:
But when the Peacocke sang his song, he scared so the Ass,
That he to go as all amazed, he knew not where he was:
But what with tone and tothers noise, they did such music make,
That I awakt out of my dream, and glad I was awake.
A Dream of a wild Boar and a Huntsman.
ME thought within a Forest wide I saw a great wild Bore,
Who as the common people said, annoid the country sore:
He brake into their fields of corn, and spoild their Wheat and Rye,
And rooted up their pasture grounds, and on their Pease would lie,
Tore up their hedges, rend their pales, and spoild their gard^^s grounds,
And when they set their dogs at him, would kill their little hounds:
When from a high wood issued out both men and dogs apace,
And with a cry of mastiffe curres did take the Bore in chase,
Who scouling set his bristles up, and champed with his chaps,
And with his tusks upon the ribs, full many a curre he claps,
And over hedge and ditch he goes, and all the chase withstood,
And fumes and fomes and suuffes as he were master of the wood:
But close behind a tree there stood a Huntsman with a dart,
Who twixt the shoulders and the rib did strike him to the heart:
When up the Bore turned both his heels, the Huntsman all came in,
And all the mastiues and the curres did such a cry begin,
And such a shout the people made, as if the air had rent,
Wherewith I wakt, and marueld what this kind of hunting meant,
FINIS.

