AN ADMONITION TO THE NOBILITY AND PEOPLE OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND CONCERNING
THE PRESENT VVARRES made for the execution of his Holiness Sentence, by the
high and mighty King Catholic of Spain.

By the CARDINAL of England.



Ao. M. D. LXXXVIII.

Gulielmus miseratione Diuina S. R. E. Tituli Santi Martini in Montibus
Cardinalis Presbyter de Anglianuncupatus, Cunctis Regnorum Angliae and
Hiberniae Proceribus populis and personis, omnibusque Christi fidelibus salutem
in Domino sempiternam.
Right honorable worshipful and most dearly beloved in our lord, no man
can be ignorante that either by report, readinge, or remembrance, list look
back, not much further the^ fifty years paste, that this great misery, and
mutation of state and Religion in this our realm of England by which our
Church (Alas) is already overthrown, our cuntrie in extreme terms of
perishinge, and our selves with what so ever is dear vuto us, in daily dread
of destruction and damnation proceaded not first of the subjects disorder or
disobedience to their kings (as else where Heresy often does) and as we see
in many of the next nations unto us yt presently happens, where popular mutenie
against their magistrates, has caused their like calamity: But begone first
and wholly in effect, by our King that then was, Henry the eighte, and
afterward till this day, has been specially pursued, by our princes
pretensed laws, and usurped souerainty over our souls, to the which our
Nobilite, Priests and people, by force and fear, have rather been drawn then
by lawful consent yielded thereunto.

lob. 14.
And albeit wicked and hipocriticall kings, be suffered sumtimes or sent from
God, for the subjects sins and for our offenses, great no doubt and
greauous in every estate (let none excuse themselves, let none accuse others;)
and that we hereby, may worthily also be thought to have deserved both our
princes fall, and our 1. Reg. 13.
own punishment, according to Gods most holy co^mination, that when his
people should cease to serve him in truth, and comitt wickedness, both they
and their king should perish together: Nevertheless, to see and know the
place specially affected, and the next immediate surge of all our sores* where
we expecte remedy and not ruin, is necessary for our recovery. VVherin, though
the case have long seemed well near desperate, yet God himself not forget full
of his old mercies, beholdinge from heaven our not voluntary but coacted
miseries, and our most holy and zealous father in Christ Sixtus the fifte, his
higheste Minister, and our chefest magistrate and master in earth, to whom our
Savior has given Apostolic power to take vengeance upon disobedience, moved
by the sorrows and sighs of so many aflicted souls, and instant prayers of
all Christian people that pity our enforced perishinge in Schism and
Heresy, does give us at this time, both better means, more hope, and redyer
help, then we could ever possibly have either deserved or de sired: yea they
have (not the pope alone but God himselst suerly, and other the most zealous and
mightiest Princes in Christendom by his Induction) taken the whole care of our
case into their own hands, and that with such sinceare intention (whereof
my-self can best bear witness and assure you my dear cuntrymen) and in such
sweet moderate and merciful sort, that in the appliance of the prepared
remedy, neither the corpse of our commonwealthe, need to feel or fear any
distress, nor any part, (other then the principal affected, and sum such
feawe as will not follow this offer of Gods ordinance) be wroonge or wrinched
thereby. For albeit of ten else, in likecase of reuolte from Gods Church and
our fathers faith, not only the kings, but also their cuntries, after diverse
dreadefull Censures and Sentences, have been by supreme authority of Christ's
vicar, given up to Inuasio^, wars, wastes, and final destruction, and we now
might by way of rigor and extreme Justice, be both charged and chastised far
more depely then the Church of Theatira for tollerating Apo. 2.
the wicked Iesabell, not now as then calling herself a prophetisse, but the
very chief spiritual gouernesse under God, to teach and deceive Gods
servants, and to force them to fornication, to eat bread of Idolatry in
Schismati call service. And also for that, by error of conscience or want of
couragc, we have so long unnaturally subdued our souls to our bodies,
hazarded our eternal salvation, to save our transitory substance, obeyed man
more then God, preferred the temporal title, not only of lawful civil
authority, but of manifold usurped Tirannie, above the supreme Bishops
spiritual soue Mat. 16. Io. vl^.
raignty, by Christ's express word established on earth, yiedling to the one
most seruilly as to our household and home God, and as to a very national
idol, subjection both of body and soul, and thearby disobeyinge,
disgraceynge dispi singe, and blaspheminge the other, as a forre^ power, or
rather as a strange devil or Antechriste Deuteronomy. 17 Luc. 10. Number. 16.
(a thing punishable in the old law by death reputed inthe new for
express contempt of Christ's own person, revenged in Core and his
confederates by fearful fire from heaven, by horrible gapinge of the ground
they stood upon and by sudden sinkinge down to hell.) Yet all this
notwthstandinge, the Popes holiness, who according to his Apostolic benignity,
wholly inclined to mercy, followinge Gods rule and example rather of sparinge
the wicked for the good, then punishinge the innocent for the evil, that the
soul which sins only may perish, does most mercifully forget and forgive
all the premises, as well in the whole body of the common wealth as in every
particular person, that is penitent and weary of these horrible disorders and
treasons committed against God, the Sea Apostolic, holy Church, and our
cuntrie (incorrigible persons, and principal procurers of these mischefs only
excepted) and only means in Christ's word and power given unto him, and in
zeal of Gods house, to pursue the actual deprivation, of Elizabethe the
pretensed Queen, eftsoon declared and iuditially sentensed, by his Holiness
predecessors, PIUS QVINTVS and GREGORY the XIII. for an heretic and usurper*
and the proper present cause of perdition of millions of souls at home, and
the very bane of all Christian kingdoms and states near about her. That in
this one woman's condign correction, Gods mighty arm that deposes the proud
and powrable persons from their Luc. 1.
seats may be feared and glorified, and the horrible and wicked outrages of
Henry the eighte her supposed fathers house and person, together with Gods
vengeance on the same, may in sum measure of his justice be accomplished, and
our whole people put in happy hope of salvation and full fredom of conscience
again, that all the Psalm. 5^
just of the earth may say. Lo this is she that took not God for her
strenghte, but trusted to her treasures and prevailed in her wickedness. And
that all the world, and namely our own nation and people, to whom the matter
so nearly apperteineth, may thoroughly judge as well of this woman's and her
parents de^ertes, as of his Holiness and his mighty and godly confederates
most happy intention; and how iustelie and nedefullie for our only benefi^e
and succor, they proceed at this present to her chastisement and deposition;
Yt may please all my most dear cuntrymen* and specialy our peers and
Nobility, on whom the ancient honor and liberty of our church and cuntrie
cheifely dependethe, and by whose sword and kinghtehood (specially given to
them and their noble progenitors for defense of the Catholic religion) our
cuntrie has often been delivered from the tyranny and vexation of diverse
disordered insupportable kings and cruel usurpers. May it please them (I
say) to consider but alitle with me, the condition of the person pursued, and
censured by Gods Church, together with the weight, qualety, and number of her
offenses, and horrible crimes, which being open almost to all the world
before, and now brefely recorded by this writing, no man (I trust) shall
marvel why Christ's vicar here in earth, with other high ministers of Gods
justice, would or could deprive this tirante of her usurped state and dominion,
when no commonwealthe by law of nature nether would nor might iustelie suffer
any such, to rule or reign over any humane society, though neither Christ,
Pope, faith, nor religion were known.

The chee se poinctes of this admonition.
To proceed therefore brefely and plainly we will set down what manner of
woman she is against whom this holy enterprise is made; of whom and in what
manner dissended; How intruded into that dignity wherein she stands; How she
has behaved herself both at home and abroad; By what laws of God and man her
punishment is pursued; How just, honest, and necessary causes all true
Englishmen have to embrace and set forward the same, seeing yt proceeds from
so lawful authorite, so just grounds, so holy intentions, and tends to so
happy an end, and is to be executed by so suer and sweet means, and chosen
persons, as now shall be declared.

And first of all it is notorious to the whole world, that Henry the supposed
father to this pretensed Queen, besides the infinite quantety and enormeous
qualety, of his most execrable wickedness, for the which by all law of
religion, reason, and nature, he deserved often times to be deprived, was in
fine, for his horrible sacriledges, murtheringe of Saints, and rebellion
against Gods Church, lawfully excommunicated and deprived by Paulus tertius in
the year 1535* and there withal by name and in particular all the issue that
should proceed of his incestuous copulation with Anne Bullen, was most justly
declared illegitimate and incapable of succession to the croune of England: and
that as well by the sentence of the said Paul, and of his predecessor Clement
the VII. in the year of our lord 1533. (both which stand in their full
force still) as by sundry acts of parliament made by Henry him self and never
repealed legitimating her sister and declaringe her to be base, she must needs
be adjudged by law and nature unable to inherit the croune.

Neither may she here alege, that by consent of the states and Commonwelthe she
is lawfully possessed: for that by force she intruded, and constreyned many men
to give their consentes, deposinge unjustly the Lords of the Clergy without
whom no lawful Parliament can be holden in that Realm, nor Statute made which
has force to authorize Prince or bind Subjects. Over and besides that she
never had consent nor any approbation of the Sea Apostolic, without which,
she nor any other can be lawful King or Queen of England, by reason of the
ancient Acorde, made between Alexander the. III. the year 1171. and Henry the
II. then king when he was absolved for the death of saint Thomas of
Ca^terburie that no man might lawfully take that Crown nor be accounted as
King, till he were confirmed by the sovereign Pastor of our souls which for
the time should be: This accord afterward being renewed, about the year
1210. by King John, who confirmed the same by oath to Pandulphus the Pope his
legate, at the special request and procurement of the Lords and Commons, as a
thing most necessary for preservation of the Realm from unjust usurpation of
Tyrants, and auoydinge other inco^ueniences which they had proved, and might
easily fall again by the disorder of some wicked King.

But howsoever she be dissended or possessed of the croune, her manifold
wickedness has been, so heinous and intolerable that for the same she has
been in person justly deposed by the sentences of three sundry Popes, whereunto
if we add the two former censures condemninge her incestuous nativity and
generation, we shall find that she has been condemned by five declaratorie
iuditiall sentences of Gods Church.

Personable crimes of Elizabeth, and first of Heresy.
And to begin with the highest and most heinouse crime of all against God and
his Church, she is convicted of many damnable heresies, and open rebellion
against Gods Church and See Apostolic, for which she is so notoriously
known, termed and taken for an heretic, as well at home as abroad, that she
was glad to provide by a special act of parliament, that none should call her
heritike, Schismatike, Tyrante, usurper, or infidel, under pain of high
treason.

She arrogateth spirtiuall dignite.
She usurps by Luciferian pride, the title of supreme Ecclesiastical
government, a thing in a woman, in all men's memory unheard of, nor tolerable
to the mastres of her own sect, and to Catholics in the world most
ridiculous, absurd, monstrous, detestable, and a very fable to the posterite.

Bastardie.
She unlawfully intruded herself, as before I have said, in to possession of
the croune of England, and the annexed dominions not by any dissent of
inheritannce or other lawful title, but only by enforced unjust partly made by
her supposed father being then an excommunicated person, and partly coacted
by herself and her coplices in the beginning of her pretended reign, being
indede taken and known for an incestuons bastard, begotten and borne in sin,
of an infamous curtesan Anne Bullen, after ward executed for aduoutery,
treason, heresy and inceste, amongst others with her own natural brother,
which Anne, her said supposed father kept by pretensed marriage* in the life of
his law full wife, the most renonmed and blessed lady Queen Katherine,
daughter of Castill and Ara gone, as he did before unnaturally know and ke pe
both the said Annes mother and sister.

Perjury and impiety.
She is guilty of perjury and high impiety for that she did break, violate,
and deride, the sollemne oath and promise made in her coronation, for defense
of the Ecclesiastical liberties and privileges granted by the ancient
Christian kings of our realm, and for the contempt of the holy ceremony used
in the annointinge and inuestinge of all faithful princes: where in her
wickedness was so notorious, that the principal Prelate that then was in the
realm, and to whom by ancient order (the Cardinal of Can terbury then being
dead) that function apperteined, durst not for fear of God, and respect of
his conscience, nor did not annointe her.

Abolisshinge Catholic Religion.
She did immediately upon her said intrusio^, violently against all law and
order (the whole Clergy, and many of the nobility and commons constantly
reclaminge) to the predition of infinite souls, abolis he the whole Catholic
Religion, and faith, that all the former faithefull kin ges of our cuntrie
honorably lived and died in; repealinge at the same time all the godly acts
that Queen Marie the only lavvfull daughter of King Henry the eighte, made
for the reconcilement of the realm, to the unite of Gods universal Church
again; and reuyued all the impious statutes, made by her forsaid supposed
father and brother against God, the Church, the Sea Apostolic, and all
innocence, by which she severed herself and subjects violently from the
society of all Catholic cuntries, and from the fellowship of all faithefull
princes and preistes in the world.

Prophaninge Sacraments.
She did at the same time abolish or profane all the holy sacraments of
Christ's Church, and above other in particular, the very blessed and sovereign
facrifice of Christ's body and blud, errectinge for the same, and in disgrace
thereof, high idolatry, and poluted bread of schism and abominable
desolation.

Forbiddinge preachers.
She did shutt up both pulpits and Churches from all Catholic preistes,
preachers, and people, caused all Gods public true ancient honor, service,
and sollemnity, throughout the whole realm of England (a most lamentable
case) and not long after in Ireland, to cease upon one day, constrayninge by
great penalties and extreme punishment many thousand poor christian souls
of every degree and sex, to forsake that faith and religion, in which they and
all their forfathers were baptized and brought up, ever since the realm was
first converted* to Christ, to the great torment of their minds and
consciences and shortninge of their days.

Prophaninge of churches and all holies.
She impiouslie spoiled all sanctified places of their holy Images, Relikes,
memories, and monuments of Christ our Savior, and of his blessed mother and
Saints, her own detestable cognisaunce and other profane portratures and
paintinges exalted in their places: and thearwith has overthrown, destroyed
and robbed, all holy alters, chalices, vestiments, Church books, and sacred
vessels, with what so ever was consecrated to Gods true worship* and the
reverence of Christian religion, in the aunciente Apostolic ministerye of the
holy sacraments.

Violatinge sacred persons.
She has ceazed upon the sacred persons of Gods anointed, even of very
Bishops that had charge of her own soul, called them to account for their
preachinge and doctrine, conuented them before her profane counselors and
comissioners, deposed and imprisoned the^ with all others that were of lerninge
and dignitye among the Clergy, till by the misery of their captivity they be
in effect wholly worn and wasted away.

Impious scorneful nes.
She has caused the Priests of God violently to be plucked from the altar in
the midst of the sovereign action, and to be carried in scornful manner
reuested through the streates, and exposed to all the ungodly villainy,
irrision, fury, and folly of the simple and barberous people: a thing certes
that above all other kinds of irreligiosity most deservethe and sonest
procures God vengeance.

Suppressio^ of Mo nasteries.
She has suppressed all the religious houses of both sexes, so many as
were restored after her fathers former horrible spoil, dispersed the
professed of the same, and robbed the^ of all their lands and possessions.

Oppression of Catholic Gentlemen* and ex^orsio^.
She has by unjust tyrannical statutes injuriously invaded the lands and
goods of Catho like Nobles and gentlemen, that for conscience sake have passed
the seas: and molested, disgraced, imprisoned, and spoiled, many at home of all
degrees, because they would not give oath and agreement, to her Antechristian,
and unnatural proud challenge of supremacy, nor honor the Idol of her
profane communion board, whereby sum provinces, be in manner wholly bereaved
of their just ge^tleme^ in administration of the laws, and the people
excedingly anoied by loss of so good lords, and so great houskepers, for
lack of vvho^, the poor dailye perish.

Destruction of the Nobility.
Besides all which sacrileges abominations and extorsions against God his
Church and her own people, she passingly has indaungered the kingdom and
cuntrie by this great alteracion of religion, which thing is never with out
inevitable perille, or rather sure ruin of the common wealth; as also she
has done by great contempt and abasinge of the ancient Nobilite, repellinge
them from due government, offices, and places of honor, thrustinge them to
shameful and odious offices of inquisition upon Catholic men, to the great
vexation and terror of their own consciences, forcinge them through fear and
desire of her favor, and of her base leaders, to condemn that in others,
which in their hearts and consciences themselves like of, and putting into
their houses and chambers, traitors, spials, delators, and promoters, that take
watch for her of all their ways, words, and writings; by which the
principal be already Norfolk Northumberland* was mer land, Da cres etc.
ruined most lamentably, and the rest stand in continual thraldom danger
and dishonor: so ielous be all tyrants and usurpers, of their state, and so
loathe they are to be seconded by any other then of their own creation.

Nevve Nobility.
She has in stead of the forsaid, and to their shame and despite, aduaunsed
base and vnpure persons, inflamed with infinite avarice and ambition, men of
great partiality briberie and iniquity, to the highest honors and most
proffitable offices of her court and cuntrie, repelling from all public
actio^, charge and authority, under color of religion, the wisest, Codliest,
lernedst, and sincearest of all sorts of men, to the special annoiance and
dishonor of the whole state.

Nevve Clerglie.
She has intruded the very reffuse of the vvorst sort of mortal men,
infamons amorous Apostats and heretics, to all the spiritual dignites and
preferme^tes in the realm, who by their insatiable covetousness and
concupiscence, have made lamentable hauoke, waste, and destruction of the
anncientest (vvelneare) and honorablest spiritual states in Christendo^,
herself not alitle helpinge to the spoil of the same.

Harboringe strangers.
She has laid the cuntrie vvide open to be a place of refuge and sanctuary
of all Atheystes, Anabaptists, heretics, and rebellious of all nations, and
replenished sundry the cost towns and other, with innumerable strangers of
the vvorst sort of malefactors and sectaries, to the great impouerishinge of
the inhabitants, and no small peril of the whole realm: this being taken
to be certain, that the number and qualetie of them is such, that when time
may serve and favor them, they may give a sturdy batail to the inhabitants of
the realm.

Po^^nge the peaple.
She has not spared to oppress her subjects (never having just vvarres
with any king or cuntrie in the world) with manifold exactio^s not only by
ordinatie means of more frequent and large subsedies (for which only end she
has had more parliaments and more often prorogations thereof then ever any
lavvful prince had, in so many years) but also by sundry shameful guiles of
lotaries, laws, decrees, and falls of money and such like deceites: and
has employed the riches of the realm to set up and sustain Rebels and
Heretics against their natural princes, to the great dishonor of our nation,
damage and danger asvvell of our merchants, as of all other trauaylers; a
public piracie and robbery both by sea and land, therewith authorisinge by
her letters of mart, and otherwise permittinge, diverse wicked persons to
spoil whom they list, without sparinge, sum piece of the gain retorninge
to sum of her own chief councellers and officers.

Sellinge of laws
She does for monye and bribes, to the enrichinge of herself and servants, by
licenses, dispensations, pardons, and permissions, abolishe or frustrate many
proffitable laws: as she does to the same end multeplie sundry frivolous
acts, with great sorfets to the transgressors* vvittingly forbearing (as yt
may be thought) the execution of the same, that after oblivion of the
observation thereof, her courtiers and other lost Cosines and compagnions
(whom her excessive avarice will not suffer to reward of her own) may
make pray by promotinge the poor people, and so live and feed on the carcas of
the commonvvealthe: yea even suck out the very bludd of poor aflicted
Catholic men's consciences, who besides those sacrilegious mas mulctes, and
the new made spoils and intolerable extorsions, for not coming to their
dam nable Idolatry of the communion, (which for the love of Gods law they
often incurr and sustain, to the utter lamentable ruin of them and their
posterity) be feign by great importable gifts to procure at her officers
hands, sum little ease and release of the intolerable fears and miseries
that they live in. By which wicked trafique and other pitiful pillage of
the people, sum of her creatures are grown so great insole^t, that all states
and degrees within the Realm stand in awe and danger of them.

D^ytester
In which sort, besides others who^ we need not note, she has exalted one
special extorsioner, whom she took up first of a Traitor and vvoorse the^
naught, only to serve her filthy lust, vvherof to have the more fredo^ and
intrest, he (as may be presumed, by her consent) caused his own wife cruelly
to be murdered, as after ward for the accomplishement of his like brutis The
Earl of Essex.
he pleasures with an other noble dame it is openly known he made away her
husband; who now of an amorous minion aduaunsed to high office, degree, and
excessive vvelthe, is becum her chief leader in all her wicked and vnvvonted
course of regiment her instrument of the destruction of the nobility, by many
indirect means, and of the ruining, abacinge, disgracinge* disauthorisinge
diverse ancient houses names and persons of renoume; besides innumerable of
the co^munalty perished most pittifulie in sundry provinces for the feeding of
his infinite avarice and other his insatiable companions and reteinors, living
only of briberie, spoil, and roberie: whereby, and through the favor of the
pretended he has this n any a year ouerruled the chamber, court counsel,
parliament, ports, fortes, Seas, Ships, borders, men, munition, and all the
cuntrie; has had still at commaundment all officers justices, Benches, Bars
and Sessions, has had the sale and monopoly of all laws, offices, licenses,
^or^ettes, Byshoprickes, benefices and Colleges; has made such traffic*
hoppinge and chaunginge with his mistress, about the treasures, prerogatives,
lands, and commodeties of the croune, that so and by diverse unspeakable
trecheries, he has enabled and fortefied himself far above the measure of
any English subjecte, and has been the principal disturber and destroyer of
the provinces round about us, to the impouerishment of the people at home, and
decay of all trafique abroad, with extreme peril of the land.

Her dishonest life.
With the forsaid person and diverse others she has abused her body, against
Gods laws, to the disgrace of princely majesty and the whole nations
reproach* by unspeakable and incredible variety of lust, which modesty
suffers not to be remembered* neither were it to chaste ears to be uttered
how shamefully she has defiled and infamed her person and cuntry, and made her
Court as a trappe, by this damnable and detestable art, to inta^gle in sin
and ouerthro we the younger sort of the nobilitye and gentlemen of the land,
whereby she is become notorious to the world, and in other cuntryes a common
fable for this her turpitude, which in so high degree namely in a woman and a
Queen, deseruethe not only deposition, but all vengeance both of God and
man, and cannot be tolerated with out the eternal infamy of our whole cun
rye, the whole world deriding our effeminate dastar die, that have suffered
such a creature almost their tie years together, to reign both over our
bodies and souls, and to have the chief regiment of all our affairs as well
spiritual as temporal, to the extinguishinge not only of religion but of all
chaste living and honesty. Refusinge (...)
.

She could never be restrained from this incontinence though the principal
peers of the realm and others of high authority as deputies from the whole
parliament and estates, made humble suit and supplicacion to her, that for
pity and compassion of their desolate case, and of the danger that the whole
realm, and specially the nobility should be in, yfshe deceased without lawful
issue, in such a number of competitors of the croune, she would therefore marry
and procure (if yt were Gods pleasure) lawful heirs of her body to inherit
her dominions after her: to whom sumtimes she merely and mockingly answered,
that she would die a maide^ Queen, but afterward in conte^pte and rebuke of
all the states of the realm, and to the condemnation of chaste and lawful
marriage (where unto as to a bridle of her licentiousnes, she is enemy) she
forced the very parliament it self to give consent and to provide by a
pretended law, not tolerable (nor ever I trow heard of before in a
Christian free people) that none should so much as be named for her successor
duringe her life, sauinge the natural, that is to say bastard borne child of
her own body. A wonderful thraldo^e, a lamentable case, that this high
court of old so renoumed for fredome and justice, should now be at the
devotion of one woman so far, as to authorize both her shameful incontinency
and pernicious obstinacy against the honor and good of the whole realm:
having no cause in the world why the next laufull heir may not better bear
the naminge, then her unlawful long concealded or fained issue, saving that
yt might be prejudicial to her private and pre sent peace, which she ever
prefferreth before the public; as she presumes upon the experience and late
remembrance of her own wicked practices against her sovereign, when the time
Her treae sons against queen Maria
was, measuring all other by her own impatient ambition: but indede yt
proceeds specially, upon the agnisinge of her unrightful po s session,
usurpers always standing in more awe of the next heir and successor, then
lawful princes commonly do.

The pretense of marriage. The Earl of Aru^dell and others. The Earl of Arra^.
the K. of Svvethe^. Archeduke Charles* the Duke of Holst. He^ri now king of
France. Monseur Alanson.
She, all this notwithstanding, in the mean season, as often before and
afterward, promised marriage to sum of the nobillity at home, making many of
them in single life to the danger of their souls, and decay of their famelies,
to attend her pleasure: and no less deeply dallied and abused by dissembly
almost all the great personages of Europe, to whom as well by letters, as by
sollemne Embasses, she proffered herself, to the mockery and final delulio^ of
the^ all, to her own infamy, and the danger of her people, and specially of
late years she has most pittifuly and deuilishly abused, the late noble
brother of France, by manifold hope and promise of her marriage and croune, by
which bait, and her deceitefull suggestion, the poor young gentleman was
driven in to those dangerous actions and dishonorable affairs of Heretics and
rebels, to his great dishonor, and likely shorteninge of his days.

Her unnatural affection to wards the cuntrie.
By all which dishonorable and unworthy dea linge, the whole world may see
that in Atheism and Epicurisme, she would (if yt were possible and might be
suffered as she has begun) turn the life and whole weal of our cuntrye once
most florishinge, to the feedinge of her own desordered delites, being loathe
no doubt that any thing should be left after her life, that her rage and
riot had not ouerrun, or that her realm should be extant any longer then she
might make pleasure of it; most gladd (as may seem) that so flourishing and
ancient a commo^wealth which she has in manner brought to destruction in her
life, might be buried in her ignominious ashes when she is dead. VVherin her
affection is so passinge vn^atural, that she has been heard to wish, that the
day after her death she might stand in sum high place between hea uen and
earth, to behold the scamblinge that she conceived would be for the croune;
sportinge herself in the conceyte and foresight of our future miseries, by her
only unhappiness procured: not unlike to Nero, who intending for his recreation
to set Rome on fire, devised an eminent pillar whereon himself might stand to
behold it, but so God may provide for her, and us, that she may see and feel
sum part of this pastime in her days, or rather she only and a few ofher
Accomplices feel the pain, who alone or principally have deserved it, if we be
so wise as to follow Gods ordinances.

Consede ration with rebels.
Besides all these outrages in her person and regiment, and besides sundry
wicked attemptes, and treasons before she came to the croune, against her
prince and cuntrie at home, she has showed such faithles dealinge toward
all near neighbors most just mighty and Catholic kings abroad, that it
is almost incredible: Sum she has ignominiouslie spoiled of great treasures;
One that fledd to her for promised succor and safety yea even her that was our
true lawful and worthy sovereign, she has against all law of God, nature,
and nations, after long imprisonment at length also murdered; of ^um she
has surprised tounes and teritories; with sum she has in great simulation
offreindship, in effect broken most ancient lea gues and amity; against them
all, she has not only notoriously co^federated herself with their rebels,
Hugonotes, Geuses, publicanes, and Male contents, giuinge them great succourse
both of men munition and monye, with much continual incoragement and
counsel in all their wicked attempts: but was and yet is known to be the
first and principal fountain of all these furious rebellions, in Scotland,
France, and Flanders, to the fall almost ofall their whole states, and the
great calamitye of the Churcheof God, where by it is evident to all the world
that herself reigns vnlawfuly as an usurper and rebel, who only stands
and holds herself up all this while, by joining with Traitors and rebels,
and succoringe them against their lawful princes and soueraines.

Her lea gue with the Turks.
In this kind she has by the execrable practices of sum of her cheese
ministers, as by their own hands, letters, and instructions, and by the
parties confessions it may be proved, sent abroad exceeding great numbers of
intelligensers, spies, and practisers, in to most princes courts, cities,
and commun wealths in Christendom, not only to take and give secret notice of
princes intentions, but to deal with the discontented of every state for the
attemptinge of sum what against their lords and superiors, namely against his
holiness and the King of In fanes instructions.
Spain his majesty, whose sacred persons they have sought many ways
wickedly to destroy, as furthermore it is evident, how she has by messingers
and letters, dealte with the cruel and dreadful Tirante and enemy of our
faith the Great Turk himself, (against whom our noble kings have in old
time so valiantly foughte^, and vowed themselves to all perriles and
peregrinations) for the inuasio^ of sum parts of Christendom, and interceptio^
of sum defensible ports and places of the same, as for the disturbance of
Christianity and annoiance of the principal defenders of the Catholic
religion, she has at this day a ledgar in his court.

By which Machiuelian, godless, and consciencelesse course, unjust usurped
regimentes be always conducted; advanced not by counsel or courage, but by
plain trumperie, treason, and cosinage, workinge their own peace, welthe, and
felicity, by their neighbors wars, woe, and misery, which never ends well,
nor dureth long, nor is in fine unrevenged; though the present prosperity,
vpholden by others calamity, has auerted the sense the simple and worldly,
from the beholdinge of that extreme plague, which always both by Gods
justice, and man's revenge insueth of the same.

^^er'extreme pri^^
Which long felicity, not withsta^dinge, has so puffed up this usurper in
presumption and pride of heart, that besides all other insolences and glorious
vanetyes and vauntes in her words, crakes, countenances, and iestures, in all
her life and behavior (in which kind she exceadeth all creatures living,)
she has caused the annual day of her coronatio^ in all parts of the realm
to be sacredly kept and sollemnised, with ringinge, singinge, shows and
ceremonies, and far more vacation from all servile labors then any day either
of our blessed lord or lady, and which is more abominable, having abolished
the solemn feast of our blessed ladies nativity, she has caused her own
impure birthe day to be solemnlie celebrated, and put in to the calendar the
very eve of the said holy feast and put out the name of an other saint the
17. of November, to place the memory of her Coronation: God grant she may
repent, least in stead of her `excessiue praises that her favorers and
flaterers now give unto her, she hear yet in her own days, the saienge of
the prophet against the proud prince Nabuchodrnosor: how did Esa. 14*
thou fall Lucifer from heaven, that wast so orient in the moringe? how wast
thou brought down to the ground that woundedst nations, that subuertedst
kingdoms, and said in thy heart, I will be like the highest? or feel the
plague of one of the Herodes that for to to much delytinge in the peoples
praises and acclamatio^s, and for not giuinge glory to God* was suddenly
stricken by Gods angel, eaten of worms, and died.

Obstinas in mali^^
Now of all these heinous horrible facts, not credible almost to be acheiued by
one woman, and her co^plices not so many, she has in fine showed herself
incorrigible, and altogether impatiet of admonition, whereof she never had
wa^te, as well by the writings of sundry her learned subjects, as sumtimes by
the Imperial Majesty, and other temporal Princes, and namely by diverse holy
Popes, whose Nuntioes she would never admit to tell her (as of deutie they
thought themselves bo^ude) Gods threatninges for all her forsaid and many other
intolerable Her excomunication and conte^pte thereof.
disorders of belief, life, and government. But to accomplish all other
impiety, and to show herself wholly sold to sin, she has now eightene
years stood stubbernly, contemptuously, and obduratly, as in the sight of God
by her own wilful separation through schism and he resie judged and
condemned before, so now by name notoriously excommunicated and deposed in the
word of Christ and omnipotent power of God by sentence given against her by
holy Pius the fyfte the highest court of religion under the heavens. The
which state of excomunication (though presently of the faithelesse, where there
is no Sense of religion, it be not felt nor feared) is most miserable, most
horrible, and (...)
most near to damnation of all things that may happen to a man in this life:
far more greauous Aug. lib. 1. contra Faust cap. 17.
(says a certain glorious Doctor) then to be hewn in pieces with a sword*
consuned by fire or devoured of wild beasts and it is expressed in the
scriptures by the state of king Pharao his obduration and excecation in
wilful wickedness.

She murdered the executors of the Popes sentence.
And she has not only continued in this damnable contempt of the holy
Churches Censures so long as we have said, but also commanded and caused the
publishers, defenders, approuers, and all others that attempted most honorably
and godly the execution thereof as well of the nobility as the Clergy and
commons, sum being apprehended at home, and others traitorously bought and
soulde abroad and sent home, and all in cruel manner murdered, yea and for
their parts very willingly martyred to their eternal estimation, rather
then they would live, serve, or see any such heretic, Atheiste, and usurper,
from whose prete^sed kingly authority, they wete in consideration of all these
her heinous crimes, clearly by Christ's own vicar, and the warrante of all the
faithefull world (that never took it self bound to obey a condemned heretic
or an Apostata) before God and man discharged.

The murder of Bishopes and Preistes.
In which her obstinacy and Sathanicall obduration daily increasing she has
these late years imbrued her hands and cuntrie with the sacred blud of a
number of most innocent* learned, and famous religious men, yea and holy
Bishopes The Archbishop of Casseles, and the Bishop of Mayon.
also as well in England as Ireland, caused the^ pitifully to be racked, rent,
chained, famished, beaten, buffeted, derided, abused, and by false accusation
of crimes never intended, under pretense of treason against her usurped state
and person, to be finally with all cruelty executed to the regret and shame of
our nation and wonder of all the world. And finally to accomplish the measure
of all her inhumaine cruelty, she has this last year barberouslie,
unnaturally against the law of nations by a statute of riot and conspiracy,
murdered the lady Marie of famous me morie, Queen of Scotland, douager of
France, The slaughter of the queen of Scotland.
Gods Anointed, her next kinswoman, and by law and right the true owner of
the croune of England.

The justice of the sentence* against Elizabeth.
All which her open enormities, and other her secret wickedness hidden from us
(which must needs be great, and not numerable, in a Caytif so long under Gods
and holy Churches curse, and given up into a reprobate sense and hardness of
heart) may put all faithefull and reasonable men out of doubt, of the justice
of the Apostolic sentence and censure against her: being well assured that if
any case may fall, in which a Prince may justly be forsaken or resisted by his
subjects, or if any crime in the world either in life, regiment, or religion,
can deserve depositio^ of a king, that here all causes together do concur in
the person of the pretensed, in the highest degree; None ever not amongst the
heathen, so unprofitable, so evil, so faithles, so pernicious, no realm ever
so far fallen from religion, public honesty, order and sincerity, as ours
has done in her unhappy usurped government.

A necessati consideration.
And here we may behold, the pitiful race of an unbridled powrable sinner
(woe be to our offenses that have deserved the experience of solamentable a
case) this unworthy woman's supposed father, frist, as now her self afterward,
by reason of their height of erthly power, free from civil chastiseme^t, could
not be content therewith* till they had also discharged themselves of all
remorse of conscience, of all awe of religion, of all spiritual discipline,
and put themselves in full fredome from Pope, Prelate, Prophet, Priest, and
ghostlye father (an example for all common weal these in the world to beware of
by us, for ever) and therefore not only in their hearts said against God and
his anointed, Let us shake of their yoke and break their bonds a sunder;
But openly and boldly both said, and made themselves heads of the Church and
spirtualtie, as well now of the souls, as they were before of the bodies: That
all life, faith, religion, Church, counsel, conscience, scripture,
Sacrament, ceremony, and what soever was i heaven or earth, might wholli
ha^ge at their hands, lusts, and lykinges. At which licentious irreligiosity,
and Antechristian pride, though the highest in heaven do in the mean time
laugh, and by long patience not only forbear the present revenge thereof, but
also by secret judgment for the parties increase of damnation, or expectation
of their repentance, or the peoples deseruinges, suffer it in them by
continual prosperity and preuaylinge against the good, to be much confirmed
and increased, yet these stubborn Nemroths, that aspire so far, and would
ouerreache the highest, can not, nor shall not escape Gods ire, and furious
wrath, neither in this life nor in the next. Fear not my dear cuntrymen,
fear not, one generation is not yet past since this wickedness began; trust now
in God* and in this self generation it shall be revenged, and in the person of
this the forsaid kings supposed daughter (in whose parents co^cupisce^ce, all
thiscalamity was conceived) shall be both punished and ended.

Psalm. ^6. and 7^.
Have patience therefore a little, and marvel not to see the ungodly florishe
and feed himself with the wealth of the world: nothing being a more sure
sign of wrath, to cum, nor more unlucky to a mortal man, specially to a
Prince, then to have prosperity and good luck in wickedness, and so to be
besett wholly with flatterers that rock him a sleep in the peace of sin, that
he may neither hear his duty, nor bear check or chastisement for the same.

Gods providence to wards princes.
It was Gods great providence (who by his prophet warned kings to take
discipline, and to serve him in fear, least in hisire he should suffer the^ to
fall to unrighteous) that ever lightly the Princes of his people had sum
Prophets or Priests their overseers, that might from time to time admonish
the^ of their offenses and enormities, but specially of their fallinge from
God, and to denounce Gods threatenings, yea and execute his sentence upon them:
whom all rightuous and godly princes did fear, reverence* honor* and obey,
even as Gods angels appointed for their custody; as contrariwise such as
were wicked Tirants not contented to be bridled by the almighty, did seek
cruelly their death and destruction, that their disorders might pass with all
liberty and licensiousnes, and without Gods own controlment in his life.

Kings (I say) being not otherwise subject to superiors, and often impatient
of admonition of their inferiors, may easelie fall. Their fall must needs tend
to the danger of whole cuntries. Therefore in respect of them namely, great
power, courage, and fredome of speech were granted by God, as well ordinarely
to Priests, as extraordenarely to sum Prophets and religious persons in all
ages, specially in the time of the new testament, as shall further be declared
herafter.

Saul deposed.
Saul the first temporal king that the Jews (then Gods peculiar people)
had, though chosen and inspired by God, was led and directed by Samuel, so
long as he was in order* but afterward for aspiringe to spiritual function,
and other disobedience, was by Gods apointment and sentence pronounced against
him, by the said Samuel deposed of his kingdom, and an other named David
anointed by him in the life of the said Saul: who now after his deprivation
and as it were after his excomunication, was invaded by an ill spirit, that
provoked him, to kill not only him that was now made the rightful owner 1.
Reg. 22.
of his croune (as Elizabethe has by Gods permission accomplished her like
diuelishe desiers against the lady Marie Queen of Scotland) but also to seek
for Samuels death his spiritual gouerner, yea and to command all the holy
Priests of Nobee (findinge none so wicked as to execute his will sauinge
profane Doeg the Ido mite) to be cruelly slain as traitors and fauerours of
David the co^petitor of his kingdom. And so he stood many years against God,
and kept the kingdom by tiranicall force not withstandinge he was accursed and
deprived as the pretensed has done. David nevertheless (in who^ was the
right of the croune) was lawfully up in arms with one of the principal
Priests that escaped the forsaid murthet, though not of such power as the
pretensed king was* till at length Ang. con tra Ad.
the vsuper whom he might lawfully have killed but for reverence of his former
holy vnctio^ would not, being slain in battle, he obtained his right, first
of a part of his kingdom and afterward of the whole, of which the said Saules
son If boseth did for two years usurp a part by the pretended right of his
father. By which example thou nedest not now marvel that king Henry or his
daughter should so long reign after their deprivation and excomunication, and
be suffered to their own damnation, to execute cruelty upon the Bishops and
Priests, yea and to kill them as traitors, who^ they honored for virtue and
lerninge before, even such persons as any just king or co^monwealthe, would
have bought and ransomed from death, by the worth of half a kingdom; or to
co^mitt other outrages, saying the spirit of Satan entering into such by their
excomunication, inciteth them to all mischief, and specially to hate Gods
Church and ministers, by whom Christ executes his sentence against them.

Hieroboa^ 1. Reg. 13. and. 14.
So did Hieroboam seek to apprehend the Prophet that threatened vengeance and
destruction to him for his Schism, and seperacion of his people from the old
ancient true worship of God in Jerusalem, and for erecting of a new altar in
Bethell (In which all Schism and division from the Apostolic see is
prefigured) and creatinge of naught, out of Aarons order, new, hungry, base,
and vnordred Priests, the very pattern of all these contemptible ministers,
put up out of the araie, and lawful succession of Apostolic preisthood: A
crime so highely afterward both in himself and his stock revenged, that none
of his house was left to piss against a wall.

(...) ^. Para^ip. 29*
Osias also like unto our disobedient kings, that can bear no function above
their own, pufte up whith pride would have executed spiritual function (a
thing infinitely less the^ our pretenseds challenge of Ecclesiastical
government) but valianty by Azarias and fourscore preistes with him, assailed
and thrust out of the temple, whilst he went a boute violently to resist, was
stricken with a filthy leprosy, and so seuerid by the said preistes authority
(a figure also of the preistes power to excomunicate in the new law) from the
cumpainie of men and consequently from government, and the regiment of his
realm and people committed to his son, whereby thou perceyuest that priests
also may use force to repress impiety, when the honor of God and his Churches
necessity so require it.

Athalia. 4. Reg. 11.
But the zeal and duty of Gods preistes is no tably recommended unto us* in
the case of Atha lia a wicked cruel Queen also; who to obtain the croune
after Ochosias, killed all his Children, only one which by certain good women's
piety was secretly stolen away, saved, and brought up within the temple for
seven years space, all which time the said Queen usurped the kingdom, til at
length Ioiada the high priest, calling to him forces both of the preistes
and people, proclaimed the right heir that was in his custody, anointed and
crouned him king, and caused immediately the pretensed Queen to be slain,
with her fautors, at the court gate, not withsta^dinge they cried TREASON,
TREASON* as not only just possessors, but wicked usurpers use to do. and
this lo is the end of unjust titles, and this is the zeal and authority of
preistes for the maintenance of righteousness and religion*

Achab and ^esabell. 3. Reg 18 and 19.
No man can be ignorante with what courage and constancy Elias being sought to
death by Achab and Iesabell, that ouerthrewe holy aulters and murdered the
true religious of the land, told them that they and their house were the
subversion of Israel, and slew in his zeal all the Queens false prophets
four hundrethe at one time, and so set up holy alters again. He spared 4.
Reg. 1.
not the Idolatrous king Ochosias his capitains and messengers but destroyed
them by fire from heaven, till the third capitain was forced to humble 4. Reg.
9.
himfelf upon his knees unto him Elizeus also caused Iehu to be consecrated
king, and the house of Achab to lose their right to the kingdom, and his son
Iora^ to be slain; by whose co^maundment cursed Iesabell was afterward thrown
out of her chamber window in to the court, and after eaten of dogs, in the
very same place where she had committed cruelty and wickedness before* This
Iesabell for sacrilege, co^tempte of holy preistes, rebellion against God and
cruelty, does so much resemble our Elizabethe, that in most foreign
cuntries and writings of strangers she is commonly called by the name of
Iesabell. I know not whether God have appointed her the like, or a better end.

Maacha* 2. Par. 15.
Queen Maacha mother to good king Asaa was as ours is an apostata from the
true faith, and in fleshly lust not unlike: for she erected ope^lie and
worshipped the filthy Venerius statua of Priapus, and replenissed all her court
and cuntrie with effeminate and amorous persons, and therefore was deposed from
her regalitie by her own son (which the holy scriptures much commend in
him) and the land purged of her whorishe abomination.

By all which we learn what crimes deserve in a prince, deposition: And how
preistes and prophets have been principal workers and Gods ministers in there
depriuatio^. VVhearin the prophet Ely was so notorious, that to his honor it is
thus said of him in holy writ. He cast down kings Eccle. 48*
and destroyed them, and plucked the honorable from their seats. And of
Elizeus in the same place, thus: He never feared prince, nor could of no man be
ouercum. And thus it was in the old testament.

Now in the new testament where the preistes have much more sovereign
authoretie, and the prince far strairer charged to obey, love, and cherishe
the Church, the cause for us is much more clear: of which Church it is
said, Kings Isa. 49. ^2. Isa. 60. Psalm. 2.
shall be thy fosterfathers, and Queens thy nurces. And again: Kings breasts
shall nurishe the, and every kingdom that serves not the, shall utterly
perish* In this Church without fail, is the supereminent power of Christ's
preistehood, who with his iro^ rod bruseth like a potsheard the pride Ier. 1.
of princes that rebel against his holy spouse; and has right in his
Church over all kingdoms* to plant and to pluck up, to buyld and destroy;
before whom all kings shall fall down and all nations shall do him service.

Matt. 16.
Now is Christ's preistly prerogative in most ample and exact terms
comunicated to the chief priest and pastor of our souls, in other manner of
clause then our pretensed monstrous spiritual gouernesse can show for her self
(fie on that secular pride and wilful blind heresy that so repugnethe to Gods
express ordinance, and yet is wickedly vpholden of her flatterers, though
reproved both at home and abroad by the most notorious heretics and
sectmasters of all sorts. Now all Christ's sheep without exception* be they
princes, be they poor me^ if they be Christian men, are put to Peter's feadinge
I^an 21. Matt. 1^.
and government: now the keys of heave given to Christ's vicarr, to let in, to
lock out, to bind, to loose, to pardon, to punish.

Now we be commanded every one, be we Hebr. 13.
kings, be we Cesars, to obeie our prelates and pastors, and to be subject
(what Christian prince can except himself) to the^, as to those that must make
account for our souls. Now they have 1. Cor. ^. 2 John 2 ad ^^t. 3.
authority to forbid us the cumpany of heretics, idolaters, and blasphemers;
and not so much as to salute them, much more not to obeie the^.

Act. 5.
Now we find by the experience of the Apostles practices and example of their
usage, that not only our souls, but our bodies and goods, be in our pastors
subjection, so far as is expedient to our souls health, and the Churches
utility, which the very order and course of nature requires.

Now S. Peter, for Sacralege and simulation, struck stark dead both man and
wife by his word. Now did S. Paul strike blind Elimas Act. 13.
the sorcerer for resistinge Gods truth. Now 1. C^r. 4. 1. Cor. 5.
did he threaten to cum to his co^temners in rodd of discipline. Now did he
excomunicate a notable personage at Corinthe for inceste: Not all only by
spiritual punishment but by bodily vexation, giuinge him up to Satan's
chastisme^t.

Now he also by excomunication corporally molested by an evil spirit, for
heresy and blasphemy, 1. ad Timo* 1. 2. Cor. 10
Himeneus and Alexander. Now he has authority to revenge all disobedience,
and to bring under all lofty spirits, to the obedience of Christ.

Apostolical power.
Such lo now is the Apostolical force, and power of Christ's Preistehood in
the new testa me^t, so far above the authorety of earthly kings, as the sun
is clearer then the moon, heaven above the earth, the Soul of man better
then his body, and the common weal of the Catholic Church formed by Christ,
more excellent then any secular society ordained by man.

Where were then these disordred laws and statutes, that make the Apostles,
yea Christ him self, and all his preistes that be borne out of England to be
foreign powers? it was fiftene hundred years before kings ever conceived such
wickedness, much less to challenge this monstrous spiritual regiment for lay
men, children, and very women. But this was then enacted, this law stood
the^ firm, and binds the highest potentate of the world if he bear the name
of a Christian, as well as the poorest person in earth: This I say, yfhe obeie
not, or hear not the Mat* 18.
Church, let him be taken for an Ethnike.

Strugglinge of princes against spiritual power.
Yet such is the misery and perverseness of men, that in a cause so plain as
this is, some kings have been found to struggle against the ordinance of
God; and now oflate have had flaterers to say, yea and some so simple as to
think, that they whom Christ at his departure hence, did endue with most
ample commission, and John* vlt.
sent forth with that auctorety which his father had given unto him, have no
power to denounce or declare* when princes be heretics or violaters of Gods
laws* Nor right to excomunicate them, nor to discharge the people of their
oath and obedience, toward such as no Christian man by law of God or nature
may lawfully obaie. In which necessary point every studious and reasonable
man may reform him self, as well by the forsaid, as by the histories of the
Church since Christ's time.

And heir thou shall find, straight upon the first conversion of kings to
the faith* how they could not withdraw them selves from the Churches
discipline* though both heretics and other of wicked life have always much
repined, but ever were either driven to order and obedience, or in fine
confounded.

Almost thirtene hundrethe years ago, Babylas bishop of Antioche,
excommunicated the only Christian King or Emperor that Chrisost. in vita
Babilae.
then was (as sum count, Numerius, as others Phillip) for executinge a prince
that was put to him for an ostage: Whereupon, as ill Kings use to do, he
martired his Bishop; whom for that, S. Chrisostom and others reckon for the
most famous martire of that time. VVherby all true Bishops may learn, that it
is their duty to chastise and excommunicate disobedient tirants, whatsoever
fall to their persons therefore. Afterward holy Fabianus the Pope pursued the
same Emperor, by like excomunication and other means, till at the lenghte he
brought him to repentance.

Ser. li. 7. cap. 24.
Afterward S. Ambrose Bishop of Milan with notable courage excommunicated the
elder Theodosius Theod li. ^. ^ 17* 19. Am^^l^. 5* ep^ 28. Aug. de Ciu^^at. Dei
lib. ^. cap. 26.
the Emperor, put him to eight months penance, and in the end forced him to
make a law or provision against the like crime for which he was excomunicated.

This was an other world (most dear cuntrymen) marvelous courage and zeal for
Gods cause, was then in priests; great humility and obedience in princes. Then
was there no flatterers so shameful, nor no heretic on the earth so
impudent, to make temporal Kings above all correction of Gods Church and
their own pastors, they having most need thereof yea above all others, when
they pass the limits of Justice and the laws of God.

Nice. lib. ^3. c. 14. Georg. Patrtar. de vita Chrisost.
Nere this time again Innocentius the first, excomunicated Arcadius the
Emperor and his wife Queen Eudoxia, for that they disobeyed and persecuted
their Bishop S. Chrisostom. I will report the Iuditiall sentence brefely
because it is much to the purpose, and full of majesty. O Emperor, the bludd
of my brother John Chrisostom cries to God against the, thou have cast out of
his chair, the great Doctor of the whole world; and in him, by thy wives that
delicate Dalida her persuasions, persecuted Christ: therefore (I though a poor
sinful soul) to whom the throne of the great Apostle S. Peter is committed, do
excomunicate the and her; and do suspende you both from the holy sacraments;
comaundinge that no Priest nor Bishop, under pain of deprivation, after this
my sentence come to their knowledge, give or minister the said sacraments unto
you.

Thus did this blessed father, whom Saint Au gustine excedingly commendethe in
his time, handle that Emperor and wicked Queen which was the cause of her
husbands fall and offenses, and at length brought them to repentance.

And when by process of time the Church became more potent, and some Princes
were fallen to contempt of Religion, as it lightly happens by heresy or
Apostasy; and that Exco^municatio^ or other ordinary ecclesiastical
discipline would not serve being only spiritual penalty, and now not having
ordinarely annexed that corporal vexatio^, executed by satan upon
excommunicate persons and therefore so much feared in the Primative Church:
then as well the Bishopes and godly persons their own subjects, did crave aid
and arms of other Christian Princes against them, as also the most holy and
aunciente Popes of Rome, did with all godly zeal incite the Catholic Kings
to the same; that those whom the spiritual rod could not frutefully
chastise, might by external force be driven down, or to repentance of their
disorder. There is no war in the world so just or honorable, as that which
is waged for religion, whether it be foreign or civil: nor crime in the world
deserving more sharp and zealous pursuit of extreme revenge, then falinge from
the faith to strange religions, whether it be in the superior or subjects.

2. Parali. 15.
Who so ever seek not after the lord God of Israel, let him be stain, from
the highest to the lowest. said King Afa admonished by Azaria the Prophet. And
again charge was given expressly in Deutronomie, to slei all false Prophets
and Cap. 13.
their followers, were they never so near us by nature, and to destroy
utterly all cities with their inahbitants, that were proved to follow new
strange Gods or religions: Princes and rulers no more excepted, but much more
punis hable in this case then the people, as appears by Gods commaundme^t to
Moises, that he should Number. ^^.
hang up all the Princes of Israel upon gallows against the sun, for
communication in sacrifice with the Moabites; and the rest of the people every
one by the hand of his neighbor, to be put to the sword for the same fault.

As an other time by Moises appointment, the faithful Leuits slew thirty
three thousand of their nert neighbors, friends, and brethren, for comittinge
Idolatry and forsakinge the true 2. Paral. cap 1^.
God: so just a quarrel is the deffence of religion. For which also the
Kings of Judah, as Abia and others, fought most justly and prosperously
against Hieroboam and other Kings of Israel, and justly possesed the cities
which they conquered in the war; as also Edom and Lobna for 2. Par* 21.
religion, even because he forsook the God of his forfathers, did reuolte from
King Ioram and could never be recovered.

Iosue 22.
VVherin the example also and zeal of the children of Israel was very
notable, that they would have denounced Battle against the tribe of Rubine and
Gad, for erectinge (as they took it) a Schismatic alter out of the only
place, in which God appointed to be worshipped by Sacrifice. So did the
Christian Armenians Eusebius. li. 9. c. 8. 9.
take arms, against Maximinus the Emperor for deffence of their faith; So did
Constantine against Maxentius the tyrante.

By all which it is clear, that what people or person so ever be declared to
be rebelious against Gods Church, by what obligation so ever, either of kindred
friendship, loialte, or subjection I be bound to them, I may or rather must
take arms against them* nothing doubtinge but when my King or Prince has
broken with Christ, by who^ and for deffence of whose honor he reigns, that
the^ I may most lawfully break with him.

So in old times of the primative Church, the Catholic people did often by
arms, defend and keep their Bishopes in their seats, against the Infidels,
and specially against the command meant of heretical Emperors: Yea and
lawfully resisted them in the deffence of thei^r Churches and Church goods.
So the people defended See Pruden* de monacho Antioch. Nazian. in etus laudibus
lib. ^. epi. ipsius.
the Church of Antioche from the Emperor Galerius his officers. So they
deffended S. Basil in the like case. So they deffended S. Ambrose.

Provided nevertheless, always in this case, that we follow not our
deceitful wills, as our adversaries do, condemning for Gods enemies such
Princes or persons as the holy Church (who must be ouriudge and informer in
all these things) pronounces and holds to be most just, godly, and
Catholic kings: But then must we take the^ for heretics, when our lawful
Bishops and popes do so adiudge them to be, and so command us to take them
yea and charge us to forsake them. Then be we sure in conscience, discharged of
our oath and obedience, which be bands of such qualety and nature, that they
hold not, nor have force, against justice, and where the matter is unlawful.
And we have just cause to arm our selves for defense of Gods honor and our
innocence, and to seek for succor at Popes and Princes hands.

Theod. li* 2 cap 5. and 13. Soc. li. 1. cap 13. Soz. li* 4. ^rp. 7.
Yea Bishops of the cuntrie so oppressed, and so persecuted by heretical
princes, should so specially do. For so did holy Athanasius (who knew his
devvtie to his king and sovereign well enoughe, and when and where he might
rise against him) ask aid against Constantius the Arian and first heretical
Emperor (whom Pope Felix declared to be an heretic) of his own brother
Constance the Catholic Emperor of the west. For fear of whose arms he
restored Athanasius and other Catholic Bishopes to their Churches and honors
again: But afterward, when the Caholike Consta^ce was dead, the said
Emperors brother did more furiously persecute Athanasius for the same.

Soc. lib. 4 cap. 16. 17 30. Sor. lib. 6 cap. 19.
So against Valens the Arian Emperor, did Petrus, Athanasius his successor,
brother to Saint Basil, seek to he Pope of Rome for succor, as all other
bishops in like distresses ever did, that no man need to marvel why we have
done the like now.

Sol. 2* ca. 18. Nice. lib. 14. ca* 21
So did Atticus Bishop of Constantinople crave aid of Theodosius the younger,
against the King of the Persians that persecuted his Catholic subjects, and
was thereby forciblie deprived and the Catholics delivered. Leo epist. 7^.
eua^g. ^i. 2. ca. 8.


So did holy Pope Leo the first persuade the Emperor called Leo also to take
arms against the Tyrant of Alexandria, for the delivery of the oppressed
Catholics from him and the heretics Eutichians, who then threw down
monasteries, and did other great sacrileges, as ours now do and have done in
England. O Emperor (said S. Leo) If it be lawdable for thee to invade the
hethens, how much more glory shall yt be to deliver the Church of Alexandria
from the heavy yoke of outrageous heretics, by the calamite of which Church,
all the Churches in the world be injured. As at this time there is no Church in
Europe, that feels not the smarte of our English miseries.

Lib. 1. epi. 72.
In brefe, so did S. Gregory the first move Gen^dius the Exarke, to make wars
against the hereti kes, as a very glorious thing: and so have ever all holy
Bishopes of the primative Church done.

Depositio^ of Princes for heresy.
For which crime of heresy and injuries done to Gods Church, as for a fault
most detestable, and most directly subject to their correction, they have
specially intermedled, as well by way of excomunicatio^, as by force procured
for their De consideratione ad Eugen. li. 4.
deposition. For as says Saint Bernard, though Popes fight not in person, nor
draw the sword themselves, yet it must be done at their commaundment, where
Gods honor and our salvation require it. For religion therefore specially,
though otherwise sumtimes, Princes have been by Popes justly both
excomunicated and otherwise punished for notorious crimes, namely when their
own subjects require the Churches Rhegino anno 864.
aid and sentence therein; as king Lotarius brother to the Emperor Lewis the
second, was excomunicated by Nicolas the first for deuorsinge Sigisber^ Tr^^hem.
his lawful wife, and marieng a strumpet, and diverse others for such like
offenses: yea and namely Popes have pursued in princes their fall from
religion, and disobedience to Gods Church, as a sin properly subject to
their correction.

Zon. in vita Leonis 3.
For heresy, was Leo the third both excommunicated, and deprived of all his
temporallties in Italy, by Gregory the second.

Chalc o^ rerum turc. li. 1.
For heresy and Schism, were the Greek Empe perours discharged, and the
Empire thereby translated to the Germans, by Pope Leo the third: and like wise
diverse German Emperors for injuries done Tho. 2. 2. quest. 12. art. 2.
to Gods Church, and for heresy, by sundry holy Popes have been brought to
order, as Henry the fourth, Frederike the first, Otho the first, Frederike the
second, Lewis the third, and many other.

Bonifa. Dec. 4.
For heresy was George king of Bohem excomunicated, and there upon by the
forces of the king of Hungary finally deprived: As John Albert Guie. lib. 2.
Honuf. in vita ^ulij secundi. Polid. lib. 15.
had half of his kingdom of Nauar taken from him, by Ferdinandus surnamed
Catholicus, King of Aragon, because he gave aid to Lewis the xij. then
excomunicated by Julius the second.

For shameful injuries done to the holy Church, and for persecution of
Bishops and religious, was John one of our kings of England with his whole
cu^trie Interdicted, and at length forced to yield his croune and dominions to
the courtesy of the Popes legate, as before is me^cyoned.

Nubrig. lib. z. c. 25. and 34.
For like causes, and namely for being accessarie to the murder of the blessed
Bishop S. Thomas of Caunterbury, was Henry the second driven by Alexander the
third, to order and penance.

Henry the eighte also, for more horrible waste and desolation of Religion,
wherein he far surmounted all his auncetors, and all other that ever we read
of since the time of Julian the Apo stata: for arrogatinge the title of supreme
head of the Church, and forcinge all his people to swear to his folly, and
that his concubine Anne Bullen was their Queen and his lawful wife: for most
cruel slaughter of Catholic Bishopes, Preistes, religious and lay men: for
infringinge and utterly abolishinge against his own oath, all the privileges
and liberties, granted to the Church of England by holy King Edward and
other his forfathers: for destroing all holy houses of Religion* and
sacrilegiously inuading all their goods and possessions: for marrienge,
remarringe, changinge, deuorcinge and killinge of his wives, when, where* and
whom he list: Honuf. in vita Pau li tertij.
for these and such like unspeakable outrages, he was excomunicated by Paulus
tertius as has before been declared.

Elizabethe excomunicated and deprived anno 1570.
And now lastly, not only for iniust intrusio^ and usurpation, but also for
the forsaid crimes, and followinge her said supposed fathers ways (who was
radix peccati of our days, and offended the more grievously, because he first
compelled the people of God to Schism and sin, as Ieoroboam did the
Israelites) this woman was by good Pius Quintus excomunicated and deprived, and
all her subjects discharged of oath and obedience toward her, with charge
efte^ones to all the subjects of the realm of England, or other her
dominions, that from thence forth under like pain of excomunicatio and Gods
and holy Churches curse, they shuold not acknowledge her for their Princesle
or superior, nor obey, defend and manteine her, but according to every ones
power and habillite, to cocurr to her deposition and condign punishment.

Executio of the en^en^e deferred.
Which sentence most holy, just, and dread full, though hitherto it have not
been openly pursued, partly by reason of the decease of Pius Quintus the
publisher, which ensued not long after; and partly for that the usurpers
forces, rage, and cruelty were so great, that they could hardly be resisted by
the only inhabitans of the realm, without evident danger and destruction of
very many noble and godly persons, in which case the churches censures so far
as they concern only temporal matters, by the meaning of him that gave the
sentence, does not bind; and lastly for that his holiness that now is (as his
predecessors before him) having exceeding tender care not only of our souls
but of our bodies and goods also, have hitherto tolerated in us, our enforced
subjection and obedience to her in civil affairs* specially upon expectation,
and hope, that she would after so long and fatherly sweet patience of the
supreme pastors of our souls, at the request of so many princes Christian, at
the pitiful suits, cries, clamors, and complaints of so many of her own
people, for the bludd of so many men meekely yielded and the inconsolable
complaints of so many afflicted consciences, either aknowledge her fault,
incline to mercy toward the Catholics, and seek (as her supposed father
desired to do in the end of his life) to reconcyle herself to the Church, or
to cum to sum good order at least with the sea Apostolic, and grant her
Catholic nobibility and people, leave to serve God after their conscience, and
manner of all their forfathers. Though (I say) for all these causes and other
more, the former iuditiall sentence has not been all this while executed, yet
now our holy father Sixtus the fifte, saying this usurper and excomunicate
person, to be nothing moved eitherwith pity of the people, or Apostolic
authority, but still obstinately and obdurately to persiste, and proceed in
all her former mischeefes and wickedness, could not contain or sorbeare any
longer, not only himself to imploie against so monstrous and pernicious an
heretic, rebel, usurper, and fierbrand of all mischief, the treasures
spiritual and temporal, that the Omnipotent God has given him for
maintenannce of justice, innocence, and religion; but also by the forsaid
examples of his predecessors and other holy Bishopes, and by a special canon
of the great De ^eret. cap. 3.
general Counsel of Laterane touching the chastisement of princes that will
not purge their do minions of heresy and heretics, has seriously dealte with
the chief and greatest princes of his Christian Catholic communion, that they
would give succurse to their afflicted brethren and co^fede rates, and join
together with him their supreme pastor, for chastiseme^t of that wicked woman*
the bane of Christendom and all their kingdo^s, the scoorge of God, and rebuke
of woma^kinde; as in this case every one would have been most ready, had they not
beneforced at this time, to im ploie all their forces against the heretics and
rebels of there own dominions, and therefore has specially entreated Philip
the high and mighty King Catholic of Spain, that for the greatness of power
given him by the almighty, for his singular love toward that nation whereof by
marriage of Holy Queen Marie of blessed memory he once was king, for the
old love and league betwixt the said cuntrie and the house of Burgogne, for
the infinite injuries and dishonors done to his majesty and people by
Elizabethe, and to conclude for his special piety and zeal toward Gods
house and the Sea Apostolic, together with the consideration of the fresh
barbarous murder of his consine the Queen of Scotland, by which the sacred
honor and name of Kingly dignety is dishonored, and all lawful princes highely
intressed; that for these and many other causes, his majesty would take upon
him in the name of God almighty, this sacred and glorious enterprise. Who at
lenghte, as well by this his Holiness auctority and exhortation, as by his own
unspeakable zeal and piety, moved also not a little by my humble and
continual suit together with the afflicted and banished Catholics of our
nation, of all and every degree, who have been by his special compassion and
Regal munificence principally supported in this their long exile, has
consented atlast, and taken upon him this so holy and glorious an act, to the
only honor of God, the benefit of the Christian world, and your delivery
(my good brethren) from the yoke of heresy and thraldom of your enemies, and
for restitutio^ of those realms and the subjects of the same to their ancient
liberty of laws and conscience. For which causes his majesty has in the name
of the lord God of Hosts, commanded sufficient royal and mayn forces both
by sea and land to be gathered, and to be conducted in to our cuntrie (if need
be, and if the pretensed and principal offender will not otherwise cum to
order) by the most Godly and valerous General, and Capitaines that be of his
majesty's service in all Christendom.

Of whose procedinge in this action, and as well of his holiness as his majesty's
intention and meaning therein, we are to aduertife you all, by these presents,
and to forwarne you against all false sclaunderous and seditious speeches of
the enemies, and heretics, by which they have many years and in wonderful
manner deluded some strangers, to their undoing, and the ruin of their
cuntreyes; And to comfort you against all other popular fears of the simple
sort: that neither the Co^queste of the land, dispossessinge of the English;
destruction of Catholics; ruin of auncye^t howses; abolishinge of our old
laws liberties or customs, is purposed; nor any other annoiaunce or
alteration in the world to be made, sauinge so much as the estates of the
realm shall agree upon with his holiness, and Majesty, for the restitution and
preservation of the Catholic religion, and necessary punishment of the
pretended. Assuring you all (my most dear cuntrymen) by my honor, and in the
word of a Cardinal, that there shall be as great care had of every Catholic
and penitent person, as possibly can be, for that is the Pope and kings
express will and pleasure.

VVherof you may all be the more secure, that his majesty has appointed for
the execution of this affair, so worthy, fortunate, and victorious a Prince,
no less renoumed for his piety mercy, and clemency (whereof you have seen
these years, hard by you, so many examples) the^ for his valor and manifold
victories, obtained against the Churches and the kings rebels* As on the
otherside, for your like security, one of the worthiest peers of Spain, for
valor, virtue, and swetenes of nature, and with him a great number of the
flower of that nobility, who have no need of any thing of yours, are
appointed for your succor, that if by your fault or mishapp, the matter should
come to a battle, they might after the victory, over rule and restreine the
fury of the Common soldiors, least they should ruin and sack the whole cuntry.

And for the same cause, his Holiness has also, not for my deserts, but of
special care and love of our nation preferred me, being of your flesh and
blud, to this high function; intendinge to send me as his Legate, with full
commission and co^maundment, to treat and deal from time to time, as well with
the states of the realm, as with his holiness, and the kings majesty for the
sweter maneginge of this godly and great affair, and with them to deliberate
of all the best means, how with the least damage of our cuntrie, nobillitie,
and gentry, and best preservation of the whole people, this godly purpose of
restoringe the Catholic religion, and putting the realm in order (as well for
the title of the croune as other controversies that may fall, betwixt the
Church and the common wealth, or any membre thereof, for what matter so ever,
since the time that heresy, scisme, and disorder began) may be acheiued.

Therefore having now through Gods merci full goodness, full and sufficient help
for your happy reconcilement to Christ's Church, and to deliver yourselues,
your cuntrie, and posterite, from that miserable servitude of body and soul
which you have so long been in for the more easy acheiuinge of this godly
designement, and for your better information: his Holiness confirms, renueth,
and reuiueth, the sentence declaratory of Pius Quintus of blessed memory, and
the Censures of all other his predecessors, and every bra^che clause and
article of them, against the said Elizabeth, as well concerning her
illegitimation, and usurpation, and inhabillitie to the Croune of England, as
for her excomunication and deposition in respect of her heresy, sacrilege,
and abominable life: And discharges all men from all other obedience,
l^altie, and fidelity toward her; requiringe and desiringe in the bowels of
Christ, and commaundinge under pain of excomunication and other penalties of
the law, and as they look for the favors and protection to them and theires,
before promised, and will avoid the Pope, kings, and the other princes high
indignation, that no man of what degree or condition so ever, obeie, abetter,
aid, defend, or acknowledge her for their prince, or superior, but that all
and every one, according totheir qualetie, calling, and habillitie,
immediately upon intelligence of his Holiness will, by these my letters, or
otherwise, or at the ariuall of his Catholic Majesty's forces, be ready, to
join to the said army, with all the powers and aids they can make, of men,
munition, and victuals, to help toward the restoringe of the Catholic
faith, and actual deposinge of the usurper, in such sort and place, as by
the chief manegers of this affare, and the General of this holy war shall be
appointed, for the best advancement of the cause.

In which case, upon especial desire I have to preserve and continue all your
noble Names and Famelies, being loathe that for the osfence of the present
possessors the whole house should perish, or any other suffer, but the
offenders them selves: Promise to make humble supplication in your behalf,
that the honors and possessions of all such offenders, may dissende to the
next hei res of that name and bludd, so that he or theycan be proved to join
with the Catholic army, with all the forces and friends they can make,
imediately upon knowledge had of this present, and means to accomplish their
desire.

Now therefore, My lords and dear Cuntrymen, if you list follow this Gods
ordinance, and happy provision that he has of his great mercy, made for your
honors, liberty, and faluation; If you without delaie join yourselues, as
God, conscience, and nature bindethe you; If you take part one with an other
in so Godly and honorable a quarrel, you shall atteine your purpose without
all bludshed: where otherwise if you should either sit still, or refuse to
help or sever your selves one from an other, or any of you seek to uphold
(which God forbid) the usurper or her accomplices, being thus cursed by the
Church, and forsaken of God and of all good men; you that so do, shall first
incurr the Angels curse and malediction upon the inhabitants Iudi* 5.
of the land of Meros, who sat still, and would not help God nor venture their
lives in his quarrel; and secondly be as depely excomunicated as she is, and
so you shall be guilty of your own ruin* and the bludd of the people, and
yet shall not prevail.

You shall fieghte against God, and against his anointed, against your next
lawful king, against truth, faith, religion, conscience, and your dear
cuntrie: you shall bootles defend, yea to your own present destruction and
eternal shame, a most iniust usurper, and open iniurer of all nations; an
infamous, deprived, accursed, excomunicate heretic; the very shame of her
sex, and princely name; the chief spectacle of sin and abomination in this
our age; And the only poison calametie and destruction of our noble Church
and Cuntrie.

Feight not, for Gods love, feight not, in that quarrel, in which if you die,
you are sure to be damned: feight not against all your auncesters souls, and
faith, nor against the salvation of all your dearest, wives, children, and what
so ever you would well to, either now or in the time to cum. Match not
yourselues against the highest: this is the day no doubt of her fall, this is
the hour of Gods wraths toward her and all her partakers* Forsake her
therefore betim^, that you be not inwrapped in her sins, punishment, and
damnation. Trust me, there was never any persecutor of the Church, but in
himself or his next seed, he came to shame and confusion. Remember the end of
Antiochus, Jason, Iesabell, Iu lian, Valeus, and of other the Apostatous and
heretical Emperors, with such like usurpers and oppressers of Gods Church,
how spedely they passed to eternal ignominy.

Cu^forts* and helps of the Catholic part.
On the otherside, you most noble and valiant Champions of Gods Church, the
honor of English kinghtehood and the deffenders of the glory and liberties
thereof, you, and all the blessed people, to whom God has given so happy a
lote, zeal and coorage, to feight for your fathers faith, for your cuntries
liberty, for Christ, for religion, and for the dread sovereign sacraments of
our salvation; the honorablest quarrel, the likeliest and most commendable
cause, in the sight of the present world, and the posterity, that possibly can
be. If you win, you save your whole realm from subversion, and innumerable
souls, present and to cum, from damnation; If you die, you be sure to be
saved, the blessinge of Christ and his Church, the pardon of his Holiness,
given to all, in most ample sort, that either take arms, die, or any way
duly endeavor in this quarrel. The prayers of all Christian people, which be
publikly promulgated for your safety and good succes: The blud of all the
blessed Bishops, religious, preistes, and laymen, shed in that land, cry to
God at this hour for your victory, and vengaunce to your enemies their
perseoutors: All the Saints in heaven, whose holy Churches, bodies, and
memories, your enemies have spoiled and profaned, make now instant suit for
your happy success. All the virtuous preistes of your cuntrie, who by the
long Tyra^nic of this time, have suffered manifold miseries and martirdomes,
both at home and abroad, to save their own souls, and win their decrest
cuntrimen to salvation, they also streche forth their consecrated hands
night and day for your victory, and be present diverse of them to serve every
man's spiritual necessity, by Confession, Counsel, and all Consolation in
Christ Jesus, giuinge you testimony by their redines to live and die with you,
how just the cause of this holy feight is, and how happy and glorious is the
bludd that shall be shed therein.

With these blessed patrons both in heaven and earth; with the guarde of all
Gods holy Angels; with our blessed Savior himself in the sovereign Sacrament,
present among you to your protection, comunicatinge comfort and coorage; and
with the daily most holy oblation of Christ's own dear body and bludd, making
more forcible intercession from the earth for you, then the blud of Abel; with
so many divine unspeakable helps; if you were never so few you could not
lose: without these and against these holies, our enemies (be they never so
fierce, never so proud, never so many, never so well appointed) then ca^ not
preuail, fear you not, they ca^ not. Though never so great show be made, never
so many raised against you, because most of the^ be Catholiltes or notoriously
injured by heretics, they be armed for us, they ca^ not strike, they will not
fight against their own consciences, be bold of it, they will not. Many
others of the^ be indifferente, of neither, or no religion; whose wit and
warynesse will be such in this extremity, and in so just cause to desire a
Change, that where by overthrow of the heretics many shall be aduaunsed, and by
their good success no man bettred, in so great hassard of things, they will
never adore the sun setting, nor follow the declininge fortune of so filthy,
wicked, and illiberall a Creature, or her so base and dishonorable leaders: who
also have been at deadly variaunce among themselves these many years, and sum
of them mortally hatinge their misters, will never omit this opportunity to
be delivered of her, and revenged one of an other.

The rest of them that be pure zealous heretics, which be very few in
comparison, and not very well contented neither, with the former regiment, of
all me^ in the world most effeminate, delicate, and least expert in the wars:
the Angel of God will persecute them, and they shall fly in fear and torment
of their own wicked minds, though none pursue them.

You may all remember how the late great traitor the Duke of Northumberland,
was in the height of his pride and power forsaken of all his men, and forced to
yeilde to a poor desolate Catholic lady. All the world knowethe how the like
usurper Richard the third, being most worthily in the very field and feighte
abandoned of the nobility and people, was made an example of Gods ire toward
all tirantes and usurpers.

But how so ever it fall out through the sins of the people at home, the
Catholic forces are strong enough, their provision sufficient, their
appointment passinge, more expert Captains the^ the enemy has good soldiers,
all resolute to die, not auailable for any to fly away, all excedingly
incoraged by the equity of the cause, and wonderfully confirmed by Gods
mercies so often in our days showed in all quarrels of the Catholic religion.

These fifty years there was never Catholic army which stood to it, but had
the victory: by mistrustinge God, by ouermuche trusting man, by flying or
auoidinge the battle, by yeildinge or co^poundinge, sundry great and Godly
atte^pts have been frustrated: but in manly and confident combating for God and
the Church, none at all.

Call to mind the miraculous victories of Charles the fifte, subduinge all the
powrable Lutheran princes in Germany, to his and the Catholic Churches
obeisance, with passinge small forces, and in a few years or rather months
space, the enemies being almost innumerable. Remember the three famous
battaills that the Catholic Cantons and people of the Swisers, being in
number, power, and provision, much inferior to the other; obtained by Gods
special grace, and justice of the cause, against the Swinglians their
Neighbors, in one of which Swinglius himself was slain, and in every one a
marvelous number of heretics, and of Catholics so few, that in such
inequality of humane helps, God must needs be the extraordinary worker of the
same.

Read the Histories of France, and see whether the Catholics have not had in
manner, always, miraculous victories against the Caluinists: among many, the
fights at Druse, at larnabe, at Saint Denis, at Mountcounter, and specially the
merciful work of God this last year, whereby we saw the huge forces as well
of Germans as Swisers, by Gods mighty arm and very small aid of man,
wonderfully defeated.

Recounte furthermore all the famous and for tunate re^counters, of a very few
Catholics against the heretics and rebels in Flanders: as at Grooning, at
Mock, at Mounts, at Antwerp, at Iemblous, and many other conflictes, where
without loss almost at all, many thousands of Gods and the Kings enemies
have been cut in pieces, our lord God no doubt co^batinge with his people
against his enemies, as he did against Senacharib, Nicanor, and other mentioned
in holy writ.

Which (thing most noble and valiant gentle men of England) may give you
courage and comfort from God himself, even the lord God of Hosts, to adventure
your selves in a quarrel most honorable, in a cause that the divine Majesty
has showed himself, not only in other ages, but even in all our eyes and
memories to have singular care of, In a case of the extrea mest necessity of
our Just defense and arms, that ever any Christian people had, or can have.

Thus much, my good lords and most dear friends, I have thought good to
forwarne you of the whole cause of these present sacred wars, and of his
Holiness and Catholic Majesty's sincere intention therein; and both their
incomparable affections toward our Nation, whereof I could give you far more
comfortable intelligence, if I were personally present with you, as I trust I
shall be very shortly, for that is fully meant by our Holy father and his
majesty, and of me so much desired, that every short day seems a long
year, till I enjoy you in our lord, though in the mean time I stand here
wholly for your service; wherein as I have spente these many years of my
banisheme^t, so would I now as God shall appointe, and need require, bestow my
bludd and the remnaunt of my life, among you in my dearest cuntrie, for the
better accomplishment of that which all true Christians and Godly English
hearts do desire.

Our lord God bless and direct you all to follow that in this action, and
in all your life that shall be most agreeable to his glory our cuntries good,
and your own honor and salvation.

From my lodginge in the Palace of. S. Peter in Rome this 28. of April. 1588.
The Cardinal.


