Melancholic humors, IN VERSES OF Diverse natures, set down by Nich: Breton,
Gent.



LONDON

Printed by RICHARD BRADOCKE. 1600.

TO THE LOVER OF good studies, and favorer of good actions, Master Thomas
Blount, heavens blessing, and earths happiness.
SIR, my knowledge of your good judgment in the diversity of humors, and your
disposition to that best melancholy, that can not run mad with trifles, has
made me (upon the gathering together of certain odd pieces of Poetry) to offer
my labors te your patience, and my love to your service. They are all waters
of one spring: but they run through many kinds of earth; whereof they give a
kind of tang in their taste. Such as they be, I leave them to the kindness of
your acceptance, and my self to your like commandment. And so (loath to use
ceremonious co^plements) in the affection of a poor friend, and in humble
thankfulness, for your many undeserved favors, I rest

Yours, very much to command, N. B.

To the Reader.
PASQVILL, having been long in his dumps, in somewhat better then a brown
study, has brought forth the fruits of a few melancholic humors: which
chiefly he commends to spirits of his own nature, full of melancholy, and as
near Bedlem, as Mooregate; a figure in the fields to be easily disciphered. To
be short, and to grow toward an end, ere I have well begun, I will tell you;
the ge^tlema^s brains were much troubled, as you may see by his perplexities:
but with studying how to make one line level with another, in more rhyme then
perhaps some will think reason, with much ado about nothing, he has made a
piece of work as little worth. He that can give him less^ commendation, let
him use his art. For mine own part, I have taken pain to write his Will,
which he has sent to the world to like as it list. According to whose will, I
leave it; entreating no man to wreste his will to any thing, further then may
stand with his pleasure; but to speak indifferently of all things, as he
finds cause: and so I rest

Your friend, N. B.

In Authorem.
THOU, that would find the habit of true passion,
And see a mind attired in perfect strains;
Not wearing moodes, as gallants do a fashion,
In these pide times, only to show their brains,
Look here on Bretons work, the master print:
Where, such perfections to the life do rise.
If they seem wry, to such as look asquint,
The fault's not in the object, but their eyes.
For, as one coming with a laterall view,
Unto a cunning piece wrought perspectiue,
Wants faculty to make a censure true:
So with this Authors Readers will it thrive:
Which being eyed directly, I divine,
His proof their praise, will meet, as in this line.
BEN: JOHNSON.

See, and say nothing.
OH my thoughts, keep in your words,
Least their passage do repent ye:
Knowing, Fortune still affordes
Nothing, but may discontent ye.
If your Saint be like the Sun,
Sit not ye in Phoebus chair;
Least, when once the horses run,
Ye be Dedalus his heir.
If your labors well deserve,
Let your silence only grace them:
And, in patience, hope preserve,
That no fortune can deface them.
If your friend do grow unkind,
Grieve, but do not seem to show it.
For, a patient heart shall find
Comfort, when the soul shall know it.
If your trust be all betrayed,
Try, but trust no more at all:
But in soul be not dismayed,
Whatsoever do befall.
In your selves, your selves enclose:
Keep your secrecies unseen:
Least, when ye your selves disclose,
Ye had better never been.
And what ever be your state,
Do not languish ouerlong:
Least you find it all too late,
Sorrow be a deadly song.
And be comforted in this,
If your passions be concealed,
Cross, or comfort, bale, or bliss,
It Is the best, is not revealed.
So, my dearest thoughts, adieu,
Hark whereto my soul does call ye:
Be but secret, wise, and true,
Fear no evil can befall ye.
What is hell?
WHAT is the place, that some do paint for hell?
A lake of horror for the life of man.
Is it not, then, the death wherein I dwell,
That knows no joy, since first my life began?
What are the devils? Spirits of tormenting.
What else are they, that vex me in each vain?
With wretched thoughts, my woeful spirit tempting,
Or else perplex me in an after-paine.
What is the fire? but, an effect of sin,
That keeps my heart in an unkindly heat.
How long shall I this life continue in?
Till true repentance mercy do entreat,
And (...) even at the latest breath;
Save me, sweet Lord, yet from the second death.
Mal content.
IF I desired unto the world to live,
Or sought in soul to serve the golden God:
If I did homage to an idol give,
Or, with the wicked, wished to have abode,
Then well might Justice lay her sword upon me,
In due correction of my crooked heart:
But, shall I live, in soul thus woe begone me,
That seek in faith to serve the better part?
Ah wretched soul, why do thou murmur so?
It is thy cross, and thou art borne to bear it:
Through hellish griefs, thy heart to heaven must go,
For patience crown, if thou will live to wear it.
Then rest with this (since faith is virtues friend)
Death ends distress, heaven makes a happy end.
A dole full passion.
OH tired heart, too full of sorrows,
In night-like days, despairing morrowes,
How can thou think, so deeply grieved,
To hope to live to be relieved
Good fortune has all grace (...) (...),
And cruel care has too much torn thee:
Unfaithful friends do all deceive thee,
Acquaintance all unkindly leave thee.
Beauty out of her book does blot thee,
And love has utterly forgot thee,
Patience does but to passion move thee,
While only honor lives to love thee.
Thine enemies all ill devise thee,
Thy friends but little good advise thee:
And they, who most do duty owe thee,
Do seem as though they do not know thee.
Thus pity weeps to look upon thee,
To see how thou art woe begone thee:
And while these passions seek to spill thee,
Death but attends the hour to kill thee.
And since no thought is coming to thee,
That any way may comfort do thee,
Dispose thy thoughts, as best may please thee;
That Heaven, of all thy Hell, may ease thee.
A Testament upon the passion.
TO care, that crucifies my heart,
My sighs, and sobbes, I do bequeath,
And to my sorrows deepest smart,
The latest gasp that I do breath.
To Fortune I bequeath my folly,
To give to such as seek her grace:
To faithless friends, that fortune wholly,
That brought me in this heavy case.
To beauty, I bequeath mine age:
To love, the hate of wit, and sense:
To patience, but the cure of rage:
To honor, virtues patience.
Mine enemies I do forgive:
And, to my friends, I give my love:
And wish, ungrateful hearts may live,
But like ingratitude to prove.
To pity, I bequeath my tears,
To fill her eyes when they be dry:
To faith, the fearelesse thoughts of fears,
To give to life, to let me die.
My care, I do bequeath to death,
To cut the threades, that thoughts do spinne,
And, at my latest gasp of breath,
To heaven my soul, to hell my sin.
A fantastic solemn humor.
SOVND, good reason, sound my sorrows,
Equal them with any living:
Find the worst of all her giving,
When she most her mischief borrowes.
Leave not patience all perplexed,
Where no passions are appeased:
But her torments never eased,
Keep her spirit too much vexed.
Tell, oh tell the truest story,
That has long time been described:
Whereto justly is ascribed
Sorrows pride, and death his glory.
Love bred in discretions blindness,
Shadows, for the sun affecting
Nothing, but nothing effecting,
Shows the cross of Natures kindness.
Wit, bewitched with wanton beauty,
Lost the raines of reasons bridle:
And, in folly all too idle,
Brake the bands of reasons duty.
Time misspent in follies trifles
(With repentance sorrow feeding)
In the rules of reasons reeding,
Finds them nothing else but nifles.
Care, yet, seeking to recover
Indiscretions heavy losses,
Found in casting up my crosses,
Sorrow only left the lover.
A brief of sorrow.
MUSE of sadness, near deaths fashion,
Too near madness, write my passion.
Pains possess me, sorrows spill me,
Cares distress me, all would kill me.
Hopes have faild me, Fortune foild me,
Fears have quaild me, all have spoild me.
Woes have worn me, sighs have soakt me,
Thoughts have torn me, all have broke me.
Beauty struck me, love has caught me,
Death has took me, all dispatched me.
A solemn sa^cy.
SORROVV in my heart breeds
A Cocatrices neast:
Where every young bird feeds,
Upon my hearts unrest.
Where every pecke they give me
(Which every hour they do)
Unto such pain they drive me,
I know not what to do.
Oh brood vnhapp'ly hatched,
Of such a cursed kind,
Where death and sorrow, matched,
Live, but to kill the mind.
Words torments are but trifles,
That but conceits confound,
And Natures griefs, but nifles,
Unto the spirits wound.
They are but cares good morrowes,
That passions can declare:
While my hearts inward sorrows,
Are all without compare.
Fortune, she seeks to swear me,
To all may discontent me;
Yet says she does forbear me,
She does no more torment me.
Beauty she does retain me
In scarce a favors tittle:
And, though she do disdeigne me,
She thinks my grief too little.
Love falls into a laughing,
At reasons little good,
While sorrow with her quaffing,
Is drunk with my heart blood.
But, let her drink, and spare not,
Until my heart be dry:
And, let love laugh: I care not:
My hope is, I shall die.
And death shall only tell
My froward fortunes fashion,
That nearest unto hell,
Was found the lovers passion.
A solemn sonnet.
FORTUNE has writ characters on my heart,
As full of crosses, as the skin can hold:
Which tell of torments, tearing every part,
While death and sorrow do my fate unfold.
Patience sits leaning like a pining soul,
That had no heart to think of hopes relief;
While fruitless cares discomfort do enroule,
Within the ground of never ending grief.
Thoughts fly about, as all in fear confounded:
Reason grown mad, with too much mal content,
Love passion-rent, to see his patience wounded,
With dreadful terrors of despaires intent:
While care concludes, in comforts overthrown,
When death can speak, my passions shall be shown.
An extreme Passion.
OVT of the depth of deadly grief, tormenting day and night,
A wounded heart, and wretched soul, deprived of all delight,
Where never thought of comfort came, that passion might appease,
Or by the smallest spark of hope might give the smallest ease,
Let me entreat that solemn Muse that serves but sorrows turn,
In ceasselesse sighs, and endless sobs, to help my soul to mourn.
But, oh, what thought beyond al thought has thought to think upon,
Where patience finds her greatest power in passions ouergon,
That near the door of natures death in doleful notes does dwell,
In horrors fits that will describe my too much figured hell.
What want, what wrong, what care, what cross may crucify a heart,
But, day and hour, I do endure in all, and every part?
Want to sustain the bodies need, wrong to distract the mind:
Where want makes wit and reason both to go against their kind.
Care, to devise for comforts help: but so by fortune crossed,
As kills the heart, to cast the eye, on naught but labor lost.
Desire to live in spite of death; yet still, in living, dying:
And so a greater death then death, by want of dying, trying.
Oh hell of hels, if ever earth such horror can afford,
Where such a world of helpelesse cares do lay the heart aboard.'
No day, no night, no thought, no dream, but of that doleful nature,
That may amaze, or sore affright a most afflicted creature.
Friends turned to foes, foes use their force: and fortune, in her pride
Shaks hands with fate, to make my soul the weight of sorrow bide.
Care brings in sickness, sickness pain, and pain with patience passion,
With biting in most bitter griefs, brings feature out of fashion:
Where brawn fallen cheeks, heart scalding sighs, and dimmed eyes with tears,
Do show, in life's Anatomy, what burden sorrow bears.
Where all day long, in helpless cares, all hopeless of relief,
I wish for night, I might not see the obiectes of my grief.
And, when night comes, woes keep my wits in such a waking vain,
That I could wish, though to my grief, that it were day again.
Thus, days are nights: which nights are days: which days are like those
nights,
That to my passions sense present but only sorrows sights,
Which to the eye but of the mind of misery appear,
To fill the heart of forlorn hope too full of heavy cheer.
Oh heart, how can thou hold so long, and art not broke ere this?
When all thy strings are but the strains that comfort strikes amiss.
Yet must thou make thy music still, but of that mournful strain,
Where sorrow, in the sound of death, does show her sweetest vain:
Or, where her Muses all consent, in their consort to try
Their sweetest music in desire to die, and can not die.
The Pelican, that kills her self, her young ones for to feed,
Is pleased to die, that they may live, that suck when she does bleed*
But, while I in those cares consume, that would my spirit kill,
Naught lives by me, when I must die, to feed but sorrows will.
The Heart, that is hu^ted all day long, has sport yet with the hou^ds,
And happly beats off many a dog before his deadly wounds:
But my poor heart is hunted still, with such a cruel cry,
As, in their dogged humors, live, while I alone must die.
The Swan that sings before her death does show that she is pleased,
To know that death will not be long in helping the diseased.
But my poor Swanlike soul (alas) has no such power to sing,
Because she knows not when my death will make my care a king.
What shall I say? but only say; I know not what to say:
So many torments tear my heart, and tugge it every way.
My Sun is turned into a shade: or else mine eyes are blind,
That sorrows cloud makes all seem dark, that comes into my mind.
My youth, to age: or else, because my comforts are so cold,
My sorrow makes me in conceit to be decrepit old.
My hopes to fears: or else because my fortunes are forlorn,
My fancy makes me make my self unto my self a scorn.
My life, to death: or else because my heart is so perxplexed,
I find my self but living dead, to feel my soul so vexed.
For, what is here that earth can yield in pleasures sweetest vain,
But, in the midst of all my cares, does still increase my pain?
While Epicures are ouerglut, I ly and starve for food,
Because my conscience can not thrive upon ill gotten good.
While other swim in choice of silks, I sit alone in rags,
Because I can not fit the time, to fill the golden bags.
While other are bedeckt in gold, in pearl and precious stone,
I sigh to see they have so much, and I can light of none.
Not that I envy their estate, but wish that God would give
Some comfort, to my careful hope, whereby my heart might live.
Some please themselves in choice of sports, in trifles, and in toies*
While my poor feeble spirit feeds, of nothing but annoyes.
Some have their houses stately built, and gorgeous to behold,
While in a cottage, bare and poor, I bide the bitter cold.
Some have their chariots and their horse to bear them to and fro,
While I am glad to walk on foot, and glad I can do so.
Some have their musickes hermony to please their idle ears,
While of the song of sorrow, still, my soul the burden bears.
Some have their choice of all perfumes, that natures art can give;
While sin does stink so, in my soul, as makes me loath to live.
They, like the wielders of the world, command and have their will;
While I, a weakling in the world, am slave to sorrow still.
The Owl, that makes the night her day, delights yet in the dark:
But I am forced to play the Owl, that have been bred a Lark.
The Eagle, from the lowest vale, can mount the lofty sky:
But, I am fallen down from the hill, and in the vale must die.
The Sparrow, in a Princes house, can find a place to build:
I scarce can find out any place, that will my comfort yield.
The little Wrenne does find a worm, the little Finch a seed;
While my poor heart does hunger still, and finds but little feed.
The Be does find her honey flower, the Butterfly her leaf:
But I can find a world of corn, that yeeldes not me a sheafe.
The horse, the Ox, the silly Ass, that tugge out all the day,
At night come home, and take their rest, and lay their work away;
While my poor heart, both day and night, in passions ouertoild,
By ouerlabour of my brain, does find my spirit spoiled.
The winds do blow away the clouds, that would obscure the Sun:
And, how all glorious is the sky, when once the storms are done!
But, in the heaven of my hearts hope, where my loves light does shine,
I nothing see, but clouds of cares, or else my sun decline.
The earth is watered, smoth'd and dressed, to keep her gardens gay;
While my poor heart, in woeful thoughts, must wither still away.
The Sea is sometime at a calm, where ships at anchor ride,
And fishes, on the sunny shore, do play on every side:
But my poor heart, in sorrows seas, is sick of such a qualme,
As, while these stormy tempests hold, can never look for calm.
So that I see, each bird, and beast, the sea, the earth, the sky,
All sometime in their pleasures live, while I alone must die.
Now, think, if all this be too true (as would it were not so)
If any creature live on earth, that do like sorrow know.
Nay, ask of sorrow, even her self; to think how I am wounded,
If she be not, to see my woes, within her self confounded;
Or say, no figure can suffice, my sorrows frame to fashion,
Where patience thus has showed her self, beyond her self in passion.
Par nulla figura dolori, nec dolor meo. A solemn farewell to the world.
OH forlorn fancy, whereto do thou live,
To weary out the senses with unrest?
Hopes are but cares, that but discomforts give,
While only fools do clime the Phoenix nest.
To heart sick souls, all joys are but a jest.
Thou do in vain, but strive against the stream,
With blinded eyes to see the sunny beam.
Die with desire, abandond from delight.
Thy weary winter lasts all the year.
Say to thy self, that darkness is the light,
Wherein does nothing but thy death appear;
While wit, and sense, in sorrows heavy cheer,
Finds thee an humor, but unkindly bredde,
Of hopes illusions, in too weak a head.
Fortune affrightes thee with a thousand fears,
While folly feeds thee with abuse of wit:
And, while thy force in fainting passion wears,
Patience is ready to increase the fit,
Where agonies in their extremes do sit.
So that, each way, thy soul is so perplexed,
As better die, then live to be so vexed.
Say, patience somewhat do assuage thy pain;
Prolonged cures are too uncomfortable:
And where that care does never comfort gain,
The state, alas, mustneedes be miserable.
Where sorrows labors are so lamentable,
That silence says, that to the soul complains,
Concealed sorrows are the killing pains.
Then do not cease to sigh, and sobbe thy fill,
Bleed in the tears of true loves living blood,
Show how unkindness seeks the heart to kill,
That hides a Buzzard in a Falcons hoode.
Feed not thy self with misconceipted good.
Better to starve, then, in a sugared pill,
To taste the poison of the spirits ill.
But, if thou can content thee with thy life,
And wilt endure a double death to live,
If thou can bear that bitter kind of strife,
Where cross conceits but discontents do give,
If to this end, thou can thine humor drive,
And cares true patience can command thee so,
Give me then leave to tell thee what I know.
I know too well, that all too JOHg have tried,
That earth contains not that may content thee.
Sorrow will so beset thee on each side,
That wit, nor reason can the thought invent thee,
But that will some way serve for to torment thee.
Hope will deceive thee, happiness go by thee,
Fortune will fail thee, and the world defy thee.
Beauty will blind thine eyes, bewitch thine heart,
Confound thy senses, and command thy will,
Scorn thy desire, not look on thy desert,
Disdain thy service, quite thy good with ill,
And make no care thy very soul to kill:
Time will outgoe thee, sorrow onertake thee,
And death, a shadow of a substance, make thee.
I know this world will never be for thee:
Conscience must carry thee another way.
Another world must be for thee and me,
Where happy thoughts must make their holiday,
While heavenly comforts never will decay.
We must not think in this ill age to thrive,
Where faith and love are scarcely found alive.
We must not build our houses on the sands,
Where every flood will wash them quite away:
Nor set our seals unto those wicked bands,
Where damned souls their debts in hell must pay:
Our states must stand upon a better stay:
Upon the rock we must our houses build,
That will our frames, from wind, and water shield
Go, bid the world, with all his trash, farewell,
And tell the earth, it shall be all but dust:
These wicked wares that worldlings buy and sell,
The Moath will eat, or else the canker ruft:
All flesh is grass, and to the grave it must.
This sink of sin, is but the way to hell,
Leave it I say, and bid the world farewell.
Account of pomp, but as a shadowed power,
And think of friends, but as the summer flies:
Esteem of beauty as a fading flower,
And lovers fancies, but as fabled lies:
Know, that on earth there is no Paradise.
Who sees not heaven, is surely spirit-blinde,
And like a body, that does lack a mind.
Then, let us lie as dead, till there we live,
Where only love does live for ever blessed,
And only love the only life does give,
That bringes the soul unto eternal rest.
Let us this wicked, wretched world detest,
Where graceless hearts in hellish sins persevere,
And fly to heaven, to live in grace for ever.
A solemn conceit.
1
DOES love live in beauties eyes?
Why then are they so unloving?
Patience in her passion proving:
There his sorrow chiefly lies.
2
Lives belief in lovers hearts?
Why then are they unbelieving,
Hourly so the spirit grieuing,
With a thousand jealous smarts?
3
Is there pleasure in loves passion?
Why then is it so unpleasing,
Heart and spirit both diseasing,
Where the wits are out of fashion?
1
No: love sees, in beauties eyes:
He has only lost his seeing:
Where in sorrows only being,
All his comfort wholly dies.
2
Faith, within the heart of love,
Fearful of the thing it has,
Treading of a trembling path,
Does but jealousy approve.
3
In loves passion then what pleasure?
Which is but a lunacy:
Where grief, fear, and jealousy
Plague the senses out of measure.
Farewell then (unkindly) fancy,
In thy courses all too cruel:
Woe, the price of such a jewel,
As turns reason to a franzy.
A strange A, B, C.
TO learn the babies A, B, C,
Is fit for children, not for me.
I know the letters all so well,
I need not learn the way to spell:
And, for the cross, before the row,
I learned it all too long ago.
Then let them go to school that list,
To hang the lip, at Had I wist.
I never loved a book of horn,
Nor leaves, that have their letters worn,
Nor with a fescue to direct me,
Where every puny shall correct me.
I will the treuant play a while,
And, with mine ear, mine eye beguile,
And only hear, what other see,
What mocketh them as well as me,
And laugh at him, that goes to school,
To learn with me to play the fool.
But soft a while: I have mistook.
This is but some imagined book,
That wilful hearts in wantons eyes,
Do only by conceits devise:
Where spell, and put together prove
The reading of the rules of love.
But, if it be so, let it be:
It shall no lesson be for me.
Let them go spell, that can not reed,
And know the cross unto their speed;
While I am taught but to discern,
How to forget the thing I learn.
Fie on pride.
THE hidden pride that lurkes in beauties eyes,
And ouerlookes the humble hearts of love,
Does nothing else but vain effects devise,
That may discretion from the mind remove.
Oh, how it works in wit, for idle words,
To buy repentance but with labor lost:
While sorrows fortune nothing else affordes
But showers of rain, upon a bitter frost.
A wicked shadow that deceiues the sight,
And breeds an itch, that ouerrunnes the heart:
Which, leaving reason in a pitious plight,
Consumes the spirit, with a curelesse smart.
While wounded patience in her passion cries;
Fie upon pride, that lurkes in beauties eyes.
A farewell to love.
FAREVVELL love, and loving folly,
All thy thoughts are too vnholly:
Beauty strikes thee full of blindness,
And then kills thee with unkindness.
Farewell wit, and witty reason,
All betrayed, by fancies treason:
Love has of all joy bereft thee,
And to sorrow only left thee.
Farewell will, and wilful fancy,
All in danger of a franzy:
Love to beauties bow has won thee,
And together, all undone thee.
Farewell beauty, sorrows Agent:
Farewell sorrow, patience pagent:
Farewell patience, passions stayer:
Farewell passion, loves betrayer.
Sorrows agent, patience pagent:
Passions stayer, loves betrayer,
Beauty, sorrow, patience, passion,
Farewell life of such a fashion.
Fashion, so good fashions spilling:
Passion, so with passions killing:
Patience, so with sorrow wounding:
Farewell beauty, loves confounding.
A ieasting curse.
FIE upon that too much beauty,
That so blinds reasons seeing,
As, in swearing all loves duty,
Gives him, no where else, a being.
Cursed be thou all in kindness,
That with beauty, love have wounded;
Blessing love, yet in such blindness,
As in beauty is confounded.
Ever may thou live tormented,
With the faith of love unfeigned,
Till thy heart may be contented
To relieve whom thou have pained.
Thus, in wroth of so well pleased,
As concealeth joys confessing,
Till my pain be wholly eased,
Cursed be thou, all in blessing.
So farewell, and fairly note it;
He, who as his soul does hate thee,
From his very heart has wrote it,
Never evil thought come at thee.
A solemn toie.
IF that love had been a king,
He would have commanded beauty:
But, he is a silly thing,
That has sworn to do her duty.
If that love had been a God,
He had then been full of grace:
But, how grace and love are odd,
It Is too plain a pitious case.
No: love is an idle jest,
That has only made a word
Like unto a Cuckoes neast,
That has never hatched a bird.
Then, from nothing to conceive
That may any substance be;
Yet so many does deceive,
Lord of heaven deliver me.
A displeasure against love.
LOVE is witty, but not wise,
When he stares on beauties eyes,
Finding wonders in conceit,
That do fall out but deceit.
Wit is stable, but not stayed,
When his senses are betrayed:
Where, too late sorrow does prove,
Beauty makes a fool of love.
Youth is forward, but too fond,
When he falls in Cupids bond:
Where repentance lets him see,
Fancy fast is never free.
Age is cunning, but unkind,
When he once grows Cupid-blinde.
For, when beauty is untoward,
Age can never be but froward.
So that I do find in brief,
In the grounds of natures grief,
Age, and youth, and wit do prove,
Beauty makes a fool of love.
A farewell to conceit.
FAREVVELL conceit: Conceit no more well fare,
Hope feeds the heart with humors, to no end:
Fortune is false in dealing of her share:
Virtue, in heaven, must only seek a friend.
Adieu desire* desire, no more adieu.
Will has no leisure to regard desert:
Love finds, too late, the proverb all too true,
That beauties eyes stood never in her heart.
Away poor love: love, seek no more a way
Unto thy woe, where wishing is no wealth:
In nights deep darkness, never look for day,
Nor in hearts sickness, ever seek for health.
Desire, conceit, away, adieu, farewell.
Love is deceived, that seeks for heaven in hell.
An unhappy, solemn, ieasting curse.
OH venom, cursed, wicked, wretched eyes,
The killing lookers on the heart of love:
Where witching beauty lives but to devise
The plague of wit, and passions hell to prove:
That snowy neck, that chillest, more then snow,
Both eyes and hearts, that live but to behold thee:
That graceles lip, from whence loves grief dothgrow,
Who does, in all his sweetest sense infold thee:
Those chaining hairs more hard then iron chains,
In tying fast the fairest thoughts of love,
Ye shameful cheeks, that in your blushing vains,
The ravished passions of the mind do prove:
Ye spider fingers of those spiteful hands,
That work but webbes, to tangle fancies eyes:
That Idol breast, that like an Image stands,
To work the hell of reasons heresies:
Those Fairy feet, whose chary steps do steal
Those hearts, whose eyes do but their shadows see:
That ruthlesse spirit, that may well reveal,
Where loves confusions all included be:
To thee, that can, or wilt not bend thy will,
To use thy gifts all gracious in their nature,
To patience good, and not to passions ill,
And may, and wilt not be a blessed creature,
I wish, and pray, thine eyes may weep for woe
They cannot get one look of thy beloved:
Thy snowy neck may be as cold as snow,
With cold of fear, it has no fancy moved.
Thy lip, in anger by thy teeth be bitten,
It can not give one kissing sweet of love:
And, by thy hands, thy shriu'led hairs be smitten,
For want of holding of thy hopes behoue:
Thy blushing cheeks loose all their lively blood,
With pining passions of impatient thought:
That Idol body, like a piece of wood,
Consume, to see it is esteemd for naught.
Those spider fingers, and those Fairy feet
The crampe so crook, that they may creep for grief:
And, in that spirit sorrows poisons meet,
To bring on death, where love has no relief.
All these, and more just measures of amiss
Upon thy frowns, on faithful love, befall:
But, sweetly smile, and then heavens pour their bliss
On thy hairs, neck, cheeks, lip, hands, feet, and all.
A quarrel with love.
OH that I could write a story
Of loves dealing with affection;
How he makes the spirit sorry,
That is touched with his infection.
But he does so closely wind him,
In the plaits of will ill pleased,
That the heart can never find him,
Till it be too much diseased.
It Is a subtle kind of spirit,
Of a venom kind of nature,
That can, like a conny ferret,
Creep unawares upon a creature.
Never eye that can behold it,
Though it works first by seeing;
Nor conceit, that can unfold it,
Though in thoughts be all his being.
Oh, it makes old men witty,
Young men wanton, women idle,
While that patience weeps, for pity
Reason bitts not natures bridle.
In it self it has no substance,
Yet is working worlds of wonder,
While, in phrensies fearful instance,
Wit, and sense are put asunder.
What it is, is in conjecture,
Seeking much, but nothing finding:
Like to fancies architecture,
With illusions, reason blinding.
Day and night, it never rests,
Mocking fancy with ill fortune,
While the spirit it molesteth,
That does patience still importune.
Yet, for all this, how to find it,
It Is impossible to show it;
When the Muse, that most does mind it,
Will be furthest off to know it.
Yet can beauty so retain it,
In the profit of her service,
That she closely can maintain it,
For her servant chief in office.
In her eye, she chiefly breeds it:
In her cheeks, she chiefly hides it:
In her servants faith, she feeds it,
While his only heart abides it.
All his humor is in changing:
All his work is in invention:
All his pleasure is in ranging:
All his truth but in intention.
Strange, in all effects conceived:
But, in substance, nothing sounded,
While the senses are deceived,
That on idle thoughts are grounded.
Not to dwell upon a trifle,
That does follies hope befall,
It Is but a new nothing nifle,
Made for fools to play withal.
A wish in vain.
OH, that wit were not amazed,
At the wonder of his senses:
Or his eyes, not ouergazed,
In Mineruas excellences.
Oh, that reason were not foiled,
In the rules of all his learning:
Or his learning were not spoiled,
In the sweet of loves discerning.
Oh, that beauty were not froward,
In regard of reasons duty:
Or, that will were not untoward,
In the waiward wit of beauty.
But, since all in vain are wishes,
Patience tells them that have past it;
Poys'ned broth, in silver dishes,
Kills their stomachs that do taste it.
Wit, and reason, love, and learning,
All in beauties eyes are blinded,
Where, in sense of sweet discerning,
She will be unkindly minded.
Let those hearts, whose eyes perceive her,
Triumph, but in thoughts tormented:
Labor all they can to leave her,
Or else die, and be contented.
A conceit upon an Eagle, and a Phoenix.
THERE sat sometime an Eagle on a hill,
Hanging his wings, as if he could not fly:
Black was his coat, and tauny was his bill,
Gray were his legs, and gloomy was his eye,
Blunted his talents, and his train so bruised,
As if his bravery had been much abused.
This foul old bird of some unhappy brood,
That could abide no hawk of higher wing
(But fed his gorge upon such bloody food,
As might, in fear, maintain a cruel king)
Fair on a rock of pearl and precious stone,
Espied a Phoenix sitting all alone.
No sooner had this heavenly bird in sight,
But up he flickers, as he would have flowne:
But, all in fear, to make so far a flight,
Until his pens were somewhat harder grown:
He gave a rowse, as, who should say, in rage
He showed the fury of his froward age.
And, for this Phoenix still did front his eyes,
He called a counsel of his kites together:
With whom, in haste, he would the mean devise,
By secret art to lead an army thither,
And so pull down, from place of high estate,
This heavenly bird, that he had so in hate.
Much talk there was, and wondrous heed was held
How to atchieue this high attempt in hand:
Some out were sent to soar about the field,
Where flue this grace and glory of the land,
To mark her course, and how she made her wing,
And how her strength might stand with such a king.
And forthwith should such cages be devised,
As should enclose full many thousand fowls:
By whom, her seat should quickly be surprised,
And all her birds should handled be like owls:
No time detract this deed must needs be don:
And ere they went, the world was wholly won.
But, soft a while: no sooner seen the land,
But, ere they came in kenning of the coast,
So great a force their fortune did withstand,
That all the bravery of the birds was lost:
Some leakt, some sanke, and some so ran on ground,
The cages burst, and all the birds were drowned.
But, when the eagle heard what was become
Of all his flight, that flick'red here and there,
Some sick, some hurt, some lame, and all and su^me
Or far from hope, or all too near in fear,
He stoupt his train, and hung his head so sore,
As if his heart had never burst before.
A conceited fancy.
PVRE colors can abide no stain:
The sun can never lose his light:
And virtue has a heavenly vain,
That well may claim a queenely right:
So, give my mistress but her due,
Who told me all these tales of you.
From heaven on earth, the Sun does shine,
From virtue comes discretions love:
They both are in themselves divine;
Yet work for weaker hearts behoue*
So, would my mistress had her due,
To tell me still these tales of you.
But, oh, the Sun is in a cloud,
And virtue lives in sweetes unseen:
The earth with heaven is not allowed,
A beggar must not love a Queen:
So must my mistress have her due,
To tell me still these tales of you.
Then shine fair Sun, when clouds are gone:
Live virtue in thy queenely love:
Choose some such place to shine upon,
As may thy Paradise approve;
That, when my mistress has her due,
I may hear all this heaven in you.
A smile misconstrued.
BY your leave, a little while:
Love has got a beauties smile,
From on earth, the fairest face:
But, he may be much deceived,
Kindness may be misconceiued,
Laughing, often, is in disgrace.
Oh, but he does know her nature,
And to be that blessed creature,
That does answer love with kindness.
Tush, the Phoenix is a fable,
Phoebus horses have no stable:
Love is often full of blindness.
Oh, but he does hear her voice:
Which does make his heart rejoice,
With the sweetness of her sound.
Simple hope may be abused.
Hears he not he is refused?
Which may give his heart a wound.
No: love can believe it never.
Beauty favors once, and ever,
Though proud envy play the elfe:
Truth, and patience have approved
Love shall ever be beloved,
If my mistress be her self.
An odd humor.
PVRELY fair, and fairly wise,
Blessed wit, and blessed eyes,
Blessed wise, and blessed fair,
Never may thy bliss impair.
Kindly true, and truly kind,
Blessed heart, and blessed mind,
Blessed kind, and blessed true,
Ever may thy bliss renew.
Sweetly dear, and dearly sweet,
Blessed, where these blessings meet:
Blessed meetings never cease,
Ever may thy bliss increase.
Blessed beauty, wit, and sense,
Blessed, in natures excellence,
Where all blessings perish never,
Blessed may thou live for ever.
Awaggery.
CHILDRENS ahs, and women's ohs
Do a wondrous grief disclose:
Where a dugge the tone will still,
And the the other but a will.
Then, in gods name, let them cry.
While they cry, they will not die.
For, but few that are so cursed,
As to cry, until they burst.
Say, some children are untoward:
So some women are as froward:
Let them cry them, 'twill not kill them:
There is time enough to still them.
But, if pity will be pleased
To relieve the small diseased,
When the help is once applying,
They will quickly leave their crying.
Let the child then suck his fill,
Let the woman have her will,
All will hush, was heard before:
Ah, and oh, will cry no more.
An odd conceit.
LOVELY kind, and kindly loving,
Such a mind were worth the moving:
Truly fair, and fairly true,
Where are all these, but in you?
Wisely kind, and kindly wise,
Blessed life, where such love lies.
Wise, and kind, and fair, and true,
Lovely live all these in you.
Sweetly dear, and dearly sweet,
Blessed where these blessings meet.
Sweet, fair, wise, kind, blessed, true,
Blessed be all these in you.
A doleful fancy.
SORROVV rippe up all thy senses,
Nearest unto horrors nature:
Taste of all thy quintessences,
That may kill a wretched creature.
Then, behold my woeful spirit,
All in passions overthrown:
And, full closely, like a ferret,
Seize upon it for thine own.
But, if thou do grow dismayed,
When thou do but look on me,
When my passions well displaid,
Will but make a blast of thee,
Then in grief of thy disgraces,
Where my fortunes do deface thee,
Tell thy Muses to their faces,
They may learn of me to grace thee.
For, thy sighs, thy sobbes, and tears
But thy common badges been:
While the pain the spirit bears,
Eats away the heart unseen.
Where, in silence swallowed up
Are the sighs and tears of love,
Which are drawn to fill the cup
Must be drunk to deaths behoue.
Then beholding my hearts swoune,
In my torments more and more,
Say, when thou do sit thee down,
Thou were never graced before.
An Epitaph upon Poet Spencer.
MOVRNFVLL Muses, sorrows minions,
Dwelling in despaires opinions,
Ye that never thought invented,
How a heart may be contented
(But in torments all distressed,
Hopeless how to be redressed,
All with howling and with crying,
Live in a contiuuall dying)
Sing a Dirge on Spencers death,
Till your souls be out of breath.
Bid the Dunces keep their dens,
And the Poets break their pens:
Bid the Sheepheards shed their tears,
And the Nymphs go tear their hairs:
Bid the Scholars leave their reeding,
And prepare their hearts to bleeding:
Bid the valiant and the wise,
Full of sorrows fill their eyes;
All for grief, that he is gone,
Who did grace them every one.
Fairy Queen, show fairest Queen,
How her fair in thee is seen.
Sheepeheards Calender set down,
How to figure best a clown.
As for Mother Hubberts tale,
Crack the nut, and take the shale:
And for other works of worth,
(All too good to wander forth)
Grieve that ever you were wrote,
And your Author be forgot.
Farewell Art of Poetry,
Scorning idle foolery:
Farewell true conceited reason,
Where was never thought of treason:
Farewell judgment with invention,
To describe a hearts intention:
Farewell wit, whose sound and sense
Show a Poets excellence:
Farewell all in one together,
And, with Spencers garland, wither.
And, if any Graces live,
That will virtue honor give,
Let them show their true affection,
In the depth of griefs perfection,
In describing forth her glory,
When she is most deeply sorry;
That they all may wish to here,
Such a song, and such a quier,
As, with all the woes they have,
Follow Spencer to his grave.
FINIS.

