THE Souls Harmony.

Written by Nicholas Breton.



Imprinted at London by S. Stafford, for Randoll Bearkes: And are to be sold at
the sign of the white Unicorn in Pope's Head Alley. 1602.

To the right Honorable and virtuous Lady, the Lady Sara Hastings, Nicholas
Breton wishes all happiness in this world, and eternal joys hereafter.
RIght Honorable, your zealous love to divine studies, has made the Muses of
that Nature, to present your favor, with the best fruits of their delights,
which in the exercise of their spiritual Contemplations, have brought sorth
these comfortable Meditations: which bound up in this little volume, they have
presumed with my service, to present to your good Ladyship, beseeching the
same, with that good favor to accept them, that may under heaven be the
greatest grace, that they desire unto them. It is entitled, The Harmony of the
Soul, who in the gracious thoughts of Gods blessing, and humble talk with his
mercy, thinks her self half in heaven ere she come there: where, after that
you have passed a happy pilgrimage on this earth, God send you the eternal
felicity of the faithful.

Your Ladyships in all humbleness, Nicholas Breton.

The Souls Harmony.
GOD.
GRace in all Glories height,
On whom all Glories wait,
Describes my joys conceit.
JESUS.
Joy in the highest of the height of joy,
Holding the state of the Celestial story
Eternal life, that does all deaths destroy,
Son to that grace, that makes the Fathers Glory,
Unmatched Power, in Mercies Princely might:
Such is the substance of my Souls delight.
CHRIST.
Clear is the Sun, that does for ever shine,
Heavenly that light, that gives al eyes their seeing,
Royal that Crown, which never can decline,
Imperious Power, that gives all powers their being.
Such is the Power, the Crown, the Light, the Sun,
That never ends where Glory first begun.
MY souls loves life, and life's loves souls delight,
How highly are thy holy Angels blessed,
That in thy grace enjoy the glorious sight,
Wherein the sum of all their joy does rest!
What heavenly music may those Muses sing,
Who set their consorts by thy sacred skill,
And Angels quauers make the Quiere to ring,
While virtues Air do all the voices fill?
How may those Spirits be with joys possessed,
That may be ravished with this Royal sight,
Where Peter saw, and in his seeing blessed
My souls life's love, and loves life's souls delight!
Oh blessed Peter, blessed in such a seeing:
Well might he sing, Sweet Lord, here is good being.
O Gracious God, and Lord of mercies might,
Why do I live amid this world of woes?
When every day does seem to me as night,
While sorrows seek my Spirits overthrows.
I hear thy word, and would obey thy will,
But want the power, that might perform my due:
I know the good, and feign would leave the ill,
And fear the sorrow, that does sin ensue:
And yet I fall into that depth of sin,
That makes me fear the judgment of thy wrath,
Until thy grace does all my help begin,
To know what comfort, Faith in Mercy has.
Oh blessed light, that shows in Mercies eye,
While faith does live, that love can never die.
LOrd, when I think how I offend thy will,
And know what good is in obedience to it,
And see my hurt, and yet continue still
In doing ill, and cannot leave to do it;
And then again, do feel that bitter smart,
That inward breeds, of pleasures after pain,
When scarce the thought is entered in my heart,
But it is gone, and sin gets in again:
And when, again, the act of sin is past,
And that thy grace does call me back again:
Then in my tears I run to thee as fast,
And of my sins, and of my self complain.
What can I do, but cry, Sweet Jesus, save me*
For I am nothing, but what thou will have me.
O Lord that live in that life of life,
Which all thou art, and of thy self alone:
Whose sacred word is that souls cutting knife,
That does divide the marrow from the bone.
O glorious God, of grace and mercy more,
Then heart and soul are able to conceive,
And see the tears that mercy does implore,
And wilt not Faith in fears discomfort leave.
My God, my Lord, my souls life's dearest love,
How so my sins have thy displeasure moved,
Let my soulesteares thy glorious mercy move,
To make me feel, how faith may be beloved,
That being set from sin and sorrow free,
I may not cease to sing in praise of thee.
MY heavenly Love, from that high throne of thine
Where gracious mercy sits in Glories seat,
In that true pity of thy Power divine,
That dries the tears, that mercy do entreat,
Behold, sweet Lord, these bleeding drops of love,
That melt my soul in sorrow of my sin,
And let these showers some drops of mercy move,
That in my grief my comfort may begin.
Let not despair confound my praying hope,
That begs an alms at thy mercies gate:
But let thy grace thy hand of bounty open,
That comfort yields, which never comes too late,
That in the cure of my consuming grief,
My joyful soul may sing of thy relief.
OH, that my soul were purified so,
It might no more be subject unto sin,
And that my care might only seek to know,
How humble grace does mercies love begin.
Oh, that my thoughts, my words and deeds were such,
As might not swerve from my dear Saviors will,
And that my truth might never have a tutch
Of false conceit, for to excuse mine ill,
And that this world were unto me a hell,
But where I see his Saints in their loves service,
And I might die, till I might live to dwell
In some such place, to do some pleasing office,
That he might be, who does my death destroy *
All above all, and all in all, my Joy.
THe worldly prince does in his Septer hold
A kind of heaven in his authorities:
The wealthy miser, in his mass of gold,
Makes to his soul a kind of Paradise:
The Epicure, that eats and drinks all day,
Accounts no Heaven, but in his hellish rowtes:
And she, whose beauty seems a sunny day,
Makes up her heaven, but in her babies clowtes.
But, my sweet God, I seek no Princes power,
No misers wealth, nor beauties fading gloss,
Which pa^per sin, whose sweetes are inward sour,
And sorry gaynes, that breed the Spirits loss.
No, my dear Lord, let my Heaven only be
In my Louesseruice, but to live to thee.
O God, forgive the greatness of my finne:
I am not worthy to implore thy Grace,
The loathsome stink, that I lie tumbling in,
With filthy shame has covered all my face.
I have deserved the depth of all thine ire,
To know thy will, yet wilfully offend,
My soul deserves, in the infernal fire,
To feel the torments that shall never end.
But Lord, thy mercy is above thy wrath,
Thou do not joy, to see a sinners death,
And true repentance in thy mercy has
The blessed food, that gives the spirit breath,
Where praying hope, in heart can perish never.
While humble faith does live in joy for ever.
WHat is the gold of all this world? but dross;
The joy, but sorrow, and the pleasure, pain,
The wealth, but beggary, and the gain but loss,
The wit, but folly, and the virtue vain;
The power, but weakness, and but death the life,
The hope, but fear, and the assurance dout,
The trust, deceit, the concord but a strife,
Where one conceit does put another out;
Time but an instant, and the use a toil,
The knowledge, blindness, and the care a madness,
The silver, lead, the diamond, but a foil,
The rest, but trouble, and the mirth but sadness.
Thus since to heaven compared, the earth is such,
What thing is man, to love the world so much?
OH, would man think but on that world of joy,
Which in the heavens the chosen shall receive,
And then again, upon this worlds annoy,
Where hellish baytes the wicked do deceive!
Would he but look upon the Angels graces,
The Paradises of their heavenly pleasures,
And then, upon the devils ougly faces,
With all their torments endless without measures!
Would men thus make a difference in their minds,
Twixt light and darkness, and the day, and night,
Then would sin die, that with illusion blinds
The eye of nature from her blessed sight,
And man would love the good, and hate the evil
And honor God, and tread upon the devil.
SOme heavenly Muse come help me sing,
In Glory of my heavenly King:
And from some holy Angels wing,
Where Graces do for feathers spring,
Oh bring my hand one blessed Pen,
To write beyond the reach of men:
Let all the subject be of Grace,
Where Mercy set in Glories place,
Does stand before that shining face,
That makes all other beauty base:
That Heaven and earth may see the wonder,
That puts all worths and wonders under:
Let Virtues only set the grounds,
Where Grace but all of Glory sounds,
While Mercy heales the spirits wounds:
Where faith the fear of death confounds:
That heaven and earth may joy to hear,
The Music of the Angels queere.
Oh tell the world, no world can tell,
How that Joy does all joys excel,
Where blessed souls set free from hell,
In Mercy do with Glory dwell,
And with the Saint, and Angels sing,
In glory of their heavenly King:
Sink not a note beneath the sense,
Of Glories highest excellence,
And keep unto that only Tence,
Where heavens have all their honor thence:
That Seraphins may clap their wings,
To hear how Grace, of Glory sings.
Oh, let the Sun in brightness shine,
And never let the Moon decline,
And every star his light refine,
Before that blessed light divine:
Of whom, in whom, from whom alone,
They have their shining every one.
Let all the Azure sky be clear,
And not a mistie cloud come near,
But all that brightest light appear,
Where Angels make their merry cheer,
And all the troop of heavens may see,
Where all the joys of heaven may be.
Let Phoebus in his brightness stay:
And drive the darkesome nights away,
And Virgins, Saints, and Angels play,
While Martyrs keep high holy day:
And all the host of heaven accord,
To sing in glory of the Lord.
Let all the year be Summers spring,
And Nightingales all Birds that sing,
And all the fruits that grow or spring,
Be brought unto this glorious King,
With all their colors and their sweetes,
Before his feet to strew the streets:
Let hony-dewes perfume the air,
That all may be both sweet and fair,
That may with Mercies leave repair,
Unto the seat of Glories Chair:
That every thing may fitting fall,
Unto the Glory of them all.
Let all the hearts, the souls, the minds,
That wisdom unto virtue binds,
And breeds but of those blessed kinds,
That gracious love in glory finds,
Agree together all in one,
To glorify our God alone.
And when they all in turn are set,
And in their swettest music met,
And highest skill the note has fet,
Where grace may highest glory get;
My ravished soul in mercy then,
May have but leave to sing, Amen.
Gloria in excelsis Deo.
Praise, in the highest of the height of praise,
Strain up thy heart unto thy spirits note,
There, (...) the worth, where all thy wonder stays,
Write to the wits of all the world to quote:
Tell them, oh tell them, that thou can not tell,
What grace and glory thy dear God deserves,
Whose Excellence all excellence does excel,
While him alone, all excellency serves.
Life, love, truth, power, grace, pity, bounty, glory,
Health, comfort, wisdom, virtue, mercy, peace;
These in the state of the celestial story,
Do sound the glory that shall never cease,
Whose holy praises to more height arise,
Then earth or heaven, or Angels can devise:
Gloria in excelsis Deo.
O That my heart could hit upon a strain,
Would strike the music of my souls desire:
Or that my soul could find that sacred vain,
That sets the consort of the Angels Quiere:
Or that that Spirit of especial grace,
That cannot stowpe beneath the state of heaven,
Within my soul would take his settled place,
With Angels Ens, to make his glory even.
Then should the name of my most gracious King,
And glorious God, in higher tunes be sounded,
Of heavenly praise, then earth has power to sing,
Where heaven and earth, and Angels are confounded.
And souls may sing while all heart strings are broken,
His praise is more, then can in praise be spoken.
Gloria in excelsis Deo.
WHen Job had lost his children, lands and goods,
Patience did kill the poison of his pain:
And when his sorrows came as fast as floods,
Hope kept his heart, till comfortes came again.
When David's life by Saul was often sought,
And worlds of crosses compast him about,
Yet was his spirit never ouer-wrought,
But in his woes, hope still did help him out.
When the sore Cripple by the poole did lie,
Full many a year in misery and pain,
His heart on Christ no sooner set his eye,
But tears moved grace, and he was well again.
No Job, nor David, Cripple more in grief:
Christ give me patience, and my hope relief.
FINIS.

